relation of the world and the religion observe in all age and place discover from the creation unto this present of the first beginning of the world and religion and of the region and religion of Babylonia Assyria Syria Phoenicia and Palestina the first book chap. i. of GOD one in nature * * (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) gal. 4.8 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) zan. 3 El. p. 4. l. 1. cap. 3. three in person the father son and holy ghost the a a Homer Virgil Ovid etc. poet be wont to lay the foundation and first beginning of their poetical fabrike with invocation of their god and muse although those work be suitable to such workman who according to their name be maker of those both poem and god ay as far short of their learning as beyond they in the scope of my desire will so far imitate their manner in this matter which I intend that although I envy not to some their foolish claim of that poetical not prophetical inheritance to make my maker and my matter as in a history not a poem must be make to my hand yet in a history of religion which have or shall have GOD to be the Alpha and Omega Apoc. 1.8 the efficient from who the end to who it proceed the matter of who the form by who and who direction it entreat I can not but make a religion to begin this discourse of religion at he this be the way which all man take to come to he first therefore I beseech he that be the first and last the eternal father in the name of his belove and only son by the light of his holy and all see spirit to guide i in this perambulation of the world so to take view of the time place and custom therein as may testify my religious bond to he who I be and who I serve and the service I owe unto his church if at least this my mite may be serviceable to the least of the least therein that as he be in himself the beginning and end so he will be in some measure of this work the author and finisher that in the behold this map of so infinite diversify superstition we may be more thankful for and more zealous of that true and only religion which Christ by his blood have procure by his word reveal by his spirit seal and will reward eternal in the heaven and hereto let all christian reader say with i amen to he which be * * Apoc. 3.14 amen that witness faithful and true that forsake all the byway which this labyrinth exhibit we may receive his witness as faithful and true disciple that follow the lamb whithersoever he go and will not hear the voice of stranger b b 2. cor. 12.11 in the next place I hold it not unfit brief to express somewhat of he which indeed and thorough can never be express for the wise of the prophet have say of he and to he that the a a 1. King 8.27 heaven and heaven of heaven be not able to contain he and the chief or at least he which be not inferior to the chief of the apostle as ravish with such a height and swallow in such a depth cry c c rom. 11.33 o o the deepness of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God how unsearchable be his judgement and his way past find out as for myself I may most fit borrow the word of AGUR d d prou. 30.2 verse 3 4. verse 5. sure I be more foolish than any man and have not the understanding of a man in i for I have not learned wisdom nor attain to the knowledge of holy thing yea indeed who have ascend up to heaven and descend who have gather the wind in his fist who have bind the water in a garment who have establish all the end of the world what be his name and what be his son name if thou can tell tell this mystery we can and yet so far as he have tell we by his word and work we may of the one the next word testify every word of God be pure of the other elsewhere e e psal. 19.1 the heaven declare the glory of f f rom. 1.20 God and the invisible thing of he that be his eternal power and godhead be see by the creation of the world be consider in his work g g act 14.17 God have not therefore leave himself without witness who beside the testimony of nature write in our heart have add those of the scripture and of the creature that this threefold cord may not be easy break and by the mouth of two or three witness we may learn plain that he be and in some measure what he be that there be a GOD heaven and earth angel and devil man and beast reason and sense greek and barbarian science in the most in the rest conscience as a thousand witness all that we see and which we see not say and proclaim that all may see and in manner palpable feel his present deity in h h act 17.28 who we live move and have our be i i d. king lect. in jon. 4. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) hiero. cicer. nat. deor. lib. 1. and Drus lib. 1. this be a common notion and impression seal up in the mind of every man a remnant of integrity after the fall of Adam a substance or blessing in the dead elm sparkle of fire rake up under the ash which can die while the soul live what a one he be be not so deep engrave in nature who Owlish eye be dazzle with the brightness of this light but when here we may renew the question what be his name and what be his son name he himself answer in scripture by attribute to himself such name whereby we may know he as the creator from all creature as the true GOD from all false god and so far as be meet and necessary to our salvation he then that dwell in light inaccessible who no man have see nor can see k k 1. io. 3.2 as he be in this our infancy have manifest himself unto we l l 1. co. 13.12 as through a glass dark that we may with Moses have some glance m m exod. 34.6 view of his hinder part these name and divine attribute I mean not with large explication here to express as not so fit my ability or purpose and be by other n n Dionys nomin. p. Galatin l. 3. Zanchius nat. l. 1 Bullinger lib. 1. ar. Montanus learned do already yet to say a little where the tongue of man and angel can say enough the scripture attribute or he in scripture attribute to himself name in regard both of author and object divine sometime as they term it in the o o as true wise live etc. concrete sometime in the p p as truth wisdom life etc. abstract the the first signify his perfect subsistence the other his supersubsi perfection those more fit to our capacity these to his divinity who eternal and essential be whatsoever he be say to be or in himself to have and as line infinite differ in their circumference be one in the centre and the sunbeam disperse through the world be in the sun but one and the same neither beam nor line but far more excellent in that indivisible and most perfect unity so and more than so all perfection of the creature be in the creator more defecate and perfect yea one perfection and superexcellent excellency and this q q in which sense rismegist affirm deus Vid. Mars ficin in Dionys d. n. Dionysius also call he etc. Empedocles describe he a sphere who centre be every where the circumference no where Sphinx Heidfeldi one himself every way infinite and incomprehensible nothing be in he either by participation or as a quality or as a natural faculty or as a mutable passion or in such sort simple as we who understanding be limit in their finite bound and for that cause receive in a finite measure conceive in a finite manner do or can comprehend who can take up the ocean in a spoon and yet these be both finite and hold near proporrion than the great creator and the great of creature yet be this glimpse of this bright shine sun comfortable through this chink and keyhole of our bodily prison and even the taste of these delicacy more than sweet and delectable some of these name be attribute to he in regard of his be r r nomina (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Heb. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Drus tetragram cap. 1. in itself consider as jehovah jah Eheie and some in regard of the person which all have that one be and every of which have all that be which s s Hook Eccles. polit. lib. 5. justin resp orthod quaest. 137. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Adami Sethi in itself be individual one and their several manner of have it be that which be call their personal propriety and incommunicable such a name say some be Elohim t t Drusius tax zanch. for entitle his work 3 Elohim as improper say he as apply to the father son and holy-ghost in signification mighty in form plural some of these name be such as be communicate to creature also but with this difference that those which in the creature be borrow imperfect accidental be in he nature perfection substance some be absolute consider as he be GOD bless for ever some relative with respect unto his creature some again u u r. Moses Moreh lib. 1. 57 be negative speak other affirmative some proper other by a figure but this be indeed a thorny way 10 10 arnob. in psal. 91. August Trinit. lib. 3. cap. 3. of which we may say with Augustine nothing be miss more dangerous nothing seek more laborious nothing find more profitable even the angelical seraphin have their y y 6.2 six wing whereof two serve to execute their prompt obedience two cover their foot because of man weakness not able to comprehend their glory and yet they themselves thus glorious with two other wing cover their face as not able to endure the brightness of a great glory let we then be wise but to z z rom. 12 3. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) sobriety let we go to the lamb to unclasp this seal book for in he all the treasure of wisdom and knowledge be hide let we so know as we may be know and so * * phil. 3.10 comprehend as we may rather be comprehend let we fear love believe and serve he and then GOD will a a psal. 25.9 teach the humble his way and b b joh. 7.17 and 17.3 they which will do his will shall know of his doctrine this be our way to eternal life thus to know he and who he have send jesus Christ if namely we so learn c c ephes 4.21 Christ as the truth be in jesus if we d d 1. cor. 3.18 become fool that we may be wise and put off the old man be renew in the spirit of our mind and put on the new man which after GOD be shape in righteousness and true holiness otherwise we e e 1. cor. 8.2 know nothing as we ought to know otherwise we know nothing more nor so much as the devil know f f prou. 1.7 the fear of the lord be the begin of this wisdom and for this cause have he call himself and proclaim those his name g g exod. 34.6 Jehova jehova strong merciful and gracious slow to anger and abundant in goodness and truth etc. and the like in other place not that we may know to know a foolish curiosity but that have such light we may believe and walk in the light that we may be child of the light jehova if we may so name it the most essential and after the jewish tradition ineffable h h of this name jehova see drutij tetragram ar. Montan. histor pag. 37. and pet. galat. lib. 2. Drusius think that Galatinus be the first author of this pronunciation jehova Castalion write it jova the most both jew and christian before forbear to name it the masscrite ascribe to it no point of it own but of Adonai and when Adonai go before or after it of Elohim it be hold that only the highpriest and that in the temple and on the day of expiation may pronounce it which to a private man the jew esteem the loss of eternal life Steuchus think that none can interpret it and Paulus Burgensis that none can translate it the Chaldaen arabian grecian latin and the new testament itself use instead thereof the lord Montanus read it jehueh and affirm that it be know both to the common israelite and to the neighbour nation etc. but see themselves I name it after the modern use for distinction Zanchy and Gyraldus observe that the name of God in all nation be tetragrammaton of four letter in dutch and english they therefore double the last consonant and learned master Selden interpret the Pythagorean oath (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) by tetragrammaton d. Syris vid. r. Mos. lib. 1. cap. 60. p. ric. praec. off 20. Reuchlin mirif lib 2. name of GOD be not therefore only reveal unto we that we may know he in himself and of himself to be i i Highss 13.8 yesterday to day and the same k k Apoc. 1.8 for ever which be which be which be to come but also as the creator of who in who and for who be all thing and as the redeemer which be know by his name jehova as himself l l exod. 6.3 interpret it by give a real be and accomplishment to his promise in which one name as in other of like signification be express the simplicity immutability infiniteness blessedness eternity life perfection and other attribute of god. when he call himself strong therein be declare his almighty power whether we understand it actual in produce and preserve all thing in heaven and earth or absolute whereby he be able to do even those thing which in his wisdom he do not whereby he be able to do all thing which either m m ap. 1. q. 25. art 3. and d. in themselves as imply contradiction or with he as imperfection be not impossible both those kind not exclude but conclude the power of GOD which because he be almighty n n 2. Tim 2.12 can lie or deny himself what shall I speak of his wisdom whereby all thing be open in his sight both himself and his creature past present or to come and that not as past or future but in one eternal perfect certain immediate act of knowledge which in regard of second cause be necessary or contingent or in effect but mere possible and never actual subsist truth be in he as a root from whence it be first in the be next in the understanding three in the writing or say of the creature true he be in himself in his work ordinary and extraordinary and in his word reveal by the prophet and apostle what shall I add of his goodness grace love mercy justice and other his attribute and name not yet mention as Adonai which signify the dominion of GOD due to he by creation by purchase by mutual covenant Saddai which signify his All-sufficiency and other yea in one chapter o o Gal l. 2 c. 13. 14. Petrus Galatinus rehearse threescore and twelve name of GOD out of the rabbin work multiply and diversify in ten sort which make in all seven hundred and twenty name to dilate of these at large will ask so many large commentary and yet even then shall we still find this GOD incomprehensible of who we may in respect of our capacity rather say what he be not than what he be who goodness be not to be distinguish by quality or his greatness discern by quantity or his eternity measure by time or his presence bound by place p p (...) of who all thing be to be conceive q q all qua^ explicaueris. Tertul. de Trin p 598. and r. Mos. Moreh l. 1. 54. and 57 beyond whatsoever we can conceive the person which communicate in this divine nature be three r r Deus Arnob in psal. 145. this be their own witness of themselves there be three which bear record in heaven the father the word and the spirit and these three be one this mystery be manifest in the s s mat. 3. baptism of Christ and in our baptism in the name of the father son and holy ghost the angel unto this glorious Trinity t t Esay 6. zanch. 3. Elohim sing their holy holy holy the scripture itself apply that which there may be interpret of the father both to the son joh. 12.41 and to the spirit act. 28.25 these with other place do also signify their personal distinction the creation be not only the father work but also of the other person as appear by that noun plural join to a verb singular in the first word of Moses and other like plural appellation Es. 44.24 and Es. 54.5 2. sam. 7.23 and many such place the apostle apply the covenant worship and work of GOD mention in the old testament to the son and holy ghost in the new neither can the one be the son or the other the spirit of GOD natural and in proper manner of speech but they must also subsist in the same nature with the father which be infinite spiritual immutable can be but one which must whole or not at all be communicate in a word the equality the name the property the work the worship peculiar to GOD be apply to the son and holy ghost equal with the father which they that listen may learn in such as especial treat of this subject where this mystery of the trinity be aver against all heretic jew and infidel yea by some u u morn C.R. f. patric p. gal. l. 12 also out of their own authentic author whether they receive scripture rabbin philosopher or any other I intend only to anoint the door-post of this house with this discourse that I may make a fit entry thereinto leave the full handle of this mystery to such as purposely frame their whole edifice with large common-place hereof which yet always must be more certain receive by faith then conceive by reason according to that of Justin martyr 10 10 justin (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) think of y y (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Nazian. one a threefold light will dazzle thou distinguish into three and a infinite unity will swallow thou say z z bern. ad Eugenio Bernard have thus with tremble hand write of that dreadful mystery of the trinity of which we may say it be not tell with tell nor can be describe by description the next to be consider be the work of GOD which be either inward and immanent or outward and transient the inward be eternal and unchangeable indeed no other but himself although account and call work in regard of their effect in the world and of our conceive for a a d. abbot par. 2 Defen pag. 9 Zanch. N.D. lib. 5. cap. 1. all the propriety of GOD be infinite as they be immanent in himself yet in their transitive and foreign effect be stint and limit to the model and state of the creature wherein the same effect be wrought such a immanent work we conceive and name that b b zanch. na. d. l. 5. c. 1. 2. decree of GOD touch the creation of the world with his provident dispose all and every part thereof according to the counsel of his own will and especial touch the reasonable creature angel and man in respect of their eternal state in salvation or damnation the outward work of GOD be in regard of nature creation and providence in regard of grace redemption and salvation in the fullness of time perform by our Emanuel GOD manifest in the flesh true GOD and perfect man in the unity of one person without c c (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) confusion conversion or separation d d 1. joh. 5.20 this be very GOD and life eternal JESUS CHRIST the son of GOD our lord which be conceive by the holy ghost bear of the virgin MARY suffer under Pontius Pilate who be crucify dead and bury descend into hell rise again the three day he ascend into heaven where he sit at the right hand of GOD the father almighty from whence he shall come to judge the quick and dead and to such as be son e e gal. 4.6 GOD do also send the spirit of his son to renew and sanctify they as child of the father member of the son temple of the spirit that they even all the elect may be one holy catholic church enjoy the unspeakable privilege and heavenly prerogative of the communion of saint the forgiveness of sin the resurrection of the body and everlasting life even so come lord JESUS chap. 2 of the creation of the World they which will without danger behold the eclipse of the sun use not to fix their eye direct upon that bright eye of the world although by this case darken but in water behold the same with more case and less peril how much fit be it likewise for our tender eye in behold the light of that light a a jam. 1.17 the father of light b b 1. joh. 1.5 in who be no darkness to divert our eye from that brightness of glory and behold he as we can in his work the first of which in execution be the creation of the world plain describe by Moses in the book of genesis both for the author matter manner and other circumstance reason itself thus far subscribe as appear in her scholar the most of the heathen and philosopher in all age that this world be make by a great than the World in prove this or illustrate the other a large field of discourse may be minister neither do I know any thing wherein a man may more improve the revenue of his learning or make great show with a little deck and prune himself like Aesop jay sort Grex etc. or Horace his chough with borrow feather than in this matter of the creation write of after their manner by so many jew ethnic heretic and orthodox christian for my part it shall be sufficient to write a little set down so much of the substance of this subject as may make more plain way and easy introduction into our ensue history leave such as be more studious of this knowledge to those which have purposely handle this argument with commentary upon Moses text of which beside many modern writer some of which have almost oppress the press with their huge volume there be diverse of the primitive middle and decay time of the church a cloud indeed of author both for their number and the variety of their opinion the most of they cover rather than discover that truth which can be but one and more to believe in their confute other then prove their own assertion their store through this disagree be become a sore and burden while we must consult with many and dare promise to ourselves no sure footing yet cleave as fast as we can to the letter implore the assistance of the creator spirit let we draw as near as we may to the sense of Moses word the beginning whereof be c c gen. 1.1 in the beginning GOD create the heaven and the earth wherein to omit the endless and diverse interpretation of other obtrude allegorical anagogical mystical sense on the letter be express the author of this work to be GOD Elohim which word as be say be of the plural number insinuate the holy trinity the father as the fountain of all goodness the son as the wisdom of the father the holy ghost as the power of the father and the son concur in this work the action be create or make of d d nothing but nothing have the lord almighty whereof wherewith whereby to build this city du bart. e quip jul. scal ex. 6. Hebraei 1. 2. 3. Es. 43.7 Oecolamp in g. nothing to which be require a power supernatural and infinite the time be the e e (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Basil hom 1. in joan. Philoponus in Hexam ap. 240. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) etc. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Hermes and Thomas s Angelica sum. p. 1. q. 47. art. 1. Fagius moses beginning of time when as before there have neither be time nor any other creature the work be call heaven and earth which f f Merula and Pererius some interpret all this bodily world here propound in the sum and after distinguish in parcel according to the six day several work some understand thereby the g g Calvin in gen. Muester Luther artopaeus and fag ap. Marlorat r. Nathmanni junius vid. ar. Montan nature first matter which other h h Theodoret beda Strabus alcuinus lyra and apply only to the word earth expound heaven to be that which be call include also the spiritual and supercelestial inhabitant again other who I willing follow i i 1. l. 1. c. 2. burgen polanus Bucanus etc. Paul Merula Cosmogr part 1. l. 1. Perer. in gen. interpret by heaven the heavenly body then make and after perfect with light and motion by earth the element of the earth extend the word heaven to a large signification therein comprehend those three heaven which the seripture mention one whereof be this low where the bird of the heaven do fly reach from the earth to the sphere of the moon the second the visible planet and fix star with the first movable the three call the heaven of heaven the three heaven and paradise of GOD together with all the host of they by earth they understand this globe consist of sea and land with all the creature therein the first verse they hold to be a general proposition of the creation of all creature k k col. 1.16 visible and invisible perfect in l l gen. 2.1 Exod. 20.11 job 38.7 six day as many place of scripture testify which as concern the visible Moses handle after particular large and plain content himself with brief mention of those invisible creature both m m gen. 32.1 good and n n gen. 3.1 bad as occasion be offer in the follow part of his history in the present o o pet. martyr in gen he omit the particular description of their creation lest some as Jew and heretic have do shall take occasion to attribute the creation to angel as assistant or shall by the excellency of that nature depaint in due colour be carry to worship of angel a superstition which man have embrace towards the visible creature far in feriour both to angel and themselves Moses proceed therefore to the description of the first matter and the creature thereof frame and form for touch those invisible creature both the angel and their heavenly habitation howsoever they be circumscribe and have their proper and most perfect substance yet according to the interpretation of divine p p Zach. operib part. 1. lib. 1. cap. 4. their nature differ from that of other creature celestial or terrestrial as not be make of that first matter whereof these consist let we therefore labour rather to be like the angel in grace that we may be like unto they in glory than pray too curious into their q q as Dionys and those which tritemius mention intelligent coel which number 7. Orifiel Anael Zachariel Raphael Samael Gabriel Michael all which in course and succession govern the world each 354. year and 4. month etc. nature to our understanding in manner supernatural and endeavour more in heed the way which lead to that heaven of the bless than busy our wit too busy in describe or describe it only thus much we may observe thereof that it be beyond all reach of our observation in regard of substance not subject to corruption alteration passion motion in quantity r r joh. 14.2 many dwell place most spacious and ample in quality a paradise fair shine delightsome wherein no evil can be present or imminent no good thing absent a mere transcendent which eye have not see nor ear hear nor the heart of man can conceive where the s s Apoc. 21.3 tabernacle of GOD shall be with man and he dwell with they and shall be t t 1. cor. 15.28 all in all unto they where the pure in heart shall see he and even our bodily eye shall behold that most glorious of creature the sun of righteousness and son of GOD Christ jesus embrace these thing with hope let we return to Moses his description of the sensible world who show that that heaven and earth which now we see be in the beginning or first degree of their be a earth without form and void a darken depth and water a matter of no matter and a form without form a rude and indigested chaos or confusion of matter rather to be u u hebr. 11.3 believe than comprehend of we this be the second natural beginning for after the express of the matter follow that which philosopher call a second natural principle 10 10 Arist phys l 1. jun. praef in gen. privation the want of that form of which this matter be capable which be accidental a natural principle require in regard of generation not of constitution here describe by that part next we earth which be without form as be say and void this be the internal constitution the external be darkness upon the face of the deep y y by darkness and deep Philoponus understand the air and water ap. phot. 240 which deep comprise both the earth before mention and the visible heaven also call a Depth as to our capacity infinite and pliant to the almighty hand of the creator call also water z z gibbins on genes not because (@) be perfect water which be yet confuse but because of a certain resemblance (@) only in the uniformity thereof but also of that want of stability whereby it can not abide together but as the spirit of GOD move upon these water to sustain they and * * hier. l. trad. hebr. Trem. and jun. Basil hom 2. Syro as the hen sit on her egg to cherish and quicken as Jerome interpret the word so to maintain and by his mighty power to bring the same into this natural order here therefore be the three beginning or principle in nature that form which the spirit of God the three person in Trinity not air or wind as * * merc. de fab. and Tertul. Hermog theod. q. 8. in gen. Caietan r. Mos. ben. maim mor. neb. l. 1. c. 39 be of that mind but l. 2. c. 31. he find the four element in these four word here mention earth spirit Deep and darkness some conceive be thing which yet be not themselves form by that action frame it unto and after more particular effect this interpretation of the spirit move upon the water agree with that opinion which some attribute to the stoic that all thing be procreate and govern by one spirit which Democritus call the soul of the world Hermes and Zoroaster and Apollo delphicus call a a Patricius number the link of this chain in this order be a sole and Empyreus deo deo pancos l. 5. the interpretation of this mystical philosophy you may borrow of himself in his Panarc pamsyc pancos more agree with Zoroaster Hermes and some Platonic than the scripture which show that all thing be immediate create in the begin by God fire the maker quickener and preserver of all thing and Virgil most elegant and divine sing seem to paraphrase on Moses word b b virg. Aeneid l. 6. on which word Servius comment 4. universal principio coelum artus mens that be heaven first and earth and watery plain bright moon of star those twinkle train the spirit inly cherish love move great body nourish through all infuse this all contain the first creature which receive natural form be the light of which GOD say let there be light a lightsome and delightsome subject of our discourse especial have late pass such a confuse and dark chaos but here I know not how that which then lighten the deform matter of the unformed world have hide itself some c c Vatab. and Marlorat in gen. interpret this of the sun which they will have then create some d d Bas hex. hom 6. greg. Naz. 43. and nicetas in of a immaterial quality after receive into the sun and star some e e zanch. Hugo Lombard Tostatus etc. of a cloud form of the water circular move and successive lighten either hemisphere of which afterward the sun be compact from which they f f Merul. p. 1. l. 1 c. 4. differ not much which think it the matter of the sun then more diffuse and imperfect as the water also be earthy and the earth fluible till GOD by a second work perfect and part they and to let pass they which apply it to angel or man other g g Damas. de f. orth l. 2 c. 7. Hugo Annot. in gen. gr. Nyssen junius etc. understand it of the fiery element the essential property of which be to enlighten yet be we not here pass all difficulty while some h h vid. plutar. plac. Philos. l. 2. patrit Panang l. 7. and Pancos. l. 15. and 22. perhaps not unjust will persuade the world that fire as it be ordinary in school understand of a sublunary element be with worse than promethean theft steal out of heaven where it be visible and imprison in this their elementary world whereas Anaxagoras Thales Anaximenes Empedocles Heraclitus Plato parmenides Orpheus Hermes Zoroaster philo and other the father of the chaldean egyptian jewish and grecian learning account the i i (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) to burn vid. aug. ciu. l. 8. c. 5. the sun say philo be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and zanch. sol. heb. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) q. d. and another be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) heaven and heavenly body to be ethereal fire to which our sense also will easy subscribe and Patricius affirm that ocellus Lucanus one of Pythagoras his scholar be first author of that former opinion from who Aristotle borrow it if it be not stealth rather while he conceal his name diverse k k Cardan l. 1. Merula Cos. l. 3. c. 2. io. pic. mirand element c. 3. Tycho brahe 1577. c. ult. and kepler de stel no. c. 19 valla fracastorius Marpurg scultetus etc. deo hebr. dial. 2. and aetherem late philosopher also seem to have conspire to burn up that fiery element or rather to advance it above this sublunary region into the aethereal throne let the philosopher determine this when they do other doubt in mean while let we if you please understand this light of the fire whether aethereal or elementary or both or neither as in diverse respect it may be for neither be this light then as it seem local separate from that confuse mass and by expansion which be the second day work elevate into her natural place and after that it possess the sun moon and star say our sense which thence receive light and there in the aethereal region see new star and superlunary comet compact of Aetherall substance as the most diligent l l Tych. bra. l. 1. n. St. and 2. comet kepler and Bariholinus 4. vid. and clau. in sac. josc and Casman Ouranograp and cosmop Hipparchi n. ap. plin. etc. observer have record both procreate and perish so that that which before be neither aethereal nor elementary while there be neither aether nor element perfect after become Aethereal-elementary as be happy the matter of the sun and star of old and of these late m m such as the new star fire be one of the four element of the world but not place beneath the moon patrit pancos l. 1. and 4. have four infinite eternal impious element space light heat and moisture appearance and also fill the aethereal world in the high and low region thereof both above and beneath the moon with the light here mention and that vigorous heat which as a affect or a effect thereof procreate recreate and conserve the creature of this inferior World no marvel if the philosopher be still dazzle and darken in this light not yet agree whether it be a substance or quality corporeal or incorporeal when the father of light himself thus convince we of darkness where be the way n n job 38.19 lucis Encom say he where light dwell and by what way be the light part and if we can conceive that which be so evident see and without which nothing be see and evident how inaccessible be that light wherein the light of this light dwell even this light be more than admirable o o vid. m. ficin to 1. lum and patrit leonem Heb. 3. dial Cabalistae splendour in s. s. Arden in vigour in colour in Archang. in cabal dog life of the earth ornament of the heaven beauty and smile of the world eye to our eye joy of our heart most common pure and perfect of visible creature first bear of this world and endow with a double portion of earthly and heavenly inheritance shine in both which contain sustain gather sever purge perfect renew and preserve all thing repel dread expel sorrow p p job 38.13 shake the wicked out of the earth and lift up the heart of the godly to look for a great and more glorious light great instrument of nature resemblance of grace type of glory and bright glass of the creator brightness this light GOD make by his word not utter with sound of syllable nor that which in the beginning and therefore before the beginning be with GOD and be GOD but by his powerful q q Amb Hex. 1. c. 9 Perer. effect call thing that be not as though they be and by his call or will cause they to be thereby r r gibbins in gen. signify his will as plain and effect it as easy as a word be to a man that uncreated superessential light the eternal trinity command this light to be and approve it as good both in itself and to the future creature and separate the same from darkness which seem a s s sic Basil hox hom 2. and Panaug l. 4. splendour etc. and etc. mere privation and absence of light dispose they to succeed each other in the hemisphere which by what motion or revolution it be effect the three first day who can determine fond it be to reason from the present order of constitution to the principle of that institution of the creature while they be yet in make as Simplicius and other philosopher may I term they or atheist have absurd do in this and other part of the creation and this be the first day work the second day work in the second GOD say let there be a firmament the word Rakiah translate firmament signify t t junius Pagnine etc. Fagius mercer in gen. or a stretch out design that vast and wide space wherein be the watery cloud here mention and those light which follow in the fourteen verse by he place in howsoever some u u jun. Merula io. pic. mirand understand it only of the air the separate the water under this firmament from the water above the firmament some 10 10 Bas and amb. in Hex. du Bart muscul in gen. th. aquin. beda Lombard and interpret of water above the heaven to refresh their exceed heat or of I know not what chrystaline heaven some of spiritual substance who Basil confute Origen after his wont allegorical most probable it seem that Moses intend the separation of those water here below in their elementary seat from those above we in the cloud to which David allude say he y y Psal. 104.2 3 have stretch out the heaven like a curtain and lay the beam of his chamber in the water this separate of the water be cause in the airy region by the aethereal in which those force be place which thus exhale and captivate these water that matter before endue with lightning quality be now in this second day as it seem attenuate and extend above and beyond that miry heap of Earthywater and both the aether and Aire form of the z z Plato Plotinus ficin 4. etc. consul zanch. and Casman Ouranog and Zabarel same first matter and not of a five essence which some have devise to establish the heaven eternity both twin of the philosopher brain and wherein do not these differ from each other touch the celestial nature roundness motion number measure and other difficulty most of which be by some a a patrit pan. cos. lib. 7. 8 9 10 11 12 13 14. deny diversity of motion cause the ancient to b b his Christ clau. in sac. Bosc Keckerman Syst. astron magini Theor. etc. number eight orb Ptolemie on that ground number nine Alphonsus and Tebitius ten Copernicus find another motion revive the opinion of Aristarchus samius of the earth move etc. other which therein dissent from he yet in respect of that four motion have add a eleven orb which the divine make up even twelve by their empyreal immovable heaven and many deny this assertion of orb suppose they to have be suppose rather for c c orb Tycho br. l. 2. p. 180. Keckerman Bartholimus instruction sake then for any real be and Moses here say as David also call it a curtain which in such diversity of orb shall rather have be speak in the plural number the d d gal. gal. Sid. nun. of tell we of four new planet Jupiter attendant observe by the help of his glass which will multiply the number of orb further a better glass or near sight and site may perhaps find more orb and thus shall we run in in a circular endless maze of opinion but I will not dispute this question or take it away by aver e e p. ricij an. Bodin Theat. nat. l 5. patric ficinus platonici r. Mos. ben. Maimon the star animate or else move by f f Arist. etc. r. Mos. l. 3. interpret ezekiel vision 1. the wheel to be the heaven and the beast angel a learned ignorance shall better content i and for these variety of motion I will with g g etc. lact. l. 2. 5. Lactantius ascribe they to GOD the architect of nature and co-worker therewith by way natural but best know to himself neither listen I to dance after their pipe which ascribe a musical harmony i i the Pythagor r. Mos. cic. som. scip. to the heaven the three day work and thus be the aethereal and airy part of the world form in the three day follow the perfect of the two low element water and earth which as yet be confuse until that mighty word of GOD do thus both divorce and marry they compound of they both this one globe which he call dry land and sea I call it a globe with the scripture k k pro. 8.31 Es. 40.22 and the best philosopher l l plat. Aristot stoici cic de n. d. l. 2. manil. Astron l. 1. record etc. for which respect Numa build the temple of Vesta round neither yet be it absolute round and a perfect sphere but (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) rather m m s. lib. ^ (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Strabo affirm have say n n Ios. scal. in manil. l. 1. Scaliger (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) depress valley extend plain swell hillock high-mounting mountain long course of river and other variety of nature and art which all in so huge a mass rather beautify the roundness then take it away the eclipse of the moon late see o o in drake voyage about the world a eclipse see here septem the sixteen before one in the morning be see by they in the Magellane straits sept. 15. at six in the evening in the east then in the west the round shadow of the earth which darken it the rise of the sun and star soon in the p p the portugal sail to China east have their day twelve hour soon than we the spaniard to manilla west twelve hour late so that both meeting there together differ a day in reckon one Tuesday be the other Wednesday east than west the unequal elevation of the pole and the northern constellation appear to we the southern continual depress all these observe due proportion according to the difference of place and country yea the compass of the earth by many mariner argue the round compass thereof against patritius q q pat. pancos l. 25. 26 31. his difformity or that deformity which other r r vid. plut. ph. l. 3. philosopher have ascribe thereto the equality or inequality of day according to the nearness or farness from the equinoctial hold proportion as well by sea as land as do also the elevation of the pole and not be long who s s as at saint miguel and panama where the south sea extend to the philippinae a quarter of the world be sea then if it be all earth do confute the pretend difformitity by hill dale water compare t t eratost think the high hill to be but ten furlong cleomedes 15. which hold proportion in their just diameter to the earth but of one to 3818. say R. hues de globis with the diameter of this globe be not so much as the inequalicy in a apple or a carve bowl or quilt ball which yet we call round and this diversity serve not only for ornament but for more largeness of habitation variety of air and earth and for pleasure and profit thus do this globe swell out to our use for which it enlarge itself and seem large to we be in respect of the universe less than little how much thereof be cover with water how much not at all discover how much desert and desolate and now many million be they which share the rest of this little among they and yet how many thousand glory of the greatness of their possession all this globe be demonstrable u u by the like magnitude of star in all place by the shadow horizon etc. Ambros Hex. 4.6 to be but a point and in comparison nothing to that wide wide canopy of heaven a man possession but a point and as nothing to the earth a man of possession but a point and in a manner nothing to his possession and as Socrates 10 10 Aelian v. hist lib. 3. 28. say sometime to Alcibiades few can show their land in a universal map where a whole region occupy a small room and yet how covetous how proud be dust and ash of dust and earth not withstand the little we have while we live and that less which shall have and possess we in a prison of three cubit be dead well do one y y art of medit. compare this our grosser and drossier world to a anthill and man the inhabitant to so many pismire in the variety of their diversify study toil and turmoil themselves therein Scipio seem ashamed of the roman z z sem. scip. plin. lib. 2. etc. empire as seem but a point of the earth which itself be but a point and yet how ready be many to sell heaven for earth that largeness and continuance beyond all name of time and place for this momentany possession of almost nothing although they have hell and devil and all in the bargain let this moral observation entertain our reader perhaps tire in these rigid dispute and now let we return to the natural disposition and constitution of this globe in which the earth be cover with variety of plant and fruit which have be before cover with slimy water God command and the water which yet oppress and by their effusion and confusion do tyrannize rather than orderly subdue and govern this inferior miry mass be partly receive into competent channel and there also gather on swell heap where though they menace a return of the old chaos both by their noise and wave yet have GOD establish his commandment upon it and set bar and door and say hitherto shall thou come and no further and here shall it stay thy proud wave otherwise the deep which then cover it as a garment will now stand above the mountain at his rebuke they flee who with fetters of sand to show his power in weakness with a miracle in nature chain up this enrage tyrant that the creature may have a meet place of habitation thus do not only the dry land appear but by the same hand be enrich with herb and tree enable in their mortal condition to remain immortal in their kind and here begin Moses to declare the creation of compound body hitherto busy in the element the four day work now when lord have make both plant tree and light without the influence yea before the be of the sun moon or star he now frame those fiery ball and glorious light whereby the heaven be beautify the air enlighten the sea rule and the earth make fruitful thus he do the four day * * a jew at Rome ask a philosopher the reason why the sun shine every Wednesday the philosopher observe it true but not assign a cause the jew say it be because the sun thus honour in his birthday Isaac levita after those other thing create lest some foolish naturalist shall bind his mighty hand in nature band see these light now become the chief officer in nature Court that shine before disperse be unite in these body whether by refraction of those former beam by these solid globe or by gather that fiery substance into they or by both or by other mean I leave to other conjecture a a plut. plac. phil. l. 2. Barthol de stellis pag. 6. many be the dream of philosopher some esteem they fire some earth other cloud and other stone fire heraclides and the pythagorean deem each star a World they be common hold round simple lucide body the most compact and condensate b b Barthol deny they to be of the same substance pag. 101. and so do r. Mos. Moreh lib. 2. cap. 20. part of their orb or of that aethereal region of and in which they be bright flame not of this our fire which devour and consume for the whole ocean will not serve the sun alone for a draught nor the earth with all her store for a breakfast but quicken and nourish let we a little consider of their greatness swiftness number influence for the first Ptolomey measure the sun greatness 1663/8 time as much as the whole terrestrial globe Copernicus who Scaliger c c scal. Opusc in Epist. call ptolomeum 162. Tycho brahe d d his vid. Tych. br. n. st. pag. 465. Pythag. ap. Phot. 100 clavium b. Albumasar Alfragan diff. 19 and d. 140. the moon be hold by Ptolomeus 39 time less than the earth by Copernicus 43. by Tycho 42. Albategnius and Alfraganus have add their opinion of the rest therefore divide they into six rank or form of differ magnitude wherein as they somewhat differ from each other so much more from Tycho brahe that learned Dane who cost and e e 100000. doler in praefat. Alphonsus spend on his table 400000. ducat or after turquet story more pain in this science be admirable but Solomon wise than they all have foretold f f prou. 25. that the heaven in height and the earth in deepness and the king heart none can search out that be exact and absolute as appear in the differ opinion both of the earth g g Clavius 7. numerat circuit and diameter and of the altitude of the heaven and consequent of the quantity of the star which must presuppose the former they agree not in the order of the planet nor how many semidiameter of the earth the heaven be elevate which after Ptolemy hypothesis be 20000. after Tychos reckon 14000. hence it be that the quantity and the swiftness h h 42398437 1/3 mile in one hour after ptol. his hypoth as patric reckon so that a bird of like swiftness may compass the earth 1884. time under the line in a hour space he to salve this incredibility devise a motion both of the earth and of the star one from the east the other from the west be much more after the former then after this late opinion which do better salve the incredibleness thereof then feign a giantlike labour as Ramus i i ram. math. schol. lib. 11. call it of the earth continual roll the number k k Barthol de stell of star some have reckon 1600. other 1022. and Tycho brahe more the jew out of their cabalist reckon 290160. Galileus his glass have make they innumerable in descry infinite number otherwise not visible to we and especial the full of they yea God himself propound it to Abraham l l gen. 15.5 who josephus call a great astronomer as a thing impossible to number they it be his own royal prerogative m m psal. 147. Es. 40. he count the number of the star and bring out their army by number and call they all by their name the end why GOD place they in the firmament Moses express to separate the day from the night and to be for sign and for season and for day and for year and for light in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth their influence and effect be in scripture n n Hos. 2.11 jud. 5. job 38. sic. zan. de op. and Arias mont. a. m. nat. mention neither can any just deny the same in the element and elementary body the stoical fate the chaldean jewish and arabian fancy be now disclaim even by those o o hen. a lindhout s. ch. heyden taisneir Ranzou etc. etc. Viues de Cor. art. l. 5. learned which maintain in our day judicial astrology or commend the same neither can it agree with christian religion to subject the will of man to any external natural force nor with reason in matter contingent and casual to make they natural arbiter nor will I easy believe that particular event can be foretold from general cause especial in the affair and fortune of man where the number substance faculty action of these star be weak or not at all know unto we as have be show it be like as to say how many and what kind of chicken a hen will hatch when we see not all nor scarce know any of the egg under she the swiftness of the heaven wheel p p nig. figulus in the swift motion of a wheel make two blot which then seem near but at the stand of the wheel be far asunder which even in the moment of observe be past observe the vanity of our Oracle-almanac which common speak doubtful or false of the weather the infiniteness almost of cause concur which be diverse qualify the weakness of those q q the twelve house one for the soul another for child fortune death etc. vid. alcabit Hali io. de Saxonia etc. foundation on which this art be ground the force of hereditary quality descend from parent of custom and education in form man manner the disagreement of the astrologer among themselves the new from the old and all from the truth as experience in all age have show and last the prohibition of the same by scripture father counsel law yea the learned of the chaldean and other astronomer themselves as Eusebius r r euseb praep. l. 6. c. 8. r. Mos. in ep. jud. Marsil contrary say scal. to good manner philosophy geometry christianity they ascribe christian religion to Mercury and Albumasar foretell it shall continue but 1460. year abi. judaeus of the come of their Messiah a. d. 1464. Arnaldus of Antichrist a d. 1345. in 1179. they all arabian jew and christian foretell almost a dissolution of the world by tempest to happen in 1186. with lie and all etc. recite of bardanes and rob. Moses ben Maimon have read all the arabian work hereof answer the jewish astrologer be strong argument against the star-gazer prediction but let Picus Mirandula his twelve book against astrology and joseph scaliger preface before Manilius be well weigh of such as dote on or doubt of this genethliacal ridiculous vanity if not s s plot. en. 2. l. 2. and mar. fie Merula Fulc Antiprog etc. impious villainy as those author and other t t Hyginus manil. and Arato German Caes Cicero auienus etc. prove it not by the error of some chieftain and champion only but of the art itself and the whole senate of jewish saracenical and christian astrologer together hatch a lie the sign and constellation which astronomer observe in and on each side the zodiake will be too prolix in this discourse already tedious as likewise those alteration which some have observe in some star but those two great light the two eye of the heaven the great light to rule the day and the less to rule the night which be call great u u Ambros hex. l. 4 c. 6. with Nazianz orat. 34. not so much for the quantity wherein it be less than many star as for the operation and seem to the sense do command my eye to take more special view of their beauty how willing can I be like Phaton to mount the chariot of the sun which come forth as a bridegroom out of his chamber and rejoice like a mighty man to run his race king of star enthronize in the mid of the planet heart of the world eye of the heaven bright gem of this goodly ring father of day year season meteor lord of light fountain of heat which see all thing and by who all thing see which lend light to the star and life to the world high steward of nature kingdom and lively visible 10 10 for the beauty and operation and the sun the beam and light so resemble the trinity arr. mont. nat. p. 182. image of the live invisible God and dazzle with this great light I will reflect my eye to that reflection of this light in the sober silver countenance of the silent moon which whether it have any native shine though weak as Zanchius and Bartholinus hold or whether it be a aethereal earth y y his vid. patric pancos Saliger Exer. 62. gal. gal. plut. with mountain and valley and other not elementary element compact of the dregs of the aethereal part or whatsoever else reason fancy or frenzy have imagine thereof be queen of the night attend with the continual dance of twinkle star mother of month lady of sea and z z arr. mont. mercurio and saturno sole etc. Archang. in cabalist io. pici. vid. leon. Heb. amore dial. 3 moisture constant image of the world inconstancy which it never see twice with the same face and true model of human frailty shine with a borrow light and eclipse with every interposition of the earth but I be not Endymion nor so much in Luna favour as to be lull asleep in her lap there to learn these mystery of nature and the secret of that happy marriage between these celestial twin and it be high time for i to descend from these measure of time the lamp of the world and to behold the near work of GOD before our foot in the air and water which GOD on the five day create but the principal rarity to be observe in these creature we shall disperse in our scatter discourse through this work as occasion shall be offer as likewise touch the beast both wild and tame and the creep thing create the six day thus be the air water and earth furnish with their proper inhabitant a a ovid. metam l. 1. Sanctius his animal and posset after he have thus provide his cheer he seek he out a guest and have build and furnish his house his next care be for a fit inhabitant of this Moses add furthermore God say let we make man but this will ask a long discourse in the mean time we have this testimony of Moses of the creation of the world who sense if I have miss or mist in these many word I crave pardon and although this testimony may suffice a Christian which must live by c c faith be the evidence of thing not see faith and not by sight yet to prevent caviller we have other b b philo de f. m. and R meir in Talmud sanbed witness both of reason and authority that this world have a beginning and that the builder and maker thereof be god. for do not nature both within and without we in the admirable frame of this less or that great world in the notion of the one and the motion of the other in the wise and mighty order and order of both lead man unto a high and more excellent d d nature which of his e e so Hermes (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) goodness we call GOD when we behold the whole world or any part of it in the element such agreement in such disagreement in the heavenly motion such constancy in such variety in these compound body be live sense reason as diverse degree diverse communicate to so many form and rank of creature we can no more ascribe these thing to chance than a printer case of letter can by chance fall into the right composition of the bible which he print or of Homer iliad to use f f cic. nat. deor. Tully similitude neither can any ascribe the creation to the creature with better reason then if by some shipwreck be cast on a desolate island and find house but see no people therein he can esteem the bird or beast all the islander he see to be the framer of these building but thou may think it eternal thou may as well think it to be GOD infinite unchangeable in the whole and in all the part do not the land by season the sea by ebb and flow the air by succeed change the heaven by motion all measure by time proclaim that they have a beginning of time be not motion and time as near twin as time and eternity be implacable enemy nay how can thou force thy mind to conceive a eternity in these thing which can not conceive eternity which can not but conceive some beginning and first term or point from whence the motion of this wheel begin and yet how shall we know this first turn of the world wheel who heart within we move be we unwitting or unwilling the beginning whereof thou can not know and yet can not but know that it have a begginning and together with thy body shall have a end how little a while be it that the best g g So lucret. l. 5. cur qua^ nan pat. panarch l. 8. story in every nation show the cradle and childhood thereof their late receive letter art civility but what then say they do GOD before he make the world I answer that thou shall rather think divine of man then humane of GOD and bring thyself to be fashion after his image then frame he after thou this foolish question some answer according to the foolishness thereof say he make hell for such curious inquisitor h h confess l. 11. cap. 12. and 13. say i i tert. adverse prax. before all thing be GOD only be and he unto himself be in stead of the world place time and all thing have all goodness in himself the holy Trinity k k prou. 8.30 delight and rejoice together to communicate therefore not to increase or receive his goodliness he create the world l l plin l. 2. c 4. m m Pythagoras be report the first which call it (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Merula (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) say but for this matter it be also of the wise and most learned in all age confess as their testimony allege by justin martyr Lactantius and other ancient and especial by n n c. r. Mutius Pansa de Osc ethnicae and Christ Philos. Viu Philip Morney do plain manifest to he therefore to Viues and other which have undertake this task by reason and by human authority to convince the gainsayer of our faith let such resort as will be more full resolve in these curious doubt as for all such o o of the opinion of philosopher touch the original of the world see Merula Cos. p. 1. l. 1. strange and fantastical or phrenetical opinion of heretic or philosopher which have otherwise relate of this mystery of the creation than Moses they need not confute and for relate these opinion we shall find fit place afterward I will here add this say of Viues to such unnatural naturalist as upon slight and seem natural reason call these thing into question p p l. 1. c. 10. hence be Aristotle eternity Pliny deity ascribe to the world Democritus Leucippus and Epicurus their atomy the stoike Plato deus exemplar and as q q Hex. l. 1. c. 1. and Apuleius lib. Plato deum and inform etc. Ambrose term they or as r r Plotinus Enn. 1. lib. 2. or the platonike Trinity other or a trinity without perfect unity the manichee two beginning and a endless world of error about the world beginning because they measure all by natural axiom s s in euseb chron. graec. Scalig. Orpheus as Theophilus the chronographer cite by cedrenus allege he have his trinity of (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) to which he ascribe the world creation but the poet dream be infinite which may make and mar their poetical world at pleasure chap. 3 of man consider in his first state wherein he be create and of paradise the place of his habitation hitherto we have speak of the frame of this mighty fabric the creation of the visible world leave that invisible to the spiritual inhabitant which there a a mat. 18.10 always behold the face of the heavenly father as not dare to pry too far into such mystery advance ourselves in those thing which we never see b b col. 2.18 rash puff up with a fleshly mind this whereof we treat they need not as find all sufficience in their all-sufficient creator the inferior creature which hither to have be describe know it not but content c c Bernard sup. cant. serm. 5. themselves with themselves in enjoy their natural be move sense only man in regard of his body need it and by the reasonable power of his soul can discern and use it man therefore be last create as the end of the rest d d Algazel ap. Paul ric. de coelesti agric. lib. 1. epitome and a epitome and map of the world a compendious little other world consist of a visible and invisible heavenly and earthly mortal and immortal nature the knot and bond of bodily and spiritual superior and inferior substance resemble both the e e o etc. deum Trismeg Pimand (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) etc. Aristides ap. phot. 249. vid. etiam leon. Hebr. dial. 3. amore fr. georg. etc. work and the workman the last in execution but first in intention to who all these creature shall serve as mean and provocation of his service to he and their creator man may be consider in regard of this life or of that which be to come of this life in respect of nature or grace and this nature also sustain a twofold consideration of integrity and corruption for f f Eccles. 7. ult. GOD make man righteous but they seek to themselves many invention his first purity in his creation his fall from thence by sin his endeavour to recover his former innocency by future glory eyeher in the byway of superstition which nature a blind guide lead he into through so many false religion or by the true new and live way which GOD alone can set he and do conduct he in be the subject of our tedious task the first two more brief propound the two last historical and large relate in that first state his author and maker be jehova Elohim GOD in the plurality of person and unity of essence the father by the son in the power of the spirit whereunto he do not only use his powerful word as before say let there be man but a consultation let we make man not that he need counsel but g g attribute it to the help of other in make a creature not only partaker of divine virtue but of vice also which he can not derive from his creator not observe what Solomon say as be before Eccles. 7. ult. that he in this creature do show his counsel and wisdom most apparent the father as first in order speak unto the son and holy ghost and the son and holy ghost in a unspeakable manner speak and decree with the father and h h socr. l. 2. c. 25. the whole Trinity consult and agree together to make man which i i Cyril alex. count jun. l. 1. for man instruction be by Moses utter after the manner of men. the manner of his work be also in this creature singular both in regard of his body which as a potter his clay he wrought and frame of the dust into this goodly shape and of his soul which he immediate breathe into his nostril thus have man cause to glory in his creator care in himself to be humble have a body frame not of solid earth but of the dust the base and light part of the base and gross element k k psal. 62.9 so vain a thing be man his soul of nothing light than vanity in the infusion create and in the creation infuse to be the dweller l l job 4.19 in this house of clay and habitation of dust yea not a house but a m m 2. cor. 5.1 tabernacle continual in dissolution such be the maker and matter of man the form be his conformity to GOD after who image he be make Christ only be in full resemblance the n n col. 1.15 image of the invisible GOD the brightness of his glory o o hebr. 1.3 and the engrave form of his person man be not this image but make according to this image resemble his author but with imperfection in that perfection of human nature this image of GOD appear in the soul proper second in the body not as the p p epiph. haer. haer. 71. anthropomorphite heretic and q q papist picture the trinity the creation etc. popish image-maker imagine but as the instrument of the soul and last in the whole person the soul in regard of the spiritual and immortal substance resemble he which be a spirit and everlasting r r philo. jod. de fa. mun. which see all thing remain itself unseen and have a nature in manner incomprehensible comprehend the nature of other thing to which some add the resemblance of the holy trinity in this that one soul have those three essential faculty of understanding Will and memory or as other of vegetation sense and reason in regard of gift and natural endowment the soul in the understanding part receive a divine impression and character in that knowledge whereby she measure the heaven s s Trismeg Pimand bring they to the earth lift up the earth to the heaven mount above the heaven to behold the angel pierce the centre of the earth in darkness to discern the infernal region and legion beneath and above they all search into the divine nature whereby t t gen. 2. Adam be without study the great philosopher who at first sight know the nature of the beast the original of the woman and the great divine except the second Adam that ever the earth bare the will also in free choice of the best thing in u u ephes 4.24 righteous disposition towards man and true holiness towards GOD be conform to his will for who will sake it be and be create the body can so lively express the vertue of he that make it but as it can in that perfect constitution 10 10 psal. 139.14 so fearful and wonderful make y y etc. ovid. and as the organ of the soul who weapon it be to righteousness have some shadow therefo the whole man in his natural nobility beyond and princely dominion over the other creature that we mention not the hope of future blessedness show after what image man be create and to what he shall be renew the end whereunto GOD make man be GOD himself who have z z pro. 16.4 make all thing for himself the subordinate end be man endless happiness the way whereunto be religious obedience Moses add a a gen. 1.27 he create they male and female thereby to show that the woman in economical respect be b b 1. cor. 11.7 the image and glory of the man be create for the man and of the man but in relation to GOD or the world she as a creature be also frame after the same image as for that monstrous conceit of the rabbin that the first man be a hermaphrodite it deserve not confutation or mention the order of the woman creation be plain relate GOD c c gen. 21. find not a meet help for Adam in his sleep take one of his rib whereof he build the woman this in a mystery signify that deadly sleep of the heavenly Adam on the cross who stripe be our heal who death be our life and out of who bleed side be by divine dispensation frame his spouse the church this may be part of the sense or a application thereof d d Whitak de script quaest. 5. as some say to this mystery or the signification rather of the e e Hugo de s. vict. to. 1. thing itself here declare then of the word which proper and plain set down the history of a thing do after the literal sense to be expound according to this sense Moses express the creation the make and marry of the woman the maker be GOD the matter a rib of Adam the form a building the end to be a meet help the man be make of dust the woman of the man to be one flesh with the man and of a rib to be a help and supporter of he in his call which require strength neither can any bone be more easy spare in the whole body which have not such variety of any other kind nor can any place more design the woman her due place not of the head that she shall not arrogate rule not of the foot that the husband shall not reckon she as his slave but in a mean between both and that near the heart in which they shall as in all divine and human law else be fast join the building of this body of the woman be in regard of the progeny which be in that large room to have the first dwelling the soul of the woman be to be conceive f f Basil as the soul of the man before mention immediate infuse and create by GOD herein equal to man be thus make she be marry by GOD himself unto Adam who bring she unto he to show the sacred authority of marriage and of parent in marriage a mutual consent and gratulation follow between the party lest any shall tyrannical abuse his fatherly power and thus be two make one flesh in regard of one original equal right mutual consent and bodily conjunction and thus be this goodly couple glorious in nakedness not so much in the ornament of beauty which make they to each other amiable as of majesty which make they to other creature dreadful the image of GOD clothe that nakedness which in we g g Apoc. 3.19 appear filthy in the most costly clothing GOD further bless they both with the power of multiplication in their own kind and dominion over other kind and give they for food h h gen. 1.29 every herb bear seed which be upon all the earth and every tree wherein be the fruit of a tree bear seed he do as it be set they in possession of the creature which by a charter of free gift he have convey to they to hold of he as lord Paramount but lest any shall think this but a niggardly and unequal gift whereas since the flood more have be add and that in a more unworthiness through man sin let he consider that since the fall i i gen. 3.17 gen. 9.3 the earth be accurse whereby many thing be hurtful to man nature and in those which be wholesome there be not such variety of kind such plenty in each variety such ease in get our plenty or such quality in what be get in the degree of goodness and sweetness to the taste and nourishment which have they remain in this sickly and elder age of the world we shall not need to envy Cleopatra vanity or Heliogabilus his superfluity and curiosity and have not man sin k k porphyrius according to the Pythagorean opinion abhor the eat of live creature especial because man before the flood be so long live without such diet roffinus there shall not have need the death of beast to nourish his life which without such stay shall have be immortal the use whereof be after grant rather to supply necessity when the flood have weaken the earth then to minister a great abundance then before it have and least of all to satisfy the greedy and curious appetite of more than beastly man liberal and bountiful be God allowance which yet as man abuse in eat the forbid fruit so whether any sinful man do transgress by eat the flesh of beast as iniquity increase it be uncertain and yet it be likely that when the earth be l l gen. 6.11 fill with cruelty as man escape not beastly butchery so beast escape not butcherly inhumanity and man that stay not now for commission to eat man flesh will then much less ask leave to feed on beast then do the godly patriarch live many hundred year m m the father do not eat flesh before the flood Orig. in gen. hom 1. chrysost hom 27. genes without such food whereas now we reach not to one with this help that I speak not of those which by abuse hereof be as cruel to themselves in shorten their day by surfeit as to the creature make their belly to become warren fishpool shambles and what not save what they shall be have not man be devilish in sin he have not be beastly in feed nay the beast have abhor that which now they practise both against their lord and their fellow-servant n n Es. 11.6 the wolf shall have dwell with the lamb the leopard shall have lion with the kid and the calf and the lion and the fat beast together and a little child may lead they and this in the time of the flood appear when all of they keep the peace with each other and dutiful allegiance to their prince in that great family and little movable world Noah ark the place o o Bas hex. hom 11. junil in gen. Pererius relate the opinion of Bonaventure Tostatus Ephrem Isidore also Vadianus Goropius Beroaldus in chronico junius and other have large handle this question of paradise of Adam dwelling be express by Moses and the lord GOD plant a garden eastward in Eden and there he put the man who he have make genes 2.8 marvel it be to see the confusion which sin bring which appear not only in the body soul diet and other prerogative of our first parent but in this place also than a place of pleasure a paradise and garden of delight after a place prohibit and keep by the blade of a sword shake now the place can be find in earth but be become a common place in man brain to macerate and vex they in the curious search hereof some do convert this history into a allegory as do the manichee and the originist confute by methodius as p p Ambrose in his long treatise Paradiso lean too much this way and philo judaus also epiphanius witness q q Epiphan. lib. anchor and contr lib. 2. Jerome in dan. 10. say that seek for shadow in the truth they overturn the truth itself such mystical mist-all and Miss-all interpreter be our familist in these time by unseasonable and unreasonable allegory raise mist over the scripture-sense which thereby they miss and can find r r gen. lib. 8. c. 1. and civit. l. 13. c. 21. Augustine relate three opinion that allegorical which he confute the literal and that which follow both the one and the other as himself do the s s aug. hermian and Seleucian be say to deny that there be any such place and the naked adamite account their church to be paradise other be as prodigal and ascribe hereunto all the earth which be a paradise till sin bring in a curse thus hold t t Wolfg. Wissenburg Praefat. dom. nig. gor. Bec. Becces joat vad. de Paradiso likewise Hugo de s. vict. reckon this opinion annot. in gen. Wolfgangus Wissenburg Goropius also and Vadianus be of like mind that man exile be but the alteration of their happy condition that the fiery sword be the fiery zone a great while it go for currant that it be a pleasant region by a long tract of sea and land separate from our habitable world and lift up to the circle of the moon whereby it be out of the reach of Noah flood as u u patric pan. Cos. lib. 20. true perhaps as Patricius and other have find another world in the moon with man and beast therein of great stature and long life than here with we thus have 10 10 hist scholast Petrus Comestor and Strabus and many traveller in old time have travel with this conceit of their fool paradise and bring forth a lie as appeareth by their legend y y leg. that saint Brandon sail thither from Ireland be as true as that he meet judas in the way release from his pain as he be always from Saturday to Sunday evensong or that they make fire on a fish suppose it to be a island as that legend tell it shall seem the man in the moon call he and show he the way to this paradise or that z z anton. diog. incredibil Thule cap. 24. ap. Dinias which according to the relation of Antonius Diogenes travel beyond Thule go so far north that he come to the moon which seem a shine earth where he see many strange sight as credible as the former or else great Lucifer himself who as a late traveller a a ignatij Concl. report have late bequeath a lieutenancy to Ignatius and his colony of jesuit in the new hell in that new-found-world of the moon the care of the foundation whereof he commit to that jebusiticall society but let we descend from this lunatic paradise other place it eastward in the high top of the earth where the four river mention by Moses have their original whence they run and be swallow up of the earth and after rise in diverse place of the world be know by the name of Nilus Ganges Tigris Euphrates b b Hugo Annot. in Genes. Hugo de s. victore and Adrichomius be of this opinion yea the great cardinal c c Adric. chron. Caietan in gen. 7. bel. de rom. pont. l. 3. c. 6. and great caretane and Bellarmine place Henoch and Elias in earthly paradise yet live there until the time of Antichrist which will he can see be in the midst of it for tree but the discovery of the world by traveller (@) description thereof by geographer will not suffer we to follow they to the want of which art I mean Geographie such fantasy may be impute whereby also be confute the opinion of they which place it under the equinoctial circle as durandus and Bonaventura d d phil. Melano and Carion other account so much to paradise as those four river do water even the chief part of Africa and Asia and some confine it in straight limit of Syria Arabia and Mesopotamia as if Adam have be so covetous as his posterity or so laborious as to husband so large country the false interpretation of those river to be Nilus Ganges etc. be the cause of this error the e e in Esa. 23.3 and jer. 2.18 Septuagint translate in stead of sichor which be Nilus Gihen the name of one of these stream Moses as it be of purpose by a exact chorography and delineation of the situation do meet with those error and with other the like which I do not here relate neither be their opinion to be follow which drown all altogether in the deluge see that after that time Moses write this Franciscus junius in his read on genesis f f see also Annot. Trem. and jun. in gen. 1. have large and learned handle this matter and add a map also of Heden in which it stand and the course of the river with the country adjacent in he the reader may find satisfaction he show out of Curtius Pliny and Solimus the miraculous fertility of that part of Babylonia which Ptolemy call auranitis or Audanitis easy decline from Heden the name give by Moses mention after Moses time 2. reg. 19.12 and Esay 37.12 for the four river he show they out of Ptolemy Strabo Pliny Dion marcellinus etc. to be so many division of Euphrates whereof Baharsares or Neharsares be Gihen that which pass through Babylon be for the excellency peculiar call Perath or Euphrates nehar-malca or Basilius Pishon Tigris g g Tigris be both the great river and a small which run out of Euphrates into Tigris which be here mean Chiddekel for the fiery sword he observe out of Pliny lib. 2. c. 106. a certain miracle of nature in Babylonia where the ground be see burn continual about the quantity of a acre but this place will not serve to dispute this point if those river do not now remain or have alter either channel or name it be no new thing in so old a a continuance of the World it be more than probable that herein these part paradise be although now deform by the flood and by time consume and become a stage of barbarism I have here for the reader pleasure set before his eye mercator map or topography of paradise paradisus neither have the place alone be such a pitch field of opinion but the fruit also which Moses express to be the instrument and occasion of Adam ruin have set some man tooth on edge who tell we what it be as if they have late taste of it a certain sign indeed and fruit of that once unlawful taste h h gorop becan Indoscythico Goropius a man addict to opinion which I know not whether he do hold more strange or strong though he enlarge paradise over the world yet he make Adam a indian marvel he place he not in Dutchland for that be his language if Becanus be to be believe about the river Acesine bebetwixt Indus and Ganges say he grow that admirable figtree which he at large describe out of Pliny Theophrastus and Strabo who branch spread from the body do bend themselves downward to the earth where they take hold and with new root multiply themselves like a maze or wood one tell i i car. clus l. 1. c. 1. see l. 5. c. 12. of this history clusius that he himself have be one of eight hundred or a thousand man which have hide themselves under one of these tree add that some of they be able to cover three thousand man strange be this tree and Becanus be with conceit hereof ravish into the pleasure of paradise this tree k k Linschoten lib. 1. cap. 58. Linschoten describe grow about goa and to bring we out of Goropius paradise say that it have no fruit worth the eat but a small kind like olive which be food only for bird he tell we l l c. 55. to this agree that of Drusius Tetrag c. 4. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) of another indian figtree grow rather like a reed then a tree a man height a span thick the leave a fathom long and three span broad the arabian and indian suppose this to be that dismal fruit the cause of this opinion Paludanus in his annotation upon Linschoten ascribe to the pleasantness of the smell and taste be cut in the middle it have certain vein like a cross whereon the christian in Syria make many speculation yea the same author tell of a hill in the i will of Seilan call Adam hill where they show his foot-print to prove that he live there of which read our discourse of that island m m lib. 5. cap. 14. boskhy in his ara coeli cite out of Moses Barcepha that wheat be the tree of knowledge of good and evil and so do the saracen hold so curious and vain be blind reason without a guide and the cabilist say n n rich. epit. Talmud doct ricius say that Eve sin be nothing but the wring out of grape to her husband which yet he interpret allegorical but I think I have weary the reader with lead he thus up and down in paradise small fruit I confess be in this fruit and as little pleasure in this paradise but that variety happy may please some though it be to other tedious and for a conclusion it be I think worth the note that m. Cartwright a eyewitness o o the preacher travel by the counsel of the nestorian Patriarke at Mosul or Niniveh visit the i will of Eden still so call and by they hold a part of paradise ten mile in circuit and sometime wall which if it be not part of that garden-plot mention by Moses yet it seem be part of that country sometime call Eden in the east part whereof paradise be plant and not far according to junius map from that happy unhappy place chap. 4 of the word religion and of the religion of our first parent before the Fall have thus make way to our history of religion the first and therefore best religion be in the first place to be declare only somewhat may be not unfit speak before of the word religion in itself be natural write in the heart of all man which will as here we show rather be of a false than no religion but the name whereby it be so call be by birth a foreigner by common use make a freedenizon among we descend from the roman which by their sword make way for their word the author both of the thing itself and of the appellation to a great part of this western world but as the latin have accustom themselves to multiplicity and variety of rite so have they vary not a little about the parent as I may say of this child as the grecian sometime about Homer birthplace some give one etymology and derivation of the word and some another that there need some herald to show the true pedigree or some grammarian dictator to cease the strife a a saturnal lib. 3. cap. 3. Servius Sulpitius as Macrobius cite he call that Religion which for some holiness be remove and separate from we deserve to be relinquish and his opinion remove and separate even with a anathema if he will remove and separate religion from we which be the life of our life the way to our happiness the like be add of a just name and reason of the most of the present romish ceremony who want be their best company massurius Sabinus in b b not at. lib. 4. cap. 9 a. Gellius have the like word with Tully be the worship of the god hereby distinguish from superstition because they be say he call superstitious that spend whole day in prayer and sacrifice that their child may be survive after they or rather as Lanctantius * * lactant. lib 4. cap. 28. but they which diligent use and peruse the thing pertain to divine worship be call religious * * Varro parent aug. de civit. lib. 6 c. 6. saint Augustine better acquaint with religion than Cicero come near to the name and nature thereof derive it c c civit. lib. 10. cap. 4. a of choose again this word Religens be cite by nigidius figulus in being take in bad sense for the same Father elsewhere in his book d d in fine acknowledge another original of the word which Lactantius before he have observe of fasten as be the bond between we and god. say his word be Cicero and according to this etymology be that which m. Camden say * * remain of a great work religion in old english be call Ean-fastness as the one and only assurance and fast anchorhold of our soul health * * lil. gyrald hist d. synt 1. Suarez Relig. li. 1. and Etymon cultus ceremonia pietas etc. graec. Latin heb this be the effect of sin and irreligion that the name and practice of religion be thus diversify else have there be as one GOD soon religion and one language wherein to give it with just reason a proper name for till man do relinquish their first innocence and the author of who and in who they hold it they need not to make a second choice or seek reconciliation nor thus with such pain and vexation of spirit to inquire and practice those thing which may bind they sure and fast unto God and in these respect for several cause religion may seem to be derive from all those fountain thus much of the word whereby the nature of religion be in part declare but more full by the description thereof say h h 83. quaest q. 31. religion be here describe general whether false or true profess the inward observation and ceremonial outward worship of that which be esteem a high and divine nature the true religion be the true rule and right way of serve god. or to speak as the case now stand with we i i morn Christ relig cap. 20. true religion be the right way of reconcile and reunite man to GOD that he may be save this true way he alone can show we who be the way and the truth neither can we see this sun except he first see we and give we both eye to see and light also whereby to discern he Adam happiness before his fall but to come to Adam the subject of our present discourse his religion before his fall be not to reunite he to GOD from who he have not be separate but to unite he fast and daily to knit he near in the experience of that which nature have ingraft in he for what else be his religion but a pure stream of * * rom. 12.2 original righteousness flow from that image of GOD whereunto he be create whereby his mind be enlighten to know the only very GOD and his heart be engrave not with the letter but the life and power of the law love and prove that good and acceptable and perfect will of god. the whole man be conformable and endeavour this holy practice the body be pliant and flexible to the rule of the soul the soul to the spirit the spirit to the father of spirit and God of all flesh which no less accept of this obedience and delight as the father in his child in this new model of himself how happy be that bless familiarity with God society of angel subjection of creature envy only of the devil because this be so good and they so wicked nature be his schoolmaster or if you will rather God usher that teach he without learning all the rule of divine learning of political economical and moral wisdom the whole law be perfect write in the fleshy table of his heart beside the especial command concern the tree in the midst of the garden the one be a universal and everlasting rule of righteousness the other by special authority appoint as the manifestation of God divine prerogative in command and a trial of man integrity in obey for the first part hereof since it be so blur in our heart it be renew by the voice and finger of God on mount Sinai give then immediate by GOD himself as GOD over all whereas the other part of the law contain the ceremonial and political ordinance be immediate give by the ministry of Moses as to that particular nation neither know I any that make doubt of this whole law natural and original communicate save only that some make question of the sabbath howbeit I must confess that I see nothing in that commandment of the decalogue prescribe but be natural and moral for both the rest be so far moral as the outward act of divine worship can be perform without suspend for a while our bodily labour although rest as a figure be jewish and in itself be either a fruit of weariness or idleness and that the seven day observation be natural I mean the observe of one day of seven in every week appear both by the first order establish in nature when GOD bless and sanctify the seven day k k Calu. Fagius Pagnin Ursin Hospin martyr jun. Zanc. Oecolam gibbins beside Perkins bind greenham Rogers and other the stream of interpreter especial the late run and join in this interpretation the elder be somewhat more than enough busy in allegory by the reason in the commandment draw from God example and sanctification in the creation by the observation of a sabbath before this promulgation of the law Exod. 16. and by the division of the day into week l l the heathen by the light of nature have their week as appear by name the day after the seven planet and satuday or Satur day be by the gentile sequester from civil and martial affair be esteem most fit for contemplation and devotion as say Aretius Probl. de sab. both then and before by Noah gen. 8.10.12 by the necessity of a sabbath as well before the law in the day of the patriarch as in the time of David or Solomon by the perfection of the number of seven in the m m philo say that some city keep a monthly sabbath number the seven day from the new moon 10. p. scripture by the general consent of all that it be moral to set apart some time to the lord of time and a orderly set time to the god of order which man may general agree on for their public devotion which the patriarch practise in their sacrifice and assembly the heathen blind as other thing in their feast thus say philo n n philo de fab. clem. Strom. l. 5. and eund. Herumius this be a feast day not of one city or region but of the whole world and may be proper call the general birthday of the world and Clemens alexandrinus show out of Plato Homer Hesiod callimachus and Solon that the seven day be not sacred alone to the hebrew but to the greek also and how mystical be the number of seven not only among the jew but also among the heathen both philosopher and poet as philo o o philo de fab. mund. and 10. pray macrob. in in some scip. l. 1. cap. 6. Virg b. etc. Macrobius and other have relate hereunto agree the judgement of Aquinas p p q. 122. art. 4. the precept of sanctify the sabbath be set among the precept of the decalogue as it be a moral not as a ceremonial precept it have please he q q Eccles. pol. lib. 5. @. 70. say m. hooker as of the rest so of time to exact some part by way of perpetual homage never to be dispense withal nor remit the moral law require therefore a seven part throughout the age of the whole world to be that way employ although with we the day be change in regard of a new revolution begin by our saviour Christ yet the same proportion of time continue which be before because in reference to the benefit of creation and now much more of renovation thereunto add by he which be prince of the world to come we be bind to account the sanstification of one day in seven a duty which god immutable law do exact for ever thus far hooker this indeed in the sabbath be jewish and ceremonial to observe only that last and seven day of the week and that as a figure and last with those appoint ceremony and that manner of observation thus say Aquinas r r etc. to have some set time for the service of God be moral but so far this precept be ceremonial as in it be determine a special time in sign of the creation of the World likewise it be ceremonial according to the allegorical signification in as much as it be a sign of the rest of Christ in the grave which be the seven day and likewise according to the moral signification as it signify a cease from every act of sin and the rest of the mind in God likewise according to the anagogical signification as it prefigure the rest of the fruition of God which shall be in our country to these observation of Thomas we may add that strictness of the observation that they may not kindle a fire on the sabbath and such like and howsoever some testimony of the father be allege against this truth and to prove that the sabbath be bear at mount Sinai as of s s cite by del. de imag. l. 2. c. 7. and by other Tertullian justin martyr Eusebius cyprian Augustine which deny the sabbatize of the patriarch before that time and account it typical why may not we interpret they of that sabbath of the t t so justin reason against Tryphon a jew and that jewish sabbatize and so the rest if their testimony be well weigh jew which we have thus distinguish from the moral sabbath by those former note of difference Broughton in his consent allege the consent of rabbin as of ramban on gen. 26. and Aben ezra upon Exod. 10. that the father observe the sabbath before Moses and Moses himself no soon come to a seven day but he show that u u gen. 2.2 3. God rest bless sanctify the sum it rest therefore that a time of rest from bodily labour be sanctify unto spiritual devotion from the begin of the world and that a seven day rest begin not with the Mosaical ceremony in the wilderness as some man will have it but with Adam in paradise that which be moral say some be eternal and must not give place I answer that the commandment be eternal but yet subordinate there be a 10 10 Mark 12.28 and 31. first of all the commandment and there be a second like to this like in quality not in equality and in every commandment the soul of obedience which be the obedience of the soul take place of that body of obedience which be perform by the body mercy be prefer before sacrifice and charity before outward worship Paul y y Act. 20.9 stay his preach to heal Eutychus Christ patronize z z Mark 2.25 his disciple pluck the ear of corn and affirm that the sabbath be make for man and not man for the sabbath although therefore both rest and work of the sabbath give place to such duty which the present occasion present as more weighty and necessary to that time yet do it not follow that the sabbath be not moral no more than the commandment of alm be not moral because as a a est v. g. and bern. praecep and Barnard observe the prohibitive commandment of steal be of great force and more bind and in a word the negative precept be of more force and b b negative precept bind at all time and to all time the affirmative bind at all time but not to all time and therefore negative be of more force Perkins ser. more universal bind then the affirmative a man must hate his father and mother for Christ sake and break the sabbath rest for his neighbour in case of necessity and therefore such scrupulous c c tho. Rogers fancy as some obtrude under the name of the sabbath esteem it a great sin to violate this holy rest then to commit murder can be defend pardon this long discourse whereunto the long discourse of other have bring i but now i think I hear thou say and what be all this to Adam integrity doubtless Adam have his particular call to till the ground his general call also to serve GOD which as he be spiritual to perform in all thing so be a body he be to have time and place set apart for the bodily performance thereof and what example can he better follow then of his lord and creator but some object this be to slacken he run rather than to incite and provoke he to bind and not to loose he can be a spur but a bridle to his devotion but they shall consider that we do not tie Adam to the seven day only but to the seven especial wherein to perform set public and solemn worship neither do Daniel that pray thrice a day or David in his seven time or saint Paul in his injunction of pray continual conceive that the sabbath will hinder man and not rather further they in these work neither be Adam state so excellent as that he need no help which woeful experience in his fall have teach God give he power to live yea with everlasting life and shall not Adam therefore have eat yea and have have convenient time for food and sleep and other natural necessity how much more in this perfect yet flexible and variable condition of his soul do he need mean of establishment although even in his outward call he do not forget nor be forget which outward work though they be not irksome and tedious as sin have make they to we yet do they detain his body and somewhat distract his mind from that full and entire service which the sabbath may exact of he neither do they show any strong reason for their opinion which hold the sanctification of the sabbath genes 2. to be set down by way of anticipation or as a preparative to the jewish sabbath ordain d d Sethus caluis 2453. Bun. Opmeerus etc. 2454. 2453. year after if any shall ask why the same seven day be not still observe of christian I answer this be figurative and be abolish but a seven day still remain say junius the law be natural have adjoin thereto the ceremonial appointment of the day but why be this day now call the lord day I answer even therefore because it be the lord day not change by the church constitution mere as some seem to hold except by the church authority they mean Christ and his apostle nor descend to we by tradition as the papist maintain see the scripture act. 20.7 1. cor. 16.21 Apoc. 1.10 mention the name and celebration by the constant practice of the apostle yea Christ himself as he rise on that day so do he usual appear on that day to his apostle before his ascension Christ therefore and his apostle be our author of this change and the church * * justin. mart. apol. 2. in fine christus ever since have constant observe it the father teach yea the papist themselves acknowledge this truth so Bellarmine Sanct. l. 3. c. 11. say e e Ignaty Tertul. clem. Orig. Athaenas Ambros Hieron Gregor. leonis hilarij it be in the primitive church call the lord day the day of bread and f f chrysost ser. 5. Resurrect. of light because of the sacrament of the supper and baptism therein administer call bread and Light and how it may be ascribe to tradition g g bell. lib. 4. cap. 7. Bellarmine the great patron of tradition show out of justin martyr who say christus Apostolis and discipulis justin in fine 2. Apolog. he there also report that they have their ecclesiastical assembly every lord day the rhemist h h rhemish test which ascribe it to tradition in Annot. matth. 15. acknowledge the institution thereof in Annot. 1. cor. 16.2 Ignatius i i ignat. may be allow arbiter in this question of the sabbath who thus write to the let we not observe the sabbath after the jewish manner as delight in ease for he that work not let he not eat but let every one of we keep the sabbath spiritual not eat meat dress the day before and walk set pace etc. but let every christian celebrate the lord day consecrate to the lord resurrection as the queen and princess of all day now for the particular commandment which be give he as a especial proof of his obedience in a thing otherwise not unlawful it be the forbid he to eat of the fruit of the tree of knowledge for in the midst of the garden GOD have plant two tree which some call * * aug. gen. lib. 8. cap. 4. sacrament and be by God ordinance sign unto he one of life if he obey the other of death by disobedience not as the jew think and julian scoff that the tree have power to give sharpness of wit and although some think sign needless to so excellent a creature yet be mutable subject to temptation and each way flexible to virtue or vice according as he use his natural power of freewill I see not why they shall deny GOD that liberty to impose or man that necessity to need such monitory and as it be sacramental instruction for what may these tree have further he in carefulness if he have consider life and death not so much in these tree as in his freewill and obey or disobey his creator these tree in regard of their signification and event be call the tree of life and the tree of knowledge of good and evil which be not evil or hurtful in itself but be a visible rule whereby good and evil shall be know and that by reason of the commandment annex which he may by this precept see to be ground in obey or disobey the authority of the lawgiver a easy rule and yet too easy break for when as God do hereby challenge his own sovereignty by impose so easy a fine which may have forbid all but one as contrariwise he allow and fore-signify the danger that he may continue his goodness to man continue in obedience yet do man herein show his contempt in reject so easy a yoke and so light a burden I will not reason whether these two tree may proper be call sacrament of which say some the one be but for the bodily life and better never to have touch the other this we know that in eat of this he lose both bodily and spiritual life which the name and institution thereof forewarn and shall have prevent otherwise in eat of the other immortality have be seal both in soul and body to he and he for ever strange it seem that he shall need no monitory sign to prevent that which even with these help add he do not eschew chap. v. of the fall of man and of original sin hitherto we have behold the creation of the world and of our first parent the lively image of the creator and the creature who we have somewhat leisurely view in a naked majesty delight themselves in the enamel walk of their delightful garden the river whereof run to present their best office to their new lord from which they be force by the back stream greedy of the sight and place which they can not hold the tree stoop to behold they offer their shady mantle and variety of fruit as their natural tribute each creature in a silent gladness rejoice in they and they enjoy all mutual comfort in the creator the creature and in themselves a bless pair who enjoy all they desire while their desire be worth the enjoy lord of all and of more than all content which may in all they see see their maker bounty and beyond all they can see may see themselves comprehend where they can not comprehend of that infinite greatness and goodness which they can not but love reverence admire and adore this be then their religion to acknowledge with thankfulness to be thankful in obedience to obey with cheerfulness the author of all this good to the performance whereof they find no outward no inward impediment sickness perturbation and death the deform issue of sin not yet be enter into the World in this plight do Satan that old serpent see disdain and envy they it be not enough for he and the devilish crew of his damn associate for their late rebellion to be banish heaven but the inferior world must be fill with his venom work that malice on the creature here which he can not there so easy wreck on their creator and because man be here God deputy and lieutenant as a petty God on the earth he choose he as the fit subject in who ruin to despite his maker to this end he use not a lion-like force which then have be bootless but a serpentine sleight use that subtle creature as the meet instrument to his labyrinthian project whereas by inward temptation he can not so easy prevail by insinuate himself into their mind he wind himself into this wind beast dispose the serpent tongue to speak to the woman the weak vessel single from her husband and by question do first undermine she the * * it be by all affirm that the fall be very soon after the creation as appear by circumstance of the narration by Satan malice the woman virginity and many hold it be the very day of their creation Bibliand Broughton Concent antique August iren. Chrysost. etc. and Genebrard be exact curious for the day and hour if you will receive he Eva woman whether she have not yet experience of the nature of the creature or do admire so strange a accident and will satisfy her curious mind in the further trial entertain discourse and be present snare for though she hold she to the commandment yet the threaten annex she do somewhat mince and extenuate what she seem to lessen he fear not to annihilate and whole disannul propound not only impunity but advantage that they shall be as god in the enrich of their mind with further knowledge this he persuade by the equivocate in the name of the tree the first equivocation we read of a a joh. 8.14 the first sin of our first parent otherwhere plain term a lie charge GOD with falsehood and malignity thus he that abide not in the truth himself but be a manslayer from the beginning and the father of lie which he no where else borrow but have of his own persuade she by his great subtlety first to doubt of God truth in his word the first particular sin that ever man heart entertain for the other be but occasion and inducement disobedience and unthankfulness be more general after that she unlawful lust after this new knowledge bewitch with the pleasantness of the fruit to the taste and sight she take and do eat and give to her husband likewise the high power of the soul be first entrap the lust and sensible faculty follow after just plague by a correspondent inward rebellion that the sense now rule the appetite and this the reason in our corrupt estate which hence proceed thus b b aug. Enchir. cap. 45. foolish and wicked be their conceit that measure this sin by the fruit a nut or apple that be eat as pope julius that say he may be as well angry for his peacock as God who vicar he be for a apple Bal vit. pont. unbelief bring forth unthankfulness unthankfulness pride from thence ambition and all that rabble of contempt of God truth believe the devil lie abuse of the creature to wanton lust sacrilegious usurp that which GOD have reserve scandalous provocation of her husband with the murder bodily and ghostly of he herself and their whole posterity for ever and whereas yet they have do so little service to GOD they offer almost their first fruit to the devil have c c freewill to have resist if they will no marvel then if such a combination of so many sin in one wring from the justice of GOD such a multitude of judgement on they and they in the deface that goodly and glorious image of GOD subject in stead thereof the body to sickness cold heat nakedness hunger thirst stripe wound death the mind to ignorance doubt Vanity fancy frenzy the will to unstaidness passion perturbation the whole man be make a slave to sin within he to the devil without whence he must expect wage suitable to his work death spiritual natural and eternal a infinite punishment for offend a infinite majesty thus have they put out their light to obscure darkness and if they be not present cast into utter darkness it be God mercy not their merit which suspend the first and natural death to prevent that second and eternal but spiritual the be even already dead in sin as appear by the accusation of their conscience whereof Moses say d d gen. 3.7 etc. athan. the eye of they both be open and they know that they be naked conscience before virtue keeper be now become hell harbinger than flash lightning in the face of their mind to show that their nakedness do now appear filthy in God sight lightning indeed which can only lighten to terrify not enlighten with instruction and comfort which spark remain after the fire of God image extinct by the merciful providence of GOD in some e e spiritus to be a bridle of nature lest they shall run into all excess of villainy and not leave a face of the world in the world and to be to other by disposition and work of a high and supernatural light a preparative to and a preservative in that light of life so much the great be their sin that seek to flash out these flash and whereas they can read the book of scripture and will not read the book of the creature labour to extinguish also this light of nature that with sear conscience they may more free in darkness commit the work of darkness and even this do Adam seek if GOD have not bring he out of his owl nest for what can a figleaf hide from GOD and do they think the innocent tree will conspire with they to conceal traitor be there any darkness which be not light to he or can breeches and tree cover their soul which receive the first and worst nakedness till which nakedness to the body be a clothe of beauty a livery of bounty a ensign of majesty such f f jer. 2.13 break pit seek they that forsake the fountain of live water and yet when GOD come into judgement and g g gen. 3.8 make the wind to usher he unto his private session in paradise to those shiftless shift they add worse impious accuse GOD uncharitable charge one another to put from themselves that blame which thus cleave fast to they a medicine worse than the disease or a disease in stead of a medicine be hypocrisy that will not see she own sickness and seek rather to cover then to cure to cover by charge other then recover by discharge and discover itself as if h h Hieron equity pretend be not iniquity double GOD proceed to sentence a sentence worthy of GOD show at once his infinite justice in the punishment of sin and no less infinite mercy to provide a infinite price to redeem we by his infinite power bring good out of evil and by his manifold wisdom take that wise one in his craftiness who in the destruction of man have seek God dishonour so good be it that evil shall be when this sovereign goodness purpose to effect his good will by wicked instrument out * * deus sicut ope creator ordinator aug. of their darkness produce his own marvelous light as appear in this work of Satan a adversary intend to his despite in and by the promise seed dispose to his glory i i gen. 3.14 the serpent have a bodily curse in his future bodily difficulty which still continue for his instrumental and bodily employment the k k Vers. 15. old serpent and spiritual enemy have a spiritual and eternal curse the break of his head by that seed of the woman that shall once lead captivity captive our parent be curse yet so as their curse be turn into a blessing all thing work to the best in sorrow shall be the woman conception but recompense with the joy which follow and be as it be the midwife in their travel because of l l joh. 16.21 fruit bear into the world and more than recompense in that they be m m 1. tim. 1. ult. save by bear of child if they continue in the faith and live in holiness with modesty Adam be set to labour not as before with delight but with pain and difficulty the earth also be curse for his sake yet by this narrow way by this crossway he be guide to heaven the hope whereof be give he before paradise be take from he so true be it that in judgement he remember mercy if we can learn to live by faith and not by sight this that Moses tell of the fall of man experience do in manner proclaim through the world in the manifold effect thereof which we daily see for whereas the world be make for man as before be show who alone in regard of his bodily and spiritual nature can need and use it no creature in the world be in his kind so imperfect as man he that be before as a earthly God be now become a incarnate devil and for aspire to be like his lord be make a servant of his n n Heurnius Chaldaic servant the noble part in he become a base officer to degrade he reason itself deject at the foot of sense to be a slave and a very bawd to sensual pleasure a very broker for dunghill profit and what be this but to metamorphose man into a beast unless that some in a low degree live only to live suffocate o o vivi sepulchrum with eat drink sleep be degenerate into plant and if he descend not low to become torpide and liveless yet do he participate the imperfection of those thing and that without their perfection as if with a imperfect retrograde he will return into his first element or in a perfect imperfection to his first nothing what stone so hard as man heart be relentless remorseless to his best good what dust more subject to the wind or water more flexible than he to temptation and sin but those thing remain in their nature or natural place man be a fume smoke a pass shadow and yet if we can stay at our element it be somewhat better but we be servant and drudge beneath all name of baseness unbowel the earth and ourselves in the earth for a little harden earth that never have the dignity to see no not to be see of the sun we seem to rule the sky wind and sea indeed we adventure our life to their mercy and not three finger thickness do separate we from death that we may bring home a idle discourse or somewhat almost less than nothing that we call a jewel once we invert nature subvert other pervert our self for those thing which sometime kill the body and always except a power with who all thing be possible prevent the soul and yet p p luc. 12.20 thou fool this night may they fetch away thy soul and who then shall these thing be and who then and where then shall thou be thou gain fair to loose thyself to be take with thy take to be thus bad to other that thou may be worse to thyself and when-as like a ass thou have be lade all the day of thy life with those thing which even in have thou want now to be more intolerable burden now to be in hell which will never be satisfy in thou who character be before engrave in thy unsatiable heart tell i not then of the reasonable power of our soul whereby we resemble GOD see that reason may tell thou and i that by abuse it q q ignat. Epist. Diabolo we be like and r r io. 8.44 be of our father the devil that erect countenance to be still grovel in and pore on the earth that immortal soul to mind only such thing as have not the imperfect privilege to be mortal those high excellency to be abuse to mischief blaspheme deny forswear GOD and all for the base of the base creature well may this deluge of corruption move that s s diog. Laer. lib. 6. cynic in a throng of man to make search for a man this man which be now leave we be but the ruin the carcase of himself well may the greek call this body of we (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) * * Plato in gorg. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the sepulchre of the soul the latin where by reason of man fall from his first estate the first syllable be fall off Cor the heart be go we be only remain corruption and filthiness and do not we call it body because both die the soul also hereby infect and that both death internal and external the spirit the better part of man be spirit indeed a puff and vain blast of emptiness animus be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) a wind that pass that pass the wind in vanity but what need all this why be we fall into so long and tedious discourse of our fall even because some be fall further beyond all sense and feel of their fall and believe not that man be ever any other creature than now they see that if their goodness can yet their wickedness may teach they that so perfect a world shall not have be frame for so imperfect a wretch now only perfect in imperfection our fall must teach we to rise our stray to return our degeneration a regeneration and therefore be not that image of GOD whole do out but some remainder continue to the posterity to convince they of misery in themselves that so deny themselves they may take up their cross and follow the second Adam unto a durable happiness but how may some ask as t t jul. Pelagian cap. August the Pelagian do come this misery to we do it agree with divine justice that if the father have eat sour grape the children-teeth shall be set on edge I answer we be heir of our father we need not seek some secret cranny we see a open gate u u rom. 5.12 by one man sin enter into the world and death by sin a little leave let we borrow to clear this difficulty sin be 10 10 1. John 3.4 a transgression of the law or a defect of conformity to the law (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and can proper be say to have a efficient but a deficient cause be in it own nature and subsistence (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the y y aquin. 1.2 q. 75. art. 1. quaest. disp. Malo q. 1. 6. Dorbel viguer etc. schoolman say in sin be two thing to be consider the substance and the quality essence and privation the act and defect whereof that they call the material this the formal part of sin be nothing else but a deformity irregularity and unlawfulness in our natural condition and condition as easy to be distinguish though not to be divide from the action as lameness from the work hand or jar in a instrument both from the instrument and sound the sinner be term z z aquin. sum p. 1. q. 48. art. 3. and in q. disp. Malo Mel: loc. com. sc. morn C.R. athan. count gent. malum and etc. Dion d. n. vid. ficim and add plot. provide and Ramb. M.N. l. 3. cap. 11. as naught as not aught not that sin be simple norh nor be it a mere and pure privation but to be consider with that subject wherein and whereof it be such a distortion and destruction the want of this consideration drive the manichee to their heretical opinion of two being and beginning sin be first see in the devil who voluntary stray from the right way and as he abide not in the truth himself so he beguile our first parent from who by the conduit of nature it be convey to we I speak of original sin which be our inheritance for actual sin be our own purchase and improvement and yet buy with that stock which our parent leave we our first parent be to be consider not as singular person only whereby they defile themselves but as the root of mankind which have receive original righteousness to keep or to lose to they and they as a perpetual inheritance as in the body politic the act of the prince be repute the act of the whole the consent of a burgess in parliament bind the whole city which he represent and a a aqu. in ro. 5. as in the natural body the whole body be liable to the guilt of that fact which the head or hand have commit as a root to his branch a fountain to his stream do convey the goodness or badness which itself have receive so stand it betwixt we and Adam our natural prince the burgess of the world the head of this human body and generation the root and fountain of our humanity when he sin he lose to himself and we that image of GOD or that part of the image of GOD which he have receive for himself and we not the substance nor the faculty of body or soul but the conformity in that substance and faculty to the will of GOD in b b ephes 4.24 righteousness and holiness of truth not so much therefore be we here to consider the ordinary course of nature wherein c c Ezek. 18.4 the soul that sin it shall die as the ordinance of GOD who appoint the first Adam the wellspring of nature which he receive incorrupted the second of grace that as man we all by generation be of the first and with the first d d ephes 4.22 one old man in who we all sin of and with the second Adam we be all one new man in the lord even one body one spirit one seed one Christ in who and with who we as member of that head obey the precept and suffer the curse of the Law f f be aquin. in rom. 5. other sin of Adam be not our natural but his personal because he can be no long a public person then while he have somewhat to save or lose for we all be already forfeit in this first sin the author then of original sin e e col. 3.10 1. cor. 12. rom. 5. be the propagator of our nature his actual sin be original we the guilt be derive by imputation the corruption by natural generation first that person corrupt nature after nature infect our person the matter of this original corruption in regard of the subject be all and every man and all and every part of all and every man subject to all sin that if all be not as bad as any and the best as the worst it must be ascribe to God restrain or renew not unto unequal degree in this original stain in regard of the object the matter of it be the want of original righteousness and a contrary inclination to evil g g gen. 6.5 the imagination of our heart be only evil continual no grape can grow on these thorn the form of this corruption be the deformity of our corrupt nature not by infusion or imitation but by default of that first instrument by which this nature descend it be the root of actual sin and whereas they as fruit be transient this still remain until Christ by his death destroy this death in we but here arise another difficulty how this sin can be derive by generation see it be true believe that God be h h Heb. 12. 9 father of Spirit the i i ecc. 12.7 gen. 2.7 zac. 12.1 Genebrard chron. l. 1. Adam Neshama Shamaim for man of our soul which do by infusion create and by creation infuse theme corruptible element be unable to procreate a incorruptible substance or generation to produce in corruption neither stand it with reason that he which communicate not the substance shall communicate the accident or with justice that a innocent soul shall necessary be stain by involuntary infusion into a pollute body I answer hereunto that although the soul be not traduct as they term it and by generation confer yet be it couple to the body in that manner and order which GOD have appoint for the conjunction thereof though man have not sin neither be it the soul alone in Adam or the body alone but the person consist of both which sin neither can we be partaker of nature sin till we be partaker of human nature which be not till the soul and body be unite we be not so much therefore to look to the concupiscence and lust of the parent in generation as k k lib. sent. 2. dist 31. Lombard teach we but to the person which l l super sent. Scotus say be and although the soul be not in the seed yet it be communicate to the body say Aquinas by a dispositive preparative power of the seed which dispose and prepare the body to the receive of the soul where it be receive after the m m general rule according to the measure and nature of that which receive the father be then a perfect father not because he beget the soul but because he beget the person or at least all whatsoever in the person be beget and though he do not beget the substance thereof yet as it be n n zanch. de red. l. 1. c. 4. such a subsistence he may be say to procreate it because his generation work towards the union of the soul and body which union be make by the spirit animal and vital and o o zanch. de Operib ^^ part. 3. these spirit be procreate by the seed and consist of a middle nature as it be betwixt bodily and spiritual so that the production of the soul and incorporate thereof may be count in the middle way between creation and generation and therefore this original corruption do not reach to Christ jesus although he be true man because he be the seed of the woman and do not descend of Adam by generation say Aquinas but be miraculous frame in the womb and of the substance of the virgin by the power of the holy ghost thus have I presume to offer my crude and rude meditation to the wise world about the derivation of original sin which itself be the cause why we can no better see it as darkness hide itself but the whole city of mankind be here with set on fire it behove every one to be more careful to quench it then over-curious to inquire how it come it be sufficient that nothing descend hereby to we by corruption or be make we by imputation which be not full cure by Christ who be p p 1. cor. 1.30 make unto we both by imputation of his active and passive obedience and by real infusion of his spirit wisdom righteousness sanctification and redemption if we have faith to receive it and charity to express it a absolute renewer and perfect of the image of God beyond what we have in our first parent lose chap. 5 of the relic of the divine image after the fall whereby natural man addict themselves unto some religion and what be the religion of the world before the flood this sin of our first parent whereby they be almost no soon make then mar be as some suppose form and deform in one day so interpret the psalm * * psal. 49.12 that he lodge not one night in honour but become as the beast that a a Broughton out of the rabbin in his consent Perer. in ge. 1.6 perish this sin I say do not whole deprive we of the image of GOD whereunto we be create a remainder and stump thereof continue like to the stump of b b 1. Sam. 5.4 Dagon who head and hand be cut off by his fall or like the stump of c c dan. 4.12 Nabuchodonosor tree who root be leave in the earth bind with a band of iron and brass among the grass of the field so be man head and hand fall off before the ark that his wisdom remain be foolishness with God not sufficient to one good thought not able either to will or to do that which may please god. and though the stump remain the substance and the faculty of body and soul yet be this stump leave in the earth fast bind with iron and brass his earthly mind captive and chain with worldly vanity and devilish villainy or to use lumbard comparison d d lib. 2. sent. dist 25. he be like the man fall e e luk. 10.30 among thief wound and spoil wound in his natural part spoil and rob of the gift of grace which GOD by especial grace add to his nature in that first beautify of this his image in the state of creation man be make able f f 1. 2. 3. 4. lumb ibid. to commit no sin in the state of corruption he can but sin until a three state of grace do free he not from the be but from the reign and imputation of sin whereby he be prepare to a four state of glory wherein shall be no possibility of sin or necessity of strive against sin and howsoever in this corrupt state of nature in our spiritual action which mere concern the kingdom of heaven we can but sin yet have not God leave himself without witness even in this darkness to convince we of sin such be those notion sow by nature hand in every of our heart according to which evidence conscience as a witness patron or judge within we g g rom. 2.15 accuse excuse condemn or absolve that hereby GOD may be h h rom. 3.4 justify and all the world inexcusible sinful and that hereby also a way may be leave in God infinite mercy for man recovery his intent be i i we must understand that god though in the beginning he suffer man to fall etc. yet vouchsafe of his goodness so far to uphold in he both light of understanding and truth of conscience as may serve to direct he in some sort for moral and civil life for the preservation and maintenance of society among man d. abbot Defen. 3. part pag. 68 not to destroy we utter as just he may and as it befall the rebellious angel but by this punishment to recall we to subjection not to break we to piece in his wrath but by wrath to reclaim we to mercy thus nature suggest reason convince and be convince that there be a GOD that that GOD have create the world as we before have show and that for man that man to who all thing serve be to serve GOD who have subject they to he do not nature teach the son to honour his father and the servant his lord k k mal. 1.6 if he then be our father where be his honour if our lord where be his fear nature infer reason urge this and from that ground of reason do scripture reason the nature whereof in our nature be write even by reason principle we learn that so perfect a hand as make all these inferior thing in such perfection will not have be so imperfect in the perfect of they all so to have leave he in the creation as we now see he in corruption the l l morn ver. ch. r. philosopher see man be a little world for who the great be make who himself be make for more than the world and that he for who so durable and substantial a thing be make must needs be make for another than this frail and wretched life that be for the everlasting life with he that be the everlasting and that be the foundation of all religion for what else be religion but the school wherein we learn man duty towards GOD and the way to be link most straight to he and what be all the exercise of religion but acknowledgement of the godhead of the creation of the world of the provident order therein and order thereof of the soul immortality of man fall and imperfection of our sovereign and supreme good to be seek out of ourselves of all which nature and reason be witness not to the learned alone who testimony in this kind may easy be produce but even to the vulgar and rude idiot yea whereas neither art nor industry nor civil society have bind man as man together yet the ground of these thing have bind they as man by the mere bond of human nature to GOD in some or other religion GOD man and religion be necessary link as a father a son and obedience as a lender a debtor and a bond. the wit no soon conceive that there be a GOD but the will infer that he ought to be worship what philosopher or what politician ever teach the eastern and western island discover in this last age of the world this necessity of religion and yet as follow in this history to be show they which never wear clothes on their body never furnish their mind with art never know any law beside reason grow almost lawless or magistrate but their father which when they see other man can not tell whether they be m m the indian see the spaniard mount think the horse and man to be all one they think they also immortal and fall from heaven heavenly wight or earthly monster these yet weary themselves in superstition show it easy to put off ourselves then to put the principle of religion out of ourselves yea among all the lesson which nature have teach this be the deep indent not art not policy nay not raiment not food not life itself esteem so dear and that natural to man as their religion hereof let this history ensue be witness which will show the reader every where in manner over the world this natural zeal of that which they esteem religion beyond all thing else esteem most natural some in the guilty conscience of their own irreligion as Aesop fox that be by casualty deprive of his tail seek to persuade all fox to cut off they as unprofitable burden will tell we that which they n n d. king on jonas can tell to themselves which they dare not tell but as they dare whisper that religion be but a continue custom or a wise policy to hold man in awe but where have custom this beginning and what be custom but a uniform manner and continuance of outward rite whereas religion itself be in the heart and produce those outward ceremonial effect thereof in one country man observe one habit of attire another in another so likewise of diet and yet be it natural to be clothe more natural to eat but natural most of all as be say to observe some kind of religion the grecian o o Herod l. 3. burn their dead parent the indian incombed they in their own bowel Darius can not by great sum procure the grecian to the indian or these to the grecian custom yet be that which move both and begin either custom one and the same principle of piety and religious duty howsoever diverse express yea even the most lascivious cruel beastly and devilish observation be ground upon this one principle that GOD must be serve which service they measure by their own crooked rule every where disagree and yet meet in one centre the necessity of religion as for policy although it be before answer yet this may be add that whereas man with all threaten promise punishment reward can scarce establish their political ordinance religion insinuate and establish itself yea take natural such root that all political law and torture can pluck it up how many martyr p p not only the true religion have have martyr but jewish turkish ethnic heretical superstition and idolatry have not our eye see brownist and papist every where else iar and yet meet in the halter while one pretence of religion have move they to commotion and disturbance of the state and even while we write these thing what mad martyr have we have for Arianisme and other blasphemy have religion yea superstition yield but who will lay down his life to seal some politician authority and so far be it that religion shall be ground on policy that policy borrow help of religion thus do Numa father his roman law on Aegeria and other lawgiver on other suppose deity which have be a foolish argument q q petitio principij and unreasonable manner of reason to persuade one obscurity by a great have not nature before teach they religious awe to God of which they make use to this civil obedience of their law suppose to spring from a divine fountain yea the falsehood and variety of religion be evidence of this truth see man will rather worship a r r calv. Instit. l. 1. beast stock or the base creature then profess no religion at all the s s Diagoras Luhemerus theodor. Cyren philosopher also that be accuse of atheism for the most part do not deny religion simple but that irreligious religion of the greek in idolatrous superstition Socrates rather swear by a dog or a oak then acknowledge such god it be manifest then that the image of GOD be by the fall deprave but not utter extinct among other spark this also be rake up in the ruin of our decay nature some science of the godhead some conscience of religion although the true religion can be but one and that which GOD himself teach as the only true way to himself all other religion be but straying from he whereby man wander in the dark and in labyrinth of error like man drown that get hold on every twig or the foolish fish that leap out of the frying-pan into the fire thus GOD leave a spark of that light cover under the ash of itself which himself vouchsafe to kindle into a flame never since never after to be extinguish and although that rule of divine justice have denounce t t gen. 2.17 to die and again to die a first and second death yet unasked yea by cavil excuse further provoke he by the promise seed erect he to the hope of a first and second resurrection a life of grace first and after of glory the son of God be promise to be make the seed of the woman the substantial u u Colos. 1.15 image of the invisible GOD to be make after the image and similitude of a man to reform and transform he again into the former image and similitude of GOD and whereas GOD have make man before after his own image and lose he he now promise to make himself after man image to recover he even that he which in the 10 10 phil. 2.6 form of GOD think it not robbery for it be nature to be equal with GOD shall be make nothing to make we something shall not spare himself that he may spare we shall become partaker of our nature flesh of our flesh and bone of our bone that he may make we y y 2. pet. 1.4 ephes 5.30 partaker of the divine nature flesh of his flesh and bone of his bone this be that seed of the woman that have break the serpent head which by death have overcome death and he that have the power of death the devil who submit himself to a death in itself bitter before man shameful and of GOD accurse that he may bring we to a life peaceable glorious and bless beyond what eye have see or heart can conceive this promise of this seed slay from the begin of the world be the seed of all true religion the soul of faith the life of hope the wellspring of charity true it be that all receive not this promise alike for a seed of the serpent be fore-signify also which shall bruise the heel of the woman seed and this in the first seed and generation of man soon appear Cain and Abel be hereof lively example it appear that GOD have teach Adam how he will be worship as it be order and ordain he the first priest of the world which function he fulfil both in instruct his wife and child in prayer with and for they and in the rite of sacrifice his child according z z gen. 4.3 in process of time bring and offer their sacrifice as concern sacrifice some hold opinion according to their own practice that a a Perer. in gen. l. 7. abel etc. nature may teach Adam this way of serve GOD as if nature be as well able to find the way as to know that she be out of the way and be as well see in the particular manner as in the general necessity of religion we can see the sun without the sun nor come to GOD but by GOD to who b b 1. sam. 15 22. obedience be better than sacrifice and to harken better than the fat of ram ABEL say the scripture c c Heb. 11.4 offer by faith without which faith it be impossible to please GOD but faith have necessary relation d d rom. 10.17 to the word of GOD who otherwise will be e e Esay 1.14 weary of our solemnity and ask who have require they at our hand these sacrifice also beside that they be acknowledgement of their thankfulness and real confession of their sin and death due to they therefore do lead they by the hand to Christ that lamb of GOD that shall take away the sin of the world figure by these slay beast confirm their faith in the promise and their hope of the accomplishment of which nature can not once have dream which have rather f f the mystery of our redemption by Christ be mere supernatural the impression of some confuse notion that we have lose the way and aught to seek it than either light to discern it or wisdom to guide we in it of sacrifice there be from the beginning two kind one call g g (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) gift or oblation of thing without life the other victim so our rhemist h h Rhem. tran Mark 9.49 act. 7.42 have teach we to english the word slay sacrifice of bird and beast again they be propitiatory consecratory eucharistical and so forth who kind and rite Moses have in his book especial in leviticus so plain declare that I shall but pour water into the sea or light a candle to the sun to dilate much of they these be the same in signification with the Levitical and little if little differ in the manner of do Cain bring his i i some rab. think that Cain and Abel bring their sacrifice to Adam that he shall offer they Betram think that they have a certain place design for their sacrifice and holy thing offering be a husbandman of the fruit of the ground Abel a shepherd of the fat of his sheep God respect ABEL and his offering the tree first and then the fruit the worker and then the work which he signify either by voice or by k k Hieron Heb. in gen. fire from heaven according to theodotian translation l l as in the sacrifice of Aaron Gedeon Manoah David Solomon Elias or by some other mean both comfortable to Abel and envy of Cain who therefore slay he thus in this member bruise the heel of that bless seed as a type of that which the head himself shall after sustain here be the first apostasy after that first evangelical promise and the first division of religion Cain be the first builder of the m m aug. de civit. lib. 15. c. 5. earthly city not that which he call after the name of his son n n gen. 4.17 roma Henoch but of that spiritual city of the wicked the seed of the serpent which he found in his brother blood even as that late compendium thereof which call herself the head of the world and indeed o o job. 17.6.9.16 etc. the world be usual in scripture apply to that seed of the serpent as it be opposite to the seed of the woman be by Romulus her first founder by like example of fratricide in the murder of Remus dedicate as it be to the future mystery of iniquity the seat of the beast and of the whore by who authority Christ himself be slay drunken after with the blood of his saint and still breathe blood and slaughter to every Abel that will not communicate in her spiritual whooredome that will not with she offer the fruit of the ground the sacrifice of Cain which neither come from heaven nor can guide to heaven be earthly sensual devilish Cain be for this his fact convent by that all-seeing justice who both by open sentence and inward terror accuse and accurse he continue his life even for the same cause that other murderer lose it that he may live a example which then in that unpeople world by his death he can not have be to the future generation brand p p some think this mark to be a shake of all the body as fear continual Perer. also by the lord with some sensible mark to exempt he and terrify other from that bloody cruelty this mercy be mix with this judgement a long time of repentance GOD before curse q q gen. 3.17 the earth for Adam he now r r gen. 4.11 curse Cain from the earth to be a runagate and wanderer thereon for how can he that have so forsake God but be forsake of the earth and of himself the s s 6 vesta ovid. stable and merciful earth which before have open her mouth to receive his brother blood shrink and as it be grudge to support such wicked foot and by deny he her strength force he to his manifold shift and shiftless remove wretched man always bleed his brother blood not dare to look up to heaven fear to look down to hell the world without he threaten a miserable life his body brand to contempt and shame till his death his soul become a stage of anguish fear horror and other fury the harbinger of hell not able to suffer which yet he can but suffer the guilt of pass wickedness gnaw he the weight of present misery press he the dread of a death and a death attend he restless in himself hate of the world despair of relief from God a lively map of the deadly and damnable state of sin and sinner without Christ t t 1. tim. 5.6 dead while they live move sepulcher the devil captive hell heir exile from heaven and vagabond on the earth even on that which they call their own land Cain more vex with the punishment then at the fault of his sin depart from the presence of the lord which be mean either of his judicial convent he or u u calv. in gen. martyr in gen. chrysost hom 20. cornel. Betram polit. jud. c. 2. in regard of the visible society of the church cradle yet in his father household where God do especial show his present providence protection and grace who otherwise fill the heaven and earth of who and in who they be from hence as Adam before out of paradise so Cain be as it be excommunicate expel and outlaw and dwell in the land of nod which 10 10 Hieron Heb. trad. some take to be appellative speak as if his misery have give name of move unto the place where he dwell or roam rather y y antiq. l. 1. c. 2. josephus say he build Naida apply it to a proper place which be either eastward from Eden or eastward towards Eden from Canaan where Adam be suppose to have dwell and after with his wife to have be bury at Hebron afterward his posterity be multiply his wife epiphanius out of leptogenesis call shave z z p. come hist schol. Comestor call her Chalmana a a pseudo-philo in antiq Bibl. philo themech he build a city which he call by the name of his son b b Pseudo-Berosus name the city oenus by Libanus Henoch to cross that curse of his wander to and fro on the earth or to arm he against other which his guilty conscience cause he to fear or to be a receptacle and store-house of those spoil which josephus say he rob from other by violence when as the earth be barren to he philo if we may so entitle that author which have write of the antiquity of the bible ascribe unto he other city Mauli lead tehe jesca celet jebbat add that he live 730. year these thing may be probable although that author be otherwise fabulous consider that man do ordinary live many hundred year in those time and be also exceed fruitful especial after that polygamy be embrace of that family and c c even I myself know one w. Collen of broxted in Essex who posterity by one woman which also survive he be such that his son report to i that there be 212. of they live at his funeral and one of his daughter have above a hundred then of her progeny if that in Abraham posterity the seed of jacob in less than three hundred year be multiply to so d d 600000. man of war great a people it be like that the cainite e e joseph say that Lamech have seventy seven child be no less populous live in more freedom he first say josephus find out weight and measure and assign propriety in possession of land before common as the air and light and be author to lewd person of a lewd and ungodly life probable it be that the city be call Henoch because the curse suffer not the father to stay in a place but to leave a hasty inheritance to his son to finish and rule it jabal and jubal and Tubalcain be inventor of art the first to dwell in tent and keep cattle the second of musical instrument the three of work in metal and make of armour which some think to be Vulcan by the nearness of name and occupation his f f Genebrard in chron. sister Naamah be account by some rabbin the first inventor of make linen and woollen and of vocal music yea they make she the wife of Noah also thus let we leave this family multiply in number in science in wickedness savour nothing divine or at lest nothing but human in their divinity therefore call the son of man g g gen. 6.1.2 and let we look back to Adam who in this wicked fruit of his body may read continual lecture of repentance for the sin of his soul Adam beget a child in his own likeness h h the jew fable that none of Adam child which he have after Abel till the birth of Seth have the true form of a man and that in that 130. year space he begat Rochot that be devil r. Mos. Egyp doc. dub lib. 1. c. 6. he interpret adam beget a child in his own likeness of that instruction whereby Seth be teach and become a perfect man the other be beast and Rochot which in a allegorical sense may be true speak and so perhaps be mean that be not in that likeness of God wherein he be create but like unto himself both in human nature and natural corruption his name he call Seth of who posterity the whole world be by Noah repeople unto Seth be bear Enosh then begin man say Moses to call upon the name of the lord this some i i Broughton consent martyr in gen. interpret of the begin of idolatry that man begin to profane the name of the lord some to call the name of the lord that be after rabbi Salomo to apply the name of God to image star and man but the more likely opinion be that when Adam have obtain a more holy posterity which be now multiply in diverse family k k Luther in gen. Tremell Vatablus Calu. in gen. Perer. in gen. l. 7. religion which before have be a private inmate in Adam household be now bring into public exercise whereof prayer have always be account a principal part and God himself in both testament call his house a house of prayer the calf of the lip and the ejaculation of the heart be the body and soul of divine worship whereof sacrifice be in a manner but the apparel fashion to that infancy of the church of the name of l l some be of opinion that all those father mention gen. 5. be ecclesiastical father also and priest for divine worship which function of lordship and priesthood unite continue to the first bear many generation after the flood Betram pol. jud. cap. 2. the posterity of Adam and his hundred year mourn for Abel of Seth his remove after Adam death to a mountain near paradise and such other thing more savour of fabulous vanity in the falsenamed m m revel philo. antiq. Genebrard chron. Edit. pet. vict. Palma caiet Paris an. 1600. methodius philo and other that follow they I listen not to write and well may Genebrard have spare his pain in search for the antiquity of popery in this first age of the World easy may we grant a church then true catholic in the posterity of Seth instruct partly by revelation partly by tradition concern the creation the fall the good and evil angel the promise seed the unity and trinity punishment and repentance for sin public and private devotion and other like article gather out of Moses but for the rabble of Rabbinical dream which he add hereunto we have need of the implicit faith of some simple credulous catholic too receive they as namely purgatory resemble in the fiery sword at the entrance of paradise freewill ground on that which GOD speak to Cain thou shall rule over he the prerogative of the elder brother over the young false apply to the rule of the mind over sinful lust the choice of meat in the first father abstinence from flesh fish and wine as he say which have not be permit to they as it be to we tradition when as yet they have no scripture superstitious obsequy to the dead because the jew in their office for the dead call upon the n n lu etc. interp Genebr father which lie bury at Hebron namely Adam Eve and the rest to open the gate of paradise devotion to saint because the cherubin be set between paradise and sinner as if their saint be honour to keep they out of heaven and not the bloody sacrifice only in Abel offering but that unbloody sacrifice so they style their mass in the offering of Cain we envy they not their founder yea he find their sacrifice of order in god execute the priestly function of matrimony in Adam and Eve of baptism in the breeches which they wear of penance because GOD say thou be dust and to dust thou shall return of confirmation in those word she shall break thy head the truth will break their head for so read it of unction in that Seth go to the cherub which keep paradise and receive of he three grain of the tree of life whereof we read in the Apocalyps the leaf shall heal the nation with those grain be a oil make Apoc. ult. wherewith Adam be annoy and the stone put into his mouth whence spring the tree whereof the cross of our lord be make hide by Solomon in the temple and after in the pool of do not Genebrard deserve a o o aquensis archlepi archbishopicke or if the observation be he do not Petrus victor Palma which set he forth with such comment deserve the palm and victory for Peter pretend successor which can find such antiquity for proof of their Catholicisme much good may it do their catholic maw with such dainty just be thou o lord and just be thy judgement which because they will not believe thy truth give they over to such strong delusion to believe so gross and palpable lie chap. 7 of the cause and come of the flood thus we have see in part the fulfil of the prophecy of the seed of the woman and of that other of the serpent in the posterity of Cain and seth. the family of Cain be first reckon and their forwardness in human art a a Luke 16.8 as the child of this world be wise in their generation in the thing of this life which they almost only attend than the child of light as for the b b martyr in gen. rab. Solom jewish dream that Lamech be blind and by the direction of Tubalcaine his son guide his hand slay Cain suppose it have be a wild beast which when he know so enrage he that he kill his son also they that listen may follow Moses reckon the generation according to the firstborn in the posterity of Seth as enjoy the principality and priesthood that so the promise seed of the woman after such a world of year come into the world may justify the stableness of God promise his lineal descent from Adam with a due chronology be declare after Seth Enosh kenan Mehalaleel Iared be Henoch the seven from ADAM who walk with God who God take away that he shall not see death this before the law and Helias in the law be witness of the resurrection be miraculous take from the earth into heaven not by death but by supernatural change of their body that he shall be still in c c Bellar. tom. 1. cont 3. l. 3. c. 6. a earthly paradise and that he and Elias shall come and preach against Antichrist and of he be slay be a popish dream the scripture d d Heb. 11.5 etc. say that HENOCH be take away that he shall not see death of Elias that he be e e Luke 7.27 matth. 17.12 already come in the person of John Baptist the spirit and power or spiritual power of walk with GOD reform religion and convert soul be communicate to many of those minister which have lie slay in the street of that great city this his assumption be f f Gib rab. Akiba Racanati targum suppose to be visible do he be a prophet and jude do in his epistle cite a testimony of he g g Perer. lib. 7. in gen. think that jude know of this prophecy by revelation and reveal the same to the church which either by h h perk. Cathol. tradition go from hand to hand as it seem the whole word of GOD be deliver before the day of Moses GOD by vision and dream appear unto the patriarch or else it be write and since be lose some hold it be pen by some jew under the name of Enoch i i civit. lib. 15. cap. 33. Augustine think that the book entitle Enoch be forge in his name as other write under the name of prophet and apostle and therefore call it apocrypha as k k in his hier. in tit. c. 1. Jerome do also l l chrysost hom. in matth. chrusostom and Theophilact account Moses the first penman of holy scripture although it seem that letter be in use before the flood if m m antiq. l. 1. c. 2. josephus his testimony be true who affirm that Adam have prohpecy two universal destruction one by fire another by water his posterity erect two pillar one of brick another of stone in both which they write their invention of astronomy that of stone be report to remain in his time some n n Otho Heurn lib. 1. ascribe this to Seth as also the first name of the seven planet the science of astronomy they say be much further by Enoch who say Eupolemon be by the greek call Atlas to who they attribute the invention thereof o o plin. l. 7. c. 56. Pliny be of opinion that letter be eternal howsoever it be more than apparent that the book bear enoch name be very fabulous which because the tale therein profess antiquity although they be late dream I think it not unfit to borrow out of p p not in euseb chron. pag. 244. frag. graec. l. 1. Enoch Scaliger somewhat of that which he have insert in his note upon Eusebius the greek copy be as the phrase testify translate out of Hebrew which have be the work of some jew the antiquity appear in that q q Tertul. Idololat. Tertullian cite it the word be these and r r a fragment of the book of Enoch it come to pass when the son of man be multiply there be bear to they fair daughter and the watchman so he call the angel out of dan. 4. lust and go astray after they and they say one to another s s this fable arise of the false interpretation of Moses word gen. 6.12 the son of God etc. let we choose we wife of the daughter of man of the earth and Semixas their prince say unto they I fear i you will not do this thing and I alone shall be debtor of a great sin and they all answer he and say we will all swear with a oath and will anathematise or curse ourselves not to alter this our mind till we have fulfil it and they all swear together these come down in the day of Iared to the top of the hill Hermon and they call the hill Hermon because they swear and anathematise on it these be the name of their ruler Semixas Atarcuph Arachiel Chababiel Orammante Ramiel Sapsich Zakiel Balkiel Azalzel Pharmaros Samiel etc. these take they wife and three generation be bear unto they the first be great giant the giant beget the Naphelim to who be bear Eliud and they teach they and their wife sorcery and enchantment Ezael teach first to make sword and weapon for war and how to work in metal he teach to make woman ornament and how to look fair and iewel and they beguile the saint and much sin be commit on the earth other of they teach the virtue of root astrology divination etc. after these thing the giant begin to eat the flesh of man and man be diminish and the remnant cry to heaven because of their wickedness that they may come in remembrance before he and the four great archangel Michael Gabriel Raphael and Uriel hear it look down on the earth from the holy place of heaven and behold much bloodshed on the earth and all ungodliness and transgression commit therein say one to another that the spirit and soul of man complain say that you shall present our prayer to the high and our destruction and the four archangel enter say to the lord thou be GOD of God and lord of lord etc. thou see what Ezael have do he have teach mystery and reveal to the world the thing in heaven etc. then the high say the holy one the great one speak and send Uriel to the son of Lamech say go to No tell he of the end approach and a flood shall destroy the earth etc. to Raphael he say go Raphael and bind Ezael hand and foot and cast he into darkness and open the wilderness in the desert of Dodoel and there cast he and lay upon he sharp stone to the day of judgement etc. and to Gabriel he say go Gabriel to the giant and destroy the son of the watchman from the son of man set they one against another in war and destruction to Michael he say go michael bind Semixa and the other with he that have mix themselves with the daughter of man until seventy generation to the hill of the earth until the day of their judgement till the judgement of the world be finish and then they shall be bring into t t (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the confusion of fire and unto trial and unto the prison of the end of the world and whosoever shall be condemn and destroy from henceforth shall be cast together with they till the finish of their generation etc. and the giant which be beget of the spirit and flesh they shall call they evil spirit on the earth because their dwell be on the earth the spirit that depart out of their body shall be evil spirit because they be engender of the watchman and man but it be tedious to recite further the antiquity of it and because it be not so common and especial because u u joseph antiq. l. 1. justin tertu Athenag cyprian lactan. euseb Hugo de s. vict. Strabus Burgensis Sulpitius sever hist l. 1. clem. alex. ap. this fable of angel etc. the saracen also retain see lib. 3. c. 5. some of the ancient and of the papist have be mislead by these dream refuse just by Jerome and Augustine interpret the son of GOD in Moses to be speak of angel as their translation do read it have move i to insert those tale notable be the diligence of the purgatory scavenger who in Viues note upon aug. de civit. lib. 15. cap. 23. have in their index set the seal of their office upon a testimony allege out of Eusebius Praep. Euang. lib. 5. cap. 4. as if they have be Viues his own word to be leave out in the impression the word because they savour of the former error have there place say Eusebius but Viues be fine for it 10 10 lact. l. 2. c. 15 say that when the world be multiply GOD send angel to keep man from fraud of the devil to who he forbid all earth contagion these be by the devil ensnare with woman therefore deprive of heaven and their progeny of a middle nature betwixt man and angel become unclean spirit so that hence grow two kind of daemon or devilish spirit the one heavenly the other earthly which will now seem to be keeper and be destroyer of man the angel be sometime call y y Iob. 1.6 and 38.7 the son of God but that name be communicate to man who z z ephes 2.3 by nature child of wrath by faith in the natural and only beget son of GOD have this prerogative to be the son of GOD and fellow-heir with CHRIST but some of the child of the kingdom shall be cast out because they have rebel against their father that beget they profess themselves to be the son of GOD but a a job. 8.44 do the work of their father the devil and of these hypocrite and apostate it be say that love pleasure more than GOD they match themselves in Cain family a provocation so mighty to evil that strong Samson and wise Solomon be witness that b b prou. 7.26 the strong man be slay by this weak sex this be the serpent policy at first Balaam policy after Babel policy now c c sheldon in his motive observe these marriage to bee a great mean for propagate popery and Balaam wage do move many still to make such linsey-woolsey marriage that the d d nehem. 13.24 child speak half ashdod and while the father profess one religion the mother another the child become giant to fight against all that be call GOD and to make little or no profession at least in their life of any religion at all I deny not that then there be giant also in regard of bodily stature e e Gib in gen. who the scripture call because they be great and fearful rephaim and Emim of their pride Hanakim of their strength gibborim of their tyranny Nephilim of their naughtiness zamzummim such be Og and Goliath after the flood yea such have be in all age which to omit other ethnic author f f de civit. lib. 15. cap. 9 Augustine affirm that at Utica he see a man tooth as great as a hundred of the ordinary life Viues on that place say he see one as big as a man fist Nicephorus tell of two man in the time of Theodosius the one not so admirable for his height which be five cubit and a hand as the other for his smallness like to a partridge in bigness yet witty and learned our history of g g giral camb. Hector Boet. Camden brit. Arthur little John Curcy earl of Ulster and one in our time 1581. see in London do show some such here and there now and then in the world which Goropius in his gigantomachia affirm of his own sight and even whole family of these monstrous man be find at this day in America both near to Virginia as h h map of Virginia captain Smith report and especial about the strait of Magellan i i Pigasetta near which he find giant and in the same strait be such see of the k k Oliver Noort and Sebastia de Weert hollander ten foot in height whereas yet other family be but of the ordinary greatness one Thomas Turner tell i that near the river of plate he see one twelve foot high and other who hinder part of their head be flat not round l l jul. Capitol Heredianus author tell of Maximinus the roman emperor that he be eight foot and a finger high who wife bracelet may serve he for ring that he often in one day drink a Amphora which be almost six gallon of wine and eat forty pound of flesh cordus say sixty he can break a horse leg or strike out his tooth with a blow of his fist etc. which occurrent in nature no doubt have give occasion to some of further fable m m plin. l. 7. c. 16 we read in Pliny of one of forty six cubit in Crete find by the force of a earthquake break the hill wherein he stand suppose to be Orion or otus more credible be that he tell of one Gabbora in Claudius time nine foot and nine inch and in Augustus time of another half a foot high how soever the body of these man before the flood be compose certain their mind be dispose to all monstrous inhumanity which hasten their destruction this make GOD to repent that he make man upon the earth not that there be any change or repentance in he but because a change for want of repentance happen to they in long sufferance he give they a hundred and twenty year space in which Noah may be a preacher of righteousness yea the ark itself which Noah that while be provide may preach to they repentance that their tear may have quench his wrath and prevent temporal drown and eternal burn Adam live till henoch time a witness and preacher of the promise he himself have receive Henoch himself be make not a verbal but a real preacher while his son Methushelash and his nephew Lamech the father of Noah live that GOD may have witness to convert some and convince other but while the world become worse and worse n n horat. Carm. a deluge of sin first and a deluge of judgement after drown the World for the circumstance of the flood Moses have more plain relate they then that I shall here express they Noah with his three son and their wife enter the ark at God appointment to which by divine instinct resort both bird and beast of the clean seven and of the unclean two in every kind if any marvel at this distinction of clean and unclean in these time suppose that GOD first in the wilderness make this partition-wall it be answer that GOD before this have appoint sacrifice of beast which may make the difference for which cause also there be a seven of every such creature reserve for sacrifice after Noah go out beside GOD have now purpose to add the flesh of beast unto man diet for which those call by the israelite clean be most fit and most in use and in that respect more of such kind be reserve as more necessary for man use in food clothe and some of they also for labour otherwise no creature be unclean in itself the hoof and cud be by nature God handmaid and not by their own vice such as make this distinction and after the flood God make no law of difference until the time of Moses although each country have observe their own peculiar custom in this food some loathe that which other esteem dainty not for religion but for natural and civil cause as at this day to the tartar horseflesh be royal fare to the arabian camel to some american serpent and other flesh to other which our appetite more than our faith our stomach more than our soul abhor concern the ark diverse doubt have be move through curiosity and unbelief of some who by divine justice be in a manner deprive of sense and reason have before through devilish wickedness lose their conscience and religion thus o o Orig. hom in genes 2. Apelles one of martion disciple can not find the ark after Moses dimension to be capable of four elephant in so small a quantity Celsus contrary to he yet agree in a foolish impiety and impious folly think so great a vessel be too great for man handiwork thus like samson fox their head be diverse way but they be tie together by the tail agree in disagree both from Moses and themselves but may not reason teach Celsus that the direction of GOD may teach a man in a hundred and twenty year space to frame so mighty a fabric do not sense and experience show building not much less both on the sea and on the land and what arithmetic or geometry nay what wit or common sense have Apelles in his assertion the ark be too little forsooth for so many creature and their provision for a year we need not seek for shift from help of the geometrical know to Moses in his egyptian learning of three six or nine foot to the as Origen and p p Hugo de Arca noe. lib. 1. Hugo do nor of the sacred imagine twice as much as the common nor of the large stature and cubit of man in those youthful time and age of the World the length hereof three hundred cubit and the breadth fifty do make of square measure by common rule of art fifteen thousand cubit three floor or room be therein of that quantity each contain ten foot in height as for the beast a floor of fifteen thousand cubit may yield fifty cubit square to three hundred several kind many more than be know by relation of the most writer Aristotle Pliny Gesner etc. which scarce reckon half that number and but forty kind or thereabouts that will take up any great q q such creature as breed of putrefaction and which live in both element perhaps be not in the ark room the height may yield commodious room for the fowl on perch and all this may one room or floor afford judge then whether two other room of equal bigness may not be sufficient for all other necessary employment beside the roof be not to be think unproportionable fit for so long and tempestuous storm and therefore not unfit with room for diverse necessary and if any accuse i for add this of the roof to Moses description I say that so it be translate by r r Tremel and junius some understand those word not of the window as many do but of the roof itself which else be no where describe which shall over-hang the ark a breadth to defend it the safe from rain as in our house the eve and slope roof be commodious both for room within and against the weather without but if any will entertain long dispute about this he may among other that have handle this question resort unto s s Beccesel Antiq. Antuerp Goropius Becanus his gigantomachia who in this point I will rather follow then in many other his becceselanical paradox Noah and his family with this their retinue be enter the fountain of the great deep be open and the window of heaven the two storehouse of water which GOD have separate in the creation be in a manner confound again the sea break their sandy bar and break up by secret undermine the privy pore and passage in the earth the cloud conspire with the water and renew their first league and natural amity to the confusion of nature and the World the heavenly light hide their face from behold it and clothe themselves with black as bewail the world funeral the air be turn into a sea the sea possess the airy region the earth be now no earth but a miry lump and all that huge world be contract into a brief epitome and small abridgement in the ark even there but a few inch distant from death thus do all t t rom. 8.20 creature detest sin which have make they subject to vanity thus will the element wash themselves clean from it and the committer thereof but the ark prevail over the prevail water a figure of the church the remnant of the elder and seminary of the new World Heurnius apply the fable of Prometheus to NoaH lib. 1. this drown of the world have not be quite drown in the world but beside Moses many other writer have mention it the time thereof be refer to that which in each nation be account most ancient as among the theban to Ogiges in Thessalia to Deucalion among the american although u u de fab. mercator think that the flood drown not those part because they be not yet people and because the beast there be mostwhat differ kind from these in our world the people have retain the tradition hereof mnaseas among the phoenician Berosus a caldaean hieronimus Aegyptius nicolaus of Damascus the poet greeke and latin add fable to the truth which without some ground of truth they can not have add all mention the flood howsoever confound the less and late with this first and universal I may add the testimony of eupolemus molon Abidenus Alexander Polyhistor out of Eusebius josephus and other Lucian in his Syria tell the opinion of the hierapolitan but a little corrupt from Moses narration that country wherein Noah live most likely retain firm memory of this miracle so plain do he attribute to his Deucalion the ark the resort and safeguard of the lion boar serpent and beast the repair of the world after this drown thereof which he ascribe to perjury cruelty and other abomination of the former people that Berosus which we now have be not so much as the ghost or carcase and scarce a few bone of the carcase of that famous caldaean author mention by the ancient but the dream of annius no new thing in this last age coin for the most part in his name some fragment of Berosus we haved cite in other author that convince this bastard among other somewhat of the flood have escape drown his testimony whereof set down in Polyhistor and Abidenus be in 10 10 euseb chron. grac. Scalig. lib. 1. and de Praepar lib. 9 Eusebius he affirm that Saturn give warn to Sisuthrus of this deluge and will he to prepare a great vessel or ship wherein to put convenient food and to save himself and his kindred and acquaintance which he build of length five furlong of breadth two after the retire of the water he send out a bird which return after a few day he send she forth again which return with her foot bemire and be send the three time come no more with other thing to like purpose plutar. which Polyhistor there and Abidenus cite out of Berosus Plutarch have also write of this dove send by Deucalion out of the ark which return be a sign of tempest and fly forth of fair weather chap. 8 of the repeople of the world and of the division of tongue and nation now a a genes 8.1 GOD remember Noah say Moses not that GOD can forget but that he declare his divine power whereby Noah may know he be not forget then do the b b Hos. 2.21 22. heaven remember their wont influence in the element then do the element remember their natural order GOD make a wind to pass in commission and as a common umpire to end their unnatural strife force the water into their ancient precinct above and beneath the firmament c c amb. l. no. rupert l. 4. Ambrose interpret this wind of the holy ghost rupertus of the sun the most of a wind which yet natural can not be produce from that mass but by the extraordinary hand of b b Peter in gen. lib. 13. God then do the earth remember first inheritance be free from the tyrannical invasion and usurpation of the water and what can then forget or be forget when GOD remember Noah and all that be with he in the ark and in the seven c c an. mund. 1656. the flood month the seventeen day of the month the ark rest upon the mountain of ararat this fall out in the year from the creation 1656. the d d after the sept. 2242. and after the most ancient copy 2262. Scalig Septuagint and the father that follow they reckon far otherwise which error of they differ from the Hebrew verity Agustine e e de civit. lib. 15. cap. 11. and 13. ascribe to the first coppier of that translation other to their own set purpose that they may contend with other nation in the challenge of antiquity for that cause and lest the often halve of age shall trouble the faithless say master Broughton they feign Cainan betwixt Arphaxad and selah in which account if g g luk. 3.36 Luke in his genealogy have follow they it be to be ascribe to they which will correct Luke by their corrupt translation of the Septuagint f f junius Broughton for h h Beza Annot. luc. 3. some copy of the gospel have want it the place be common think to be Armenia the Sybilline oracle if at least we may so call those eight book in greek verse translate into latin by Castalion do place i i sybil. Oracul 1. phrygia etc. ararat scal. Opusc ararat in Phrygia and say it be the hill whence the river Marsyas issue but Scaliger censure our sibyl to be counterfeit invent with zeal to up-hold the truth by falsehood in which our late legendary have follow they k k gor. Bec. Indescythica pag. 473. Goropius after his wont paradoxical hold it to be the hill Paropanisus or paropamisus a part of the hill Taurus unproper ascribe to Caucasus which rise between the euxine and hircan sea suppose the high part of the earth call now l l m. Paul Ven. Naugracot he imagine that the place first inhabit after the flood be margiana whence those colony pass that with Nimrod build Babylon his reason be because m m gen. 11.2 they go from the east to the plain of shinar whereas Armenia bear somewhat westward from thence as though that journey have be present after the flood which be a hundred year after in which space it be likely they follow the mountainous country eastward a long time and from Assyria Adiabena turn back into that fertile plain where pride fullness of bread and abundance of idleness set they on work against God I hold it not meet that a few conjecture shall counterpoise the general consent of all age josephus say the place in Armenia be call Apobaterion of this their go forth of the ark and allege Berosus testimony that a part of this ark be then say to remain in the cordyaean or Gordyaean hill the pitch whereof some scrape away wear the same for annulet and out of nich. Damascenus lib. 96. there be say he above the region of the minyae a great hil in Armenia by name baris wherein they say many save themselves in the time of the flood and one bring in a ark there stay the remnant of the wood thereof continue there long time after which happy be he that Moses the jewish lawgiver write of this mountain or mountainous region the caldean paraphrast call n n Tremel and jun. Annot. Epiphan. lib. 1. contr Haer. Kardu Curtius Cordaei montes Ptolomaeus Gordiaei the people be call Cardyaei or Gordyaei in this tract say Epiphan. there be one high mountain call Lubar which signify the descend place Lubar in the armenian and egyptian language signify the same that (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) before mention and the word baris before cite out of Damascenus seem to be corrupt write for Lubaris the armenian through all age have as it seem reserve the memory hereof and even o o cartwright travel in our day there stand a abbey of saint Gregory monk near to this hill which be able to receive p p the persian king shaugh Thamas and a great part of his army these monk if any list to believe they say that there remain yet some part of the ark keep by angel which if any seek to ascend carry they back as far in the night as they have climb in the day Cartwright a eyewitness say that this hill be always cover with snow at the foot thereof issue a thousand spring there be adjoin three hundred village of the armenian he say also that there be see many ruinous foundation suppose to be the work of this first people that a long time dare not adventure into the low country for fear of a other flood q q in chron. graec. Euang. l. 9 c. 4. Abidenus say that the ship or ark be still in Armenia in his time and that the people use the wood thereof against many disease with marvelous effect after that Noah have obtain his deliverance and be now go out of the ark his first care be r r gen. 8.20 religion and therefore he s s ph. Ferdinandus cite seven precept of No first to observe justice second not to blaspheme three not to uncover any man nakedness four not to kill five not to eat a member of any beast yet live six not to serve idol seven not to rob r. ab. ben. Kattan he build a altar to the lord and take of every clean beast and of every clean fowl and offer burn offering upon the altar and the lord smell a savour of rest and renew the ancient blessing and promise to Noah and his posterity the live creature be also permit to their food and submit to their rule by who they have in the ark escape drown only the blood be prohibit to they as a ceremonial observation to instruct they in lenity and hatred of cruelty the political ordinance be annex touch the blood of man against man or beast that shall shed the same this difference be t t gibbins in gen. 9 cic. de fin. lib. 2. allege of the life of man and beast that the life of the beast be his blood the life of man be in his blood not that the blood which we see shed be the life of the beast for that be proper not Sanguis that be the matter who form be the life or vital spirit which be separate from the body be sever also from the form or life and the life of beast have no other form but that which be unite with the blood as the life of tree be the sap of tree their blood be as it be their soul but u u aquin. sanguis Aristot gen. l. 3. the life of man be in his blood have his seat therein live when it be by death separate from the blood mean while the spirit be the pure part of the blood as conduit convey life to the bodily member and as firm band of a middle nature between the body and soul unite they together which band and carriage be break by effusion of blood the soul subsist a spiritual substance without the body not subject to substantial corruption or mortality God do also make a covenant for man with the beast of the field infuse into the nature of all thing a dread and fear of man whereby they fear the power the snare and sleight of man and therefore flee or else submit themselves not by that willing instinct as to Adam in innocence but rather with a servile fear and although by hunger or provocation or fear of their own danger they sometime rebel yet otherwise there remain some impression of this natural decree in they as experience in all place have show even the lion king of forest and savage creature do not easy give onset but on such occasion yea the moor meet with this beast do rate and brawl at he this magnanimous beast pass by with a leer countenance express a mix passion of dread and disdain fear the voice of one that fear not the weapon of many and which himself by the terror of his voice make the beast to tremble hereunto the lord add the rainbow a new sacrament to seal his merciful covenant with the earth not to drown the same any more which yet at last shall be burn with fire so to purge the heaven and earth of that 10 10 rom. 8.20 vanity whereto man sin have subject they and thus much do y y Gregor. mag. hom s. in Ezec. Melanc. come some read in the colour of the z z Rabbini Christiani clo oar 4 Gib rainbow of a waterish and fiery mixture as a continue sign of the double destruction of the world the first outward as already past the other inward as yet to come well indeed may this bow be call the a a Iris Thaumant child of wonder both for the natural constitution and divine ordinance not that there be before no such b b Alcuinum and Chrysost. pererius opin l. 14 in gen. creature but that then this use of the creature be ordain the reflection or refraction of the sunbeam in a watery cloud the brightness from the sun and the cloud meet together the variety of colour proceed from the variety of matter the fumish and dry part of the cloud yield a purplish the watery a greenish sea-colour etc. borrow the roundness from the sun half eclipse by the shadow of the earth be account the natural cause of this wonder of nature sometime also by reason of abundance of matter the same be double one bow within the other their colour place contrary for that the one be the image by reflection of the other neither be it to be think that there be no rainbow before the flood any more than that there be no water bread or wine before the institution of our christian sacrament which name and dignity not nature but use by the appointment of the god of nature and grace do give unto they for not in the cloud alone be this bow to be see but as further witness of the natural cause and constitution thereof the same effect may be show by concurrence of like cause in the water and rock where river have their fall yea on the building of man as I myself have see a perfect rainbow by the reflection of the sunbeam on a board wall of a watermil the board thereof be very wet with the fall of the water and opposite to the sun the son of Noah be sem which because of divine privilege from who loin Christ be to come according to the flesh be first name Ham or cham and japheth who seem as c c junius and Pererius lib. 15. in gen. learned man gather by the d d genes 10.21 text to be the elder fabulous methodius contrary to Moses speak of another son jonithus after the flood whereas the e e gen. 9.19 scripture say that of those three all the earth be replenish to show direct which nation descend of each of these three be a hard task and now after this confusion of nation by war league and otherwise impossible but for the first beginning of nation before that colony be by violence of conqueror or by themselves in their exceed multiply voluntary translate from one place to another they be by Moses faithful relate although the confusion of language and of people do make the matter hard and harsh to we yet the name of nation in the greek story do in great part agree with the name of these first patriarch as f f Broughton consent m. Broughton have show by lay down the name of Noah house which unvowel may admit sundry pronouncing set against they such name as heathen author have mention out of he and Arias Montanus his Phaleg and other what I think likely I have here insert jape japetus gomer or after the Septuagint Gammer Camaritae cammerij and cimbri josephus g g joseph ant. l. 1. Trem. and jun. an. say that the inhabitant of Galatia be of gomer sometime call gomarae master h h camd. brit. Camden derive the ancient gaul and Britan from this gomer the name which they give to themselves to this day imply the same which be kumero Cymro and Kumeri a british or welsh-woman kumerae and their language Kumeraeg i i Magog massagetae and getae Magog be suppose the father of the scythian before say josephus call magoge Ezek. 38.2 and 39.6 who after invade those part leave the name Magog to hierapolis in Syria plin. lib. 5. c. 23. of madai come the mede of javan the jones or grecian of Thubal the iberian call sometime say josephus Theobeli the iberian say Montanus dwell near to Meotis certain colony of they inhabit Spain and call it hiberia and themselves hiberian whence the spaniard have a report that Thubal be the first people of their country the cappadocian be call of Meshech who city mazaca be name of Meshech since by Tiberius name Caesarea where Basil be bishop hence be name Moschius and Moschos and the moscovite from Thiras come the thracian The name tros may cause man to ascribe the trojan to this beginning of the son of gomer Aschenaz be author of the nation in Asia Pontus and Bythinia where be the lake and river Ascanius a proper name also of man in those the axine or euxine sea the ascanian island and Ascania in Phrygia of Riphath come the paphlagonian sometime call the riphathaei say josephus and the riphaean hill in the north the amazonian be also call Aeorpatae k k Herod Melpom the Arimphei also near to the riphean hill Thogarma give name to the inhabitant of Armenia Minor who king call Tygranes and town tygranokartae witness it some also attribute the turk or turkeman nation to this name and author these people Asia first and from thence by degree these part of Europe of Togarma Africanus derive the armenian of javan child elisha found the Aeolus call also Aelisei of tarshish come the cilician who Mother-city be Tarsus Paul birthplace Montanus think that Tharsis be Carthage in Africa which the poeni after possess some refer the venetian to Tharsis also Cittim be another part of Cilicia the cretan after Montanus be call chetim and of other Cortini of who the italian coast call magna Graecia be inhabit and the city caieta build of dodanim come the dorian and rhodian these people the north and west part of the world in Asia and Europe Cham posterity be cush Mizraim put and Canaan these possess the south of Asia and Africa of cham be the name chemmis in Egypt and Ammon the idol and oracle so notorious cush give name to the aethiopian and arabian know in scripture by that name Mizraim to the egyptian even at this day so call in their own and the arabian tongue put to the libyan sometime call Phuthaei the river fut be mention by l l lib. 5. c. 1. Pliny not far from Atlas the canaanite I need not mention Moses plan describe they of the son of cush Seba author of the inhabitant of Arabia psal. 72.10 or after Montanius Sabaea Chavila be a name more forget suppose to be author of a people near the persian gulf m m Sabbetha Stabei persic and Messabbathae Arias Montanus Sabbetha leave the name to the inhabitant of Arabia foelix where be the city sabbatha with threescore temple therein other people Arabia foelix come of raamah where Ptolomaeus place Regama the garamantes also in Libya Sabtheca be author of the sachalitae in Arabia foelix Nimrod the son of cush some think to be Zoroastres some Belus Mizraim beget Ludim the inhabitant of Maraeotica in Egypt Anamim the cyrenean and Lehabim the Libyan and naphtuhim the aethiopian near to Egypt who town napata be mention in Ptolemy Pathrusim the pharusian Casluhim at the entrance of Egypt Cassiotis Montanus interpret Ludim the lydian ghananim the troglodyte Lebabim the Cyrenaikes naphthubim Africa the less Chasluhim the saracen Caphthorim the cappadocian to shem posterity befall the part of Asia from judaea eastward shem son be Elam the father of the elamite in the high part of Persia ashur of who come the assyrian Arphaxad the cudusians or the chaldaean be with little likeness of sound ascribe to he Lud be hold father of the lydian and aram of the syrian call also aramaei other of aram derive Armenia aram son be we of who the region Ausanitis be name Chul of who cholle seem to have his appellation in the Palmyrene desert near to Euphrates Gether Josephus ascribe ascribe to he Bactria other that part of Syria where Gnidar stand atergate and Derceto that notorious syrian goddess happy borrow the name hence of mash be the name Masius part of the hill amanus Montanus say of mes misij and Misia who Iwenal call Mesos joctan beget Elmodad of who the hill Emodus may seem name of Shalah the selebij and sariphi of hatzarmave the sarmatian of jarach the arachosian of Hadoram the orite people of India of Uzal or Auxal auzakea a city in Scythia and the river oxus of Diklah after Arias Montanus Scythia Imaum the reason I see not in the name of Obal or Ghobal the Cabolites people of Paropanisus of Abimael imaus of sheba the Sabae which Eustathius place in India or according to Montanus the sacae of Ophir some think be so call aurea chersonesus where Pegu and malacca now be Montanus think it to be Peru Chavilah have not leave so plain impression behind Montanus ascribe to he India of jobab Arias Montanus conjecture parias in the west indies to have come but with little probability which I can see and of the most before name we have probable conjecture not certain proof as appear by the difference of opinion of author concern they neither may we think that Moses intend so much a geographical history of all the nation of the world many of which be not long after this time plant or people but of the first father who people the place by degree as they increase in multitude which be near that armenian centre and especial he relate and dilate of they who it most concern the israelite to know as the canaanite who bound and nation be exact describe I can add much touch the several nation descend of these three brethren and the bound of their habitation in which Africanus sometime take profitable pain and Eusebius out of he although both be in this part lose somewhat have be barbarous translate into latin by a unknown author for the solecism tedious for the substance of history profitable to the reader and therefore by Scaliger in his edition of Eusebius communicate to the World but the uncertainty n n Isidorus Etym lib. 9 cap. 2. also perer we Osmerus and other commenter on genesis and chronologians have do somewhat in this argument which yet as in many we see much probability so very much be exceed doubtful of that they say make i unwilling to proceed in this argument further of this uncertainty no great cause can be allege than the division and confusion of tongue the history whereof Moses declare for whereas God have give to man two privilege and principal prerogative whereof other creature be no way capable his inward o o etc. cic. Officio 1. reason and ability to utter the same by speech this benefit of God in nature be turn into a conspiracy against God and nature they say one to another p p (...) come let we make brick for stone and slime have they in stead of mortar also they say let we build we a city and tower who top may reach unto the heaven that we may get we a name lest we be scatter upon the whole earth this be their vain arrogance and presumption that when their guilty conscience threaten a dissipation and scatter by divine justice they will thus hearten and harden themselves against GOD and man in stead of thankfulness to GOD and honour his name they will win themselves a name and honour in stead of prevent punishment by repentance they will in this giantlike fight against GOD prevent future judgement but even that by which they intend to keep they from scatter be the true and first cause of their scatter so do GOD scatter the counsel of his enemy and take the wise in their craftiness Babel or confusion be always the attendant of pride Sibylla allege by q q ant. lib. c. 4. josephus for the sibyl which we have in greek verse translate by Castalion into latin be but counterfeit if (@) Scaliger judge right but that more ancient Sibyll testify of this confusion of tongue in these word when all man before use one speech they erect a high tower as if they will ascend to heaven but the god by Tempest overthrow (...) tower and give to each of they several language whereof the City be name Babylon according to that of Moses r r scal. ep. ad Casaub s s Genes. 11.9 therefore the name of it be call Babel because the lord do there confound the language of all the ear from thence then do the lord scatter they upon all the earth The Atheist and Naturalist (...) the world to eternal and conceive that all all man can not be of one caus of this diversity of sin cause if such have be at Jerusalem and hear the apostle not the expert man in their own vulgar speak all language they (...) then have letter see the power in a contrarie effect to this of Babylon Mans (...) this God (...) that the one come from Babylon the other from Hierusalem that old Hierusalem give a taste and earnest of that which the new jerusalem shall once full accomplish when all shall be make new and all shall be one and God shall be in all it appear that these builder lose the understanding of their own speech and be endue with other language whereto their understanding and tongue be frame in stead of tat former what his former Language be have be doubt either of ignorance or of curiosity and self-love Theodoret esteem Syrian the first language t t Theod. q. 59 in Gen. and that Hebrew (...) with Moses u u Scal. Opusc. ep. Tomson Joseph Scaliger affirm that the Syrian Maronite attribute greater antiquty to the ancient Syrian than to the Hebrew which be all one say he as if one shall contend that the Italian idiom be ancient than the latin he conclude that the bible be write in the most ancient language which at first be pure in Assyria but by merchandise and war corrupt for Assyria say he be first inhabit both before and after the flood and from thence be colonies send into Syria and Phoenicia which hold their language pure by reason few stranger have recourse to they till after the (@) of the first temple as appear by coin of the tyrian and sidonian which be dig out and find daily 10 10 Herodot lib. 2. PSAMMETICHUS king of Egypt cause two child to be close bring up by a shepherd who shall at time put goat to they to give they suck without ever hear human voice after two year they utter the word bec bec which be the voice that they have hear of their nurse the goat but not so interpret by Psammetichus for he inquire in what language bec be significant and hear that the phrygian so call bread ascribe to they the priority of all nation and language Melabdim Echebar the great y y Relat. Regn. Mogor joan. oran Mogor as the jesuit epistle declare make the like trial of thirty child who he cause without hear of man to be bring up set guard to observe the nurse that they shall not speak to they purpose to be of that religion whereto they shall addict themselves but neither can z z Viues trad. disc. l. 3. they ever speak or will he ever addict himself to one certain religion a a Indoscyth Goropius by a few dutch etymology grow into conceit and will have the world believe he that Dutch be the first language which if it be we english shall reign with they as a colony of that dutch city a stream from that fountain by commerce and conquest since manifold mix but his evidence be too weak his authority too new the b b Orig. in num. 11. hier. in Sophon c. 3. Chrys. in gen. 20. aug. de civit. l. 16. c. 11. etc. common and more receive opinion be that the Hebrew be the first confirm also by universality antiquity and consent of the christian father and learned man ground themselves upon this reason that all the name mention in scripture before the division be in that language only significant beside it be not like that Shem conspire with these babylonian and therefore not partaker of their punishment now it be very probable and almost manifest that he be c c see Brougton on that argument Genebrard chron. gen. 10. 21 the same which after be call Melchisedech king of Salem betwixt who and Abraham in that familiarity it be not likely that there be much dissonance in language he be also call the father of all the son of Heber by a peculiar propriety although he have other son because the purity of religion and language remain in Heber posterity and why shall Heber call his son peleg division but of this division which then happen the nation and language of Israel borrow their name Hebrew of he and if it have happen to himself why shall he more than other have so name his son chap. 9 a geographical narration of the whole earth in general and more particular of Asia typus and psalmo 24. @@@@ we have all this time be view one nation which alone be know in the earth until confusion of language cause division of land and have take notice of the head and author of those people and nation that from that time be scatter over the world and after settle in their proper habitation we have not follow the opinion of some both of the * * Augustine hierom. Arnobius Epiphan. Broughton etc. ancient and late writer in define the number of nation and language through the world reckon by they seventy two for who see not that Moses in that ten of genesis be most careful to describe the posterity and bound of Canaan which GOD have give to Israel which it be absurd to think in so small a territory to be of so many that be eleven several language and how many nation be found after that by Abraham posterity not to mention so many other fountain of people by the son of Hagar and Ketura and Esau the son of Isaac neither can the world so sudden be people and of that which then be people Moses write a history of and for the church so far mention the affair and nation of the world as it be meet for the church and especial that church of the israelite to know according as it be likely they shall have then or after more or less to do with they a a Latina Ios. Scalig. Eusebium Africanus have reckon the seventy two by name but how easy be it in these day to set down seventy two more of differ nation both in region and language and how little of the world be then know shall present be show beside it may be a question whether diverse of those there mention do not speak the same language as in chaldaea Syria and Canaan b b gibbins in gen. 11. with some diversity of dialect a little more than in our northern western and southern english which may appear both by the pilgrimage of the patriarch Abraham Isaac and jacob in those part which have need new interpreter by that rule in every two or three day travel except themselves have be almost miraculous skilful in language and by the chaldaean and syrian monument and book which some observe to come nigh to the Hebrew c c d. willet in dan. c. 1. q. 25. doctor willet reprove Philo opinion that the Chalde and Hebrew be all one because Daniel a Hebrew be set to learn the Chalde or that the syrian and Chalde according to Mercerus opinion be the same yet grant that in the first time the syrian and Chalde little differ d d scal. Epist. Toms and Ubert Scaliger a fit man to speak of language who can speak so many say as before be observe that in Assyria be the first both man and language even the same which thence pass with their colony into Syria and Canaan where it remain pure even then when in Assyria itself it be corrupt by intercourse of stranger Abraham speak this corrupt syrian which take place only in the tract of Euphrates at the first but after both he and his posterity use the language of Canaan so that Laban who kindred country and language be the same with e e gen. 31.47 abraham yet speak another and differ language from that of jacob one call that gale which the other call jegarsabadutha Thus it appear by he that the ancient syrian assyrian and Chaldaean be first that which be now call hebrew because the Hebrew observe and retain it and only have leave book to we write therein who the canaanite call hebrew as f f euphratensibus Hebr. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Scaliger and Montanus affirm because Abraham have pass over the river Euphrates unto they but after degenerate first in the part near Euphrates where it be first speak and when the tyrian and sidonian have the empire of the sea by reason of their traffic it prove impure there also howsoever in the time of Elisa or Dido the phoenician or punic which she carry into Africa be pure hebrew as be also their letter the late Carthaginian letter be read from the left hand to the right as the latin and greek but those from the right hand yet not the same which now be call Hebrew but aught rather to he call jewish as bring by they from their babylonish captivity but the Canaan or phoenician letter which the samaritan still use and wherein Moses have innovate nothing as some will have he neither in the letter nor in the language but use they as (@) be long before his time war and traffic can not but further alter those language in continuance of time which appear most after the captivity when the jew speak not Hebrew but syrian and that also in likelihood more and more by time alter perhaps it be with these three language as with the Frank g g see Wolfgan Laz de Mig lib. 3. beat. rhenanus r. verstegans antiq. language when they first seat themselves in Gallia and that which be now call h h the old french and our old english be very like both in their original Dutch french or the saxon and the present english for there be no less mutation and transmutation by time and war in those part then in these it seem therefore probable that at the first division of language they that most disagree do further separate themselves and they that speak either the same or near in likeness to the same speech observe the same neighbourhood of nation as of speech which the name and word of the Phoenician syrian persian arabian and egyptian language testify the division of tongue be about a hundred year after the flood a thousand seven hundred fifty seven as Caluisius and Buntingus account now that we have speak of the first author of the principal and first nation let we survey the land and inheritance which GOD give unto they which be the habitable earth this earth together with the water make one globe and huge ball rest on itself support by the almighty hand of GOD to the roundness whereof the high mountain in comparison of the whole can be small impediment and be but i i of this see more chap. 2. as a few mote of dust stick to a Ball possidonius eratosthenes Hipparchus Pliny Ptolomey and other skilful in geography have endeavour by art to find out the true quantity hereof and although there appear difference in their sum yet that be impute rather to the diversity of their furlong which some reckon long than other then to their differ opinion but never have they so certain intelligence of the quantity of the earth as in our time by the navigation of k k f. Magellanes spaniard l l f. Drake t. cavindish english and m m Oliver Noort dutch round about the same be give we art and experience consult and conspire together to perfect the science of Geographie for whereas the ancient divide the world into three part n n some of they make but two ascribe Africa to Asia as eratosthenes Varro Silius italicus or to Europe as Lucanus l. 9 and Paulinus Asia Africa and Europe and yet never know the east and north part of Asia nor the south of Africa nor the most northerly part of Europe not only these three be by land and sea far more full discover but also o o a. maginus geog. three other part no less if not much great then the former be add to they namely America Mexicana and America Perwiana and or the land lie towards the south Pole as for the seven part which some reckon under the north Pole because we have no relation but p p Mercat. tab. universal from a magician a friar of Oxford call nicholas de Linna which may with as good conscience lie to we as by Art-magic take view of those part otherwise it be not certain know whether it be join to Asia or whether it be land or sea I therefore leave it out in this division Europe be divide q q ortel Mercat. gem. Phrys etc. from Africa by the mediterranean sea from Asia by the egean and euxine Maeotis Tanais and a line from the fountain thereof north-ward on the north and west part wash with the ocean which run by the staight of Gibraltar flow along the coast of Africa to the cape of good hope and thence pass all alongst on the east-side thereof into the arabian gulf where by a neck of land it be encounter this neck the mediterranean and ocean do limit the bound of Africa the rest of the old world be Asia America Mexicana or north and the south call Peruniana be sever by the narrow straits of Dariene in other place compass by the sea the south continent be very little know and contain the rest of the world not bound in the former limit but in their particular place we shall hear of each of they more full it can be without some great work of GOD thus in the old and decrepit age of the world to let it have more perfect knowledge of itself which we hope and pray may be for the further enlargement of the kingdom of CHRIST JESUS and propagation of his gospel and as in former time in those then discover part the jew be scatter some violent some willing through Asia Africa and EUROPE to usher the gospel into those part and make way for that which the most of themselves reject who know whether in the secret dispensation of divine providence which be a co-worker in every work able even out of evil to bring good the donation of pope the navigation of papist the preach of friar and Jesuit may be forerunner of a further and true manifestation of the gospel to the new-found nation for even already it be one good step of a atheist and infidel to become a proselyte although with some soil and again the jesuit there can play the statesman as in these part yea r r thus do fr. xavier and the rest of they themselves in their relation be witness they rather take evangelical course of those which here they count heretic and by lay open man sin through the fall and divine justice only by CHRIST satisfy do beat down infidelity with diligent catechise although upon that golden foundation they build afterward their own hay and stubble with their rack of confession and rabble of ceremony and the most dangerous to new convert a exchange polytheisme in worship of saint image and the host but if GOD shall once show mercy to Spain to make they true catholic and as a divine inquisitor condemn that devilish inquisition to perpetual exile how great a window may by that mean be open unto this new world for their conversion and reformation and why may not the english expedition and plantation in Virginia and the navigation of other protestant help this way if man respect not their own pride ambition and covetousness more than the truth and glory of GOD but he that by fisher convert the old world and turn the wisdom of the world into foolishness subdue sceptre by preach the cross yea by suffer it in himself and in his member be able of those stone to raise up child to Abraham and that by the mouth of babe and suckling by weak mean when it please he let we therefore pray the lord of the harvest to send forth labourer into these wide and spacious field ripe thereunto but to return to our part of the world whence this meditation have withdraw i the ancient s s lege ortelij descrip. and geographer be ignorant of a great part of that threefold division as appear by their own write the use of the loadstone find out by John Goia of Melfi a italian or as t t p. bellonij obseru. l. 3. c. 16. and Kecker problem vid. Pancirol l. 2. c. 10. and Salmuth Gilbert mag. l. 1. say some ascribe this invention to Paulus venetus as if he have bring it out of China 1260 some to Solomon etc. seb. cabot first find out the variation of the compass bellonius observe by one Flavius but Albertus Magnus be the first that write of the nature of it be a great and necessary help to further discovery especial after that Henry son of John the first king of Portugal u u bar. dec. 1. l. 1. Asiae Osorius de reb. Ema lib. 1. maff. l. 1. hist ind. dam. 4 go mor. got. Arthus hist and this Henry of Portugal the great discoverer be son to Philip daughter to John of Gaunt by his first wife so that by the mother side he be english gen. hist of Spain l. 17. lew. de Mayern Tarquet begin to make voyage of discovery upon the coast of Africa and John the second second that enterprise and use the help of mathematician Roderigo and joseph his physician and Martin Bohemus by who the astrolabe be apply to the art of navigation and benefit of the mariner before use only in astronomy this John also send man of purpose into Arabia and Aethiopia and other country of the east to learn further knowledge thereof from these beginning daily increase have navigation first in Portugal and by degree in other european nation by the help of astronomical rule grow to her present perfection and by it geography and if the longitude of place may as easy be find out as the latitude which our countryman master linton make 10 10 compliment of the art of navigation promise of we shall yet grow to better knowledge in those science and of the world by they moreover as the expedition of Alexander and those flourish monarchy in Asia bring some knowledge thereof to the ancient so the history of late time but especial the great travel by land of Marcus Paulus Odoricus will. de rubruquis joannes de plano carpini our countryman Mandevile and other before this skill of navigation have give much light to the knowledge of the inland country of Asia which we be first to speak of as for the circle the aequinoctial which part the globe in the midst the tropic of cancer and Capricorn in twenty three degree and a half from either side of the aequinoctial the Arctic and Baltic circle in twenty three degree and a half from the north and south pole or not much differ which be usual set in map with red or double line for distinction the Meridian which be circle pass over our head in what part of the world soever we be and also through both the pole the horizon which divide the upper half of the world which we see from the nether half which we see not the parallel y y every region where the long day be half a hour long or short than it be in any other region must be account in a several climate from it half whereof be a parallel so that between the Line and the polar circle be 48. parallel and 25. climate on either side of the equinoctial beyond the polar circle this distribution be improper and less certain the day increase whole day week month etc. see jac. Cheyneius geog. lib. 1. c. 10. r. hues de Glob pag. 51. keckerm Syst. geog. lib. 1. record Cast. lib 3. Ptolemey and the ancient be not herein to be follow of latitude from the aequinoctial towards either pole the clime or climate which be the space of two parallel also the term of pole which be two the Arctic and the antarctic and the axletree of the world a right line imagine to pass from the one to the other through the centre of the earth the degree contain sixty mile or after Cornelius de judaeis sixty eight thousand ninety five pace and a half and after other author otherwise according as they have differ in opinion touch the measure of the earth or touch the furlong mile and degree which they use in their computation the variety whereof both ancient and modern among the greek roman arabian italian spaniard and other master hues our countryman have studious collect into ninety of which degree every four part of the world be divide and amount in the whole to three hundred sixty also the geographical term of Litius fretum insula sinus promontorium Isthmus that be Shore strait island bay continent cape or headland neck of land and such like all these I say and other thing of like nature needful to this kind of knowledge the studious shall find in those author which teach the principle of astronomy and geography with the use of globe or map as master BLUNDEVILE master hve and z z Euclid io. de sac. Bos Clavius Proclus Simlerus a. Mizaldus b. keck sistem geog. Ios. Langius Elem. math. jac. Cheyneius geog. r. record castle of knowledge Danaeus cornel. Valerius gem. Phrys etc. other my intent be not to teach geography but to bestow on the studious of geography a history of the world so to give he flesh unto his bone and use unto his theory or speculation whereby both that skill may be confirm and a further and more excellent obtain Geographie without history seem a carcase without life and motion a a n. Eod. Meth. c. 1. Cosinographia astronomiam and history without Geographie move but in move wander as a vagrant without certain habitation and whereas time and place be twin and unseparable companion in the chief history to set down the true time of chief accident will add much light to both a great task in one country but to take up the whole world on my shoulder which have not the strength either of Atlas or Hercules to bear it and in the whole to observe the description of place order of time and the history of action and accident especial religion and as triplex thrice happy he that can happy achieve it I confess beyond my ability exact to perform but with the wise I hope that the haughtiness of the attempt in a thing so full of variety and hardness shall rather purchase pardon to my slip then blame for my rashness and how can I but often slip that make a perambulation over the world that see with other eye that tell of matter pass so many age before I have a be yet such be the necessity of such a history either thus or not at all but as near as I can I purpose to follow the best evidence and to propound the truth my fault where it be worst shall be rather then and yet the tales-man shall be set by the tale the author name annex to his history to shield i from that imputation and first we must begin with Asia to which the first place be due as be the place of the first man first religion first city empire art where the most thing mention in scripture be do the place where paradise be seat the ark rest the law be give and whence the gospel proceed the place which do bear he in his flesh that by his word bear up all thing HONDIUS his map of Asia Asia Asia after b b a. maginus gotarous Arthus histor ind. orient cornel. de judaeis abr. ortel and some be so call of Asia the daughter of Oceanus and Thetis which be wife to japetus mother of Prometheus other fetch this name from asius the son of Manaeus both with like certainty and credit it be great than Europe and Africa yea the island thereof be large if they be put together than all Europe it be compass with the eastern indian and scythian ocean on three part on the west it have the arabian gulf that neck of land which divide it from Africa the mediterranean aegean pontic sea the lake Maeotis Tanais with a imagine line from thence to the bay of s. Nicholas some make it yet large and make Nilus to divide it from Africa but with less reason Taurus divide it in the midst on the north side be that which be call Asia interior on the south be Asia exterior more unequal be that division into Asia the great and the less this be less indeed then that it shall sustain a member in that division io. barrius divide it into nine part Ortelius into five maginus into seven which be these first that part of Tartary betwixt muscovia the northern ocean the river ob and the lake Kytai and a line thence draw to the caspian sea and that isthmus which be betwixt that and the pontic sea second the great Cham country from thence to the eastern sea betwixt the freeze sea and the caspian three that which be subject to the Turk all from Sarmatia and Tartary southwards between Tigris and the mediterranean sea four the persian kingdom between the Turk Tartar India and the red sea five India within and beyond Ganges from Indus to Cantan six the kingdom of China seven the island these division be not so exact as may be wish because of that variety and uncertainty in those kingdom many thing do Asia yield not elsewhere to be have myrrh frankincense cinnamon clove nutmeg mace pepper musk and other like beside the chief jewel it have also mineral of all sort it nourish elephant camel and many other beast serpent fowl wild and tame as in the ensue discourse in their due place shall appear yet do it not nourish such monstrous shape of man as fabulous antiquity feign it bring forth that monster of irreligion Mahumet who sect in diverse sect it foster with long continuance of manifold superstition it have now those great empire of the Turk persian Mogore cathayan Chinois it have sometime the parthian and before that the persian median assyrian scythian and first as it seem before they all the babylonian empire under Nimrod which be therefore in the next place to be speak of chap. x. of Babylonia the original of idolatry and the chaldaean antiquity before the flood as Berosus have report they confusion cause division of nation region and religion of this confusion whereof be already speak the city and thereof this country take the name a a plin. l. 5. c. 12. Pliny make it a part of Syria which he extend from hence to Cilicia b b Strab. lib. 16. Strabo add as far as the pontic sea but be usual reckon a entire country of itself which c c ptol. lib. 5. cap. 20. Ptolomey do thus bind on the north it have Mesopotamia on the west Arabia deserta susiana on the east on the south part of Arabia and the persian gulf Luke make Babylonia d d act. 7.21 a part of Mesopotamia Ptolomey more strict divide they whereunto also agree the interpretation e e d. willet in dan. c. 1. q. 15. of the land of shinar that it be the low part of Mesopotamia contain chaldaea and Babylon lie under the mount Sangara in this country be build the first city which we read of after the flood by the ungrateful world move thereunto as some think by Nimrod the son of cush nephew of cham. for as Cain posterity before the flood be call the son of man as more savour the thing of man then of God more industrious in human invention then religious devotion so by Noah curse it may appear and by the nation that descend of he that cham be the first author after the flood of irreligion neither be it likely that he which deride his old father who age holiness fatherhood benefit and thrice great function of monarchy priesthood and prophecy shall have teach he to reverence that he I say which at once can break all these bond and chain of nature and humanity will be hold with any bond of religion or can have a eye of faith to see he which be invisible have put out his eye of reason and civility have he fear God have he reverence man have he make but profession of these thing in some hypocritical show he can not so easy have sit down at ease in that chair of scorn whence we read not that ever he rise by repentance from this cham come Nimrod f f gen. 10.9 the mighty hunter before the lord not of innocent beast but of man compel they to his subjection although Noah and sem be yet alive with many other patriarch as for Noah the fable heathen it be like deify he the Berosus of fable annius call he father of the god heaven chaos the soul of the World janus his double face may seem to have arise hence of Noah experience of both age before and after the flood the fable of g g Saturnus coeli in Saturnus cut off his father privity may take beginning of that act for which cham be curse sem be suppose to be that Melchisedech king of Salem the figure of the lord and the propagator of true religion although even in his posterity it fail in which Abraham father as witness h h Iosh. 24.2 joshua serve other god japhet piety cause we to persuade ourselves good thing of he cham and his posterity we see the author of ruin philo i i philo Antiq. method revel and methodius so be the two book call but false tell that in these day they begin to divine by star and to sacrifice their child by fire which element Nimrod compel man to worship and that to leave a name to posterity they engrave their name in the brick wherewith Babel be build Abraham refuse to communicate with they and good cause for k k the building of Babel be an. mun. 1757. and Abraham be bear an. 1948. or after Broughton junius and other 60. year late but the jewish chronicle sedar Olam Rabath and sedar Olam Zuta make it 340. year from the flood to Abraham interpret the word of Moses in his day phaleg the earth be divide of his last day in the end of his life k. Abraham levita number from the flood to Abraham 292. year he be not yet bear be cast into their Brick-kiln and come out long after from his mother womb without harm Nahor lot and other his fellow nine in number save themselves by flight l l chronic. before the bible gen. 20.9 other add that aram Abram brother be do to death for refuse to worship the fire to come to true and more certain report Moses say that the beginning of Kimrods kingdom be Babel and Erech m m Erec Scaliger interpret Arectei mention by Tibul. l. 4. as he read it and acad and calne which three some interpret Edessa Nisibis callinisum and whereas common it be translate in the next word out of that land come ashur and build Niniveh tremellius and junius read it out of this land he Nimrod go into ashur or Assyria and build ninive and rehoboth Calah and resen but n n Hugo de s. vict. ar. Montanus melancthon chron. Gramay asia otho Heurnius most usual this be understand of ashur the son of sem who disclaim nimrod tyranny build ninive which after become the chief city of the assyrian empire to which Babylon itself be subject not long after Xenophon de aequivocis if his authority be current say that the elder of the chief family be call Saturni their father have to name coelum their wife Rhea and out of a pillar erect by Semiramis to Ninus allege this inscription my father be jupiter Belus my grandfather Saturnus Babylonicus my great grandfather Saturnus aethiop who be son of Saturnus Aegyptius to who Coelus phoenix Ogyges be father Ogyges be interpret Noah therefore call phoenix because of his habitation as be think in Phoenicia not far from whence in jerusalem sem reign Saturnus Aegyptius may be the name of cham of who name Egypt be in scripture term the o o ps 18.51 land of cham. Saturnus aethiop be cush Nimrod Babylonicus the father of Belus who beget Ninus but this can be altogether true for ninive have great antiquity than nimrod nephew howsoever the greek history ascribe this to Ninus and Babylon to his wife Semiramis except we say that by they these two city former build be enlarge and erect to that magnificence which with the growth of the assyrian empire they after obtain Eusebius p p chron. gr. edit scal. pag. 9 and 13. in the first book of his chronicle attribute the original of idolatry to serug the father of Nahor beda q q Bed chron. say in the day of Phaleg temple be build and the prince of nation adore for god the same have r r Isid. Chro. but in Etim 1.8 cull he say that after the jew account Ishmael make the first image of earth which the gentile ascribe to Prometheus Isidore epiphanius s s Epiphan. con. haer. l. 1. in refer it to serug and add that they have not grave image of wood or metal but picture of man and Thara the father of Abraham be the first author of image the like have suidas Hugo de s. victore say Nimrod bring man to idolatry and cause they to worship the fire because of the fiery nature and operation of the sun which error the chaldaean afterward follow these time till Abram they call Scythismus the reason of their idolatry t t Annot. in gen. Eusebius allege that they thus keep remembrance of their warrior ruler and such as have achieve noble enterprise and worthy exploit in their life time their posterity ignorant of that their scope which be to observe their memorial which have be author of good thing and because they be their forefather worship they as heavenly deity and sacrifice to they of their u u (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) god-making or canonization this be the manner in their sacred book or kallender they ordain that their name shall be write after their death and a feast shall be solemnize according to the same time say that their soul be go to the isle of the bless and that they be no long condemn or burn with fire these thing last to the day of Thara who say suidas be a image-maker and propound his image make of diverse matter as god to be worship but Abram break his father image from Saruch the author and this practice idolatry pass to other nation suidas add special into Greece for they worship Helen a giant of the posterity of japheth a partner in the building of the Tower not unlike to this we read the cause of idolatry in the book of 10 10 wisdom cap. 14.14 wisdom suppose to be write by philo but because the substance be Salomon profess and bear his name which of all the apochrypha-scripture sustain least exception attain high commendation when a father mourn grievous for his son that be take away sudden he make a image for he that be once dead who now he worship as a god and ordain to his servant ceremony and sacrifice a second cause he allege viz. the tyranny of man who image they make and honour that they may by all mean flatter he that be absent as though he have be present a three reason follow the ambitious skill of the workman that through the beauty of the work the multitude be allure take he for a god which a little before be honour but as a man the like affirm y y Hieron in ose 2. cyp. idol Polid. lib. 1. inventorib Jerome cyprian and Polydore de inventoribus z z lactant. lib. 4 cap. 28. vid. Isid. Etym. l 8 c ult. Lactantius as before be show make that the etymology of the word either because they honour with such worship the survive memory of their dead ancestor or because survive and out-living their ancestor they celebrate their image in their house as household god such author of new rite and deifier of a a hier. in Hos. 2. dead man they call superstitious but those which follow the publicly-received and ancient deity be call religious according to that verse of but by this rule say Lactantius we shall find all superstitious which worship false god and they only religious which worship the one and true GGD the same * * lib. 2. c. 14. Lactantius faith that Noah cast off his son cham for his wickedness and expel he he abide in that part of the earth which now be call Arabia call say he of his name Canaan and his posterity canaanite this be the first people which be ignorant of GOD because their founder and prince receive not of his father the worship of god. but first of all other the egyptian begin to behold and adore the heavenly body and because they be not cover with house for the temperature of the air and that region be not subject to cloud they observe the motion and eclipse of the star and while they often view they more curious fall to worship they after that they invent the monstrous shape of beast which they worship other man scatter through the world admire the element the heaven sun land sea without any image and temple worship they and sacrifice to they till in process of time they erect temple and image to their most puissant king and ordain unto they sacrifice and incense so wander from the knowledge of the true GOD they become gentile thus far Lactantius and it be not unlike that they perform this to their king either b b bullinger Orig. lib. I cap. 9 in flattery or fear of their power or because of the benefit which they receive from they this be say c c plin l. 34. c. 4. Pliny the most ancient kind of thankfulness to reckon their benefactor among the god to which accord * * nat. d. l. 2. Cicero in the example of Hercules Castor Pollux Aesculapius Liber Romulus and thus the moor deify their king and the roman their decease emperor the first that be name to have set up image and worship to the dead be d d Ambros in Epist. Roman cap. 1. Ninus who when his father e e some think and with probable conjecture that Belus be Nimrod Belus be dead make a image to he and give privilege of sanctuary to all offender that resort to this image whereupon move with a graceless gratefulness they perform thereunto divine honour and this example be practise after by other and thus of Bel or Belus begin this imagery and for this cause say f f lyra in sap. 14. pet. come hist c. 40. lyra they call their idol Bel Baal beel-zebub according to the diversity of language g g Cyril l. 3. cont Iulian cyrillus call he Arbelus and say that before the flood be no idolatry among man but it have begin after in Babylon in which Arbelus next after who reign Ninus be worship Tertullian h h Tertul. idol out of the book of Enoch before mention be of opinion that idolatry be before the flood thus to continue the memory of mortal man and in admiration of the immortal heavenly light together with the tyranny of prince and policy of the priest begin this worship of the creature with the contempt of the creator which how they increase by the mystery of their philosopher the fable of their poet the ambition of potentate the superstition of the vulgar the gainful collusion of their priest the cunning of artificer and above all the malice of the devil worship in those idol there give answer and oracle and receive sacrifice the i i oenomaus out of Hesiod affirm the number of god in the world to be 30000. which number he say be then much increase euseb (@) l. 5. c. 15 history of all nation be ample witness and this roman Babylon now tyrant of the west be the heir of elder Babylon sometime lady of the east in these devotion that then and still Babylon may be the mother of whoredom and all abomination to which apt agree the parallel of Babylon and Rome in k k Oros l. 2. c. 2 3 orosius the empire of the one cease when the other begin first to have a be which he further prosecute in many particular but before we prosecute these babylonian affair after the flood it shall not be amiss to show here the chaldaean fable of antiquity before the flood out of Berosus a chaldaean priest which live in the time of Alexander Polyhistor l l polyhist in euseb chron. cite out of Berosus his first book this report of himself and tatianus m m tatianus Scalig. say he be the priest of Belus and write his chaldaean story to Antiochus the three after Seleucus in three book his name signify the son of Osee alorus reign the space of ten Sari sarus with they be three thousand six hundred year Alasparus three Sari Amelus thirteen Sari amenus twelve Metalarus eighteen daorus ten Aedorachus eighteen amphis ten otiarte eight Xixuthrus eighteen in his time as be say before the flood happen the whole space be a hundred and twenty Sari which amount to four hundred thirty two thousand year this I think not unfit although incredible to report from Berosus both because my scope be to declare as well false as true religion it be not theological but historical or rather historical theological and because the ancient Cicero Lactantius Augustine have mention this monstrous computation of the chaldaean calendar which yet they rack high to four hundred threescore and ten thousand year here you have the particular out of Apollodorus and Abidenus which both borrow they of Berosus n n extant in ch. on gr Buseb lib. 1. Scalig. photij bibliotheca in Helladio Polyhistor add that there come one out of the red sea call Oannes and Annedotus a monster otherwhere like a fish his head foot and hand like a man as say photius but al. Polyhistor ascribe two head one of a fish and the other of a man the image whereof be unto his time reserve this monster live without meat and teach they the knowledge of letter and all art building of city foundation of temple enact of law geometry and husbandry and all necessary to man life afterward he return to the sea and after he appear other such monster four of they come out of the sea say Abidenus when daos who Apollodorus call Daorus reign their name be Euedochus Eneugamus Enaboulus Anementus Pentabiblus it seem be then their chief city that Oannes the first do write of the first beginning that all be darkness and water in which live monstrous creature have two form man with two wing and some with four with one body two head one of a man and another of a woman with the privity of both sex other with horn and leg like goat some with horse foot some like centaur the former part man the after part horse bull also head like man and dog with four body etc. with many monstrous mixture and confusion of creature who image be keep in the temple of Belus over all these rule a woman name Omorkae which signify the sea and by like signification of letter the moon then come Belus and cut she in twain and make the one half of her land the other heaven and the creature therein appear this Belus make man and beast the sun moon and planet these thing report Berosus in his first book in the second he tell of king before mention which reign till the flood after the flood also the same Polyhistor out of he show that Sisuthrus have by Saturn warning before build a ark as be before say and lay up all monument of antiquity in Sipparis a city dedicate to the sun and now with all his world of creature escape the flood go out of the ark do sacrifice to the god and be never see more but they hear a voice out of the air give they this precept to be religious his wife daughter and shipmaster be partaker with he of this honour he say unto they the country where they now be be Armenia and he will come again to Babylon and that it be ordain that from Sipparis they shall receive letter and communicate the same to man which they according do for have sacrifice to the god they go to Babylon and dig out the * * (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) letter write or book and build many city and sound temple do again repair Babylon thus far out of Alexander Polyhistor a large fragment of the true Berosus chap. 11 of the city and country of Babylon * * the former Map of paradise do descripe the topography of the country of Babylonia their sumptuous wall temple and image leave these antiquity rot with age let we come to take better view of this stately city a a Herod l. 2. Herodotus b b Philostr vit. apol. l. 1. c. 18. Philostratus c c plin l. 6. c. 26. Pliny and d d Solinus c. 60. Solinus report concern the compass of Babylon that the wall contain four hundred and eighty furlong situate in a large plain four square environ with a broad and deep ditch full of water e e diod. l. 3. c. 4. Diodorus say that there be but so many furlong as be day in the year so that every day a furlong of the wall be build and thirty hundred thousand workman employ therein f f see lib. 16. Strabo ascribe to the compass three hundred and eighty furlong and g g curt. l. 5. Curtius three hundred fifty eight ninety furlong thereof inhabit the rest allot to tilth and husbandry concern the thickness of the wall or the height they also disagree the first author affirm the height two hundred cubit the thickness h h Propert. 3 fifty they which say least cut off half that sum well might i i n. lyr. in Dan. 4 Aristotle esteem it a country rather than a city be of such greatness that some part of it be take three day before the other hear of it k k Arist. Politic. l. 3. c. 2. lyranus out of Jerome upon Esay affirm that the four square thereof contain sixteen mile a piece wherein every man have his vineyard and garden according to his degree wherewith to maintain his family in time of siege the fortress or tower thereof he say be that which have be build by the son of Noah and not without cause be it reckon among the l l greg. Naz. in vit. Basil martial ep. 1. Nicetes and non. in Naz. wonder of the World it have a hundred brazen gate and two hundred and fifty tower it be indeed a mother of wonder so many miracle of art accompany the same the work partly of Semiramis partly of Nabuchodonosor which I will desire the reader to stay his hasty pace and take notice of every where I shall not I can be so tedious in these kind of relation m m diod. sic. l. 3. or after the greek l. 2. c. 4 Diodor. thus add of Semiramis she build also a bridge of five furlong the wall be make of brick and and slimy kind of pitch which that country yield she build two palace which may serve both for ornament and defence one in the west which environ sixty furlong with high brick wall within that a less and within that also a less circuit which contain the Tower these be wrought sumptuous with image of beast and therein also be game and hunt of beast this have three gate the other in the east on the other side the river contain but thirty furlong in the low country of Babylonia she make a great square lake contain two hundred furlong the wall whereof be of brick and that pitchy mortar the depth thirty five foot in the midst of the city she erect a temple to jupiter Belus say Herodotus with brazen gate now in his time remain four square Herod l. 2. each square contain two * * (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) translate a furlong be but six hundred foot furlong in the midst whereof be a solid tower of the height and thickness of a furlong upon this another and so one high than another eight in number in the high tower be a chapel and therein a fair bed cover and a table of gold without any image neither as the chaldaean priest affirm do any abide here in the night but one woman who this god shall appoint they say the god himself there lie in regard of this exceed height Diodonus affirm that the chaldaean do thereon make their observation of the star he also add that Semiramis place in the top three golden statue one of jupiter forty foot long weigh a thousand babylonian talent till his time remain another of Ops weigh as much sit in a golden throne and at her foot two lion and just by huge serpent of silver each of thirty talent the three image be of juno stand in weight eight hundred talent in respect of this idolatry it be like that Dionys call Babylon a holy city her right hand hold the head of a serpent her left a sceptre of stone to all these be common one table of gold forty foot long in breadth twelve in weight fifty talent there be also two stand cup of thirty talent and two vessel for perfume of like value three other vessel of gold whereof one dedicate to jupiter weigh twelve hundred babylonian talent every babylonian talon be say to contain seven thousand sixty three pound nine ounce and a half and half a quarter Troy weight all these the persian king take away without the temple by Herodotus testimony be a golden altar and another huge one beside for their solemn sacrifice the other be not to be pollute with blood except of suck thing in that great chaldaean burn yearly in their sacrifice a hundred thousand talent of libanotus one statue of gold twelve cubit high Darius affect spare but Xerxes both take it and slay the priest that forbid he I may here also tell of those pensile garden bear up on arch four square each square contain four hundred foot fill on the roof with earth wherein grow great tree and other plant the entrance be as it be a hill the arch be build one upon another in convenient height still increase as they ascend the high which bare the wall be fifty cubit high and twelve in breadth there be within these arch inn there be also a conveyance of water to the water thereof this garden be make long after Semiramis time by n n a Syro diod. a king which herein seem to lord it over the element and countermand nature be himself the servant of his wife appetite who in this lowly valley wherein Babylon stand will fain have some representation of her own hilly and mountainous country of Media this king be Nabuchodonosor as witness o o Beros fragm joseph Appion lib. 1. vid. scal. frag Berosus in josephus who have conquer Egypt Syria Phoenicia Arabia enrich the temple of Belus with the spoil and add a new city to the old without the same and provide that the enemy may not after turn the course of the river and approach to the city he compass the inner city with three wall and the utter city with as many these of brick those also with bitumen or pitchy slime of that country add thereunto stately gate and near his father palace he build another more sumptuous and this he do in fifteen day therein he raise stone-work like unto mountain and plant the same with all manner of tree he make also a pensile garden many more thing say josephus do Berosus add and blame the greek writer for ascribe the building of Babylon to Semiramis a assyrian this fragment of Berosus cite by josephus do well serve we to clear both the holy and profane history in the one Daniel p p dan. 4.27 induce Nabuchodonosor walk in his royal palace in Babel with word answerable to his pride be not this great Babel that I have build for the house of the kingdom by the might of my power and for the honour of my majesty his word even in the speak be write in the book of GOD and a indictment thereof frame in the high court where he be adjudge present the loss of reason which he have thus abuse till he know that the most high bare rule over the kingdom of man give the same to whosoever he will well may he say he have build it in regard of this new city and palace with other miracle thereof with more truth than some expositor which accuse he herein of a lie for arrogate that which Semiramis do his wife also for who love he do this be as q q scal. in frag Berosi Scaliger think nitocris mention by Horodotus who also conjecture that she be the daughter of aliatte that Daniel intend she dan. 5.10 that she administer the kingdom in the time of her husband madness and in the time also of Euilmerodach and Balsasar a woman no whit inferior to Semiramis that it may be say Semiramis begin Babylon and nitocris finish and perfect it finish and perfect those work which Nabuchodonosor her husband before the time of his madness have begin and for Semiramis profane history r r babylona foemineus labour claud. general make she the founder of this city and among other s s pseudo Beros l. 5. annius his Berosus who contrary to this fragment of the true Berosus in josephus say that Semiramis make Babylon of a town a great city that she may be rather esteem the builder thereof than enlarge Nimrod have before build the tower but not finish it and do not t t lib. 4 find the city which he have design and set out and Belus his son have u u gen. 11.8 aug. ciu. li. 18. c. 2 ap. euseb Prep lib. 9 dan. ca. 3. erect those design foundation rather of the town than the city Babylon Moses testify that at the first building they be by confusion of language force to cease their work leave a name of their shame in stead of that renown and name which they have promise to themselves it may be that Semiramis do amplify this and happy so do other assyrian and babylonian king as Augustine and Abidenus affirm likewise Abidenus say that the wall be by inundation fall be build again by Nabuchodonosor and agree in other thing with Berosus but the grecian be child in comparison of ancient history and little of this matter can we affirm on their testimony their first historian Herodotus live long after this age in the time of the persian monarchy howsoever Nabuchodonosor be he which by divine and human testimony there establish that golden head of the image the seat of the babylonian monarchy raise it to that high top of worldly excellence yea Daniel speak of one more sumptuous image than any mention by Herodotus and Diodorus set up by this king threescore 10 10 lyranus think that the basis whereon it stand be include in this height for as symetrians observe the length of a man hold proportion but of six and not of ten to the breadth cubit high and six broad enjoin a catholic and universal idolatry thereunto which the three saint shadrach Meshach and abednego refuse and in a fiery trial be find both martyr and confessor y y see d. willet in dan. 3. Ver. 14. c. 18. think that Nabuchodonosor set up this image for himself require divine honour to be give unto it as Caligula since among the roman but by his expostulation will you not serve my god and the like answer of those three man we will not serve thy god it seem to have be consecrate to Bel or some other babylonian deity which because it be erect in the plain of dura this be think to be dera in susiana mention by Ptolomey z z ptol. geog. l. 6. cap. 3. Daniel may have good occasion of absence from thence who office be to a a sit in the gate of the king at Babylon b b Strabo l. 15. Strabo out of megasthenes who annius have set out as true as he have do Berosus save that he lisp in the name and call he Metasthenes say of this king c c Metasthenes the true megasthenes write about fifty year before Berosus have travel all the east about the end of Alexander reign who he name Nabacodrosor more esteem of the chaldaean than Hercules that he come in his expedition as far as the pillar of Hercules the straits of Gibraltar and as far as Tearcon the aethiopian and that he conduct a army out of Iberia into Thracia and Pontus this tearcon be he who the scripture call Tirhaka which war against Senacherib * * 2. King 19.9 but to return to our pensile garden which Diodorus and Curtius attribute to a syrian king which be no other but this conqueror of Syria d d Syria comprehend in it after the large sense Babylonia also see cap. 15. and plin. l. 5. c. 12. Nabuchodonosor and both they and Strabo do at large describe and account among the world wonder as be also the bridge and the wall of the city and no less wonderful be that obeliske or needle a square stone make spire-fashion cut by Semiramis out of the mountain of Armenia one hundred and fifty foot long and four and twenty thick on many wane bring to the river thence to Babylon and there erect Pliny testify that the temple of Belus still remain in his day and that Belus be inventor of astronomy this temple be the same with the sepulchre of Belus which Strabo say be raze by Xerxes yet not so but that Alexander will have repair it but in regard that it ask so much labour and time for only the cleanse of the earth require ten thousand man two month work he be not able to finish that which he have begin in the description he say less than Herodotus that it be a pyramid or spire-work a furlong or six hundred foot in height and each of the foursquare contain as much arrianus e e Araian Alexand lib. 3. affirm that Alexander have the same purpose of other temple also the temple say he which Xerxes have overthrow he command to be repair and among they the temple of Belus who the babylonian with singular religion worship f f ar. lib. 7. at his return homeward Belus in thankfulness it seem send his chaldaean priest to meet he and forbid he to enter the city as he love his life who oracle Alexander contemn there end his day the cause why he listen not to they be think a mistrust that he conceive of the chaldaean for whereas Xerxes at his return out of Greece have raze this and all other sacred place of the babylonian Alexander mind the repair hereof have already remove the rubbish think with his whole army to achieve this enterprise but the revenue which the king of Assyria have leave for the maintenance of this temple sacrifice after the overthrow thereof be share among the chaldaean which they by this attempt be like to lose and therefore be willing to want his presence this temple some suppose to be that tower of Babel mention by Moses gen. 11. and suppose still in part to remain for about seven or eight mile from Bagdat as man pass from Felugia a town on Euphrates whereon old Babylon stand to this new city on Tigris a work of eighteen hour and about forty mile space there be see a ruinous shape of a shapeless heap and building in circuit less than a mile some say but a quarter of a mile about the height of the stone-work of Paul steeple in London the brick be six inch thick eight broad and a foot long as master Allen measure with mat of cane lay betwixt they yet remain as sound as if they have be lay within a year space mention also by sir ant. Shirley in his travel into Persia thus master Eldred and master fitch master Cartwright also and my friend master Allen by testimony of their own eye have report but I can scarce think it to be that tower or temple because author place it in the midst of old Babylon and near Euphrates whereas this be near Tigris Isidore affirm that first after the flood Nimrod the giant found Babylon which Semiramis the assyrian queen enlarge and make the wall with brick and bitumen the height of the tower be five thousand one hundred seventy four pace g g Verstegan c. 1. Verstegan add the passage to mount up be very wide and great wind about on the outside the middle and inward part for the more strength be all massy and by cart camel dromedary horse and ass the carriage be bear and draw up and by the way be many lodging and hostery both for man and beast yea field also for grain and pasture if you can believe it but it be now as we see come to confusion also there be yet beyond Tigris some ruin of a temple which be call the temple of Bel with high iron gate as be report dominicus Niger h h Domin nig. Asia com. 4. have these word seleucia in process of time have change her state and her site for it be on the western bank of Tigris which a cut from Euphrates flow into in which place be now see the ruin thereof where the shepherd have erect they cottage and on the eastern bank have the barbarian build the city and call it Bachdad right over-against the old if this be true vain be the conceit of credulous traveller which suppose those ruin to be the monument of Babylon burial and confound against this late world with the report of Babel Tower the bitumen of slimy pitch which they use in stead of mortar in their building be as dominicus Niger out of Trogus report common in those part Herodotus tell that eight day journey from Babylon be another city name be with a small rill of the same name which run into Euphrates carry thither as tribute much of this slimy matter Niger mention one place where out of a cleft or open of the earth proceed such a stink that it kill the bird which fly over it and at this day two day journey from Bagdat i i r. fitch Hak. voy. tom. 2. at a place call ait be a mouth continual throw forth boil pitch therefore by the moor call hel-mouth which run into a great field almost full thereof and herewith they pitch their boat the water as my friend master Allen who live in Bagdat diverse month tell i be warm and account medicinable for which cause he have drink large thereof the liquid pitch float on the top of the water like clout cream to use his own phrase the country of Babylonia have be the most fruitful in the world k k Herod lib. 2. yield ordinary two hundred and in some place three hundred increase the blade of the wheat and barley about four finger broad l l plin. nat. hist lib. 18. cap. 17. Pliny somewhat otherwise they cut say he or mow their corn twice and seed it a three time in Babylonia otherwise it will be nothing but blade and yet so their barrener laud yield fifty their best a hundred increase Tigris and Euphrates overflow it but bring not fatness to the soil as Nilus in Egypt but rather cleanse that superfluous fatness which natural it have the soil be of a rosenny clay say master Allen and will still retain in likelihood his ancient fertility if it be water with like diligent husbandry in dig it yield corrupt water favour of that pitchy slime in the city ancient it seem that in every garden of any citizen of sort be ril make out of the river the ruin from the tower aforesaid to Bagdat which some call Babylon and beyond on the other side of the river contain twenty two mile yet to be see which happy be the ruin not of old Babylon so much as of the neighbour town here build seleucia Vologesocerta and Ctesiphon which I rather think because they reach beyond Tigris as well as on this side to return to the religious place in Babylon Caelius rhodiginas tell cel. rhod. lec antiq l. 8. c. 12. that in the temple of Apollo be find a golden chest of great antiquity which be break by some accident thence issue a pestilent vapour that infect not those alone which be present but the neighbour nation as far as Parthia ammianus marcellinus m m Ammian l. 23. have the like history of the image of Apollo Chomeus at seleucia which be bring to Rome and there place by the priest in the temple of Apollo palatinus and when as a certain hole which the chaldaean wiseman have by art stop through the covetousness of certain soldier break in thither for spoil be break up the world be thence poison with a contagion from Persia as far as France n n Philost apol. l. 1. c. 18. Philost aid Viu trad. dis. lib. 5 corrigil apollonius etc. Philostratus report but who will believe his report of Apollonius that he see at Babylon such stately palace as scarce agree with the state of Babylon in the time of Apollonius which be while domician reign among other thing he see gallery full of greek image as of Orpheus Andromeda etc. he come also into a gallery the roof whereof be make bow like the heaven and cover with saphire so to resemble heaven and the image of their god make of gold be there son from the roof there hang four bird of gold represent the goddess of revenge which they call the tongue of the god I know not by what art or mystery admonish the king not to exalt himself chap. 12 of the priest sacrifice religious rite and custom of the babylonian the chaldean say a a diod. sic. l. 3. cap. 8. Diodorus be of reputation in Babylon as the priest in Egypt chaldaean be a name sometime apply to the whole nation sometime appropriate to the priest who spend their whole time in religious service and in astrology many of they by divination foretell thing to come as we have show before in the history of Alexander and the book of Daniel witness this their profession by their augury or divination by bird by sacrifice and enchantment they be account to do good or harm to mankind they be most expert in their sacred rite in the knowledge whereof they be bring up from their childhood and continue in that course of learn all their life the child be instruct in his father science they profess the interpretation of dream and prodigious accident in nature their opinion be that the world be eternal without beginning and end the order and furniture of all be do by divine providence all heavenly thing be perfect not by chance of their own accord but by the determinate and firm decree of the god by long observation search the course and nature of the star they foretell thing to come but the great power they attribute to the five planet and especial to Saturn they call they mercuries because when other be fix these have their proper motion and show future thing as the interpreter of the god by their rise set and colour under their course they give the title of god b b to thirty other star the one half above the other under the earth behold all accident and in ten day one of the high be send to the low as a angel or messenger of the star and one from they to the high and this course they take eternal they hold twelve principal god each of which have his peculiar month and his sign in the zodiac by which the sun and moon and five planet have their motion these planet they esteem to confer much good or evil in the generation of man and by their nature and aspect thing to come may be foreknow many thing they foretell to Alexander Nicanor Antigonus Seleucus and to private man beyond the reach of man they number four and twenty constellation without the zodiac twelve towards the north and as many towards the south these northern be see which they attribute to the live those southern be hide and present they think to the dead which they hold the judge of all concern the site motion and eclipse of the moon they hold as the greek but of the sun eclipse they have diverse opinion and dare not utter their opinion thereof nor foretell the time the earth they conceive to be hollow like a boat r. Moses Ben Maimon out of a book entitle r. Mos. Moreb l. 3. c. 30. vid. epist. ad Masil jud. attribute like thing unto they that they believe the star be god and that the sun be the chief God and next to he the moon that the sun rule the superior and inferior world and concern Abraham that he be bear in a land which worship the fire which when he reprove and his countryman object the operation of the sun he answer that the sun be as the axe in the hand of the carpenter but at last the king cast Abraham into prison and when as there he still continue the same dispute and opinion the king fear hurt to his people banish he into the utmost bound of Chanaan have first spoil he of all his good this contradict the history of Moses and of the old and new testament which commend Abraham faith in voluntary forsake of his country at the command of GOD gene. 12. Heb. 11. and not by compulsion of man although it reach not to the former c c mention c. 10. absurdity which ascribe this to the time of Nimrod and whether Abraham be a idolater before that his call be handle d d lib. 2. c. 2. else where but to return to our rabbin high e e Ios. scal. in Epist. ad casaubon omnia allius magistri judaos admire by a most admire author he say that hence Abraham grow renown through the the world all nation honour his memory except some heathen as the parthian on the left hand and indian on the right which be remainder of the chaldaean and call zabij these zabij Scaliger also say be chaldaean so call a Apeliote as one may say eastern-man or easterling and add that the book so often cite by f f so the jew call the say r. Mos of the first letter r. m. b. m. rab. Mos. ben. Maimon contract Rambam Rambam concern their religion rite and custom be yet extant in the hand of the arabian Muhamedans out of this book our Rabbi recite their opinion that Adam be bear of man and woman as other man and that he be a prophet of the moon and by preach persuade man to worship the moon and that he compose book of husbandry that no also be a husbandman and believe not in idol for which the zabij put he in prison and because he worship the creator Seth also contradict Adam in his lunary worship they tell also that Adam go out g g these fable be some rubbish of paradise the tree and serpent therein etc. in his epistle to the Marsilian jew he write of book which mention jambasor Tzareth Roani and say they be before Adam and that Sombascher be Adam master and of the indian which say they have city 100000. year old etc. of the land of promise which be towards India and enter into Babylon whither he carry with he a tree still grow with branch and leaf and a tree of stone and leaf of a tree which will not burn under the shadow of which tree he say ten thousand man may be cover the height whereof be as the stature of a man Adam also have affirm in his book of a tree in India the bough whereof be cast on the ground will stir like serpent and of another which have a root shape like a man endue with a kind of sound voice differ from speech and of a certain herb which be fold up in a man clothes will make he walk invisible and the smoke of the same be fire will cause thunder another tree they worship which abode in Niniveh twelve year and contend with the mandrake for usurp her room whereby it come to pass that the priest or prophet which have use to prophesy with the spirit of that tree cease a long time from prophesy and at last the tree speak to he and bid he write the suit between she and the mandrake whether of they be the more honourable these foolery say he they attribute to Adam that so they may prove the eternity of the world and deity of the star these zabij make they for this cause image of gold to the sun of silver to the moon and build they temple say that the power of the planet be infuse into those image whence they speak unto man and teach thing profitable the same they affirm of those tree which they apropriate to each of they with peculiar worship rite and hallow whereby that tree receive a power to speak with man in their sleep from hence spring magical divination augury necromancy and the like they offer to their chief god a beetle and seven mouse and seven fowl the great of their book be that of the egyptian service translate into Arabic by a Moor call Enennaxia which contain in it many ridiculous thing and yet these be the famous wiseman of Babylon in those day in the say book be report of a certain idolatrous prophet name tamut who preach to a certain king this worship of the seven planet and twelve sign be by he do to a grievous death and in the night of his death all the image from the end of the world come and assemble together at the great golden image in the temple at Babylon of this mourn for tamut or Thamuz see Ezek. 8.14 and vid. c. 17. which be sacred to the sun and hang between the heaven and the earth which then prostrate itself in the midst of the temple with all the image round about show to they all which have befall tamut all the image therefore weep all night and in the morning flee away each to his own temple and hence grow that custom yearly in the begin of the monerh tamut to renew that mourn for tamut other book of they be mention by he one call deizamechameche a book of image a book of candle of the degree of heaven and other false ascribe to Aristotle and one to alformor and one to Isaac and one of their feast offering prayer and other thing pertain to their law and some write against their opinion all do into Arabic in these be set down the rite of their temple and image of stone or mettle and apply of spirit to they and their sacrifice and kind of meat they name their holy place sumptuous build the temple of intelligible form and set image on high mountain and honour tree and attribute the increase of man and fruit to the star their priest preach that the earth can not be till according to the will of the god except they serve the sun and star which be offend will diminish their fruit and make their country desolate they have write also in the former book that the planet jupiter be angry with the desert and dry place whence it come that they want water and tree and that devil haunt they they honour husbandman and fulfil the will of the star in till the ground they honour kine and ox for their labour therein say that they ought not to be slay in their festival they use song and all musical instrument r. Mos. l. 3. 31. and 33. affirm that their idol be please with these thing promise to the doer long life health plenty of fruit rain tree freedom from loss and the like hence it be say r. Moses that the law of Moses forbid these rite and threaten the contrary plague to such as shall observe they Tehy have certain hallow beast in their temple wherein their image be before which they bow themselves and burn incense these opinion of the zabij cap. 38. be hold also by the aramite chanaanite and egyptian they have their magical observation in gather certain herb or in the use of certain metal or live creature and that in a set certain time with their set rite as of leap clap the hand hop cry laugh etc. in the most of which woman be actor as when they will have rain ten virgin clothe in hallow garment of red colour dance a procession turn about their face and shoulder and stretch their finger towards the sun and to prevent harm by hail four woman lay on their back naked lift up their foot speak certain word and all magical practice they make to depend of the star say that such a star be please with such a incense such a plant such a metal such word or work and thereby will be as it be hire to such or such effect as to drive away serpent and scorpion to slay worm in nut to make the leave fall and the like their priest use shave of the head and beard and linsey wolsey garment and make a sign in their hand with some kind of metal the book of Centir prescribe a woman to stand arm before the star of Mars moloch and Saturn sacrifice of human body see cap. 18. and a man clothe in woman attire paint before the star of Venus to provoke lust the worshipper of the fire make man believe that they which will not cause their child to pass through the fire shall lose they and easy persuade they thereunto as a thing easy say the Rabine for they do not burn they although herein both divine and human testimony make i believe the contrary from hence say he descend the custom observe by woman in hold and move their child over the fire or smoke they have their diversity of procession and when they hallow a tree to a image one part of the fruit thereof be offer and the other eat in the house of the idol the like they do with the first fruit of every tree make man believe that otherwise the tree will become unprofitable they have their magical enchantment in the plant or graft of tree with observation of the star incense word but this most diabolical that in the hour when one kind be to be ingraft into another the science which be to be ingraft shall be hold in the hand of some beautiful woman Aversa Venus and that some man shall then carnal but unnatural have knowledge of she the woman in that instant put the science into the tree they use also to make circle when they plant or sow and go about the same some five time because of the five planet some seven in regard of the sun and moon add to that number for this cause the jew not unprobable think that mixture in garment seed and the like be forbid by the law of Moses with other rite any way resemble these they further worship devil believe that they appear to man in the form of goat and therefore call their devil kid and hold it unlawful to shear or to eat their kid but especial they abhor the kill of kine but perform much worship to they as they also do in India to this day they sacrifice lion bear and wild beast as be mention in the book Zeuzit they hold blood in much abomination account it a great pollution and yet do eat it because they say it be the food of devil and they which do eat it shall have communion with they and that they will come to such and reveal unto they thing to come some who nice stomach can not endure to eat it receive the same when they kill a beast h h p. ric. in explic precept neg. 220. r. Mos. gerundensi in a vessel or in a ditch and do eat the flesh of that sacrifice be place about that blood think that the devil do eat the blood and that thus by this as it be eat at the same table be entertain betwixt they and the devil mutual familiarity and society they believe also that in their sleep the devil come and reveal secret unto they concern a menstruous woman their custom be that she shall sit alone in a house and that the place where she set her foot shall be burn whosoever talk with she be unclean yea if he but stand in the wind of she the wind from she do pollute he likewise these zabian think whatsoever go from their body be unclean as nail hair blood and therefore barber and surgeon be hold pollute and after cut off their hair use much wash for expiation but it need some expiation that I insist so long in these narration and have need of some barber or surgeon to ease i of superfluity if that can be superfluous which fit so to our project and in the judgement of the learn of the jewish rabbin in many age seem the cause of so many prohibition in Moses his law lest they shall conform themselves in religious observance to these superstitious zabian but let we now return to Diodorus who affirm that the chaldaean number forty three thousand year until the come of Alexander since first they have begin their observation of the star these year Xenophon de aequivocis interpret of month for so say he the chaldaean reckon their antiquity in other thing they keep their computation according to the sun but of their fabulous antiquity we have hear before where we have also touch that one beginning of idolatry do arise of this curious and superstitious stargazing especial in the country of Egypt where not at all usual and in chaldaea where diverse month i i eight month together master Eldred Hak. voy. tom. 2. together they have neither rain nor cloud Strabo divide the chaldaean into sect orcheni borsippeni and other diverse opinionate of the same thing borsippa be a city sacred to Diana and Apollo Pliny k k plin. l. 6. c. 26. think they name orcheni etc. of the place and not of difference of sect as if there have be university or college of chaldaean the orcheni be of Erech scal. in frag ber. add the Hippareni Daniel l l dan. 2.2 see d. willet comm. ibid. q. 7. and 29. reckon up four kind of wiseman among the chaldaean the first be call Chartummim which be enchanter Ashaphim astrologer mecashpim sorcerer or juggler deluder of sense and Chasdim chaldaean which howsoever it be a general name of that nation yet be it appropriate unto a certain sect and profession of learning among they which seem to excel the rest and be their priest philosopher and mathematician as you have hear in the seven and twenty verse of the same chapter be mention also cachimim wizard which by conjecture and cast of lot do guess of thing to come and Gazrin of the word gazar to cut these open and divine by the entrail of sacrifice the vanity of their divination appear in that prophet howsoever they have be renown therefore among the heathen as in the foretell of Alexander death and before that when * * q. Curtius Darius have change his scabbard into the greek fashion the ruin of that empire by the greek when Faustina m m jul. Capitolin m. ant. Philos. the empress wife to m. Antonius have fall in love with a fencer or swordplayer and be sick confess the same to her husband the chaldaean be send for who give counsel to kill the fencer and that she shall wash herself in his blood and then accompany with her husband which be do and Commodus beget who in quality resemble that fencer upon this occasion as the people report though other esteem he a bastard Plutarch n n plut. in vit. mar. and syl. show how vain the roman depend on their prediction thus juvenal reprove they juven. sat. 6. jove oracle no great credit have then sooth-saying of Chaldaee cozen knave many edict be after make against they otho Heurnius o o otho Heurn Chaldaic labour to bring the grecian philosophy from the chaldaean yea Aristotle himself as he have receive the the persian and indian philosophy by tradition of Pythagoras and Democritus and the egyptian and jewish learning from Plato so be he instruct say he in the babylonian science by calisthenes but Caelius rhodiginus p p cael. rhod. lec ant. lib. 16. ca. 4. and josephus Scaliger q q Ios. scal. praef in manil. think they rather corrupter of learning whereof they have no solid knowledge and that the greek attain thereunto by their own industry without borrow of the chaldaean Peucer deem r r peuc theom and astrol they too philosophical the perverter of religion into theorical speculation of nature and confute their five kind of prognosticate but their estimation can not have be such in daniel time if they have not be very learned and somewhat be add as we may well conjecture to their learning by he who by Nabuchodonosor be s s dan. 2.48 bab. Trem. set over they for beside the gift wherewith he be enrich and the civil authority wherewith he be dignify he be exalt also to this ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the school of the wiseman as after junius and Osiander d. willet have observe as it be their superintendent which though Calvin think he refuse yet it appear by the title which the king t t dan. 4.6 praefecte magorum after give he that he accept it in which his superintendentship say our author u u d. willet in dan. 2. and jun. such laudable science as may safe be learn he promote and further such corruption and superstition as be practise among they he correct and reform but such abuse as can not be take away he forbear and keep himself free from they and here have we a testimony of their hierarchy which nature teach these and all people contrary to the novelty of parity in the day of Hezechiah when the sun go backward it appear how studious the chaldaean nation be in that 10 10 2. Chro. 32.31 their prince send their ambassador into judaea to inquire thereof yea the delphian oracle as Theodoret cite it out of y y theod. curand graec. ser. 1. Porphyry ascribe the find out of that learning which lead to the god not to the greek but to the egyptian phoenician chaldaean and hebrew in which the chaldaean as that father out of Daniel observe be further by the hebrew some z z Philostrat. apol. lib. 1. do call the babylonian priest magi but because they be by this name best know and most esteem among the persian which in that vicinity of region have as near neighbourhood in religion we will speak of these magi in our persian relation and it be think that the persian magi come from these chaldaean Mornaeus a a ph. morn de Verit. c. r. reckon among the chaldaean opinion that of oromase mitris and ariminis that be to say GOD mind and soul which he apply to the christian doctrine of the holy trinity the oracle of Apollo pronounce the chaldaean and hebrew to be only wise the chaldaean opinion concern judicial astrology be not receive of all the chaldaean as Strabo report and bardesanes syrus the best learned of the chaldaean it be Eusebius b b euseb par. eu. l. 6. c. 8. testimony do at large confute that opinion which yet many wizard carcase of christian still follow he affirm that in those thing which a man have common with a beast eat sleep nourishment age etc. a man be order by nature as the beast be but man have also a reasonable soul and freedom of will be not subject to that natural servitude which at large he prove by the diverse custom of man both in diverse and in the same country in diet government and religion as the reader willing to read so worthy a discourse may find relate at large in Eusebius Alexander polyhist c c euseb praepar. l. 9 c 4. out of eupolemus tell that in the ten generation after the flood in Camyrine a city of Babylonia which other call ur Abram be bear which excel all in knowledge and be the inventor of astrology among the chaldaean he by divine precept go into Phoenicia and teach the phoenician the course of the sun and moon and when the armenian war upon the phoenician have take his brother son prisoner he by a band of his servant recover he and free dismiss the captive which he have take he after live with the priest at heliopolis in Egypt and teach they astrology confess that he have receive that art by succession from Enoch he add that Belus reign the second in Babylon and be call Saturn the father of a second Belus and Canaan which Canaan be the father of the phoenician and the aethiopian brother of Mizraim the author of the egyptian with many other thing not much differ from the divine history astronomy in all likelihood be know to Abraham to who the heavenly star may be remembrancer of that promise so shall thy seed be his country also where it be practise may therein further he and the excellency of the science in itself but this stargaze destiny judicial conjectural genethliacal astrology reason and experience GOD and man have condemn ur signify light which agree to the fire the chaldaean deity d d Ammian l. 23. plutar. fancy in orb which the persian and chaldaean feign to have receive from heaven and keep ever burn as the vestal in Rome they hold water and fire to be the beginning of all thing they make a challenge of their fiery god e e suidas in Canopo Ruffin hist eccl lib. 2. to contend with any other god of the godless heathen a egyptian encounter and overcome they thus he cause his Canopus to be make full of hole stop with wax and hollow in the middle which he fill with water and the chaldaean put their fire under the wax melt open a quiver of watery arrow that cool the heat of their devour god and devour he they have yet a more foolish god even a f f alex. Alexand l. 6. c. 26. onion which they worship they observe diverse wicked science of divine by fire Aire water earth consult with the dead and with wicked spirit chaldaea say Claudian every day the king g g coelius l. 8. c. 1. offer a horse furnish unto the sun as do also the persian Philostrat. say that it be a white horse of the nisaean race sumptuous trap lib. 1. cap. 20. they observe a feast in Babylon athenaeus h h athen. lib. 14. cap. 17. cite it out of Berosus on the sixteen calends of September which continue five day in which the master be subject to their servant and one of they royal attire be carry out of the house who they call Zoganes Baruch cap. 6. in the epistle of Jeremy apocrypha rip up their idolatrous rite idol procession bear idol on man shoulder the people before and behind worship their priest collusion to make gain of the Idol-offering together with their priest shave head and beard their rend clothes their roar before the idol their temple wherein they stand with sceptre axe or other weapon in their hand have candle light before they with other such rite that in the read one will think he be tell the discourse of the mystery of mystical Babylon in the west g g (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) which may be interpret with cord about they which better answer to Herodotus his report so even they accord the chaldaean invocate their Belus to do miracle also say he invocate a dumb idol to give speech unto another which himself want but above all one beastly rite be in use among they the woman say he i i bar. 6.42 sit in the way gird with @ cord of rush and burn straw and if one of they be draw away and lie with any such as come by she cast her neighbour in the tooth because she be not so worthy repute nor her cord break thus be their glory their shame l l Hero clio. Strabo lib. 16. mention the same Herodotus will yield we a commentary on this place the babylonian have a abominable law say he that all their woman once in their life do sit at the temple of Venus to have familiarity with stranger the rich sort come in chariot rich furnish and attend to this ungodly purpose their manner of sit be crown on their temple with garland their retire place distinguish with cord by which the stranger may have access to which of they he like best and thus do these votary of Venus sit hold it religion to be irreligious none of they ever return home till some guest have cast money into her lap who it be not lawful for she to refuse but to accept of he and his price whatsoever he be and follow he aside from the temple where he defile she at the give of the money he use these word mylittam that be at this price or for so much I implore unto thou the goddess Mylitta so the assyrian call Venus m m the arabian call her Alytta the persian Mitra the babylonian call she also alamhone lyl. gerald. hist deor. Syut 13. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) sca. epist. cas (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and this money be consecrate to a sacred use after this with the goddess good leave she may return home although for no great price again say our author to be hire by this mean the fair be quick dispatch the rest endure a restless and irksome penance sometime a year two or three before they can be discharge of their honesty and the law together and hence may arise that former ambitious upbraid in Baruch among their many idol n n Bel Belti nebo mero Scheschach Heurnius in indigo Bel bear the bell not here alone but in all the country of Assyria and adjoin thereto as appear in the history of the bible where Bel or Baal be so often mention as the idol of so many nation and the sin of the apostatical synagogue they o o Ier 19.5 jerem. 32. 1. reg. 18. and 16. 2. reg. 23. and 10. ose 2. Es. 46. build unto he high place or else in stead thereof use the roof of their house to his worship they build he house they make he image erect altar plant grove bend to he the knee and kiss he in token of subjection use perfume and incense observe to he holy day cut and lance themselves in his service with other ecstatical fury and religious frenzy with ornament of gold and jewel invocation and immolation yea of their own child he have also his peculiar prophet and priest these and such like do the scripture mention of this babylonian idol who contagion infect the east with a catholic idolatry that can plead antiquity universality and consent by evidence of Scripture-history which late Babylon can do and yet be but catholic and general error Bel be say Pliny p p plin. l. 6. c. 26. oth. heurnij indicus Aelian var. hist lib. 13. cap. 3. the inventor of astrology which Heurnius add he defile with impure magic as do his daughter Semiramis who war upon Zoroaster in envy of his great learning bell magic appear in his sepulchre which Xerxes open find a vessel of glass and therein a carcase swim in oil which reach not to the brim by a hand-breadth in a little pillar just by be engrave that he shall dear repent it which open the sepulchre do not fill up the vessel this Xerxes assay to do in vain and therefore depart very heavy find in his grecian expedition the truth of bell prophesy the like be say to happen when Darius in hope of treasure q q Herod lib. 1. tell this of nitocris rod. Toletanus report as strange a prodigy of Roderigo a little before the saracen invade Spain lib. 3. cap. 17. open the sepulchre of Semiramis he find a chest which be open a venomous pestilence issue that consume the three part of man ribera affirm r r Rib. in Hos. 2. that diverse late author and before they s s in jerem. 32. Theodoret do esteem the name Bel or Baal to be a general name agree to all the god of the gentile according to the signification of the word to wit a lord t t nic. Serar in judic. it be a name general to their idol when it be put alone but particular with some addition as bel-zebub baal-zephon there be so many Baal in Syria say u u Drus pra. pag. 225. Drusius as there be region and almost as many as city the moabite have their Chamos the ammonite moloch the sydonian astarte in Gaza Maruan in Hamath Asima etc. all call Baal in like sort as the europaean vary the name of jupiter as jupiter capitolinus jupiter Ammon Stygius olympius and the rest many god and many lord say saint Paul 10 10 1. cor. 8.5 yet in the eastern dialect we may read many Baalim and in the western many jove the greek (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and the latin the ancient nominative and by contraction jupiter not as Tully Lactantius and other be all derive that we may note this by the way of that ineffable name which we pronounce jehova and have they not intend the true God when they use Baal or jove absolute without addition neither y y Hos. 2.16 act. 17.26 have the lord prohibit thou shall call i no more Baali that be my lord nor Paul apply that speech of Aratus (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) we be his generation have four verse before begin his book with (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) unto the true god. Servius be z z on those word of virgi Belus and belosoliti etc. Aeneid 1. author that Belus the father of Dido descend of that ancient Belus the first king of the assyrian which people worship Saturn and juno which be after worship in Africa whereupon the punike call GOD Bal from whence come those name Hannibal adherbal and such like who the assyrian in some respect call Bel and Saturn and the sun this opinion that in Bel they worship the sun be follow by tremellius and junius in their note on esaias chap. 46.1 because the assyrian persian and babylonian account the sun the great God and worship the fire as a particle thereof to he the jew with this borrow foreign idolatry dedicate horse and chariot which a a 2. King 23.11 josias abolish together with the altar on the roof of Ahas his house and the high place where their god may see their devotion Hierom on that place of Esay say that Bel be Saturn which suidas confirm Augustine b b aug. tom. 4. quaest. lib. 7. 16. Elias creten com. in Nazian. orat. in Iul. 3. do also take Bel and Baal for the same in orat. 15. relate the usual opinion on those word jud. 2. they serve Baal and Astaroth that Baal in those part be the name of jupiter and astarte of juno and produce the punic language in which baalsamen signify the lord of heaven and for Astaroth which he read astartibus he say it be in the plural number in regard of the multitude of Juno image each bear the name of juno this also be exemplify in the bless virgin by ribera sometime call our lady of Loretto sometime our lady of monteferato etc. according to the diversity of place wherein they worship not Marie the virgin but their own idol the daughter of their whorish mother Babylon for the tyrian sydonian Philistine and other syrian and assyrian nation the scripture brand they with this bell or Baal-idolatry in hatred of which name the jew call the prince of devil as the acaronite do their principal idol by the name of Beelzebub thus the greek and latin have confound the assyrian and tyrian Bel which by josephus c c Scalig. can. Isagog lib. 3. pag. 314. Scaliger who not unworthy be call d d m. Selden Annot. on m. Drayton Poliolb. the dictator of knowledge and great prince of learning state be distinguish and make two the one say he be write (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and the late (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and reprove Jerome for make Belus the father of Ninus and the virgilian Belus to be one but in his note on the fragment of Berosus and other ancient author he say the tyrian and sydonian call he (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) which the greek make Belus and so Mr. Selden also be of opinion that these name (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) differ only according to the propriety of the language and not indeed for the grammarian observe that the Chaldee word often lose that middle letter Elias in his Thesbi observe that Baal signify the act of generation which may well agree with those beastly baal-rite before mention Baal be read in the feminine gender tob. 1.5 rom. 11.4 in photius be e e phot. Biblioth. in Damascio 242. Sachoniatho as after follow cap. 17. make Elius the father of Saturn mention that the phoenician and syrian call Saturn (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) el and Bel and Bolathes lilius Giraldus f f lil. g. gyr. hist deor. synt. 2. out of Servius affirm that (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) in the assyrian language signify the sun from whence the greek (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) be derive some attribute this to the phoenician tongue in which Hal signify god. the assyrian name Saturn and the sun hel. the indian call that Hercules which Tully nat. deor. number the first Belus but we find no end of these labyrinth d. willet in his comment upon g g cap. 1. q. 16. Polanus in dan. cap. 1. Daniel have these word the chaldaean have five idol three god and two goddess their first god be Bel a name contract of Behel which come of Bahal which signify a lord to who be build that temple before mention the second be the sun which they call Rach that be a king because he be chief among the planet and the persian call he Mithra as justinus martyr say Dialog. in Triphon the Priest of this idol be call raciophantae observer of the sun their three god be nego the fire so call of the brightness this be carry about among they the priest be call Ortophantae their first goddess be Shacha which be the earth worship also of the roman under the name of Tellus and opis of the syrian call Dorcetha in the honour of this goddess they use to keep a feast five day together in Babylon during which time the master be under the dominion of their servant one of which be usual set over the rest and royal clothe and be call Sogan that be great prince our lord of misrule seem to derive their pedigree from hence this festival time be call shache whereof Babylon be call Sheshach of keep this feast jerem. 25.27 and 51.41 their other goddess be mulitia which be Venus who priest be call natitae or natophantae but the chief of their idol be bel. he also interpret h h Quest. 16. those word dan. 1.4 who they may teach the learning and tongue of the chaldaean of school wherein youth be bring up in good letter to be after employ in the State so among the egyptian they have the like use where Moses be teach the learning of the egyptian among the israelite eight and forty city be appoint for the levite which be as the common school and university for the whole kingdom Samuel and elizeus have their school and college of prophet yea the rude indian have their gymnosophist and the roman have their college of augur this bell or Baal idolatry pass out of Asia into Europe even as far as these part of Britain for the celtae and britanni worship abellio belenus or Belinus as appear by inscription in Lipsius and Scaliger and our famous antiquary Mr Camden mention a altar in Cumberland inscribe and on the coin of Cunobelinus the british king be stamp Apollo or belenus which in heathen mystery be the same with the sun play on a harp and the name Cunobelinus make evident to our purpose Heliogabalus be another syrian idolatrous title for the sun as appear by a inscription alagabalo for so also be that name write neither be Gabalus from any other derivation the name of the roman emperor priest of that god who name he usurp derive from the Hebrew Ahgol-Baal that be the round or circular lord either in respect of the sun circular body and journey or of that round stone which the syrian conceit as the trojan of their Palladium and the ephesian of their Diana to have divine descend such stone as Mr Selden in relation of those thing observe be the Baetaelia or Betuli of the ancient dedicate to diverse deity somewhat of fashion like fire round and sharp upward the beginning of which Baetuli some derive from Jacob stone at bethel in the seventeen chapter of the second book of king be mention succoth Benoth a idol of the babylonian beda interpret it the tabernacle of Benoth and so the word succoth use amos 5.25 be by saint Stephen act. 7.43 interpret and so do the i i ra. in gloss gloss on that part of the king interpret where lyra k k lyra in 4. reg. 17. according to the signification of the word a tabernacle of wing relate out of rab. sal. that this idol be make like to a hen brood her chicken which idol the babylonian frame in worship of that constellation call by the vulgar the hen and chicken and of the learned pleyade as other do to the sun other to the moon some l l Wolph in 2. reg. 17. Selden in tract de this Syris apply it to the mystery of their idol which Christ the truth true say of himself protect his worshipper as a hen her chicken my learned friend Mr Selden have gather by the signification of succoth Benoth the tabernacle of the daughter that thereby be mean the temple of Venus Mylitta or Urania where the daughter of the babylonian sit as before be say to perform their filthy devotion yea by a easy deduction he derive the name of Venus from this Benoth b and u easy exchange the modern jew pronounce th like s Venos suidas also call her binos and in Africa be a city call sicca venerea a name transport by the punike from this siccuth or succoth Benoth where be a temple of like nature in which the woman purchase their marriage-money by prostitute their body it seem the idolatrous priest carry the tabernacle of their idol on their shoulder in apish imitation of the true priest and levite for so amos say m m amos 5.26 you carry succoth or Sicchuth your king Chiun your image which Drusius n n Drus in amos interpret moloch and Hercules in the fourteen chapter of Daniel as the latin read be a large history both of Bel a dead statue and of a live dragon which the babylonian worship the priest of Bel be seventy beside their wife and child who fraud and cozenage Daniel detect make it manifest by their footstep in the ash which he have strew in the temple that they be the devourer of that huge portion of forty sheep twelve measure of meal and six great pot of wine daily consecrate for bell breakfast he after slay the dragon also for which the babylonian force the king to lodge he six day among the lion but howsoever general more authority be to be ascribe to the apocryphal book then to any human history or other ecclesiastical author as o o Zanc. confess Zanchius religious hold yet for this fragment of Daniel it be account p p Whittak Scrip. quaest. 1. cap. 9 the work of theodotion a bad man who foist it into his translation and not only the reform church account it as it be but Driedo a learned Papist Erasmus a semi-christian so Bellarmine call he julius Africanus of old and the jew general reject it out of the canon as the cardinal himself q q Bellar. lib. 1. c. 9 have observe and he be fain the tell we of another Daniel of the tribe of levi ro maintain the credit hereof but Jerome in the preface of his commentary style they and allege Eusebius Origen Apollinarius and other ecclesiastical doctor which be of his mind and think they need not to answer Porphyry who have hence rake some objection against the christian for these thing which have not authority of scripture as for Pyramus and Thisbe with Cyparissus and such like I leave they r r Metamorph. 4 and 10. Ovid and the poet it seem worthy relation that fall out at assus a babylonian city where a dolphin so love a boy that follow too far after their wont sport he stick fast in the sand s s solinus c. 18. which Alexander interpret to be ominous prefer the boy to the priesthood of Neptune for the present saracenicall religion now observe in these part our three book shall large relate thereof concern other babylonian custom Herodotus l. 2. tell of three family in Babylon which live on fish it may be the carthusian of our western Babylon be of their offspring for who spare their fellow may eat the more flesh with which those of old and these late may not forsooth pollute themselves t t quint. curt. lib. 5. Curtius tell general that for fleshly vice the babylonian be most corrupt they prostitute their wife and daughter to their guest for reward they be addict to excessive banquet and drunkenness in the begin of their feast their woman be modest attire by degree they strip themselves of their clothes begin with the uppermost till nothing be leave to cover their shame or forbid their shamelessness and not their courtesan alone but their matron yea in token of civility do thus prostitute themselves to those flame of lust which have come from hell and carry thither here be Alexander manly and victorious army make effeminate unfit after to have encounter with a strong enemy u u coelius rhod. lib. 8. cap. 11. some ascribe the loose life of the babylonian to a law of Xerxes who to chastise they for a rebellion enact that they shall no long wear arm but addict themselves to music riot and such like chap. 13 the chaldean and assyrian chronicle or computation of time with their manifold alteration of religion and government in those part until our time we have before a a cap. 10. show the prodigious chronology of the chaldaean reckon the reign of their king before the flood 432000. year they tell also after the flood of diverse dynasty or governement in this country of Babylon first b b Scalig. can. Isag. lib. 2. and 3 the c c the chaldean dynasty chaldaean euechoo reign 6. year chomusbolos 7. poros 35. nechubes 43. abios 48. Oniballos 40. zinziros 45. he be dispossess by the arabian d d the arabian dynasty mardocentes begin the second arabian dynasty and reign 45. year and after he Sisimardichos 28. abias 37. parannos 40. Nabonnabos 25. 41. the space of these two dynasty be reckon four hundred and forty year thus Scaliger relate but in my mind as the former be beyond all possibility of truth which they tell of before the flood so this have no great likelihood at least for so long space before Belus with who the most history begin their relation and Scaliger his e e the assyrian dynasty Moses gen. 14.1 speak of Amraphel king of Shinar that be of these part of Babylonia as his companion reign not far hence three dynasty of one and forty king in this order 1 Belus 55 2 Ninus 52 3 Semiramis 42 4 Nynias zames 38 5 Arius 30 6 Aralius 40 7 Xerxes 30 8 Armamithres 38 9 Beluchus 35 10 Balaeus 52 11 Sethus 32 12 Mamythus 30 13 Aschalios 28 14 sphaerus 22 15 mamylus 30 16 Spartheus 42 17 aschatade 38 18 amynte 43 19 Belochus 25 20 balatores 30 21 Lamprides 30 22 Sosares 20 23 lamprae 35 24 Panyas 43 25 sosarmos 37 26 mithaeos 42 27 teutamo 27 28 teutaeus 44 29 Arbelus 42 30 chalaos 45 31 Anabos 38 32 babios 37 33 thinaeos 30 34 dercylus 40 35 eupacme 38 36 Laosthenes 45 37 Pyritiades 30 38 Ophrataeus 21 39 ephathere 52 40 Acracarnes 42 41 tonos Concoleros and Sardanapalus 20 the sum of this dynasty 1484. year the four dynasty be f f the median dynasty of the mede begin by Arbaces who deprive Sardanapalus he reign 28 year his son mandauce 50. sosarmus 30. Artycas 50. in the 19 year of this king nabonassar the babylonian rebel and begin a new dynasty in Babylonia and in the 43. year of his reign Salmanassar captive the ten tribe Arbianes or Cardiceas 22. arsaeos or deioces 40. artyne call also phraortes 22. Astibaras or cyaxares 40. apandas alias Astyages 40. in all 322. year the five g g the persian dynasty dynasty be of the persian begin by Cyrus which overthrow Astyages and reign 30. year his son Cambyses 8. the magi 7. month Darius son of hystaspes 36. year Xerxes 20. artabanus 7. month Artaxerxes longimanus 40. Xerxes 2. month sogdianus 7. month Darius nothus 19 year Artaxerxes mnemon 40. year Artaxerxes ochus 26. arse 4. Darius 6. in all 231. year the six h h the macedonian dynasty dynasty be of the macedonian the first of which be Alexander who after the conquest of Darius reign 6. year Antigonus 12. Seleucus nicator 32. Antigonus soter 19 Antigonus Theos 15. in the 12. year of his reign Arsaces the persian rebel Seleucus callinicus 20. Seleucus Ceraunus 3 Antiochus Magnus 36. Seleucus Philopater 12. Antiochus Epiphanes 11. Antiochus eupator 2. Demetrius soter 12. Alexander bala 10. Demetrius Nicanor 3 Antiochus sidetes 9 Demetrius D.F. 4. Antiochus Gripus 12. Antiochus Cyzicenus 18. Philippus 2. in all 237. and from the begin of the first dynasty 2633. these I have here insert out of Scaliger rather to show the continue succession of the eastern empire then with any intent to persuade that all these be king and rule the country of Babylonia for after arsaces rebel the parthian dispossess the syrian king of these part and before the babylonian often rebel as in the time of the persian when zopyrus by a strange stratagem recite by justin and other restore they to Darius but especial in the time of the mede who dynasty be much disquiet sometime the scythian say i i Oros 1. c. 19 orosius and sometime the chaldaean and sometime the mede prevail sometime also as the scripture witness the assyrian renew their ancient power yea in the time of the assyrian dynasty the chaldaean be say to war in the reign of Panyas against the phoenician which argue that they be then free the scripture and other history speak of phul teglath-phalasar jareb Sargon Salmanasar Senacherib Asar-haddon which be great and mighty not only strong enough to defend themselves against the mede but to invade foreign nation yea do translate people from one kingdom to another and k k 2. reg. 17.24 seat the captive of Israel in the city of the mede and send babylonian colony to Samaria which they can not do if they have not command both Assyria and Media with Babylonia nabonassar rebel as be say against Artycas and begin the chaldaean dynasty from who for this restitution of liberty the chaldaean begin their astronomical computation he reign 14. year Nassyus 2. Chinzerus and Porus 5. Dilulaus 5. mardokempadus 12. l l call Merodach he send ambassador to hezekiah arkeanos 5. interregnum 12. Belithus 3 Aporonadicus 6. Herigebalus 1 Nesnoemondacus 4. interregnum 17. jearaedin 13. Saosducinus 9 kiniladacus 14. nabopollasarus 29. in the seventeen year of his reign he send his son Nabuchodonosor in Syria with a army Nabuchodonosor 30. Euilmerodach 6. Neregasolarus 5. Nabonidus 17. this be a Mede by lineage not as some m m scal. in frag Beros say king of the mede son of Xerxes a Mede but bear at Babylon and by conspiracy raise to the kingdom not invade Babylon with Cyrus but reign in Babylon till Cyrus deprive he megasthenes call he a Mede and the scripture Darius medus Cyrus come against he in the nineteenth year of his reign and eleven year before the seventy of the captivity be end in which space Cyrus have enough to do to besiege and conquer Babylon and borsippa where Darius be from the beginning of nabonassar to the end of Cyrus be 217. year from thence to the asiatike empire of the macedonian 201. from thence to the rebellion of Arsaces the parthian of who the parthian king be call arsacidae 79. and the dynasty of the parthian continue 479. year the last of they artabanus be slay these king and the time of their reign be not easy to set down and Onuphrius be therefore reprove of Scaliger for undertake this task in which authority fail he of they we shall speak in due place the n n the second Pesian dynasty second persian dynasty continue till the mahometans deprive they the first Artaxerxes reign 12. year sapores 31. Ormisdas 1 Wararanes 3 Wararanus 2. 17. wararanet 3. four month narses 7. Ormisdas 7. sabores be bear king and reign 70. year Artaxerxes 4. sabores 5. Wararanes 4. 11. Izdigerdes 21. Wararanes 5. 10. Isdigerdes 2. 17. peroze 24. Obalas 4. cabades 11. Zamaspes 4. cabades again 30. Cosroes Magnus 48. ormizda 8. Casroes 39 Siroes 1. Adeser 7. month Barasas 6. month baram 7. Monethr Ormizda jezdogird 3 in all 402. the saracen succeed who name and time you may see in our o o lib. 3. cap. 1. saracenicall relation after the saracen reign the tartar and since sometime one family sometime another among the persian till Solyman dispossess the sophian of the babylonian dominion under which Turkish servitude it groan till our day I dare not take upon i to be umpire and decider of those many alteration among chronologer but have simple follow Scaliger who very name be able to shield i from contempt if not to yield i commendation let other that have more lust and leisure traverse these matter at their pleasure my intent be most of all the history of religion and the succession and alteration of state I have light touch but precise to determine in what year of the world every king begin his reign and to dispute the same with all opiponet will be somewhat tedious to the reader to i perhaps in these variety of opinion impossible leave therefore the more studious to the chronologer let we take a little review of some principal occurrent in the former catalogue Africanus begin the assyrian monarchy at Belus and not as the most with Ninus that Belus some think to be the same with Nimrod who Ninus as we say before consecrate Semiramis be p p Caelius r. lib. 17. cap. 29. report to be the first that cause eunuch to be make Ninias which succeed leave not like monument of his great exploit as his predecessor before he Buntingus think he to be that Amraphel king of shinar mention genes 14. and that Arioch king of Elasser be his son however it breed much difficulty to reconcile the ancient history of the babylonian and assyrian great and long continue empire with the kingdom and king in that chapter by Moses mention eupolemus as before be cite out of Eusebius say that those king be armenian Diodorus Tarsensis as Pererius affirm reckon they persian josephus assyrian Pererius himself think they vassal and tributary to the assyrian Genebrard suspect the history of the assyrian greatness and true not altogether unjust neither do we read in all the history of mosce and joshua of any king in those part for aught can be gather yield subjection to Babylon and the sodomite and his neighbour have be the tributary of Chedarlaomer king of elam and not of Amraphel king of shinar unless we say that violent thing be not permanent and the yoke impose before by the assyrian be now in Ninias day reject Semiramis be weaken with her indian expedition and Ninias by kill she give occasion or discontent to her follower the man of war which may hereupon contemn this effeminate king who have suffer his mother to possess the sceptre so long fall to share for themselves and erect petty kingdom Arius happy restore the empire thus decay if it be true that Buntingus write that he be a great warrior therefore call Arius and Mars and as the god of war invocate by i assyrian when Teutamos reign q q diodor. sic. lib. 3. cap. 7. Diodor. lib. 3 testify that Priamus then besiege by Agamemnon as vassal and tributary to the assyrian send to he for aid who send to his succour Memnon with twenty thousand soldier but to descend unto time near both we and the truth and to view the ruin of that great estate we read in the same author and in r r justin lib. 1. orosius li. 2. 1. 2. other that Arbaces who justin call arbactus orosius Arbastus be by Sardanapalus make captain of the army which be yearly send to nina or ninive where a conspiracy be contract between he and Belesus a chaldaean priest captain of the babylonian who by his chaldaean skill in divination have foretell Arbaces this destine empire and be promise for his share the babylonian principality thus the mede babylonian and arabian enterprise rebellion assemble to the number of four hundred thousand who Sardanapalus overthrow in battle twice but be still animate by s s some think this Belelus to be Daniel who the babylonian king call Belteshazzar Broughton consent Belesus prediction which say he the god by the star fore-signify and by corrupt of the bactrian army send to succour the king and adjoin themselves to the enemy they at the three battle overthrow the force of Sardanapalus lead by Salamenus his wife brother the king flee into ninive trust to a prophecy that the city shall never be take till the river be enemy to it after two year siege by extreme rain the river swell overflow part of the city and cast down twenty furlong of the wall whereupon despair as seem to see GOD and man against he he which before have chamber himself with woman and accustom himself to the distaff in a woman both heart and habit now in a manly resolution if it may not more fit be call a feminine dissolution which thus run from that danger which it shall encounter gather his treasure together and erect a frame in his palace there burn they himself his wife and eunuch together the ash under pretence of a vow thereof make to Belus Belesus obtain of Arbaces the new conqueror and monarch to carry to Babylon but the cozenage be know and Belesus condemn for the treasure which with the ash he have convey Arbaces both give they and forgive he add the praefecture of the babylonian according to promise t t Phrygio Carion lib. 2. some say that Belesus who they call phul Beloch share the empire with he Arbaces reign over the mede and persian the other over ninive and Babylonia follow herein the forge Metasthenes who as annius make he to say out of the susian library pen his history have before fable a catalogue out of Berosus of the ancient king contrary to that which out of the fragment of the true Berosus before be deliver Sardanapalus be write say u u euseb chron. Scalig. Scaliger in his note upon Eusebius with a double ll. Sardanapalus a name fit to his effeminate life (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) signify the same whence be those word of Cicero 3 de repub. Sardanapalus Sardanapalus build Tarsus and anchiale say Eusebius at the same time the one famous for the most famous divine that ever the sun see except the sun of righteousness himself Paul the apostle and doctor of the gentile the other for the author monument and stony image 10 10 Strabo lib. 14 with this assyrian epigram Sardanapalus the son of Anacyndaraxis build anchiale and Tarsus in one day and thou o stranger eat drink play and verse be annex which I have thus english mortal thou know thyself then please thy appetite with present dainty death can yield thou no delight loe I be now but dust whilom a prince of might what I do eat I have and what my greedy mind consume how much alas how sweet leave I behind learn this o man thus live best wisdom thou can find this his legacy he have bequeath to all epicure the live sepulcher of themselves breathe grave not of so many creature only better than themselves which they devour but of reason nature religion soul and if it be possible of GOD which all lie bury in these swine cover with the skin of men. y y 1. cor. 15.32 let we eat and drink for to morrow we shall die who know whether Paul do not allude to this speech of the founder of his city this subversion of the assyrian empire be 3145. after Buntingus account of the mede see more in their proper place the babylonian empire renew by nabonassar continue till Cyrus of which time we have little record but in the scripture as neither of those assyrian king which before have captive Israel and invade juda Senacherib be famous even in the ethnic history although they have not the full truth for thus Harodotus z z Herod lib. 2. tell that Senacherib king of the arabian and assyrian war on Egypt where sethon before Vulcan priest then reign who be forsake of his soldier betake he to his devotion amidst the which he fall asleep and the god appear promise aid which he perform send a army of mouse into the army of Senacherib which do eat his soldier quiver and the leather of their shield and armour insomuch that the very next day they all flee in witness whereof the image of the king make of stone stand in the temple of Vulcan hold a mouse in his hand utter these word he that look on i let he be religious this history the egyptian in vanity and ambition have thus pervert and arrogate to themselves Funccius of Osiander make Nabopollasar and Nabuchodonosor to be one and the same and commenter upon Daniel hold the same opinion who Scaliger and Caluisius confute at large Nabopollasar be suppose to begin his reign 3325. which he continue nine and twenty year in his a a sc. canon l. 3. seventeen year Nebuchadnezzer so the masorite miss-call he say Scaliger or Nabuchodonosor his son be send by he to subdue the rebellious egyptian jew and palestinian at which time he carry away Daniel into captivity b b Berosus app. lib 1. Caluisius he begin his reign 3354. and in the year 3360. destroy jerusalem in the year 3386. Euilmerodach his son succeed he who Neriglossoorus as Scaliger c c animaduers in Eusebium pag. 85. affirm slay thereby to advance his own son the nephew of Nabuchodonosor call Laborosoarchadus to the sceptre which himself sway as protector in the minority of his son but he be dead and his son more fit for a chamber then a throne Nabonidus conspire against he and slay he this Nabonidus say he be Darius medus and Laborosoarchadus be that baltasar mention by Daniel d. willet hold otherwise com. in dan. 6. after scaliger interpretation of the prophet out of Berosus and megasthenes it be a world to see how the catholic so they call themselves sweat in find out that Nabuchodonosor mention in judith 1 pintus will make it a common name to the babylonian king as Pharaoh to the egyptian Pererius will have two of the name other will have he to be Cyrus other Cambyses Artaxerxes ochus once Babel be a mother of confusion to her child and make they babble while they will canonize apocrypha-scripture Cyrus end the babylonian monarchy and have win Babylon and take Darius medus at borsippa he give he his life and the government of Carmania an. mund. 3409. as Nabuchodonosor have by edict proclaim the GOD of Daniel so Cyrus end the captivity of his people give liberty to such as will to return but many jew abide there still and thence send their yearly offering to the temple in the time of artabanus the parthian when Caligula tyrannize at Rome d d joseph antiq. l. 18. c. 12. Asimaeus and Anilaeus brethren of the jewish nation grow mighty and haughty withal forget GOD and themselves which cause the babylonian to conspire against they and after the death of the brethren with thousand of their partaker and slay in seleucia fifty thousand of the jewish nation Neerda and Nibisis be then much people by the jew and thus religion partly hold the ancient course partly be mix according to the custom of conquest with the persian macedonian parthian beside the jewish and syrian until the apostle preach here the christian verity about the same time Helena and her son izates king of Adiabena which be in these part of Assyria become jewish proselyte seleucia e e seleucia be build by Seleucus nicator on a channel dig out of Euphrates into Tigris plin. l. 6. cap. 26. build by Seleucus as it be the marriage-chamber of Euphrates and Tigris which there meet and mix their water nature be by man industry force to yield to the match as Pliny say for that purpose empty Babylon of her inhabitant and inherit her name also with her people it be from Babylon ninety mile or as some read it forty inhabit with six hundred thousand citizen to spoil the spoiler the parthian build Ctesiphon three mile from thence and fail of their purpose Vologesus build another town by call Vologesocerta yet do Babylon itself remain but not itself in the time of ammianus marcellinus and after Ortelius think that Bagdat be call Babylon as seleucia before have be because it stand near to the place where Babylon have stand for that old Babylon in f f Pausanias Arcad lib. 8. Pausanias time have nothing leave stand but the temple of Bel and the wall sometime say he the great city that ever the sun see in jerome time g g Hieron Es. 13. within those wall be keep beast for the king game it be after inhabit with many thousand of jew and be lay even with the ground as Ios. Scaliger h h scal. animaduers in euseb pag. 126. affirm in the year after the jewish account 4797. and after the christian 1037. master fox have a little i i act. and mon. m.s. cariens pag. 211. lengthen the date and fate thereof show that almaricus king of jerusalem raze and ruin it and that it be never after inhabit ann. 1170. but in Benjamin Tudelensis his day which seem to be somewhat before almaricus this city be utter subvert as in his itinerary be relate in these word one day journey from Gehiagan ancient call resen be old Babel contain thirty mile space now utter ruin in which the ruin of nabuchodonosor palace be yet see not accessible for diverse hurtful kind of serpent and dragon there breed there now k k sir a. Shirley remain nothing but the small part of that great tower either of ornament or of greatness or of place inhabit before that time be Bagdet build by Bugiafar as l l i. de bar. Asdec 1. lib. 1. barrius call he or after m m scal. can isa lib. 2. and 3 Scaliger Abugephar Elmantzur who begin to reign in the one hundred thirty and six and die in the one hundred fifty and eight year of their aegeira Scaliger and n n lydyal em. tem. vid. ott. Fris chron. 1.7 cap. 3. Lydyate agree of this place which in their emendation of time disagree so eager that it be seleucia or build in the place and of the ruin thereof a opinion not so improbable as they altogether which think the present bagded to be the old Babylon the story of this bagde or Baldach and her chalif you may read in o o lib. 3. cap. 2. our saracenicall history author p p joy le roy. lib. 8. Knolls T.H. pag. 113. m. polo Ven. Haiton Armen agree that Haalon the tartar sack it about the year one thousand two hundred and threescore Mustratzem be then Chalipha the four and fifty and last of those saracenicall pope he find a miserable death where other with miserableness seek a bless life be shut up and starve amidst those treasure whereof he have store which nigardise forbid he to disburse in his own defence there be yet a bone leave of this calipha carcase or some ghost and shadow of that great and mighty body I mean that ancient name and power of the calipha which magnificent Solyman the turkish emperor in his conquest 1534. will seem to acknowledge in accept the royal ensign of that new conquer state at the hand of their Calipha a ceremony which the sultan in Egypt and Persia use more for form then necessity this assyrian and that egyptian caliph have but gesture and vesture the sultan themselves enjoy both body and soul of this authority in the year one thousand one hundred fifty nine the river Tigris overflow bagd and desolate many city barrius q q Decad. as l. 1. affirm out of the arabian and persian Tarigh which he say he have see that bagd be build by the counsel of a ginger a gentile name Nobach and have for ascendent sagittarius be finish in four year and cost eighteen million of gold these study of astrology do there flourish one richardus r r rich. Alcoran cap. 13. a friar preacher say that here be a university the student whereof be maintain at public charge of which number himself be one that caliph that found it for the prevent of sect banish philosophy out of these school and account he a bad saracen which be a good philosopher the reason whereof grow from some which in read Aristotle and Plato relinquish Mahomet Marco Palo s s m. pa. lib. 1. cap. 7. or Paulus the venetian say that they study here in his time the law of Mahomet necromancy geomancy physiognomy physic and astronomy and that it be then a great staple of the indian commodity this be within few year after the tartar have win it he add that there be many christian in these part and that in the year one thousand two hundred twenty and five in derision of the gospel the caliph command by a day that the christian shall remove a mountain in testimony of their faith according to the word of Christ or else to abide the peril this be effect by a shoemaker and the day in remembrance thereof yearly solemnize with fast the even the jew go still to visit the den which be there show as the place of daniel imprisonment with his terrible gaoler or fellow-prisoner as master Allen tell i a certain merchant the discourse of who voyage t t cap. 8. ramusius have publish speak of u u this may be of the chaldee whence Abraham pass first to Canaan Orpha a town in the way from Byr to Babylon wherein the people foolish suppose that Abraham offer Isaac at which time say they there spring a fountain which water their country and drive their mill here be a christian temple call saint Abraham after turn into a Mahometan Moschee and now call abraham well into which if any enter so many time they have a set number with devotion he be free of any fever the fish which be many have take sanctuary in these water and none dare take they but hold they holy six mile from hence be a well hold in like sacred account which cure leprosy nisibis Carrae and 10 10 volater l. 11. edessa be chief city of Mesopotamia at edessa reign Abagarus betwixt who and our saviour pass if we may believe it those epistle yet extant at carrhae y y Spartian in caracal alex. alexand. dier. lib. 4. cap. 8. there be a temple of the moon in which they which sacrifice to the goddess Luna be subject to the government of their wife they which sacrifice to the god Lunus be account their wife master as for this difference of sex ancient idolatry scarce observe it for we read of the god Venus which the cyprian say Macrobius account both male and female and so do Trismegistus mystical say of God himself so be Baal in the scripture sometime masculine sometime feminine he say that the babylonian allow marriage of parent and child z z lib. 2. cap. 24. Cafe be two day journey from Bagdet a a Cartwright religious for the burial of Hali and his son hassan and Ossain whereunto be resort of pilgrim from Persia who king be wont here to be crown but this city Curio b b Curio sar. hist lib. 8. call Cufa assign it to Arabia and say that of this accident it be call Massadale or the house of Ali slay here by muani his competitor Mesopotamia be now call Diarbech the c c maginus chief city in it be Orfa of seven mile compass famous say some for the death of Crassus Caramit d d assyrias latio Carras say Lucan the mother city of the country of twelve mile compass mosul and Merdin of which in the next chapter between Orpha and Caramit be the paradise of Aladeules where he have a fortress destroy by selim. this e e Cartwright his paradise be like to that which you shall find in our persian f f inf. l. 4. c. 8. and l. 2. c. ult. history man by a potion bring into a sleep be bring into this suppose paradise where at their wake they be present with all sensual pleasure of music damosel dainty etc. which have have some taste of another sleepy drink after come again to themselves and then do Aladeules tell they that he can bring who he please to paradise the place where they have be and if they will commit such murder or haughty attempt it shall be they a dangerous device Zelim the Turk destroy the place chap. 14 of ninive and other neighbour nation we have hitherto speak of Babylonia but so as in regard of the empire and some other occurrent necessity now and then compel we to make excursion into some other part of Assyria Mesopotamia etc. and I know not how this Babylon cause confusion in that sea of affair and in regard of the division of the pen as sometime of tongue of such as have write thereof hard it be to distinguish between the assyrian and babylonian empire one while unite another while divide as each party can most prevail and no less hard to reconcile the ethnic and divine history touch the same Ptolemey a a lib. 6. cap. 1 straitn Assyria on the north with part of Armenia near the hill niphates on the west with Mesopotamia on the south with susiana and Media on the east but her large empire have enlarge the name of Syria and of Assyria which name the greek do not well distinguish to many country in that part of Asia the scripture derive Syria from aram and Assyria from ashur both be in their time flourish and mention be make from Abraham time both of the war and kingdom in those part yea before from ashur and Nimrod as already be show Mesopotamia be so call and in the scripture aram or Syria of the water because it be situate between Euphrates and Tigris the country Babylonia and Armenia confine the same on the north and south whereas therefore we have in our former babylonian relation discourse of Assyria extend the name after a large reckon here we consider it more proper Euphrates be a river very swift for they which go to Bagdet buy their boat at birra which serve they but one voyage and sell they at Felugia for seven or eight which cost fifty because they can return but Tigris be swift raph. fitch Hak to 2. the armenian bring victual down the same to Bagdet on raft make of goat skin blow full of wind and board lay upon they on which they lade their good which be discharge they open the skin and carry they back on camel Strab. lib. 11. di ny Asero Carm. geog. Lucan l. 3. Dionysius and Strabo tell of this river that it pass through the lake thonitis without mixture of water by reason of this swiftness which also give it the name for the mede call a arrow Tigris Lucan say it pass a great way under ground and weary of that burdensome journey rise again as out of a new fountain at tygrim the chief city in these part be ninive call in jonas b b joh. 3.3 a great and excellent city of three day journey it have I borrow the word of our reverend diocesan a c c d. king on jonas lect. 2. ancient testimony long before in the book of d d gen. 10.11 genesis for thus Moses write that ashur come from the land of shinar and build Niniveh and rehoboth and Calah and resin at length he single out ninive from the rest and set a special mark of pre-eminence upon it this be a great city which honour by the judgement of the most learned though stand in the last place belong to the first of the four city namely to ninive other e e Annius upon Beres imagine but their conjecture be without ground that the four city be close up within the same wall and make but one of a usual bigness some ascribe the building of ninive to Ninus the son of Belus Volaterran plin. 6. nat. hist 13. of who it take the name to be call either Ninus as we read in Pliny or after the manner of the hebrew ninive they conceive it thus that when Nimrod have build Babylon Ninus disdain his government go into the field of ashur and there erect a city after his own name between the river Lycus and Tigris other suppose that the affinity betwixt these name Ninus and Niniveh deceive profane writer touch the author thereof and that it take to name Niniveh because it be beautiful or pleasant ar. mont. junius and Trem. other hold opinion that ashur and Ninus be but one and the same person and last to conclude the judgement of some learned be that neither ashur nor Ninus but Nimrod himself be the founder of it but by the confession of all both sacred and gentile history the city be very spacious have four hundred and fourscore furlong in circuit when Babylon have few almost as some report by a hundred diod. sic. Strabo and as afterward it grow in wealth and magnificence so they write it be much more enlarge Raphael Volaterranus affirm that it be eight year in building and not by few at once than ten thousand workman there be no city since by the estimation of Diodorus siculus that have like compass of ground or stateliness of wall Paulus de Pa'atio upon jonas the height whereof be not less than a hundred foot the breadth sufficient capable to have receive three cart on a row and they be furnish and adorn beside with fifteen hundred turret thus far our reverend and learned bishop Diodorus f f diod. sic. l. 3 c. 1. tell out of ctesias that Ninus after he have subdue the egyptian phoenician syrian cilician phrygian and other as far as Tanais and the hyrcanian parthian persian and other their neighbour he build this city after that he lead a army against the bactrian of seventeen hundred thousand footman and two hundred thousand horse in which expedition he take Semiramis from her husband Menon who therefore impatient of love and grief hang himself he have by she a son of his own name and then die leave the empire to his wife his sepulchre be nine furlong in height each of which be six hundred foot and ten in breadth the credit of this history I leave to the author scarce seem to agree with Moses narration of the building of ninive any more than Semiramis build of Babylon some write that g g alien var. hist l. 7. c. 1. Semiramis abuse her husband love obtain of he the sway of the empire for the space of five day in which she deprive he of his life and succeed in his estate but lest the name of this city call we back again too much to those assyrian relation before dilate as much as concern our purpose let we see what can be say of their religion here of this we find little but as before be show of the babylonian Nisroch be the idol in who temple Senacherib be slay by his own son but what this Nisroch be I can find certain it be that he which have upbraid confidence in the true GOD find his idol even in the place and time of his worship his traitor and he which have blaspheme the GOD of heaven find heaven and earth and his own bowel against he Venus Urania h h Wolph in 2. King 19 be reckon among the assyrian devotion and adad be their chief god which they interpret one and Macrobius the sun which as before be say they worship and may well agree with that latin etymology and Atargatis the earth Belus also be here worship as witness Dion Eusebius and cyrillus Lucian i i luc. in jove say that the assyrian sacrifice to a dove the touch of which fowl require much ceremony for expiation whereto accord the fable that Semiramis k k metam 4. be turn into a dove concern adad and Atargatis Macrobius l l saturnal l. 1. 23. say that the assyrian ascribe all power to these two the image of m m Macrobius Ada Deus Hada (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Chaldaeum and Drus in luc. 18. seldenus (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) heb. jud ei Deut. 6. dominus etc. Archang. in cabal dog Apollo Plato pertinent adad shine with ray or beam downward design the sun force that of Atargatis with beam upward as it be ascribe to the heavenly influence all her plenty under the same image be the shape of lion as also the phrygian feign the mother of the god that be the earth to be bear on lion but of this Atargatis more in the next chapter jonas be send to preach to the great city of ninive as some n n Gramay as sigon in Sulpit. think in the day of Sardanapalus his next predecessor Broughton with some other think in the day of pull or phul-assur their repentance stay that judgement nahum after denounce the like judgement which according come to pass phraortes king of the mede mention in the former chapter besiege it his son cyaxares succeed in the kingdom and in this siege after that the scythian invade Media and hold it eight and twenty year according to the prophecy of Jeremy 49.34 and in the same expedition obtain ninive but cyaxares after prevail against the scythian and Astyages his son overturn and destroy ninive that it shall no more be a receptacle or encouragement to the assyrian to rebel against the mede nahum threaten o o Nah. 2.6 open of the gate of the river and destruction to the temple as tremellius read it note thereon the cast down of the fort on Tigris and among they the temple of Belus there erect out of who note on the first chapter of nahum I insert the former relation Herodotus in the history hereof say that phraortes there perish in the siege with most part of his army cyaxares to revenge his father death renew the siege but be not able to hold his own against the scythian until after eight and twenty year that the scythian have enjoy the empire of Asia under pretence of feast be entertain in a banquet the most of they in their drunkenness be slay by the mede and so the scythian lose what before they have get cyaxares recover the empire and destroy ninive thus be that city p p Dorothaeus in his affirm that by a earthquake the lake which compass the City drown it and a fire consume the upper part thereof destroy who riches beauty antiquity largeness and puissance the scripture so often mention a man may compare ecbatana of the mede Babylon on Euphrates and ninive on Tigris to the triumvir at Rome so do they both emulate and share the eastern empire as each can make herself strong now Babylon another while ninive and sometime ecbatana prevail which be the cause of no small difficulty in these history Mr Cartwright a eyewitness have behold he say the ruin of this city and agree with Diodorus in the equality of the side two of which contain a hundred and fifty furlong the two other but fourscore and ten on a side mosul be suppose to be ninive haply for the nearness of Mosul and the Nestorian here see Onuphrius in vita jul. 3. or for that as a posthume issue it have spring from the former the ash yet have not yield such a phoenix as the former be rather a witness of the other mightiness say St. Anthony Shirley and God judgement then of any magnificence in itself q q g. bo. ben. part. 1. l. 2. mosul be in fame for cloth of gold and silk for fertility and for the patriarchal sea of the nestorian christian who authority stretch to cathay and India Merdin a town on the same river be also a patriarchal sea of the chaldee or Mahometan Sect in Paulus venetus his day r r m. Paul l. 1. cap. 6. they be in the province of mosul partly mahumetan partly Christian and in the mountain dwell the Curdi that be participle or mongrel in religion profess partly Christ partly Mahumet in practice robber and wicked the christian patriarch have archbishop and bishop under he as the roman pope the mahometans be call aratry Assyria say s s magin geogr. Magmus be now call by Niger Adrinsa by Girava Azemia by pinetus mosul by mercator sarh and of Castaldus Arzerum it sometime contain the province arapachite Adiabena and sittacene now call after some Botan Sarca and Rabia Boemus @ tell of a strange fashion ancient use in Assyria t t i. Boem. l. 1. that the maid which be marriageable be yearly bring forth in public and set to sale to such as will marry they the money which be give for the fair be give to the more deform for their portion in marriage the assyrian use to wash themselves daily but chief after carnal company as for the saracenicall religion we shall more fit handle the same by itself then tedious repeat the same thing for this therefore and other country subject to turkish or persian servitude the reader may read of their superstition in their due place when we speak of the saracen turk and persian the relation of their christian rite belong to another tome but let we come out of Assyria into Syria the history of which be not a little as be say confound together and many rite be common to they both and to all these part from the persian gulf to Asia the less as be so often subject to one empire or rather still part of that one empire which receive often alteration under the assyrian babylonian mede persian macedonian scythian parthian etc. chap. 15 of Syria and the ancient religion there of the syrian goddess and her rite at hierapolis of the daphnean and other syrian superstition Syria be call in scripture aram of aram the son of a a gen. 10.22 Shem as before be say and Strabo call the syrian Arammaei hence also he c arimi be derive and Arami lib. 13. it be diverse bound by diverse author b b Strab. l. 1. and l. 13. some confound the name of Syria and Assyria Eustathius do reckon these five part thereof Commagena Seleucide coelesyria Phoenicia and judea c c Mela Orb. l. 1. Mela extend it further and d d plin. l. 5. c. 12. Pliny name as part of Syria palaestina judea coele Phoenicia damascena Babylonia Mesopotamia sophene commagene adiabene Antiochia and in this large sense do e e g. post bar. syr. descrip. Broc descrip. ter. sand postellus and Brocardus stretch it beyond Tigris eastward from the mediterranean sea and from Armenia to Arabia but dom. Niger and before he f f lib. 5. c. 15. Ptolemie who we especial follow make it to a but on the north upon Celicia and part of Cappadocia by the mount amanus on the south upon judaea and part of Arabia Petraea on the east upon Arabia and Euphrates on the west upon the syrian sea this country be think to have be the habitation of our first parent before the flood and of Noah and his sincerer family as we have say after yet how soon and how much they degenerate in the wicked offspring of curse cham who posterity people a great part hereof till they be thence by the israelite expel the scripture be sufficient record yea even from Noah time do they derive their idolatry as appear by g g Lucian Syria Lucian narration of the syrian goddess which he partly see with his eye and partly receive of the priest report this goddess be with godless rite serve and observe at hierapolis which although Strabo h h lib. 16. place it beyond the river in Mesopotamia be by i i lib. 5. c. 23. Pliny account in Coelosyria call also bambyce and of the syrian themselves Magog and by Ptolemie name among the syrian city of the division Cirristica 71.15 Longit. and 56.15 and Lucian who himself be there k k gilb. in Annot. he call himself a assyrian and be bear at samosata in Commagena place it on this side the river Pliny and Strabo deceive in the name mention the worship of Atargatis call of the greek Derceto in this place athenagoras in his apology for the christian have these word Semiramis the daughter of Derceto a lecherous and bloody woman be worship by the name of the syrian goddess but Lucian otherwhere a scoffer here a historian at large describe it make this difference between this and that Atargatis be half a fish but the syrian goddess whole resemble a woman there be another hierapolis in Phrygia wherein be a famous temple of Apollo with a cave or vault under it deadly to all entrer but the priest yea to the bird also which fly over it Damas. in isidor ap. phot. 242. the city he think to have receive the name hierapolis holy city of these holy thing here observe in which respect it give place to none other place in Syria have a stately temple enrich with gift statue and as they esteem they miracle Arabia Phoenicia Babylonia Cappadocia Cilicia and Assyria bring her present and celebrate her solemn feast this temple be in the syrian opinion first found by Deucalion who history you will think Lucian have learn of the hebrew not of the syrian or greek so lively do he express the infidelity and cruelty of the old world the manner of the flood the ark wherein with himself his wife and child he save also all other creature that live on the earth which come to he by couple by dispensation of jupiter hereunto these hierapolitan add that in their territory be make a great clift which swallow up those water which clift but then very little be show to our author to who also they report that in memory hereof Deucalion institute that rite which to his time continue that twice every year not the priest only but many out of all Syria Arabia and beyond Euphrates go to the sea and from thence bring water which they pour down in the temple that he have build over that clift unto juno all which water be receive into the same some ascribe the building of this temple to Semiramis in honour of her mother Derceto other to attes for the worship of rhea which attes be a lydian and be author of the superstition of rhea to the phrygian lydian and samothracian but the opinion most probable be that Dionysius or Bacchus be founder of it two substantial witness beside other affirm the same namely two Phalli or priapi huge image of the privy part of a man erect at the entry of the temple with a inscription that Bacchus have consecrate they to juno that ancient foundation be consume by time this late temple be erect by queen stratonice who be in a dream enjoin this office of juno and for neglect the same punish with sickness vow upon her recovery to perform it the king join in commission with she as general of his army and overseer of these holy work a beautiful young man name combabus who fear what may happen geld himself and close those his dismember member first for their preservation embalm in a box seal as some great treasure he commit to the king fidelity to be safe reserve to his use which his practice save his life according be after produce to clear he of adultery with stratonice which have be lay to his charge by his envious accuser and by the jealous king greedy apprehend in memory whereof a brazen statue of combabus be set up in this temple and both then whether to solace combabus or by inspiration of juno and yearly ever after many in this temple geld themselves and put off together the nature and habit of man attire themselves like woman these man-woman priest be call Galli the temple be build in the midst of the city compass with a double wall the porch look northwards almost a hundred fathom high where stand those priapi aforesaid about the height of three hundred fathom up to one of these one ascendeth twice a year and abide in the top thereof seven day he carry with he a long chain which he let down and thereby draw up to he such thing as he need many offer gold and silver and brass and one appoint receive their name which he show to he above and he make his prayer for every of they sound while he pray a little bell. the temple within shine with gold and the roof be whole of this metal it yield so fragrant a smell that the garment of those which come thither retain this send long after there be also another inner room or choir whereinto the chief of the priest only have entrance yet be it open without any door in this sanctuary be the image of the god jupiter support with bull but juno sit upon lion hold in one hand a sceptre and in the other a distaff in some thing or other resemble diverse other goddess by the egyptian indian armenian babylonian aethiopian and mede adorn with many jewel and among the rest she have on her head a stone call the lamp of the effect yield light in the night season as if all the temple be hang with lamp this statue go twice a year to the sea for the water before mention neither of the syrian be call by any name but only the image not express of who in the temple be the image of Apollo clothe with a beard contrary to the custom of the greek and in a far more glorious manner give forth oracle for it move itself which the priest espy lift it up aloft otherwise it sweat and move itself forward nevertheless and be thus support it turn itself and they about and leap from one place to another then do the chief of the priest make supplication and request for all thing which if it mislike it go backward if it approve it carry they forward and without these oracle they enterprise nothing neither private nor sacred and Lucian say he see it leave the priest the supporter and move itself above in the air here be also the statue of Atlas Mercury and Lucina and without a great brazen altar and many brazen image of king and priest and many other record in poet and history among other stand the image of Semiramis point to the temple with her finger which they say be the sign of her repentance who have give commandment to the syrian to worship no other god but herself be by plague send from heaven drive to revoke that former edict and thus seem to acknowledge and point out another deity there be also place enclose wherein be keep and feed sacred ox horse eagle bear lion the priest be in number above three hundred some for kill sacrifice some for offering some minister fire to other at the altar their garment all white their head cover and every year be choose a new highpriest which alone be clothe with purple and a golden head-tire a great multitude there be beside of musician Galli and prophetical woman they sacrifice twice a day whereat they all assemble to jupiter they use neither song nor instrument in sacrifice as they do to juno not far hence be a lake of two hundred fathom depth wherein be preserve sacred fish and in the midst thereof a altar of stone crown always with garland and burn with odour they have a great feast which they call the go down to the lake when all their idol descend thither their great and most solemn feast be observe in the spring which they call the fire they solemnize it in this sort they fell great tree and lay they in the churchyard as you may term it and bring thither the goat sheep and other beast they hang they on these tree together with they fowl and garment and work of gold and silver which be set in due order they carry the image of the god about the tree and then fetch all on fire they resort to this feast out of Syria and the coast adjoin and bring hither their idol with they and great multitude resort to the sacrifice the Galli and those other sacred wight beat and wound each other other play on instrument and other ravish by divine fury prophecy and then do the Galli enter into their order for the fury ravish many of the beholder whatsoever young man come prepare to this purpose hurl off his garment with a great voice he go into the midst and draw his sword geld * * of the knavery of these effeminate priest in self-whipping with whipstring full of bone and wound themselves with weapon their prodigious sodomitical lust theft fortune-telling and other abomination see Apuleius Asin aur. l. 8. and 9 and Lucian ass whence the former be take even still among the religious man of the turk and other both mahometan and indian these severe course which themselves be use almost to a miracle in do and suffer so vain so vile a thing be man to illude the world and himself and to do homage to the devil with such austere hypocrisy which impose in and for the verity may with the world admiration to God glory proclaim they holy confessor and martyr which buy hell at a dear rate follow self devotion and will-worship than other save their selfe deny get the gift of God eternal life himself and run through the city carry in his hand that which he will no long carry on his body and into whatsoever house he cast the same he receive from thence his womanish habit and attire when any of they die his fellow carry he in to the uburbe cover he and his horse with stone and may not enter into the temple in seven day after nor after the sight of any other carcase in one day but none of that family where one have die in thirty day and then also with a shave head swine they hold for unclean beast and the m m 1. hence it seem the jew hold dove in that hatred that he that keep dove may not be allow for a witness as be account a sinner ph. Ferd r. ab. be Katton yet io. 2.16 be mention seller of dove in the Tempie and they be a usual offering luc. 2. dove they esteem so sacred that if one touch one against his will he be that day unclean this cause dove in those part to multiply exceed neither do they touch fish this because of n n euseb praep. l. 8. cap. 5. Derceto half a woman half a fish that for Semiramis which be metamorphose into a dove o o jul. Hyginas fab. 197. julius Hyginus have this fable that a egg of marvelous greatness fall out of heaven into Euphrates which the fish roll to land on the same do dove sit and hatch thereout Venus who be after call the syrian goddess at who request jupiter grant the fish their heavenly constellation and the syrian for that cause eat not their fish nor dove but number they among their god their p p Plutarch superstition concern herring and dace be ridiculous esteem that the syrian goddess do fill the body of such as have eat they with a ulcer cause also the forepart of the leg and the liver to consume many be the ceremony also to be perform of the religious pilgrim or votary that visit this holy city for before he set forth he cut off the hair of his head and brow he sacrifice a sheep and spread the fleece on the ground he kneel down on it and lay upon his head the head and foot of the beast and pray to be accept the rest he spend in the banquet then do he crown himself and his fellow pilgrim and after set forward on his pilgrimage use for his drink and wash cold water and sleep always on the ground till his return home in this city be appoint public host for diverse city diverse call doctor because they expound these mystery they have also one manner of sacrifice to hurl down the beast destine hereunto from the top of the porch which die of the fall they have a like rite to put their child in a sack and carry they down brand first on the neck or palm of the hand and hence it be that all the assyrian be brand the young man also consecrate their hair from their nativity which be cut in the temple be there preserve in some box of gold or silver with the inscription of the owner name thereon and this do I say Lucian in my youth and my hair and name remain in the temple still of Atergatis see more in the chapter of Phoenicea q q sueton. ner. Suetonius tell of Nero that he contemn all religion but this of the syrian goddess of which also he grow weary and defile she with urine after which he observe a little needle suppose to have a power of foresignify danger and because soon after he have it he find out a conspiracy intend against he he sacrifice thereto three time a day Plutarch r r de Consolat. ap. call the syrian a effeminate nation prone to tear and say that some of they after the death of their friend have hide themselves in cave from the sight of the sun many day rimmon the idol of the syrian and his temple be mention 2. King 5.18 byr I have little certainty to say of he some reckon among the syrian deity fortune conceive the mention thereof gen. 30.11 by Leah at zilpa travail the word bagad which she use be usual in our translation and tremellius a troop come but in the vulgar latin in Vatablus in Pagnine and Montanus the Hebrew and greek interpreter understand it of a ominous and well-wishing presage yea some comment I know not whether planet-like express the planet jupiter call Mazal who influence help in the opinion of astrologer as Munster note to generation of child according to the rabbin liberality which will not have so much as the mean herb on the earth to want correspondence and intercourse with some or other star in heaven Mazal signify a star hence their superstition mention to mazaloth 2. reg. 23. and the jewish astronomer call the zodiac the circle of mazaloth which name also their cabalist ascribe to a order of angel many thing can I here annex out of a learned work write by master Selden of the inner temple Syris which according to his and the wont of all such as nature have make ingenious and ingenuous art true liberal he have impart to i and now also to the world a rich magazine and treasury of manifold learning divine and human in multiplicity of tongue art and read out of which I have borrow in this and diverse part of this work no mean nor few jewel to adorn my book and enrich the reader this testimony I here once for all publish of that book new in the time of this impression publish of himself we want not public proof of his due in that which he have give to the world and the world in she more solid and lucid part can but reflect again upon the giver title of honour a man who worth I confess I rather admire than measure with my poor pittance of praise which in this gad or fortune of the syrian want not his Bagad or happy and prosperous observe many thing to this purpose out of the Chaldee paraphrase the Hebrew rabbin the greek Septuagint the latin cabalist astrologian and other which be somewhat beyond our common reader I forbear to write lest the contrary to leah wish be wish to i certain it be that Laban daughter have not quite lose all their syrian superstition as appear by Rachel steal her father Theraphim s s vid. l. 2. c. 8. idol which Kimchi and Aben ezra think be make according to astrological superstition capable of celestial influence and prediction therefore steal as they conceive that her father shall not consult with they touch their way in this flight g. Malm. gest reg. ang. l. 2. c. 10 the like do Malmsbury report of Gerbertus which by inspection of the star make a idol head with which he use consultation this be Silvester the second the necromancer and pope an. do. 998. and the like tale be relate of friar Bacon that dea Syria before mention be worship in the time of the roman empire here also in this island as appear by a inscription which sir Robert Cotton have deae syriae and diverse altar-stone inscribe DEABUS MATRIBUS mention by master Camden which be think to be the same with the syrian goddess who image be just the same with that of Berecynthia or the mother of the god interpret also the earth and heaven for it be no unusual thing with superstition to make a hellish confusion of all thing yea the Astaroth before mention be think to be the same with Syria and these this astarte be also account juno and the moon as her bullhead with horn in stead of a crown wherewith they paint she argue and Minerva and Venus Io and Lucina and Mylitta or Alytta and Mitra and astroarche and coelestibus or Urania the queen of heaven and all thing and nothing jer. 44.18 1. cor. 8.4 for a idol be indeed nothing in the world but the very be thereof be but the distract vain various imagination fancy and frenzy of the idolater this be also the cause of ascribe difference or community of sex to their deity as this astarte sometime feminine sometime masculine as Venus likewise in some of the greek and latin poet and the egyptian mystery of the moon or Isis with both sex as have be already touch Antiochia build by Seleucus to who in honour of his memory in mount casius they observe sacred solemnity as to a demigod some time the seat royal of the syrian king three city of the roman empire three seat of the christian patriarch and first where that melodious name of christian be hear be now the sepulchre say Boterus of itself or as Niger a great wilderness wherein itself be the least part of itself be leave but a small village say t t Cartwright another in the midst of its own wall about five mile from Antiochia be that fair and sacred Daphne which Ortelius in his theatre have present to the spectator with a peculiar description and of which the elder author u u Zozomen l. 5. cap. 18. Niceph. lib. 10. cap. 18. euagr. l. 1. c. 16. Strab. l. 16. have plentiful write it be ten mile about a place every way environ with many stately cypress beside other tree which suffer not the sun to kiss their mother earth who lap be according to the diversity of the season replenish with variety of flower her breast flow with stream of watery nourishment a spring there be derive as man suppose her water from the castalian fountain to which ancient superstition and therefore superstitious antiquity attribute a divine faculty with like name and force to that at Delphos this also be further by the legend of Daphne 10 10 ovid. metam lib. 1. record by the poet believe and what will not superstition believe but the truth by the credulous multitude who be say to have flee from Apollo and here turn into a tree but thus can not Apollo be turn from his love which he continue both to the tree and place this be lettuce suitable to the lip of vain youth y y ter. in eunucho say amorous Chaerea of jupiter in the comic animus ego there need no other lecture of sensuality to they than this legend especial in this school where every place may be a place of argument under pretence of reason and religion to shut true religion and reason out of the place especial with scholar greedy of this conclusion here you may have hear the whisk wind in a murmur accent breathe this lustful oratory the enamel floor do offer she more than officious courtesy a soft sweet and inlay bed to lie on the air with temperature seem to further intemperance the eye of the day and watchman of the night be prohibit by the cypress roof with their unwelcome light to testify those work of darkness which those guilty bough cover from discover once the concur object of each sense do in silence speak and persuade to sensual pleasure insomuch that by a general decree temperance and temperate man be hence exile and scarce will the vulgar allow he the name of a man which here will be transform into a beast or will presume without a courtesan to tread on this holy ground needs must they go who the devil drive such god such religion here be erect sumptuous building the temple of Apollo daphnaeus with a stately image therein the work as be think of Seleucus also Diana chapel and sanctuary julius capitolinus write that verus a voluptuous emperor spend four summer here and winter in Laodicea and Antioch jul. capit. verus Severus more true answer his name do to death certain tribune by who negligence the soldier here be suffer to riot the oracle add renown to the place which be deliver out of these daphnaean water by a certain wind or breath adrian the emperor be report to have hence receive the faculty of divine by dip a cypress leaf in the fountain julian resort hither often for that purpose but his elder brother Gallus who Constantius have call to be Caesar and after say ammianus for his outrage execute have in the time of his abode at Antioch remove the bone of Babylas their bishop and other holy martyr his companion in suffering to this place where also he build a church now when as julian in his persian expedition have send other to visit all the other oracle in the roman empire himself here consult with Apollo an emperor with a angel about the success of those war but all his sacrifice obtain no other answer then that he can not answer by the countermand of a more divine power there live in those dead bone hereupon julian command the christian to remove those ill neighbour which they do say Theodoret with a solemn procession sing the psalm and dance with the heart of David make this the burden and foot of each verse confound be all they that worship grave image wherewith julian enrage persecute the christian Euagrius affirm that he build a temple in honour of Babylas how true I know not but the true God confound both the idol and idolater short after call the one to give account of his ill employ stewardship uncertain whether by divine or human hand and for the other his temple be consume with fire from above together with the image one pillar whereof remain in Chrysostom day the pagan attribute this fire to the christian and no marvel for what do not that fire of blind idolatry kindle with zeal attribute to the innocent christian herein testify that it come from hell and must to hell again by that hellish character and impression of so great fire and as great darkness such be hell and such be ignorant zeal a fire but no light zeal without knowledge resemble to hell Apollo priest by no torment can be force to confess any author thereof and the officer of the temple affirm it be fire from heaven which certain countrypeople confirm by their own sight julian to satisfy his rage cause some temple of the christian to be burn Nicephorus z z nic. l. 16.23 and 17.14 tell of the continuance of this daphnaean grove honour with building and spectacle by Mammianus and chosroes Apollo image be make of wood cover over with gold Theodosius forbid the cut of any of those cypress Orontes a a nutritor Orontes Claudiax be a river which arise in coelesyria and pay tribute to all the three brethren it visit Pluto palace run with a long tract under the earth and then heave up his head make his gladsome homage to jupiter and after his custom pay to the antiochian in fine pour himself into lap of Neptune enter the sea near to seleucia it b b Strab. lib. 16. be call Typhon until Orontes build a bridge over it cause it to be call by his name they have here a tale of Typhon a huge dragon which divide the earth as he go seek to hide himself and perish by the stroke of a thunderbolt thus do he indent a passage for this river not far hence be a sacred cave call Nymphoeum also mount casius and Anticasius and Heraclia and nigh thereto the temple of Minerva in Laodicea be this goddess honour to who they offer c c eus laudib Constantini and praep. eu. lib. 4. cap. 8. in yearly sacrifice in old time a maid after that in stead thereof a hart. I may here mention also that which Tacitus d d tacit. l. 2. hist report of the mount carmel as he place it betwixt judea and Syria where they worship a god of that name with ethnic rite they have not any temple or statue to this god and altar only and reverence be here see Vespasian do in this place offer sacrifice where basilides the priest view the entrail foretell he of his good success damascius in the life of Isidorus mention a syrian goddess ap. phot. Biblioth. 242. name Babia of who infant new bear be by the syrian especial at Damascus call also Babia perhaps they be esteem under her tutelage and our english word babe may hence borrow the original chap. 16 of the syrian king and alteration in government and religion in those country Syria quick grow into people and kingdom although time have long since devour both they and their memory of Menon the husband of Semiramis mention by Diodorus be speak before Adadezer be in David time a a nic. Damascenus speak of this war adad say Scaliger in his note on that fragment be the common name of all the syrian king high they say Benhadad Appian alex. Syriacis king of aram Zoba which some take for chobal in Syria some for sophene in Armenia and some for the Nubei whatsoever they be David make they tributary 2903. Benhadad Hazael and other the scripture also mention but certain succession we find not record of these syrian king till the time of Alexander which conquer all from Macedonia to India by his inexpected death leave his huge empire to be share among his chief follower Seleucus the son of Antiochus a macedonian first master of the elephant then tribune after that deputy of the babylonian at last obtain the kingdom of Asia 3638 of who appianus thus write the first king of Syria after Alexander be Seleucus call nicator because he be of very great stature and as a wild bull have in a sacrifice of Alexander break loose he hold he with both his hand he build sixteen city call by the name Antiochia of his father Antiochus and six laodicea in memory of his mother Laodice nine seleucia of his own name three apamea and one Stratonicea after the name of his two wife he prosper in his war take Babylon subdue the bactrian pierce to the indian which have slay Alexander governor place among they after Alexander death he slay Lysimachus and seven month after be circumvent and slay of Ptolemy who sister Lysimachus have marry be seventy three year old to he succeed his son Antiochus surname soter 3667. Appian ibid. who have obtain stratonice his mother in law of his father move thereunto by his son violent love and his physician subtle persuasion his son Antiochus Theos be contrary to his name poison by his wife who son Seleucus callinicus and Antiochus succeed and after they Antiochus Magnus the son of callinicus who much enlarge his empire add thereto Babylonia Egypt and judea but invade Graecia provoke the roman against he with who he compound on base and mean condition he do yet comfort himself for his loss among his friend say that he be b b val. max. 4. cap. 1. behold to the roman that ease he of so weighty a burden and lessen his care of government for they have coop he in a corner of his kingdom beyond Taurus after this he be slay exhibit in himself a true example of the world falsehood that play with sceptre and vy diadem use man like counter or figure in number and cast account where the same with a little difference of place be a pound shilling or penny one ten or a hundred and yet as earthly happiness herein come short of heaven that it be never mere and unmixed but have some sour sauce to relish it so fall it as far short of hell that not only hope but the most miserable hap have some glimpse of comfort but to come to our history Antiochus his son surname Epiphanes and after Epimanes for his furious insolence who begin his reign 3774. be first send to Rome in hostage for security of his father faith and after that Seleucus his brother which send c c 2. mac. 3. heliodorus to rob the temple at jerusalem have a while warm the throne succeed in the syrian kingdom of he and his tyranny Daniel have long before prophesy in the interpretation of nabuchodonosor image d d dan. 2. who leg be interpret to be this syrian and the egyptian kingdom e e Graserus interpret and labour to prove these two leg to be the eastern empire under the Turk and western under the pope refute by d. willet in append dan. both heavy and hard neighbour to the church in judea lie betwixt they but more especial in his f f dan. 7.24 vision in the seven chapter where after other thing he foretelleth of the ten horn g g Trem. jun. in Dan d. Downam of Antichrist d. willet on dan. 4. cap. 7. which be the eight king afore-named and two egyptian Ptolemus euergetes and Philopater in their time prevail in Syria and infest judea and the last shall subdue three king which be Ptolemie of Egypt drive out of Syria Seleucus his brother and Demetrius to who after Seleucus the right of the sceptre belong his policy and blasphemy and tyranny be also by Daniel plain fore-signify and in their event as full in the history of the maccabee relate there you may read his wicked life and wretched death he take jerusalem h h caluis 3781 and slay fourscore thousand people rob the temple of eighteen hundred talent and of the holy vessel pollute the temple forbid the sacrifice name it the temlpe of jupiter olympius force man by torture from their religion with other execrable outrage which will require a just volume to describe as he be thus mad and rage against the true religion so i i ath. l. 5. c. 4. athenaeus show his vanity in his own who pompous solemnity at the daphnean feast he thus relate Antiochus in emulation to Paulus Aemilius proclaim this solemn festivity in the city of Greece and perform it at Daphne first pass in order five thousand man arm after the roman manner next follow five thousand mysian and three thousand cilician with crown of gold of thracian three thousand of galatian five thousand of who some have shield of silver twenty thousand macedonian and five thousand with shield of brass after these two hundred and forty couple of champion which shall fight in single combat there follow one thousand pisaean horseman and three thousand of the city the most whereof have crown and vial of gold other trappings of silver next come the band call Socia nothing inferior in pomp or number then a thousand extraordinary and another thousand in the band call Agema last the barded horse fifteen hundred all these in purple vesture which many have embroider or emboss with gold chariot draw with six horse one hundred and forty draw by four one draw by elephant attend with six and thirty other the rest of the pomp be incredible and tedious eight hundred youth with golden crown a thousand fat ox and three hundred person to attend the sacrifice eight hundred elephant tooth there be also the image of all the god and hero that can be reckon some gild some clothe with golden vesture their fabulous history be with great pomp annex after all these the image of day night earth heaven morning and noon then come a thousand boy each have a piece of plate of a thousand dram six hundred with vessel of gold eighty woman be carry in chair foot with gold and five hundred in other foot with silver very sumptuous attire two hundred of they out of bason of gold strew odour these spectacle last thirty day a thousand and sometime twelve hundred hall or dine room be furnish for banquet the king himself affect too officious familiarity therein visit the table of the base people yea and that as a base minstrel with music not of the best instrument but such as the poor sort use for want of better as learned Casaubonus have on that place of Athenaeaus observe so base be the pride of ambition temper a confuse distemper according in a strange harmony the harsh discord of proud-aspiring and deject baseness where a base and servile mind beget pride and pride produce a servile baseness a changeling which the dote world father on humility of the death of this Antiochus the former and second book of maccabee seem to disagree and which be more strange the second book in the first chapter say k k and etc. 2. mac. 1. he and his company be destroy in the temple of Nanaea in Persia and in the nine chapter say that in Media at Echatana he be smite with a uncouth disease and a fall from his chariot whereof he die some l l Mel Canus loc. l. 2. c. 11. that will have this history Oanonical apply it to two Antiochi as lyra and rupertus and after they Canus but Bellarmine m m bel. ver. l. 1. c. 15. see that they will not agree with the time of any other but Epiphanes prove himself Epimanes and run mad with love of that trent-minion affirm that in the temple of a he fall but escape as n n gen. 14.16 the king of Sodom be say to fall when lot be captive and yet be not slay and after perish as in the after part of the history be express whereas it be there say that they shut the door on he and cut he and his fellow in piece and make they short by the head who yet after this forsooth can go into Media and there have a fall from his chariot they must have no delicate stomach that will be jesuit any thing must down when they will up especial if Trent or the Vatican command though manifest reason and sense that I say not religion countermand I envy not the red hat with these label well fare that modesty of the author o o 2. mac. 15.39 that confess his weakness but anathema to their anathema that enact p p conc. trident. contradiction to be canonical I omit the successor of Antiochus to wit Antiochus Demetrius Alexander who take away the golden image of Victoria out of the temple at Antioch in his necessity jest that jupiter have send he victory and when he will have add jupiter q q justin l. 33. to his sacrilege be chase away by the multitude and after slay by Gripus the rest with the time of their reign be before express r r c. 12. Pompey set a end to these Seleucidan king and the roman enjoy the country of Syria till the saracen dispossess they who history you may read s s lib. 3. c. 12. in their due place the turk displace those saracen the christian of the west by war make those part christian but be expel again by the turk and they by the tartar the Mamaluke t t lib. 6. c. 6. slave and their egyptian sultan after hold the syrian dominion until Selim the great Turk subdue it to the ottoman empire under which it still groan of these thing this our history will acquaint you in the proper report of these nation Aleppo be now chief city of Syria but Damascus both in elder and late time have bear the great name be the head of aram as t t Es. 7.8 Esay affirm call of julian the city of jupiter and eye of the whole east holy and great call also u u Tzet ad Lycophr p. 100 the trophy of jupiter because he there have conquer the titan it be interpret drink blood by 10 10 hier. com. in Ezec. li. 8. Hierom who tell from the Hebrew tradition that in this field kain slay his brother y y Chytr Onomastic. Chytreus expound it z z wolphij com. in 2. reg. 16 Genebrard Wolphius derive it of two word signify blood and to spoil which in the time of Hazael and Benhadad and of resin it perform but never so much as when the saracen make it the sink of blood and spoil which they execute on the christian a a it be the seat of their Calipha in their first rise and after that of Noradine see lib. 3. c. 2. and Noradine Saladine and the turk fit themselves and this city to the name before the egyptian sultan and ottoman turk be lord of it stephanus ascribe the name to one ascus a giant which cast Dionysius there into the river or because Damascus the son of Mercury come hither out of Arcadia build it or because Dionysius there fleid off the skin of Damascus which have cut up his vine the turk now call it Leunclavius and Chytreus testify Scham and so be the whole region call in the arabian chronicle who extract you may find b b li. 3. in our saracenicall history the army of David ahab Teglath Phalasar prevail much against it the babylonian subvert it after that the ptolemy repair it Pompey win it Paul hallow it the saracen as be say pollute it the christian in vain besiege it in the year one thousand one hundred forty and seven @ Haalon the tartar c c ch. Adrichom tehatrum terra sanct. tyr. bell sanct. lib. 17. Herold 6. see more of Damasc inf l. 3. c. 2. one thousand two hundred threescore and two obtain it and about one thousand four hundred Tamerlane besiege it and as he have do at Aleppo fill the ditch with the body of captive and slay carcase cast wood and earth upon they and at last force it and the castle he spare the city for the temple sake which have forty porch in the circuit and within nine thousand lamp of gold and silver but the egyptian by a wile possess it he again engird it and recover it he command Mahomet the pope or chalife and his priest which come to meet he to repair to the temple which they do with thirteen thousand citizen where he burn they all and for monument of his victory leave three tower erect of skull of dead man the egyptian regain and hold it till Selim the Turk dispossess they 1517. now in thus many alteration of state who doubt of diversity in religion in Syria first the true religion in the time of Noah and the first patriarch next those superstition of rimmon and the rest before relate in the assyrian babylonian persian macedonian and roman government after which long night the sun of righteousness shine unto the syrian and make a more absolute conquest than all the former not by legion and army but by a handful of fisherman manifest his power in their weakness the reason of man and malice of devil not be able to withstand their evangelical weapon which s be mighty through GOD to cast down hold d d 2. cor. 20.5 and bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of CHRIST insomuch that hence the to christian world receive first that name e e act. 11.26 and how sweet will thy name remain o syrian Antiochia even now in thy late fate which first be christen with the name Christian have thou not outlive thy christianity or rather after the soul depart remain the carcase of thyself which cease to be christian have long since cease to be have not the divine hand reserve a few bone of thy carcase to testify this his justice to the world and what harmony can have be more grateful to the gentile ear than thy memory Damascus where the doctor of the gentile be first teach himself and make a teacher of other but in thou be the chair of pestilence the throne of Satan the sink of mahometan impiety to the rest of the world infect with thy contagion and subdue with thy force more nation than ever Paul by preach convert Syria first in the first and principal privilege of mankind embrace in her rich arm if some be right surveyor the promise possession the seal of a further and better inheritance be with the first subdue to Saracene servitude under their caliph under the turk under the christian from the west under the tartar from the east under the mameluke from the south and from the north the ottoman by new succession and vicissitude of misery and mischief become a common stage of blood and slaughter and in all these late change of state and chance of war religion be the life that quicken those death and whet those murder sword no cruelty or sacrilege against GOD or man so irreligious and inhuman but religion be pretend to be the cause and bear the standard to destruction a new religion always erect with a new conqueror for the reader delight we have here add out of Hondius which he have contract out of Ortelius the map of Paul peregrination for the plantation of the gospel pauli in in act chap. 17 of Phoenicia and of the theology and religion of the ancient phoenician of their art and invention PHoenicia be the sea coast a a Strabo l. 16. of Syria after Pliny or that coast or tract border on the sea from Orthosa now Tortosa to Pelusium this sea coast say Andrea Masius b b Mas. come in Ios. 5. be of the greek call Phoenicia and of the hebrew peculiar style Chanaan and the inhabitant chananite so the spy tell Moses the c c num. 13.30 mat. 13.22 mat. 7.26 chanaanite dwell by the sea the woman in the gospel which Matthew call a Canaanite be by mark name a syrophoenicean and the Septuagint in this place for the king of Chanaan read the king of Phoenicea and in the scripture it be appellative use for a d d Es. 23.8 Os. 12.7 pro. 31.24 Dionys Aser in vers. merchant because the phoenician or chanaanite be famous for merchandise as appear both by divine and profane testimony most proper the northerly part be Chanaan Phoenicia the southern Palestina although it be sometime extend as we have say even to Egypt Dionysius which make the phoenician the first mariner merchant and astronomer place Gaza and joppe in Phoenicia Sachoniatho a e e euseb praep. Euang. lib. 1. ca. 6. and 7. a author commend by Porphyriae li. 4. cont Christ but not thus ancient say scal. in frag phoenician suppose to have live before the trojan war write in his own language the history of his nation which philo Biblius translate into greek this philo in the begin of his work say that his author Sachoniatho as he be general learn e e euseb praep. Euang. lib. 1. ca. 6. and 7. a author commend by Porphyriae li. 4. cont Christ but not thus ancient say scal. Innotis frag so especial he search out those thing which Taantus call of the egyptian thoyth of the greek Mercury the first inventer of letter have write he also blame those that by allegory and tropology pervert and obscure the history of their god affirm plain that the ancient phoenician egyptian and other adore those man for god that have be the author of good thing to man apply to they also the name of those natural god the sun moon etc. so make some god mortal some immortal according to this Taautus therefore the first beginning of all thing be a dark disorder chaos and the spirit of the dark air hence proceed moth which we may interpret mire from whence issue the seed and generation of all creature in the earth and heaven the plant first and from they the reasonable creature call Thophasunin that be the beholder of heaven form in the shape of a egg from moth also come the sun moon and star the sun by his heat separate these new-formed creature their conflict in the air produce thunder which noise awake and cause to leap out of their earth this slimy generation after of the wind Colpia and Baau which signify night be bear man name f f genus age and firstborn age teach man to live of the fruit of tree of these come kind and generation who be trouble with heat lift up their hand to the sun which they take for a god call he which signify the lord of heaven who the greek call jupiter kind beget light fleame fire s this last by rub of stick together find out fire from these descend in succeed generation those giant that leave their name to the hill where they dwell Cassius and Libanus that contend against their brother uson who first adventure the sea in the body of tree burn in which manner the indian even yet make their canoas or boat and he erect two statue to the wind and the fire who he adore with the blood of beast these first man after their death have statue consecrate to they by posterity and yearly solemnity to these succeed other hunter and fisher which have two son one of which be name Chusor a great magician from these descend Amynus and Magus author of Sheep-cote and flock or herd of cattle these be the titan inventor of art hunt fish build iron-work tent and such like to misor one of these be bear Taautus first author of letter at that time be bear Elius and Beruth his wife which dwell in biblos the parent of Caelus and Terra his wife and sister who deify with rite and ceremony their father Elius be tear of wild beast to these be bear Saturn Baetilus Dagon and Atlas but Calus take other wife there arise a great quarrel betwixt he and his former aid herein by her son of who Saturn the elder create Mercury his scribe by who magical art and by those weapon first by he and Minerva the daughter of Saturn devise Caelus be overthrow who after two and thirty year war betwixt they be take by his son and deprive of his genitory Saturn have issue beside his daughter Minerva and Proserpina Amor cupido Saturn jupiter Belus and Apollo of his sister astarte Rhaea Dione then also be bear Typho Nereus Pontus the father of Neptune Saturn suspect his brother Atlas bury he in the ground and cast up a high hill over he where not long after be a temple erect to he Dagon be inventor of tillage and therefore call g g jupiter aratrius jupiter of the plough but Saturn become a great conqueror bestow Egypt on Taautus or Mercury who first make a mystery of their theology as the son of one Thalon the phoenician priest first do among the phoenician apply allegorical interpretation thereof to nature and institute rite to posterity this allegorical theology of Taantus be interpret by Surmobolus and Thurro it follow in the history that it be then a custom in great calamity for the prince to appease the angry daemon with his best belove son and thus in the time of a perilous war be leud h h Heurnius read it jud signify a only son the son of Saturn by a nymph name Anobreth clothe in royal apparel offer on a altar erect for that purpose this be practise long after by the king of moab i i 2. King 2.3 who be besiege by three king of Israel juda and idumaea sacrifice his elder son which yet some interpret of the elder son of the king of idumaea Taautus ascribe divinity to the serpent as be of a most fiery and spiritual nature move itself swift and in many form without help of foot and a creature which renew her age k k Trem. and jun. the phoenician and egyptian follow he herein they call it a happy spirit of God these en and frame thereto the head of a hawk of which in his place we have speak and thus far have we be indebt to l l euse praep. Euang. l. 1. Eusebius in the time of those war betwixt Saturn and Caelus be bear Hercules to who be a temple of great antiquity at Tyre to Hercules be also celebrate game at Tyrus every five year to which jason send three hundred dram for a sacrifice @ hiram in Solomon time pull down the old temple of Hercules and astarte g g 2. mac. 4.19 and build new he first erect a statue to Hercules and in the temple of jupiter consecrate a golden n n jose ant. l. 8. pillar the sydonian also worship astarte in a stately and ancient temple to her build who o o luc. dea. syr. Gilberti vid. scal not in frag some interpret Luna p p pet. mart. Comm. in 1. sa. 7. some Venus and one of her priest to q q 101 de Natur. dear lib. 3. so Chytraeus and before he Eusebius and Plautus in mercator the fable of tamut be before recite ca. 12. and mention Ezek. 8.14 Lucian Europa she be worship of the punickes a phoenician colony by that name of juno but philo bybliensis say it be Venus which may be all one for Herodotus say Urania which be also juno be Venus and Luna also after Lucian and so it appear by her horny head wherewith philo say she be paint the arabian call her Alilat the chaldaean Militta the same be call also beltis or Baaltis and belisama in a old inscription that be juno Olympia or queen of heaven she wear on her head in stead of a crown a bulls-head whereby what else can be mean but the moon queen of the night as the sun Baalsamen be king of heaven or lord of the day but the manifold name give to the same deity bring in confusion and a numberless polytheisme nor can we well distinguish betwixt Minerva juno Venus Luna and other name of their misty mystery she be call also astroarche juno Lucina ilithyia which have her mid-wife-mystery borrow together with the name from the jewish Lilith of which we shall after speak as the name Alilat also be the syrian goddess before relate and the persian Mithra which some derive of mader that be in the persian also a mother be no other but this astarte Urania or as Tertullian call her coelestibus or what other name before mention you please to give she which I know not how mystical be also call cybele Berecynthia and with a confuse mixture of heaven and earth the earth Astaroth a word plural be exemplify in the european junones mention in inscription and in those altar in master Camden and master Selden inscribe DEABUS MATRIBUS diverse of which have be find in this island intend by they as be also the Beli which make vow Dis SYRIS Lucian say that he see also at biblos the temple of Venus biblia wherein be celebrate the yearly rite of Adonis who they say be slay in their country with beat and woeful lament after which they perform obsequy unto he and the next day they affirm he to be alive and shave their head and such woman as will not be shave must prostitute their body for one day unto stranger and the money hence accrue be sacred to Venus some affirm that this ridiculous lamentation be make not for Adonis but Osiris in witness whereof a head make of paper once a year in seven day space come swim from Egypt to byblos and that without any human direction of which Lucian report himself a eyewitness this be call the mourn for Thamuz which junius interpret Osiris whence the four month common their harvest be call Tamuz for ists which institute these rite be their Ceres Hierom interpret it Adonis but it seem the difference be more in the name then the idol or rite woman be the chief lamenter if not the only as Ezechiel testify and the proneness of that sex to tear and to superstitious devotion also which they seem to acknowledge who pray stile be Plutarch nicias am. marce. l. 22 and li. 19 his wound in his ripe age say he signify the cut off the ripe corn iu. fir. profan relig likewise ethnic author be witness Plutarch say the woman keep the Adonia or feast of Adonis every where through the city set forth image observe exequies and lamentation ammianus report of this festival solemnize at Antiochia at the same time when julian enter the city then fill with howl and lament and elsewhere compare the woman which lament the death of their young prince to the woman which observe the rite of Venus in the feast of Adonis julius firmicus affirm that in most city of the east Adonis be mourn for as the husband of Venus and both the smiter and the wound be show to the stander by for Mars change into the shape of a boar wound he for the love of Venus he add that on a certain night they lay a image in a bed and number a set bead-roll of lamentation which be end light be bring in and then the priest anoint the chap of the mourner whisper these word trust in God for we have salvation or deliverance l. Viues in aug. de C.D. li. 8. c. 27. from our grief and so with joy they take the idol out of the sepulchre be not this mourn think we sport to the devil especial when this Adonia be apply unto the burial and resurrection of Christ the pageant whereof follow the Good-friday and lenten fast of the papist yet be this worse than the former not only because the best thing by abuse be make worst but also because the treason of judas and Peter denial be propose in action to the people laughter say l. Viues complain of this great wickedness of the priest sacerd. but here and elsewhere often when he tell tale out of school the good man tongue be shorten and their index purge out that wherewith he seek to purge their leaven but let we back from Rome to biblos hereby run the river Adonis also which once a year become red and bloody which alteration of the colour of the water be the warning to that their mourn for Adonis who at that time they say be wound in Libanus r r other think this form of sheep to be a sheepish conceit of the r. r and ascribe this name rather to the multitude of sacrifice whereas that redness arise indeed of the wind which at that time blow violent do with their force carry down alongst the stream a great quantity of that red earth or Minium of Libanus whereby it pass this constancy of the wind may yet seem as marvelous as the other if diverse part of the world do not yield we instance of the like in Libanus also be a ancient temple dedicate to Venus by cyniras astarte or Astaroth be worship in the form of sheep * not of the sydonian only but of the Philistine s s 1. sam. ult. also in who temple they hang the armour of Saul and wise Solomon be bring by dote on woman to a worse dotage of idolatry t t 1. reg. 11.5 with this sydonian idol among other and not then first do the israelity commit that fault but from their first neighbourhood with they present after the day of joshua u u judg. 2.13 this Sidon the ancient metropolis of the phoenician now call Saito in likelihood be build by Sidon elder son of Canaan 10 10 gen. 10.15 Ios. 16.28 and fall to the lot of Asher c c Chyrtaeus Onomast whence it be call great Sidon it be famous y for the first Glass-shop and destroy by ochus the persian this fair mother yield the world a daughter far fair namely Tyrus now call sur who glory be sufficient blaze by the prophet Esay and Ezechiel be situate in a island seven hundred pace from the shore to which Alexander in his siege unite it who it hold out eight month as it have do Nabuchodonosor thirteen year which long siege be mention in Ezec. 26.7 in nothing more famous then for help Solomon under hiram their king z z 2933. and d. to build the temple a hundred fifty five year before the building of Carthage this hiram a a Ios. count ap. lib. 1. josephus report it out of Dius a phoenician historiographer enlarge the city and compass within the same the temple of jupiter olympius and as he add out of Menander ephesius therein place a golden pillar he pull down the old temple and build new and dedicate the temple of Hercules and astarte Ithobalus astarte priest slay phelle the king and usurp the crown he be great grandfather to Pygmalion the brother of Dido founder of Carthage the phoenician famous for merchandise and marinership sail from the red sea round about Africa and return by Hercules pillar arrive again in Egypt the three year after report that which Herodotus b b Her. lib. 4. doubt of and to we make the story more credible that they sail to the southward of the sun they be send by Pharaoh neco Cadmus a phoenician be the first author of letter also to the greek at Tyrus be the fish for purple not far off be arad a populous town seat on a rock in the sea like Venice along the shore be Ptolemais near which run the river Belaeus and nigh to it the sepulchre of Memnon have hard by it the space of a hundred cubit c c joseph debel iu. lib. 2. c. 9 pli. 5.19 and 36.26 Sirab. 16. yield a glassy sand and how great a quantity soever be by ship carry thence be supply by the wind which minister new sand to be by the nature of the place change into glass that will seem strange if this be not yet stranger that this new glass if it be cast upon the brink of this place receive the former nature of sand again Belus and Hercules tyrius and the sun call of they Heliogabalus be phoenician deity when Alexander the great employ the great of his force and cunning to win Tyrus and to pluck it out of the arm of Neptune a fast friend unto she then ever Hercules or Heliogabalus have be one of the tyrian dream that Apollo so the greek call Heliogabalus mean to forsake the city who be therefore prevent with a golden chain wherewith he be tie to the image of Hercules who superstition honour as their most assure patron from which golden thraldom Alexander free he in the conquest of the city glorious Alexander shall I admire thy greatness to become a patron and freer of the god or rather the blindness and vanity of superstition which acknowledge such patroness of freedom who friend can bind or enemy free so make somewhat more colourable Alexander ambition of deity to who his fortune have make former deity indebt for liberty d d Drus in lib. 1. Hasmon Drusius be of opinion that diverse of these phoenician idol be derive from name use in the scripture so interpret the word in 1. mac. 3.48 Taantus of the phoenician and the egyptian Thoth from Thohu and Baau from Bohu Bel from Baal as beelsaman also astarte asthore from the store of sacrifice offer to she e e euseb landib Constan and Prep lib. 4. cap. 7. Eusebius relate other phoenician abomination both bloody and beastly the one in yearly sacrifice of the dear pledge of nature to Saturn the other in that temple of Venus build in the most secret retreat of Libanus where Sodom burn with fire from above and drown in dead sea seem to revive such be their practice of impure lust intemperate use the natural sex and unnatural abuse their own worse in this then the sodomite that these intend sensuality they pretend religion Constantine raze these suburb of hell and destroy both the custom statue and temple itself f f aug. lib. 4. c. 10. Augustine say that the phoenician prostitute their daughter to Venus before they marry they of melcanthor Usor and other their god sometime man I forbear to speak Alexander g g lib. 2. c. 8. ab Alexandro affirm that the priest of the sun in Phoenicia be attire with a long sleeve garment hang down to the foot and a golden crown we may add to these phoenician superstition their mystical interpretation by h h macrob. Saturn li. 1. c. 21. Macrobius he expound Venus and Adonis to signify the earth and the sun the wild boar which wound Adonis be the winter which for the absence of her lover make the earth to put on her mourn weed at who approach she after put on her new apparel say i i s. p. Sid. arc. libr. 1. our english Arcadian oracle this be shadow in a certain image in mount Libanus portray in mourn habit and to this sense he apply the egyptian rite of Osiris and Isis and of orus which be Apollo or the sun and likewise the phrygian mystery of atinis and the mother of the god he say that they abstain from swine flesh the Philistine and all that sea-coast by k k Strabo lib. 16. plin. l. 5. c. 12. Strabo and Pliny and Dionysius as be say be reckon to the phoenician their original be attribute to Misraim who posterity the l l gen. 10.14 vid. jun annot. Deut. 2.23 casluhim and caphtorim chase the avim which former have inhabit Palestina and by dint of sword purchase their country they have five principal city Ascalon Accaron Azotus Gath Gaza of their sheepish astarte you hear even now and of their legend of Dagon their superstition the scripture often m m judg. 16.23 1. sam. 5.2 mention what this Dagon be say n n comm. petr. mart. in jud. 16. martyr be not well know but by the derivation of his name which signify a fish it seem he be a sea-god for such sea-deity have the greek and latin as Neptune leucothea Tryton above his belly he be of human shape beneath like a fish such be idolatry divine it will not be it can content itself with human but prove monstrous in the ugly and deform image exhibit the character of the true author of this falsehood when Cicero o o cic. de Natur. dear lib. 3. say the syrian worship a fish it may be construe of this Dagon happy say p p petr. mart ^ come in 1. sam. 5. martyr they intend Neptune or I know not what devil q q Trem. annot. in judg. 16.23 tremellius think Triton that which in the ten chapter be speak of that monster Oannes fit agree to this Dagon yea and all the legend of Atargatis and Derceto for we need not repeat how little constant they be in the sex of their r r Drus Quest. lib. 1. qu. 82. god which they make male female or hermaphrodite at pleasure this may we see and say when man be give over to themselves when they become beast monster devil yea worse than such for while they worship such they profess themselves as client and votary to be worse and base than their deity Drusius derive not this Dagon of dag a fish but of Dagon which signify wheat whereof Eusebius say (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and philo Biblius Dagon (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that be be call wheat or Bread-corn but Scaliger s s scal. not in frag blame philo for that interpretation and agree to that fish deity for Dagon say he be one and Dagan another he add that they worship god in the likeness of stone which they call Baetul or Baitul whence come the fable of the stone give to Saturn in stead of his child to be devour this as we have say seem borrow from Jacob anoint the stone at bethel Saturn have many name il Israel melcom the tyrian worship his star amos 5.26 not the planet Saturn but luicfer they have their purification in the midst of their garden to adad of which be speak before when the Philistine have place the captive ark in Dagon temple he fall on his face before the ark but they place he again in his room with a second fall his head and hand be cut off upon the threshold the stump or as tremellius and Vatablus read it Dagon or that part of he which resemble a fish remain and therefore the priest of Dagon and all that come into Dagon house tread not on the threshold of Dagon thus true religion the more oppose the more it flourish the prisonhouse of her captivity be the throne of her empire blind superstition the more it be detect the more enrage add new devotion to increase not care to amend the former Dercetos or Dagon image Lucian t t luc. syr. say he see in Phoenicia not unlike to that which be report of the mermaid the upper half like a woman the other like a fish therefore of Pliny call u u plin. l. 5. c. 25 Portigiosa in reverence of who the phoenician be say to abstain from fish author do also call this idol Atergatis and 10 10 athen. l. 8. c. 6 athenaeus report that the country-law of the syrian deprive they of fish and that Gatis a syrian queen prohibit the eat of fish ater Gatis that be without Gatis without her licence and therefore be call Atergatis as a forestaller of the fish to her own delicate tooth Mopsus a lydian after drown she in the lake of Ascalon where this fish-devourer be of fish devour they yet esteem she a goddess and offer unto her fish of gold and silver and the priest all day long set before her true fish roast and sodden which after themselves do eat and it be not to be doubt but the metal-maw of those ostrige can also digest the other Diodorus sieulus y y Niceph. l. 1. c. 5 that hard by a lake full of fish 10 10 diod. sic. li. 3. cap. 2. near unto Ascalon be a temple dedicate to this fishwoman her story follow that she yield to the lust of a young man have by that copulation Semiramis who now too late repent of her folly she expose on the rock where she be nourish by bird of which bird call in their language Semiramis she receive that name the shepherd after espy this hospitality of the bird find the child and present she to simma the king shepherd who bring she up as his own daughter the mother not able to swallow her shame and grief cast herself into the lake to be swallow of the water but there by a new metamorphosis be turn into a fish and hallow for a goddess and for company the fish of that lake and the bird of that rock be canonize also in this deify devotion in Ascalon be a temple of Apollo and Herod father of Antipater z z pet. mart. in 2. reg. 1. grandfather to Herod the great hence call Ascalonita be servant to Apollo priest at Accaron be worship Ballzebub that be the lord of fly either of contempt of his idolatry so call or rather of the multitude of fly which attend the multitude of his sacrifice where from the sacrifice of the temple at jerusalem as some say be whole free or for that he be their larder-god as the roman Hercules to drive away fly or for that a a d. Chytr onoma form of a fly in which he be worship as Nazianzene against julian report he be call Swinthius and as some say Myiodes and myiagrus howsoever one of these name come from mouse and the other from fly such mouse-eaten fly-blow divinity do they profess nec muscam Accaron say Nazianzene of this Baal or Beelzebub the arcadian b b Pausan Arca sacrifice and pray to myiagrus and by that mean be free from danger by fly Pliny c c plin. l. 29 c. 6. lil. Gyral syntag. 1. and Gent. Heruet in clem. pag. 45. report that at the olympian game they sacrifice a bull to Myiodes which do cloud of fly depart out of that territory and in another place d d Piln l. 10.28 he show that the cyrenian sacrifice to the god anchor haply the god Accaron here mention when the multitude of fly cause a pestilence all which fly thereupon present die the jew e e Drus prat. mat. 10. Exsepher misuoth gadol jupiter in detestation of this idol term he Beelzebul that be dunghill or dung-Iupiter yea Scaliger say f f scal. in frag Beros the name Beelzebub be in disgrace also and that the tyrian and sydonian do not so call he Baal or Belus be a common surname to their god which they distinguish with some addition as jupiter be name beelsamen lord of heaven but the hebrew and not the phoenician in contempt call he Beelzebub or fly-lord this be jupiter olympius so Iuno be entitle (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) or heavenly she be paint at Carthage sit on a lion with a thunderbolt in her right hand in she leave a sceptre but for Beelzebub he be there Aesculapius or physic-god as appear by Ahaziah @ who send to consult with he in his sickness and perhaps for this cause the blaspheme pharisee g g 2. reg. 1.2 rather apply the name of this then any other idol to our bless saviour h h math. 10.25 who they see indeed to perform miraculous cure which superstition have conceive of Baalzebub and if any thing be do by that idol it can by no other cause be effect but by the devil as tend like the popish miracle to the confirmation of idolatry what the devil have at beelzebub shrine to this end perform blind with rage and malice they impute to the miracle of Christ which in regard of the efficient be more excellent than can be Satan imposture as countermaund he and all his project for the matter be mere supernatural in the form be act by his will signify by his naked word and for the end which be i i Deut. 13.2 the only touchstone for we to try all miracle be to seal no other truth than be contain for substance in the law and the prophet which he come not to destroy but to fulfil if a angel from heaven yea with heavenly miracle if it be possible shall preach unto we otherwise Paul bid we to hold he accurse and curse be that devil of hell that under colour of miracle one of antichrist ensign k k 2. thes. 2.9 have teach the wolrd to worship the l l lipsij halensi etc. lipsian m m Lauretan mat. 4.10 lauretan and I know not what other lady not that virgin on earth holy in heaven glorious but their idol-conceit and idol-block of she our lord have teach we plain in Matthew to serve God only without sophistical distinction as for the heathenish and popish and all those other packet of miracle which we receive by the jesuit annual relation from the east and west indies I esteem they with doctor hall a hall of elegance that they be either false report or false do d Hall dec. 1. Epist. 6. or false miraculous or false ascribe to heaven but I know not how pardon it reader I be transport to hale Zichem and Loretto from our phoenician port the name of Beelzebub have be occasion of this parenthesis but the power of Beelzebub I fear have induce Bellarmine n n bell. tho. a jesus l. 8. to fall down and thus to worship he for his purple advancement for among the note of the church he have reckon for one this of miracle a great miracle he that now will not believe without miracle that gospel which at first be thereby sufficient prove we read that the o o mat. 12.38 jew seek for sign and be therefore call p p mat. 24.24 a evil and adulterous generation and not only false Christ and false prophet and Antichrist himself but the heathen have their legend of miracle as the whole course of our history will show go now and reckon a catalogue of miracle through all age even to the time of bless Ignatius and his society and ask of we miracle for proof of our doctrine our doctrine have already by the apostle and prophet penman of holy scripture be prove that way August tract in 10.13 and we leave to you the stile of mirabiliarij miracle-monger which Augustine for like brag of thing miraculous wrought by they give the donatist with we miracle must be prove by the truth and the church and not they by miracle but let we come back to Phoenicia the phoenician be account first author of arithmetic and astronomy as also of the art of navigation say Tibullus and observe the north-star to that sea-skill the sydonian be repute first author of weight and measure q q Herod terpsi Herodotus affirm that the phoenician which come with Cadmus into Greece teach the grecian both other science and also letter r r Lucan and curt. and Cadmi which before that time they know not these letter after change their sound and form be by the jonicks principal learn who call they phoenician and call their skin or parchment haply of biblos in Phoenicia he see the cadmean letter engrave in a temple at Thebes much like the jonike than the only greek letter out of certain old inscription much resemble the present latin letter and the auncient phoenician I may say with he the ancient use by the canaanite and hebrew of old and by the samaritan at this day for those which the jew now use he affirm to be new corrupt from the syrian and these from the samaritan his learned discourse thereof be worthy the read but here will be too prolix s s Aminad in euseb chron. pag. 103. and d. 113. Heurnius I know not by what authority say that the phoenician before the israelite depart out of Egypt use hieroglyphical letter which he think they learn of Abraham the same with Seth and Henoch have use before Moses if you believe it receive the first alphabetary letter in the table of the decalogue and from the hebrew the phoenician t t Otho Caldaicus out of a old book he cite these verse which I think not unworthy the transcribe concern the first author in inventor of letter o o Moses invent the Hebrew letter the phoenician the arctic Nicostrata the latin Abraham the syrian he mean the phoenician and chaldaean Isis the egyptian Gulfila the goatish Moses u attica latini Nicostrata Abraham Syras and chaldaicas Isis aegyptias Gulfila he add also that the ancient learning which the phoenician have receive from the hebrew and chaldee pass into Europe by Cadmus who found Thebes and into Africa by elissa after her selfe-inflicted death call Dido i virago a woman of resolution and courage who flee Pygmalion first seize on the island Cothone and nine year after take Tharsus which the posterity of gomer have there build which she call Karthada that be Karthage half city because the one half thereof be phoenician to which agree the testimony of Saluianus that Carthage have in it school of liberal art and philosophy he cite Aristotle testimony of hog a phoenician philosopher who he think to be that king of bashan which Moses conquer dyctis cretensis if his testimony be authentical testify that the grecian gallant which besiege Troy dyct lib. 1. choose Agamemnon for their general q. septim rom. write his name in punic letter and this story be also write in punic letter as the interpreter affirm p. Aemyl in l. crasso but how the posterity of Letter-inventor be by letter circumvent it will not be a unwelcome stratagem to our reader when the christian force in the time of Ludovicus Crassus besiege Tyrus by sea and land a dove be see to come fly and deem by expert man which have see experience of the like to carry letter to the besiege whereupon a terrible shout be raise through the army which rend the air with such violence or else so amaze the silly dove they carry dove from their house or louvre into far place and fasten a letter let they fly Drus in Amos that down she fall they take her letter from she wherein be contain that the tyrian shall be of good courage and short relief shall be send this take away and fasten another of contrary tenure to this swift carrier which present convey the same to she home at Tyrus and with her counterfeit news cause the tyrian to yield Dionys alexandrinus call Tyrus (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) for the antiquity the greek because they can not pronounce the letter Tsadi call it Tyrus for sur or Tsur as it be there call of the phoenician king here may be insert a large history but I fear tediousness their catalogue be thus in scaliger 10 10 can. Isagog l. 2. M.E. canon first Abibalus two year Hierom the son of Abibalas 38. year Leazaros 7. Abdestarius 9 the nurse son 12. 12. Aserymus 9 Pheles 8. month Ithobaal the priest of astarte 32. year Badezorus 6. Margenus 9 Pygmalion 47. in his time Dido flee into Libya a long time after this reign another Itobalus 19 year Baal 10. and then judge rule Ecnibalus 2. month Helbes 10. month abbarus the high priest 11. month balator 1. year Mytgonus and Gerestratus 6. merbal send from Babylon 4. Hierom his brother 20. thus much out of the phoenician antiquity the rest of their history be for substance the same with the syrian before handle jop y y p. Mela lib. 2 c. 11. plin. l. 5. cap. 13. say Mela and Pliny be build before the flood and Cepheus reign there witness certain ancient altar there observe religious and bear title of he and his brother Phineus they show monstrous bone the relic of the whale from which persen free Andromeda mount casius have in it the temple of jupiter casius and Pompey tomb Albertus Aquensis relate the exploit of the western christian in that invasion of Godfrie of Buillon say that in the part of Tyre and Sidon they be sting with a kind of serpent call Tarenta which cause they with intolerable burn swell and thirst to perish the remedy be strange the touch of some chieftain in the army upon the wound or this chap. 18 of Palestina and the first inhabitant thereof the sodomite idumean moabite ammonite and canaanite with other PHoenicia be stretch by some as you may read even to Egypt all alongst that sea-coast and in that respect partly and partly because they observe some nearness in religion I have adjoin the Philistine to the phoenician howbeit other do confine Phoenicia betwixt the river Valania and mount carmel thus have a a Brocard descript. maginus geogr. Brocard write and after he maginus who do reckon unto palaestina galilaea Samaria judaea and idumaea leave out Phoenicia bound as aforesaid to make a part of Syria by itself of this region I purpose to make large discourse in the next chapter here intend to take out of their dust the ancient nation which inhabit this land before the israelite be lord thereof the sodomite sometime inhabit a pleasant and fertile valley water by jordan which Moses compare b b gen. 13.10 to the garden of the lord and the land of Egypt for pleasure and plenty to the sodomite I reckon also those other city partaker of the same both fertility and vengeance Gomorrha Adma Zeboim and little zoar save at the request of Lot their king and their war be mention gen. 14. their wickedness in many place of scripture which Ezechiel c c Es. 16.49 reduce to these four head pied gluttony idleness and cruelty or hard-heartedness their judgement both Moses and other and the place itself do record their religion be a irreligion and profane contempt of God and man Europe I will I can not say England can now yield the like save that in our subtle and more wary age policy have eat up religion have with the blood thereof die her cheek and will seem more shame face then those former sodomite thus do d d Es. 1.10 Esay speak to the prince of Sodom in his time and the people of Gomorrha in respect of that their wickedness which survive they and have fructify unto we among who yet the lord of host as with they have reserve a small remnant from this worse plague than sodom brimstone a reprobate sense the difference betwixt we and they be that they be more open we more close both in like height but not in like weight of wickedness our darkness excel they both in the sin and in the punishment in as much as a great light have shine which we with hold in unrighteousness and if you will have the main character of difference betwixt these and those the one be beastly man the other be devil in the flesh first from a spark of hell concupiscence guide by sensual lust attend by e e pro. 1.32 ease and prosperity and further inflame and blow by the devil a unnatural fire which still bear the name of sodomy be kindle which give coal to a supernatural flame rain by the lord in brimstone and fire from the lord out of heaven and burn even to hell again the Alpha and Omega of wickedness where they suffer say jude * * jude v. 7. the vengeance of eternal fire this f f 2. pet. 2.6 be write for our learning on who the end of the world be come their ash be make a example unto they that shall after live ungodly let not any object the preacher here and require the historian see that history build no castle in the air but preach both civil and divine knowledge by example of the pass unto the present age and why shall not I preach this which not my call alone but the very place itself exact be the quintessence of all history they be dead yet speak and the place of their burial be a place to our memory be turn into a sea but a dead sea g g jordan run into the dead sea and there stay without issue to the ocean which cover their sin that it may discover we which as astonish at their unnaturalness have forget she own nature it drown the earth which it shall have make as whilom it do fertile it stay itself with wonder and indignation and fall in a dead swoon sink down with horror not waken not move with the wind bluster refuse the light of the sun the lap of the ocean the commerce of stranger or familiarity of her own and as it happen in deep passion the colour go and come change three time every day it gasp forth from her die entrails a stink and noisome air to the near dweller pestiferous sometime void as it be excrement both light ash and gross the neighbour fruit participate of this death promise to the eye toothsome and wholesome food perform only smoke and ash and thus have out GOD show himself a consume fire the lord of anger to who vengeance belong all creature muster themselves in his sight and say b b joseph bell jud. l. 5. c. 5. cornel. tacit. hist. lib. 5. these two describe it at large also Strabo lib. 16. plin. lib. 5. c. 16. beside the modern and elder christian Ptolemey place the midst thereof in 66. 50. and ^1 10 l. 7. c. 16. at his first call to execution loe we be here that which I have say of these miracle still live in this dead-sea be confirm by testimony of many @ author Brocard tell of those tree with ash grow under Engaddi by this sea and a vapour rise out of the sea which blast the neighbour-fruit and the i i gen. 14.10 slimy pit on the brink of the sea which he see neither stranger nor her own have access there where fish the natural inhabitant of the water and Water-fowl the most usual guest have no entertainment and man or other heavy body can sink Vespasian prove this experiment by cast in some bound unskilful of swim who the water surfeit with swallow she own spew up again this be mention by Aristotle k k Arist. meteor lib. 2. cap. 3. also who say that the saltness there of be the cause why neither man nor beast though bind can sink in it nor any fish live therein which yet in the salt-sea we see no otherwise the philosopher can see no further than reason nor all that neither but Moses guide we beyond philosophy to divine vengeance which thus subvert nature when man become unnatural the lake josephus say be five hundred and fourscore furlong in length Pliny have a hundred mile the breadth between six and five and twenty mile Strabo tell of thirteen city still whereof Sodom be chief of threescore furlong compass whereof some be consume by fire or swallow by earthquake and sulphurous water the rest forsake some remainder as bone of those carcase then in his time continue l l l. ver. l. 1. c. 9 Vertomannus say that there be the ruin of three city on the top of three hill and that the earth be without water and barren and a great miracle have a kind of bloody mixture somewhat like red wax the depth of three or four cubit the ruin of the city be there see still georgius Cedrenus in his greek history write above five hundred and fifty year since write that he have see this dead-sea and reckon thereof these marvel that it produce no quick creature that dead carcase sink therein a live man can scarce dive under water lamp burn swim but be put out they sink there be fountain of bitumen allume also and salt but bitter and shine where any fruit be find nothing be find but smoke the water thereof be wholesome to such as use it but differ from other water in contrary accident not long after his time Fulcherius Carnotensis in the begin of the western kingdom in these part testify the untolerable saltness of this sea from his own taste and that near the same be a hill which in diverse place thereof be likewise salt shine therewith like ice and hard as stone and ghess that the saltness of this sea proceed partly from that cause partly from the intercourse which under the earth it hold with the great sea compass this lake on the south side we come to a village which they say be segor abound with date where the inhabitant be black and there say he do I see apple on the tree which when I open I find black and dusty within * the like be read sap. 10.7 of who wickedness even to this day the waste land that smoke be a testimony and plant bear fruit that never come to ripeness and a stand pillar of salt be a monument of a unbelieve soul they leave behind they to the world a memorial of their foolishness etc. and Moses Deut. 32.32 their vine be of the vine of Sodom and of the vine of Gomorrah their grape be grape of gall their cluster be bitter etc. which allegory must have his foundation in the natural disposition of those place and fruit late traveller as William Lithgow and I have hear the like of master Eldred which have see these part say there be now no such fruit which may come to pass by that alteration which so long space may cause or else because they visit not those part which Fulcherius mention Lithgow add that the water of this dead sea contrary to the former report bear nothing on the top no not the weight of a feather the water be blackish and at present terrible shape perhaps of bituminous matter congeal there grow neither bush nor tree near to Sodom by many mile and in his journey thither they pass such sand that their mulet can not bear they and light they wade therein sometime to the middle and sometime over head and ear the arab also at the same time molest they with arrow shoot from place of more secure foot idumaea lie southward from judaea it have name of edom the surname of Esau son of Isaak the history of this people and the horites who the child of Esau expel succeed in their inheritance be relate by m m gen. 36. Deut. 2.22 Moses it be subdue by David according to the prophecy the elder shall serve the young they rebel under joram the son of jehosaphat as Isaak have also prophesy from that time they continue bitter enemy to the people of GOD n n Ios. antiq 13. till Hircanus the son of Simon compel they to accept both the jewish dominion and religion after which they be reckon among the jew of the idumaean be the amalekite o o 1. sam. 15. destroy by Saul they be south from juda p p Iob 2.11 Eliphaz the Themanite it seem be of Esau his generation and of the right religion the idumaean moabite and ammonite be by some place in Arabia of which I will not contend I here mention they as both borderer and subject to the israelite of which we read much in the scripture little elsewhere that make to our purpose south from amalek be kedar a country abound with flock of sheep and goat but I may not now dwell in the tent of kedar till I come to the ismaelite on q q moabite and madianites the east-side of the lake of Sodom be that region which the moabite so often in scripture mention sometime inhabit and before they the emims which be giant tall as the anakim Deut. 2.10 the moabite be the posterity of lot by incest with his daughter r r Arias Montanus moab have on the east the mountain of Horeb on the west the salt sea and part of jordan Arnon on the south and the north border stretch from jabbok to the mountain of Pisga that part of their country between jabbok and Arnon Sihon king of the amorite have take from they and lose again to the israelite Balac their king fear to lose the rest send for Balaam the wizard to curse the israelite who yet by divine power be force to bless they yet the lustre of balac promise so dazzle his eye that s s Apoc. 2.14 he teach Balac to put a stumble block before the israelite and by send among they their woman to draw they to carnal and spiritual whoredom so to provoke the wrath of God jealousy against they but the zeal of phineas stay it and Balaam in his return homeward to his country of Mesopotamia be slay by the israelite among the madianites partaker with the moabite in Balaam idolatrous project these madianites descend of Abraham t t Abraham child by Keturah be author of the nation call the child of the east which inhabit the part of Arabia between the moabite ammonite and the persian and chaldaean from Mesopotamia to the persian gulf ar. mont. Canaan by Keturah and dwell in a part of Arabia near to the moabite on the east some of they dwell near to mount Sinai Exod. 2.15 and in the desert on the east side of the red sea their mighty army be miraculous destroy by u u judg. 7.20 the sword of the lord and Gedeon the moabite be subject to Israel by David and so continue to the king of Samaria till that state be rend they free themselves it seem they worship the sun as the name kircherese beth-baalmeon and balac high place do show and we have observe before in the worship of Bel and Baal Chemosh be another idol of they to which Solomon build a high place pehor also and baal-pehor and the rest who rite be now rot and the memory wear out this his name it seem be borrow of the hill peor mention by Moses where it be likely he have his altar and temple 10 10 Orig. in num. hom 20. Origen say the name baal-peor signify filthiness but what filthiness he know not Solomon jarchi write that they offer to he ordure place before his mouth the likeness of that place which nature have make for egestion saint Jerome y y hier. in ose 4. Isid. Etym. l. 8. Deut. 34. psal. 106. think he to be the same with Priapus and worship of the woman and so Isidore Moses mention bethpeor whereby it appear he have a temple David ascribe to his worship the eat of the sacrifice of the dead such it be like as the heathen offer in memory of the dead but some z z seld. de d. syr. ascribe these conceit of dung-offering to jewish malice and agree not to that priapeian conjecture in their rebellion against jehoram king of Israel he and jehoshaphat king of juda with the king or viceroy of idumaea go to recover they by force the Moabite in despair offer a bloody sacrifice of his elder son and heir or as tremellius read it the a a 2. reg. 3.27 king of Edom son which cause the israelite to return the ammonite and moabite may not enter into the congregation of GOD unto the ten generation because a a Deut. 23.3 they meet not the israelite with the bread and water in their way when they come out of Egypt and for hire Balaam against they Arias Montanus say that the moabite be circumcise in imitation of the israelite but worship not their God but their own idol the b b the ammonite succeed the giant call Zamzummim Deut. 2.20 ammonite their brethren in the evil both of lot their father and their own inhabit northward from moab on the east be the hill Acrabim on the west the amorite the hill luith Basan etc. make it a valley their chief city be rabbath after call philadelphia these ammonite have be troublesome to the israelite in the time of c c jud. 11.5 jephte and of d d 1. sam. 11. Saul and after David in just revenge for violate the law of nation destroy they moloch or melchon be their idol which be suppose e e p. mart. in 2. reg 2. Vatab. in leu. 18. to be Saturn who bloody butcherly sacrifice be before speak of the word signify a king as Mithra signify a lord and it be like that these eastern nation intend as the phoenician also in their adad that one and great GOD although as to the king of visible creature these mystery be apply to the sun likewise certain it be that these moloch-sacrifice pass hence into Africa as there shall be observe it be a hollow image say f f lyra in leu. 18. lyra of copper in form of a man in the hollow concavity be make a fire with which the idol be heat they put a child into his arm and the priest make such a noise with their timbrel that the cry of the child may not move the parent to compassion but they shall rather think the child soul receive of the god into rest and peace other g g aret. in act. c. 7. p. fag l. white add that this moloch have seven room chamber or ambry therein one for meal a second for turtle a three for sheep the four receive a ram the five a calf the six a ox if a man will offer son or daughter the seven be ready for that cruelty some interpret moloch and Remphan act. 7. to be the sun and moon the talmudist h h lib. Sanhedrin vid. p. ric. praec. prohib 40. and Rombam Moreh neb. l. 3. c. 38. will persuade man that they do not burn their child in this moloch-sacrifice but only the father take his child and move they to and fro through the fire none otherwise then at this time on saint John baptist day when the sun pass through cancer child use to leap through bonfire but both scripture and heathen author write otherwise moloch be also i i jer. 19.5 call Baal there be a valley near Jerusalem sometime possess by the son of k k p. mart. in 2. reg. 2. Chytr Onomast hinnom where the hebrew build a notorious high place to moloch it be on the east and south part of the city it be also call Topheth or timbrel of that tymbrellrite which those Corribantes and bloody priest do use or else for the spaciousness of it l l jer. 7.31 32. Jeremy prophesy that it shall be call the valley of slaughter because of the judgement for the idolatrous high place in it upon the pollution hereof by slaughter and burial it grow so execrable that hell inherit the same name call Gehenna of this place first of the lowness be a valley second for the fire which here the child there the wicked sustain three because all the filth be cast out of the city hither it seem they hold some resemblance the ammonite also be as Montanus affirm m m aegyptij Arab etc. circumcise Canaan be the son of cham father of many nation as n n gen. 10.15 Moses declare Sidon and heth jebusi emori Girgashai hivi Arki sini Aruadi zemari hamathi the most of which be expel their country slay or make tributary by the israelite their border be from Sidon to Gaza west and on the east side from Sodom to Lasha or Callyrrhoe o o antiq. judaic. lib. 3. cap. 7. Arrias Montanus be of opinion that according to the number of the twelve tribe of Israel so be the people of Canaan and therefore to those eleven before rehearse he add their father Canaan who leave his name to they all and where he live retain a part to himself between the Philistine and amorite of those his son Sidon the elder inhabit the sea-coast and eastward from he heth unto the hill Gilboa of he come the hittite jebus go further on the right-hand Emor inhabit the midland country westward from the jebusite the girgashite dwell above the Hittite next to jordan and the lake Chinereth so call because it resemble the form of a harp after call Gennezareth the Hevite or hivite inhabit between the amorite and the philistim the arkite possess the root of Libanus the sinite dwell beyond the Hittite eastward near to jordan Aruadi enjoy the country next to the wilderness of cade zemari obtain the hill call of he Semaraim the Hamathite possess the country nigh to the fountain of jordan as for the most notable mountain and city which each of these family enjoy they which will may read further in the same author of these and their ancient religion and policy we find little or nothing but in the scripture where the lord testify that for their sin the land spew they out some of they as some think flee into Africa where Augustine p p exposit ep. rom. incheat say that the country people inhabit near Hippon call themselves in their punic language Chanani Procopius in the four book of the Vandale war affirm that all the sea-coast in those time from Sidon to Egypt be call Phoenicia and that when joshua invade they they leave their country and flee into Egypt there multiply and pierce further into Africa where they possess all that tract unto the pillar of Hercules speak half phoenician they build the city Tinge or Tanger in Numidia where be two pillar of white stone place near to a great fountain in which in the phoenician tongue be engrave we be canaanite who JOSHVA the thief chase away which if it be so the name of Hercules may therefore be ascribe to those pillar as account the chief phoenician idol philo q q Philo ant. Bib. or the author of those fabulous antiquity say that the israelite find among the amorite seven golden image call nymph which as oracle direct they in their affair and wrought wonder the work of Canaan phut selah nebroth elath Desvat of admirable workmanship yield light in the night by virtue of certain stone which can not by mettle be break or pierce or be consume by fire but must needs have a angel to bury they in the depth of the sea and there let they lie this people be not utter at once destroy but sometime as in the day of r r judg. 4.2 jabin and Sisera conquer their conqueror and retain some power and name of a people till the time of David who destroy the jebusite and dwell in the fort of Zion call it after his own name s s 2. sam. 5.7 the city of David and in the day of Solomon Pharaoh king of Egypt take and burn gezer and slay the cavaanite that dwell in the city and give it for a present to his daughter Salomon wife and all the people that be leave of the amorite hittites Perizzite hivites and jebusite who the child of Israel be not able to destroy those do Solomon make tributary unto this day 1. King 9.16 20 21. the posterity of these servant of Solomon be mention t t nehem. 7.60 among the israelite which return from the babylonian captivity and accrue into one people with they of the Hebrew nation and religion from the beginning thereof to our time the second book chap. i. the preface of this book and a description of the region of palaestina since call judaea and now in the former book we have trace the footstep of religion follow she in her wander from the truth and herself through diverse nation till we come into this land sometime flow with milk and honey who first inhabitant we last take view of the hebrew be by the sovereign lord of all make heir of their labour and possess both their place and wealth house and city which they build not vineyard which they plant not and which be more these be a type unto they of the true and heavenly country which not by their merit but by the mere mercy of the promiser they shall enjoy these do GOD choose of all the kindred of the earth to make unto himself a a exod. 19.5 6. a kingdom of priest a holy nation and his chief treasure above all people though all the earth be his he make they the keeper b b rom. 3.2 of his oracle bestow on they c c rom. 9.4 5. the adoption and the glory and the covenant and the give of the law and the service of God and the promise of who be the father and of who concern the flesh Christ come who be God over all bless for ever amen these thing be not only communicate but appropriate to they d d psal. 147.20 he show his word unto Jacob his statute and his judgement unto ISRAER he deal not so with any nation neither have the heathen knowledge of his law he be their prerogative and they his peculiar e e psal. 76.1 3. in jewrie be GOD know his name be great in Israel in Salem be his tabernacle and his dwell in Zion and Christ himself ratify it acknowledge himself f f mat. 15.24 send to the lose sheep of the house of Israel g g rom. 15.8 a minister of the circumcision and say to the Cananite woman which beseech he for her daughter it be not good to take the child bread and to cast it to dog such in spiritual reputation before GOD be all people exclude as unclean dog out of his heavenly jerusalem till this h h ephes 2.14 etc. partition wall be take down and they which have be far off be make near by the blood of Christ who abrogate through his flesh that hatred and make of twain Jew and gentile one new man in himself so that the gentile the name of all the world except this people which have be without Christ and alien from the commonwealth of Israel stranger from the covenant of promise have no hope and be without GOD in the world be now no more stranger and foreigner but citizen with the saint and of the household of GOD build upon the foundation of the prophet and apostle jesus Christ himself be the chief corner stone let it not be tedious to hear of this which the angel rejoice to learn i i ephes 3.9 10. a mystery which from the begin of the world have be hide in GOD and unto principality and power in heavenly place be make know by the church but the word whereby we have fellowship in this mystery come out of Zion and the preach begin at jerusalem this and not Rome by the confession of Espensaeus a learned Papist k k c. espen in 1. tim. 4. be Emporium Christiana and the mart of christian faith and mother of the church l l act 13.46 yea it be necessary that the word of GOD shall first be speak unto they which they by incredulity put from themselves and give place to the gentile m m rom. 11.22 the fall of they become the riches of the world and the diminish of they the riches of the gentile as a glass wherein we may behold the bountifulness and severity of GOD and in both the deepness of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of GOD who judgement be unsearchable and his way past find out I may fit compare they to gideon fleece n n judg. 6. which receive the dew when all the earth beside be dry and after it be dry upon the fleece only when the dew cover all the ground sometime they alone receive all those dew shower Rivers sea of save bounty and all the world beside be a parch wilderness now o o psal. 107.34 35. he turn the fruitful land into barrenness for the wickedness of the inhabitant but that wilderness he turn into pool of water and the dry land into water-spring he have p p rom. 9.24 call they his people which be not his people and her belove which be not belove and where it be say you be not my people there they be now call the child of the live god. thus have he q q rom. 11.32 shut up all under unbelief that he may have mercy upon all that his free election may appear not of work lest any shall boast themselves but of grace behold therefore all atheist and wonder the jew brand with judgement wander over the world the contempt of nation the scum of people the hiss derision and indignation of man for refuse he who they expect deny he who they challenge hate he who name be in life and death unto they the sweet tune and most melodious harmony still wait for and glory in that Messiah who unknown they crucify and slay and still pursue with the deadly hatred in all his follower GOD they please not and be contrary to all man yet such be God manifold wisdom in his deep judgement that his enemy shall fight for he even against themselves the midianite r r judg. 8. shall sheathe their sword which they have draw out against GOD in their own bowel and christian truth shall prevail and let our s s Deut. 32.31 enemy themselves be judge out of their premise which they maintain as earnest as thou o atheist secure deride which they will seal with that which thou make thy heaven thy GOD we will and do conclude against thou and they that in which with which for which we will live and die let the old testament yield the proposition in prophecy and the new testament assume in history and even be thou the judge if that reason which thou have as a man and perverte as a devil will not by force of their scripture which they prefer before their life necessary in the conclusion demonstrate the christian truth neither I appeal unto our common reason can thou more wonder at we for believe thing in thy seem incredible absurd and impossible then at they upon such ground which with we they hold not t t the jew be a witness against the atheist that we feign not those prophecy of Christ see the jew hold the prophecy dear than his blood and yet hate Christianity more deadly than the atheist persecutor in Christianos Hieron in abd. 1. believe for what believe we but for the main and chief point of our faith be as plain in their evangelical prophet as in our prophetical evangelist all the history of Christ in a more divine way seem rather tell then foretell a history not a prophecy as be easy by conference of both to show and thou if thou be not idle or wilful malicious may find that than which thou see come upon they a spirit of slumber eye that they shall not see and ear that they shall not hear which yet have the light of the first scripture have they not a veil over their heart the same see in thyself that when great light do offer itself willing shut thy eye as though there can be no light because thou live in and love thy darkness it be the same hand that give up both thou and they u u 2. thess 2. because you will not believe the truth to be save to strong delusion that you may believe lie and be damn to i and all christian let the jew be both real and verbal teacher of the truth which they let fall and we take up the one in their oracle of sacred writ the other in their exemplary judgement and to they let o thou lord of all hear and grant it let all christian be that which Moses prophesy 10 10 Deut. 32.21 a provocation to emulation not of envy and hatred which hitherto have be in these among all the christian enemy the most implacable and despiteful but of imitation that as y y Rom. 11. their cast away have be the reconcile of the world their receive may be life from the dead which Paul seem plain to foresignify thus much be premise as a preparation to our jewish history which as of more importance than any other deserve more ample view let we in the next place survey that country which their progenitor have with those privilege and their posterity together with those privilege have lose this country be first z z the name of the country call the land of Canaan after that the posterity of Canaan the son of cham have possess it a a Moses subdue the kingdom of the amorite on the one side joshua the rest on the other side of jordan Moses and joshua conquer it to the posterity of jacob of who it be call the land of Israel after the division of the ten tribe from the house of David by ieroboam in the time of rehoboam the son of Solomon the name of Israel be more particular appropriate to those ten rebellious tribe and the other two be know by the name of the kingdom of juda yet Israel remain in a general sense the name of they all especial in the new testament Paul of the tribe of Benjamin b b rom. 11.1 and 2. call himself a Israelite and all Israel say he in that chapter shall be save after the babylonian c c Ios. antiq. 11.5 justin mart. apol. 2. say they be call jew of judas the son of jacob but Elias in Thishi rad. jehudi derive this name from the kingdom of juda when the ten tribe rebel say that the two tribe be then call jew and their language jewish which be also the opinion of saint Jerome com. in c. 1. captivity they be call jew of the chief and royal tribe and their country judaea it be also call palaestina of the Philistine which inhabit the sea-coast and after in the time of the christian it be general call the holy land Phoenicia also be under that name comprehend it be situate between the mediterranean sea and the arabian mountain Ptolemey d d Ptol l. 7. c. 16. call it palaestina syriae and judaea abut it on the north with Syria on the east and south with Arabia Petraea on the west with part of Egypt and the sea Adrichomius who have bestow a large volume on this subject which he call the theatre of the holy land on the east confine it with Syria and Arabia on the south the desert pharan and Egypt on the north mount Libanus on the west the sea maginus place a part of Phoenicia on the north on the north-east Libanus on the south and part of the east Arabia on the west part of the mediterranean sea it be extend from the south to the north from the one and thirty degree to the three and thirty and somewhat more other set it down in other word but these and they agree for the most part in substance it be common hold e e Hieron Epist. c. 19 160. mill in latitud etc. to be a hundred and sixty italian mile in length from dan to Bersebee and sixty in breadth a exact division thereof into twelve shire or share joshua set down at large with their bound and city from the thirteen chapter of that book to the one and twenty as they be by lot and divine dispensation allot to the twelve tribe the posterity of Jacob twelve son only Ephraim and Manasses the son of joseph constitute two tribe and therefore have the double portion descend of Jacob elder son by Rachel his first intend wife and levi have no portion but be scatter in Israel to keep Israel from scatter and to unite they in one religion to one GOD who dispose that curse into a blessing Reuben gad and half the tribe of Manasses have their portion on the east side of jordan the other half of Manasses with Simeon juda Benjamin Ephraim Naphthali Aser Dan Izachar Zabulon have their portion assign betwixt jordan and the western sea they which will be full acquaint with their several division may find in joshua himself to satisfy they and in the commentary which Andraeas Masius and other have write on that scripture laicstaine more Stella Adrichomius and Arias Montanus have in map present they to the eye HONDIUS his map of terra sancta tabula cananaeae christi neither in the whole world beside be there I think find any region have more city in so small a space than this sometime have except we believe that which be tell of the thousand of f f see l. 6. c. 2. Egypt some reckon g g Adrichom praefat. in each tribe these as royal city in aser Achsaph beside Sidon and Tyrus in Benjamin bethel Gabaa jerusalem jericho in dan Lachis beside Acaron and Gath in Ephraim gazer Samaria Saron Taphua in gad Rabath in Isachar Aphece in juda arad Bezec Eglon Hebron Lebna Maceda odolla Taphua in Manasse 1. Dor Galgal jezrael Mageddo tanac Thersa in Manasse 2. Astaroth edrai Gessur Machati Soba Theman and Damascus in Nepthalim Asor cedes emath in Reuben Heshbon Madian Petra in Simeon Dabir Gerara in Zabulon jeconan Semeron the like catalogue he make of episcopal city in this land while it be christian my purpose be not to write of all but especial of such as be in some respect eminent and first let i dip my pen in jordan this say Pliny h h plin. l. 5 c. 15. be a pleasant river and as far as the situation of place will permit ambitious prodigal impart itself to the inhabitant and as it be unwilling pass to that curse lake asphaltites of which at last it be drink up lose his laudable water mix with those pestilent as soon therefore as the valley give opportunity it spread itself into a lake call Genesara sixteen mile long and six broad environ with pleasant town julia and Hippo on the east on the south Tarichea and Tiberias on the west make wholesome with his hot water the fountain of this river be two call i i ar. mont. jor and dan which compound their stream do also compound their name as tame and Isis with we bring forth happy parent our tames or Thamisis k k in Ios. 1 dan. Talmud here be the city dan so call of the danite before laish jud. 18.29 and Leshem Ios. 19.47 but before this time both the river have the same name jordan and the place itself at the foot of Libanus whence the fountain spring be call dan gen. 14.14 when Moses write except we believe Masius that the pentateuch and other scripture be by ezra after the captivity digest into that form with those name which we now have here be after build Caesarea Paneadis call afterward of Philip the tetrarch Caesarea Philippi and after that by Agrippa neronia this join of jor and Dan be the begin of the apparent stream but the true l l Ios. bel. jud. l. 3. 18. Brocard and first conception of it be in Phiale one hundred and twenty furlong from Caesarea a fountain of unsearchable depth which yet like some miserable churl always contain the water in itself till sink and as it be bury in the earth those treasure be by nature stealth convey under ground unto dan or paneas who be liberal of that usurer wealth for into that Phiale pour as much as you will it never increase or decrease and thence it become a river Philip the tetrarch of trachonitis by cast chaff therein which be pay he again at dan first find out this under-earth passage the saracen call that Phiale in this respect m m or Maiedan Mas. in Ios. 1. Medan that be the water of dan. before it make the lake of Genezareth it make another call samachonitis this be especial fill when the snow on Libanus be melt which cause n n Welssenburg and Trem. 1 Chro. 12.15 jordan then to swell and overflow his bank in the first month yearly and make the miracle in ioshua o o Iosh. 3. passage through it the more miraculous but in summer it be almost dry up and by reason of that matter which therein grow be a harbour for wild beast it be call the water of Meron half way between Caesarea Philippi where the marriage between jor and Dan be solemnize and the lake of Genezareth Elias and after his assumption his cloak divide these stream naaman leprosy be here cleanse and a great leprosy than naaman be daily cleanse in the church by the laver of regeneration first sanctify to that use in this stream where the holy Trinity p p matth. 3. do first yield itself in sensible apparition to the world thereby to consecrate that baptism whereby we be consecrate to this bless trinity the father son and holy ghost in which respect q q Vitrias l. 1. c. 53. Adricom timberley pilgrim in memory thereof do still wash themselves in this river spot themselves further I fear by this wash with some mire of superstition I can blame this sacred stream if it seem loath as Pliny say to leave so fertile a country and linger as long as it may in r r r. David psal. 24. Israel Maria 7. lake by the way not only for that salt sea or hellish lake which shut up his guiltless wave in perpetual imprisonment but also for those pleasure in the passage the fruit of the earth without exaction free yield as rose Sage rue etc. of the tree in olive fig pomegranate date and vine which last the mahometan superstition do not cherish and the western christian do so husband that one vine s s Brocard by their art and industry yield three vintage in August septemb October the t t num. 13.24 grape of Eshcol which can lade two man with one cluster be not so famous as the balm of gilead u u jerem. 8.22 and 46.11 which the 10 10 gen. 37.25 Trem. Ios. Antiq. 15.5 first merchant we read of from that mart vent to other part of the world these balmtree grow in the vale of jericho which be cut yield this precious liquor whereof beside the admirable effect in cure other wonder be tell by ancient and late writer too long here to relate bellonius y y Bellon lib. 2. cap. 39 will do it for i if any list to read his observation he be not of their mind which think there be now no true balsam in the world these in judaea be perish but think in arabia-foelix it grow natural from whence some shrub he see in z z Dioscorid say that it grow in Egypt Strabo also in Coelosyria etc. cairo but I shall be too tedious if I shall insist on this argument that instance of such a world of people in such a patch of the world do sufficient declare the fertility when as David a a 1. chron. 21. see Tremell note on 2. sam. 24.9 number they a eleven thousand israelite and of juda four hundred seventy thousand or as in 2. sam. 24.9 five hundred thousand which draw sword and yet Benjamin and levi be not reckon in this number and in the day of ieroboam b b 2. chron. 13. Abija king of juda bring into the field four hundred thousand and ieroboam eight hundred thousand and on this part be slay in one battle five hundred thousand all choice man which history can be match with the like in all age and place of the world that a country a hundred and sixty mile long and not above sixty in breadth shall nourish at once or lose in a battle such multitude not to speak of impotent person woman and child but this multitude by civil war and invasion of enemy decrease till first the relic of Israel and after the remnant of juda be by the assyrian and babylonian lead captive and the land enjoy her sabbath for the kingdom of Israel consist of ten tribe some reckon Simeon also to juda because of his portion mix with juda as benjamin be adjoin thereto to who the levite c c 2. chron. 9.14 like wise and priest forsake their city and all the religious israelite annex themselves forsake d d a great part of Benjamin and Simeon be subject to David posterity not the house of David only but the house of the lord and set they up calf egyptian superstition at Dan and bethel and make priest for their idolatrous purpose this their rebellion and apostasy GOD plague with civil dissension and foreign hostility until at last the assyrian e e 2. reg. 17. remove they altogether and repeople those part with new colony such be the end of religion which have not GOD for the beginning but be ground on human policy a sandy foundation juda can not take warning but provoke GOD by idolatrous course at last be carry to Babel and thence after seventy year return the history of these thing so full relate in scripture I shall but mar in the tell after this their return the land be not as before name after the portion of the several tribe but be call by a general name f f Ios. antiq. 11.5 judaea and the people jew because the tribe of juda have before inhabit those part or at least the principal of they dilate themselves further as they increase in number and power but more especial judaea be the name of one g g Palestina divide into 3. part galilaea Samaria judaea three part of the country by that name distinguish from the other two Samaria and Galilea which two last be sometime refer to Phoenicia galilaea be the most northerly confine on Libanus and antilibanus towards the north Phoenicia westerly Coelosyria on the east and Samaria with Arabia enclose her southerly border jordan part it in the midst it be divide into the high and low Galilee the high call also Galilee of the gentile contain the spring of jordan and those city which Solomon give to hiram the low be also call Galilee of Tiberias that city give name both to the lake and region in which Nazareth be famous and the hill thabor Samaria be seat betwixt Galilee and judaea much less then either of they judaea be the most southerly between the mediterranean and dead sea Samaria and Idumea Pliny h h plin. l. 5. c. 14. make galilaea a part of it and peraea another part separate from the rest by jordan the rest he divide into ten toparchy ierico Emaus Lidda joppe Acrabatena Gophnitica thamnitica Betholene Tephene Orine in which be jerusalem far the fair of the city of the east not of judaea alone Herodium with a famous town of the same name he add unto these the region of decapolis so call of the number of the town and the tetrarchy trachonitis paneas abila Arca Ampeloessa gabe those ten town of decapolis be Caesarca Philippi Asor cedes Neptalim sephet corozain Capharnaum Bethsaida jotapata Tiberias and Bethsan otherwise call scythopolis and before nysa where Bacchus bury his nurse but these be part of those former part above mention and so may we say of the rest sustain in diverse respect diverse division best fit to the present polity and little to our purpose those thing which of old be famous in those place be mention in the scripture those thing which since have be more remarkable I purpose in the next part of this work of christian religion to handle and especial the rarity of jerusalem sometime the holy city and city of the great king now a den of thief a habitation of mahumetan or rather now not at all for this which be now be a new city call by the founder Aelia capitolina i i Hieron in ezech. 5. and Epist. 129. build by Aelius adrianus who cause the plough to pass through and salt to be sow in the old as testify her eternal desolation and fulfil Christ prophecy to the utmost not leave a stone upon a stone if Titus have not full accomplish the same before Arias Montanus in his Nehemias affirm that jerusalem be found on three k k description of old jerusalem this be say Jerome in the midst of the world and the navel of earth have on the east Asia on the west Europe Africa on the south Scythia etc. on the north. hill to wit Zion on which the jebusite build their tower and which in David time be further build on and call the city of David the second hill be mount moriah which David buy of Arauna to erect thereon the temple the three be the high acra call the suburb these be compass with one wall without and within divide with three wall by which the city of David and moriah and the high acra be sever in the circuit of the wall be nine gate he that desire further to read or rather to see the old jerusalem with her holy Fabriques let he resort to Arias Montanus his judaicae where he both relate and in figure present these thing it be suppose that Melchisedech build it about the year of the world 2023. and call it Salem Jerome in his 129. epistle have these word ipsa metropolis jebus Salem Hierosolyma and Aelia as if it be call jebus before it have the name of Salem which be not so probable yea Jerome himself in his 126. epistle confute josephus and the vulgar opinion that Salem be jerusalem and say that Salem be a town near to scythopolis which remain to his time where also be still show the ruin of melchisedek palace the monument of her ancient and antiquate splendour the like saint Ambrose in his commentary on hebr. 7. the king thereof be ancient call melchizedek or adoni-zedek that be king or lord of justice or of Zedek which some will have the first name thereof and Salem the second this signify peace righteousness l l psal. 85.11 indeed and peace do here kiss each other when the m m jer. 23.6 lord our righteousness here preach peace and be make our peace and righteousness the true Melchizedek who kingdom n n rom. 14.17 be righteousness peace and joy in the holy ghost it be after call jerusalem by addition of the word jer as some think to the former name Salem for so it be say of Abraham o o gen. 23 14 when GOD try his obedience in here offer his son he call the place jehova iereh the lord will provide from which and Salem by composition arise this name so fit both the city and mystery josephus p p Ios. de bell. lib. 7. c. 18. say it be first call Solyma and by Melchisedech name Hierosolyma of a temple by he there build as if (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) have be the language of jerusalem elsewhere q q antiq. l. 7 c. 3. he attribute it to David from a Hebrew derivation which and other like etimology have cause Masius r r josephus and philo unskilful in hebrew Mas. in Ios. 10. scal. Elench. ser. to pronounce he ignorant of the Hebrew and educate only in the greek as Scaliger somewhere affirm of philo his companion in nation learning and in that grecian eloquence wherein they never have companion neither of their own nor scarce of any other nation the jebusite after possess and of they some derive the name jerusalem till David expel they who have before reign in Hebron call cariatharbe the city of four man say some because of Adam Abraham Isaac and jacob their both dwelling and burial there yet Adam other say be bury in mount Caluarie with other speculation curious and uncertain he translate the high seat both of spiritual and temporal regiment to jerusalem where he reign after three and thirty year to who succeed Solomon and the rest in order it then contain in circuit fifty furlong compass with a great ditch threescore foot deep and two hundred and fifty broad Nabuchodonosor destroy it Nehemias re-edify it three and thirty furlong in circuit the maccabee Herod and other add to her excellence till Titus besiege and take it in which siege be say to have perish eleven hundred thousand people and be now a sepulchre of dead carcase be make a spectacle of divine vengeance for murder the lord of life but those struggle spirit and small remnant of life which remain in this forlorn carcase of the sometime jerusalem breathe a new rebellion in the time of Adrian and thereby breathe she last as before be say Bernard de Breidenbach say he never see any place which have a fair prospect than jerusalem present to the eye Arabia the plain of jericho and the dead sea but what do we now in Aelia or the now jerusalem who rarity the journal of many s s beniam tud Breidenb Ludolph such Brocard vel Borchard b. de saligniaco etc. testify concern the former the history of this city the scripture have record and where divine history end josephus and hegesippus that I speak not of late writer have large supply especial concern her late fate and as I may term it in her funeral sermon t t justin lib. 36. Strabo lib. 16. Strabo justine and other have write of this people but not sincere but the fountain be clear enough to acquaint we with their true original which come next to be consider chap. 2 of the hebrew patriarch and their religion before the law also of their law and polity @. i. of the patriarch and religion before the Law the name of hebrew some derive from Abraham as if they be call Hebraei Abrahai Arias Montanus a a mon. Antiq. jud. Canaan lib. 3. cap. 9 and Hieron in jon. 1. scal. Epist. Tomson and add steph. Ubertum tell we that this name of hebrew be not appropriate to any family but common to all such as have pass over the river Euphrates fix their tent and abode between that river and the great sea he gather this from the Hebrew word b b (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) transmitten which signify to pass over such a one first of all be Heber seek a life answerable to his name who example say he there imitate and after abram for his twofold transmigration from chaldaea and from Haran deserve that name and leave it to his posterity but c c Ios. antiq. lib. 1. cap. 6. josephus d d aug. de civit. l. 26. c. 13. Augustine and other more fit in my mind of Heber the four from Shem the son of Noah with who family as we have say continue the ancient language of the world call of his name hebrew his son peleg or Phaleg bear the name of that division which at the time of his birth the rest of the world in their language sustain this peleg be grandfather to serug who some affirm to have be the first maker of idol which be afterward worship by Nahor his son and there his nephew the father of Abram who preach open that there be but e e Ios. antiq. lib. 1. cap. 7. one God creator and governor of all thing and by this doctrine provoke the chaldaean against he warn by oracle depart towards Canaan Bellarmine f f bell. Not. Eccles. l. 4. c. 9 so eager swallow this opinion that he tax Caluine of heresy for attribute to Abraham the contrary namely that Abraham before GOD call he out of ur be a idolater a opinion so much more probable than the other as have better authority for joshua g g Ios. 24.2 object to the israelite their forefather idolatry and name Abraham among they and Genebrard h h Genebrard chron. lib. 1. do so interpret it and Masius i i mag. in Ios. 24. in his commentary on that place both zealous and learned papist yea Lindanus k k Lindan in Panop specify the idolatry and call he a worshipper of Vesta l l suidas suidas say that Abraham by the observation of the creature in his study of astronomy lift up his mind above the star and by the glory and order of they learn the knowledge of GOD never cease that divine search till GOD appear to he which opinion may reconcile both the former that first he be and after cease to be a idolater before God appear in vision to he he allege philo for his author that at fourteen year Abraham reprove Thara for seduce man unto idolatry move by his private lucre with image and see the heaven sometime clear sometime cloudy he gather that that can not be god. the like he conclude of the sun and moon by their eclipse for his father have teach he astronomy at last GOD appear and bid he leave his country whereupon he take his father image who as before be say be a image-maker and partly break partly burn they and then depart suidas further think he the first inventor of letter of the Hebrew tongue and of the interpretation of dream which I leave to the author credit but for the fault of Abraham before his call and other blemish after in he and the rest of the patriarch what m m etc. Mas. in Ios. 24. do they else but in abound of man sin set out the superintend grace of GOD and be profitable as learned Morton n n mort. ap. p. 1. lib. 1. cap. 30 in his answer of this cavil have out of one of their own o o sixtus senes Bibl. 7. c. 8. observe against they what he have observe out of Augustine to these four purpose faith instruction fear and hope the faith of the history which flatter or conceal the fault of none instruction to virtue by see other fault tax fear for what shall shrub do if cedar fall and hope that we imitate their repentance by see their pardon but to return to our history many of the ethnic history mention he Berosus commend he for his justice and skill in astronomy nic. Damascenus say that he reign at Damascus and that in his time his house continue in Damascus and be still call by his name hecataeus write a book of he and Alexander Polyhistor tell that he be bear in the ten generation after the flood in Camarine or Urien a city of Babylon josephus p p antiq. l. 1. c. 8. add that when famine drive he into Egypt q q gen. 12. he dispute with the priest and most learned egyptian in question of divinity and in their divide sect have confute one by another he communicate to they the truth both in this and in arithmetic and astronomy whereof before the egyptian be ignorant Abram say master Broughton in his consent be bear sixty year late than the common account as appear r r see the chronology chap. 11. by computation of terah age who die at two hundred and five year and after his death s s gen. 12.4 Abram go from Charan into Canaan the threescore and fifteen year of his own life and therefore be bear in the hundred and thirty and not in the 70 year of his father in the three hundred fifty and two year after the flood whereas the common opinion reckon the two hundred ninety and two to Abram GOD have give commandment say go from thy country and from thy kindred and from thy father house into the land which I shall show thou and I will make of thou a great nation etc. his history be full relate by Moses and his progeny also whereof Ishmael his son by Agar and other his son which he have by Ketura his second wife he send to inhabit the east country Arabia in his life time but Isaac be make his heir both temporal and spiritual to who jacob succeed in the promise blessing who with his son and family go down into Egypt where his posterity multiply exceed and be call sometime hebrew of their ancient pedigree sometime israelite of the name Israel give to jacob by the angel gen. 32.28 their whole history so large and plain in holy writ record I fear to make t t martial i by evil recite those fountain be more open to all then that any shall need we or other brook mix with some miry earth at least in the passage and my intent be to be large in relation of those thing which be not in the scripture only touch those thing brief for order sake their religion mean while be the best among the best though stain in some as Rachel which stale her father Laban idol and jacob be force to reform his family in this respect and after in Egypt they be corrupt with the egyptian superstition as u u Ezec. 20.8 and 23.3 Ezechiel protest against they the manner of divine worship be not so straight limit as afterward to person and place by revelation and tradition they receive the religious worship wherein they instruct their posterity until that in their extreme thraldom GOD send Moses and Aaron to deliver they under who conduct they pass through the sea and wilderness to the brink of jordan receive in the 10 10 it seem in the wilderness before the law give they have some set place for the solemn worship as Betram observe c. 4. pol. jud. ex. 16. and ex. 18. and Moses at the first be king and priest have the first bear as inferiour priest under he way that law which as a tutor or schoolmaster be in that their nonage to train they up until that full and ripe age when y y 4.4 GOD send his son make of a woman make under the law that he may redeem they that be under the law that we may receive the adoption of son @. 2 of the law of Moses the twelve tribe and of proselyte of this law although Moses have give we a absolute relation in scripture whereof he be the first penman of that at lest which remain unto we yet if we shall out of he bring they into their order and rank they under their several head as Sigonius a a car. sigon Rep Hebr. Betramus de pol. jud. etc. and other have do it shall not be I think over-tedious to the reader the law be divide usual into the b b etc. jun. de pol. Mos. moral ceremonial and judicial as part of the same the first deliver on the mount Sinai by the dreadful voice of the almighty God and by the finger of God write after in table of stone call ten word summary abridge into two commandment by the lawgiver himself c c mat. 22.38 the first and great commandment enjoin the love of GOD the second of our neighbour that God who himself be charity impose nothing but the lovely yoke of love and charity unto his servant this law be eternal write first in the heart of our first parent which be deface it be write again in the stony table of the law where it be but a kill letter till grace and truth by JESUS CHRIST indict and indent it in the fleshy table of the gospel as d d joh. 13.34 Christ new commandment write it renew heart and shall for ever be then grave in those spiritual table when we that here be e e 1. cor. 15.44 natural man shall rise again spiritual man and shall be the law of that holy city the new jerusalem this be then perfect when f f 1. cor. 13. faith and hope and this world shall be finish the other part ceremonial and judicial be for the particular proper unto that nation the one respect the manner of divine service the other of civil government not give as the other immediate to the israelite by GOD himself but communicate in the mount to Moses that he may acquaint the people withal in the death of Christ these die and have their consumption with his the judicial remain ever since dead the ceremony deadly only they be as it be for their more honourable funeral after that their death detain some time above ground and those ceremony which before Christ be necessary in the time of the apostle till the jewish church may be instruct become indifferent but since mere unlawful neither can it now but be sacrilegious to violate the sepulcher of the dead this nation be divide as be say already into tribe according to the number of Jacob son among who levi have no portion but the lord be their portion they serve at the altar and live of the altar but eight and forty city with their suburb assign for their habitation among other tribe that be so disperse they may disperse also and preach the law to the rest and be reckon g g judg. 17 7. to that tribe with which they dwell and whereas other may not marry h h some say that only heir be tie by that law as though the death of diverse near may not make room for other further of to inherit for fear of alienation of their inheritance into another tribe this of levi either have or take liberty herein as judg. 19 and 2. chron. 22. joiada marry the king sister and thus Elizabeth wife of Zachary the priest may be cousin to Marie the mother of our lord the number of twelve remain yet entire in reckon of these tribe because joseph have a double portion and his son Ephraim and Manasses make two tribe neither be they alone reckon israelite that natural descend from some one of these twelve son of Israel but such also of other nation as embrace their ceremony and religion be for distinction sake call proselyte the Hebrew i i ar. Montan. in matth. 23. word which be interpret a proselyte signify extract or draw forth because they esteem such draw forth of hell who yet they make the child of hell more than themselves in burden their conscience not only with those ceremony whereunto the law and their tradition tie they but with diverse other also the name proselyte as Drusius affirm k k Drus 3. sect lib. 2. be either take large for any stranger or strict for a convert to their religion a proselyte be make with observation of three thing circumcision baptism or wash and oblation the first be a sign of the covenant in which they be receive the second as a badge of their cleanness for all the gentile be unclean the three for the atonement with god. this be while the temple stand and now be not in force but whether baptism be still use I know not he ought to be circumcise in the presence of three and if by nature l l p. ricius de caelesti agric. l. 3. and 117. or accident he be before circumcise and want that foreskin yet do they cut he there and make he bleed notwithstanding and when his wound be whole then before three witness be he baptize in which ceremony they cover the whole body with water this manner of baptise they use also in reconcile and receive penitent which have give scandal by notorious offence in token of repentance and newness of life have first before this wash testify their humiliation by fast and prayer of this wash they be so scrupulous that m m clem. alex. storm l. 4. Clemens alexandrinus testify they be often wash in their bed a woman proselyte be admit by baptism only and the offering of two turtle or two pigeon Serarius say baptism and circumcision be still require the like be write by p. ricius and n n Munster in l. precept Mos. expos. rab. in Euangel. matth. hebr. Annot. cap. 22. Munster who add that when any desire to become a proselyte they propound to he the hard thing of the law with the promise of future happiness as of the sabbath not eat fat etc. with some penance that he shall not after say have I wist and they will seem to be willing by these mean to drive they from their religion as be corrupt by such new comer but Christ affirm otherwise @. 3 of the Hebrew polity and civil government the government of this people be as o o bet. de Pol. judg. c. 5. exod. 18. Betramus think before iethro advice have bring in those governor of thousand hundred fifty and ten under seventy elder according to the number of person which descend with p p num. 11.16 jacob into Egypt and that the seventy assign after to Moses for assistant in the government be continue in their former office with further ratification and increase of gift and not new institute yea this number he say govern in Egypt howsoever pharaoh tyranny do afterward much eclipse their authority and be by Moses and Aaron assemble together Exod. 4.29 so that the thirteen tribe consist of several family according to the number of the chief head thereof mention by q q num. 3. and 26. Moses to which the thirteen prince of the thirteen tribe be annex make up the number his reason let such as will learn of himself the government in that time of Moses be mix the monarchy be in Moses but qualify with a aristrocraty in these seventy and the other officer before mention a democraty also appear in the assembly so often mention in light matter the chiliarch centurion quinquagenarij and decurion judge in more weighty the seventy thus it continue in ioshua time till they have conquer and inhabit city and then each city have their senate or council of the chiliarch and other officer beforenamed proportionable to the greatness thereof r r Ios. antiq. l. 4. cap. 8. josephus number seven elder and two levite in every city which seem more to agree with his time then this former even in Bethlehem the least of the thousand of juda boaz s s ruth 4.2 1. chron. 23.4 and 26.29 2. chron. 19.8 assemble ten elder about the matter of ruth it seem that they have levite assist in the judgement and tribunal as man learn in the law and so we read of the time of David and jehoshaphat but I have rather send my reader for these thing to the scripture and to the labour of Betramus and Sigonius from all which it be also apparent that the state be after Moses and joshua manage by judge of diverse tribe not by election nor inheritance succeed in that office but by appointment of God till they desire a king whereas before God be their king and by his law partly partly by oracle rule the state be as some think a aristocraty there be also in the time of these judge prince of each tribe and the head of family there be also a government in each city by the elder or senate exercise in the gate thereof as before be observe they have according their counsel or assembly either of the whole nation or of a whole tribe or of some one city the kingdom of Israel after it be divide from the house of David continue the like form of government as be most probable after the captivity it appear by the history of Hezra and Nehemiah that the chief sway be under the lieutenant or deputy of the persian king according to commission from he other office happy receive some alteration in regard of their number and estate weak and less than in those former time of prosperity so that what josephus have write of seven elder in each city and those thing which in the Talmud be write of their polity have now first as some t t Betram c. 13. think their beginning concern this because it be not so common let i have leave for a large discourse out of the talmudical Sanhedrin which thus record u u Sanhedrin lib. tal. jud. vid. Paul ric. de Tulmud and Galat. arc. l. 4. cap. 5. and 6. to these three court Christ allude mat. 5 22. which place may hereby be understand matter which concern good be determine by three criminal case by a council of three and twenty but such thing as belong to a whole tribe a false prophet or the high priest by the great council at jerusalem of seventy and one the high priest judge and be judge he sit at funeral on a little Seare all the multitude sit on the ground the king judge not and be not judge give testimony against none nor none against he he make war but not without consent of the Sanhedrin he may not have above eighteen wife he ought to have the book of the law write and hang about his neck in civil cause each of the litigant choose a judge or arbitrator 10 10 these arbitrator be not those three judge before mention but other beside and both these thus choose choose a three of this office be uncapable dicer usurer and such as practice dishonest course for gain they also which be of near kindred to the party may neither be judge nor witness their companion or adversary may give testimony but not judgement woman and servant may not be witness Ios. antiq 4.7 nor a thief robber Usuret publican child or keeper of dove ph. Ferdinand this last do not mention but add a gentile fool deaf blind the ancient witness be first examine and that from his own sight or the debtor mouth or else it be nothing thirty day after sentence give the defendant may allege what he can for himself the odd number be the cast voice in criminal cause decide by three and twenty one odd voice absolve but there must be above twelve of the three and twenty to condemn and when sentence be give nothing may be allege further for accusation which for absolution be lawful and he which have speak for the accuse may not after speak against he civil cause be examine in the day and sentence in the night but criminal y y they deal otherwise with Christ either for fear of the people or that thus their tyranny and his justice may appear such a work of darkness to extinguish the light of the world best fit the night only by day and sentence of condemnation may not be pronounce the same day and therefore on holy-day eeven examination be forbid proselyte and bastard may determine civil cause priest and Levite with other israelite be require in criminal these judge sit in a semicircle z z one write the absoluer sentence the other of they which condemn whereto perhaps Christ allude mat. 25.41 say Drus p. 52. have one scribe or register on the right hand and another on the left in the session-house be present beside three order of student which sit on the ground according to their degree out of which the number of the senator be supply when need be so that one of the first order be make senator another be choose out of the second order into his place and out of the three in the room of the second and out of the people into that three order the witness must testify only from their own sight and that exact what a a they use also other question and circumstance which I for brevity have omit seven year of the jubilee what year of that seven what month what day of the month and week and in what hour and place he see it for to save or lose a Israelite be asmuch as to preserve or destroy the frame of the world if one witness be ignorant of any of those circumstance or contradict another his testimony be vain none of the student which sit by may be suffer to accuse if they can say any thing in defence of the party they may if they can find sufficient to absolve he that day the senator or judge scan that matter serious two or three together all night use a spare diet if twelve condemn and the rest clear he they add to the number of judge till they make up seventy and one to make further search when sentence be pronounce the condemn person be carry away and bring again four or five time to see whether he or any other can say any thing for his purgation and if nothing be allege sufficient to reverse the sentence he be lead to execution b b ph. ferd. recite eighteen crime to be punish with stone ten with burn six with strangle p. ric. 24. deadly uncleaneness in the law and twenty other by the Talmud ad. Praec. 111. the crier go before he and proclaim the crime and sentence and accuser that if any can then say any thing in his behalf he may speak when he come within ten cubit of the place of execution he be admonish to confess his fault and so he shall have part in the life to come and if he know not the form of confession it be enough for he to say let death be unto i the remission of all my sin be within four cubit he be strip naked all but his privity if it be a woman she be lead forth in her clothes the stone place be build twice the height of a man from whence by one of the witness he be cast down headlong the ground beneath be set with flint and if he die not with the fall another of the witness smite he near the heart with a flint which if it do not finish his death the whole multitude cast stone at he they may not condemn above one in one day to death he which be stone if he be a man be present hang on a gibbet and after take down and bury with other person which have before suffer in like manner when the flesh be there consume his bare bone may be lay in his own or his father sepulchre after this his friend and kinsman go to the judge and witness and salute they acknowledge the justice of their fact beside this punishment of stone c c he which be stone for blasphemy be hang till sun set and then his gibbet and he bury together the stone which they use in his death be also bury likewise the sword which they use in behead and the linen cloth use in strangle be bury Drus l. 4. p. 139. Hierom speak of a punishment use among they to drown they with a stone about their neck in math. 18. they punish with the fire sword or strangle the manner of burn be to put the condemn person in dung up to the armhole and one executioner on one side and another on the other grane he with a linen cloth about his neck pull the same till they force he to gape and then a bar or rod of burn metal be thrust down into his body the sword be use in behead strangle be do with a course piece of linen pull close about his neck till he be dead it will be too long to show what fault be appropriate to each of these kind of execution if a man have deserve two of they he be to be punish with the most severe in some case of homicide the guilty person be put in a little-ease prison where he be force always to stand and be feed only with barley till his belly rot and his bowel fall out any one may present slay he which have steal any of the holy vessel or blaspheme the name jehova the priest which exercise his function while he be pollute be not bring to judgement but other priest choose to that purpose lead he out of the holy place and knock out his brain from the Sanhedrin be no appeal they be also call Mehokekim that be scribe or lawgiver because whatsoever they deliver or write be receive for a Law their college say Galatinus d d p. galat. de arcanis lib. 4. cap. 5. and 6. Scalig. in ep. Casaub say that Galatinus his work be a compendium of two huge volume of Raimund Sebon a dominican call yet extant in collegeo fuxensi Tolosano who from their fail prove that the Messiah be come represent that sceptre by the holy ghost in jacob promise to juda and therefore not only under the king and judge do exercise judgement but also when there be no king or judge in Israel of their quality it be thus write they appoint none e e they be sau to go into Egypt to learn sorcery to know they that they may beware of they say R. johanan but man of wisdom stature and of goodly presence and of old age and cunning in exorcism and understand the seventy tongue that they may not need interpreter their stature and comeliness rabbi Selomoh say be require to acquire they reverence and skill in enchantment to convince such wizard there be require the whole number of seventy and one in determine the go to war in add to a city or the revenue of the temple or in convent the ordinary judge of the tribe to constitute one of this number they use imposition of hand r. judas say of five a wolf lion bear leopard and serpent be to be slay by the three and tgo e. the great college call Sanhedre ghedola consist of seventy and one the less of three and twenty that odd number above seventy be to supply the room of Moses which be over those first seventy hereby Galatinus gather that in the council that condemn Christ there be the whole number of seventy and one which be true if Herod have not before disannul that society the great Sanhedrin ordain the less for those seventy ordain all the session of judge which in other city and place rule the people and to this court of the seventy in jerusalem they be all subject the place where they sit be call gazith that be carve whereof this court have the name as the star-chamber with we other court or house of judgement they have diverse of the three and twenty one f f three court of judge in jerusalem of they sit in the gate of the mountain of the temple another in the gate of the court other in every city and when there be a controversy it be first bring to that city or town and so to the rest if occasion require in order to that in the gate of the mount after to that in the courtgate and last to the gazith consistory in which they sit from morning till night on sabbath and solemn day they sit on the Wall but when Herod obtain the sceptre he slay Hercanus and his son Antigonus which have be king and priest and also all of the seed royal and burn the genealogy of their king and further to establish his throne in blood he kill the scribe and doctor of the law and cause all the Sanhedrin to be do to death because the Rabbanan they be the word of the Talmud have say according to Deut. 17. from among thy brethren thou shall set a king over thou he slay the Rabbanan or master reserve only Baba the son of Bota who eye he after put out and therefore the Sanhedrin perish for as be say five or at least after r. ismal three be necessary to the ordination by the imposition of hand but there be by Herod permission other judge institute to be under the king like the former college but have no authority of sentence in weighty and criminal cause and therefore they say to Pilate it be not lawful for we to put any man to death g g his vid. Erasti thesis Betramum Sigonium and Drus praet l. 4. pag. 147. where be mention of a priest daughter burn for whoredom with vine-branche some say this power be take away forty year before the city be destroy but Scaliger have 61. when Archelaus be banish scal. Annot. in euseb pag. 182. as some think but other maintain the contrary Betramus take a middle course that the jew may examine and condemn but then be to present the condemn party to the roman magistrate for execution except in the cause of stone wherein they take more liberty as in the act of the apostle by Stephen and Paul example appear after their false sentence pronounce against Christ they be expel from the consistory gazith forty year before the destruction of the temple and afterward by the commandment of the roman be all slay they be expel gazith hold their consistory at Hamith another place in jerusalem but say r. Abdimi with the place they lose their power in criminal judgement which may not be give but in gazith so do the rabbin interpret the word Deut. 17.10 according to the word which they of that place show thou thou shall do they have inferior punishment with the whip for small offence in which the law have stint they at forty stripe and they abate one of that number for fear of exceed as h h 2 cor. 10.24 Paul say he have five time receive forty stripe save one the i i Drus pag. 271. whip be of calf leather as Drusius affirm Betramus say that they have in each city seven judge in money matter whereof three be principal two levite and one of the rest from whence the number be say to be but three they have also ten aedile tasker or judge of the market one of which be of the priestly stock they have in jerusalem a under-provost or k k Betramus de pol. Ind cap. 13.2 mac. 3.4 captain of the temple in other city of their dispersion they have synagogue and magistrate as at Alexandria Antiochia Sardis and other city where they have obtain privilege and immunity that which be speak of their threefold consistory consist either of 3. or 23. or 71. Buxtorfius thus relate that that l l Buxtorf Heb. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) of 3. be appoint in such habitation which have under the number of 120. householder and that it behoove always two of the three to agree in their sentence the other of twenty three be in great town or city and deal in great matter the former in money matter this in criminal and in the gate of the city and be call the less synedrium the great be at jerusalem where the wise be choose to be precedent of the council as successor to so they call he and nasi the wise of the other 70. be adjoin as his colleague call ab-beth-din the father of the consistory these two sit alone somewhat separate from the rest which make a half circle so that these two may see they all the manifold mutation of their state by the babylonian persian macedonian egyptian sytians roman and civil war among themselves do both then change the face of government and have make it now to we obscure and uncertain @. 4 of the jewish excommunication now concern the jewish excommunication Drusius a a quaest Heb. lib. 1. and 2. have observe that the jew have three kind and degree of excommunication Niddui Herem Samatha the first signify a remove the second anathema the three the same which the apostle call maran-atha b b (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Elias in fine thisb penetrate in 248. by the first they be make (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) of which be a example gen. 4.4 excommunicate from the ecclesiastical assembly he which be thus excommunicate be call menudde and the denouncer Menuddim there be four and twenty cause for the which it be inflict if any die therein without repentance they judge he worthy of stone and therefore stone his coffin whereof they c c Drus lib. 4. pag. 136. and 2.3 lib. Musat 121.2 give example in one Eleazar the son of Henoch they may enter the temple when they be excommunicate but that they may enter the synagogue be unlikely thus they write d d Musar 95.1 Solomon make two door in the temple one for mourner and excommunicate the other for the new marry at this if any enter the israelite which come on the sabbath and sit betwixt those door say he who name dwell in this house glad thou with child if any enter at the other door with his upper lip cover they know that he be a mourner and say he which dwell in this house rejoice and comfort thou if his lip be not cover they know that he be menudde excommunicate and say he which dwell in this house put into thy heart to hear the word of thy fellow etc. when the temple be destroy they decree that the bridegroom and mourner shall enter the synagogue and the man which see they rejoice with the one and sit on the ground with the other if they do not amend they be excommunicate with a great curse or anathema and if they persist obstinate they do samatize they the word anathema be sometime take general but here for a particular kind maran-atha signify the lord come and so do sem-atha for by sem and more emphatical hassem they use to signify the name mean that and ineffable name of God now common pronounce e e Hova Drus Preterit. n t. in fine and gentilium etc. and jehovah it may also be compound of Sama after the Chaldee form or of Sam and mitha which signify there be death some author ascribe this to the institution of Henoch which they gather out of judg. 14. chap. 3 of the religious place of the israelite their tabernacle temple synagogue in the discovery of their ancient religion it seem fit to discourse first of place second of time three of rite four of person consecrate to religion and first of the first neither be the first man a a Hospinian templis cap. 1. nor first hebrew very religious in this point of dedicate place to religion as appear in history both holy and profane and if for some vision make unto they in some place they do for a time hallow the same with altar and sacrifice yet neither be they always or only thus esteem but he who be the earth and all that therein be do by his law appoint as it be a place of his residence among these who he have choose for his own people and command they to erect a tabernacle in the wilderness fit that their peregrination afterward Solomon build he a house in jerusalem which therefore be call the holy city and the city of the great king the tabernacle a movable temple that may be take asunder and join together again be by God commandment erect in the wilderness in the same manner and of the same matter which God have both command and show to Moses in the mount the matter and form whereof with all that thereunto appertain the ark the candlestick the altar etc. in the book of exodus be lively declare it be after as we read in the book of b b Iosh. 3.10.15 joshua with great solemnity carry miraculous through jordan by the levite depute to that service and after their conquest of the country c c Iosh. 18.1 place in Shilo a city of Ephraim there do joshua divide the land to her new conqueror there be their solemn assembly for state and religion in the time of Heli they remove the ark from the tabernacle into the army which they have gather against the Philistine of who the ark be take the tabernacle in the time of Saul be carry to nob and in the time of David to Gibeon where Solomon offer a thousand burn offering the Philistine force by divine judgement send back the ark receive by the bethsamite curious to their cost it be after place in kiriathiarim in the house of Aminadab next of Obed-Edom and then by David in the place which he have fit for the same in jerusalem whence it be remove into the temple which Solomon have build where it be till the time of the deportation in which time d d 2. mac. 2.5 it be say the author of the second book of the maccabee hiddne by jeremia the prophet but that author be behold to the council of Trent for his credit the jew themselves in that point not believe he e e r. Samuel in lib. Sanhedrim Higrosol cap. Elluben haggol pet. Galatin l. 4. Genebrard in chron. who affirm that the second temple come short of the former by the want of the fire from heaven of the ark of the and Thummim of the succession of prophet and the glory of God between the cherubim the temple be build on mount moriah by Solomon according to the f f 1. Chron 28.11.12 pattern which he have receive of David to which work he have gather a great mass of wealth then easy we shall read of in the persian greek roman or any other Christian turkish or heathen empire g g 1. Chro. 22.14 namely one hundred thousand talent of gold ten hundred thousand talent of silver and afterward three thousand talent of gold and seven thousand talent of silver to which be add by the offering of the prince ten thousand talent of silver and more than five thousand talent of gold beside jewel and brass and iron without weight with cedar and stone without number the gold amount after the common computation of the common talon at six thousand crown to six hundred forty eight million of crown and upward the silver to about the same sum but that which by we be undervalue account to the talon but six thousand crown as some do master Brerewood in his learned work raise to a high sum estimate the talon at four thousand five hundred pound so that the hundred thousand talent of gold which David have provide for that work amount to four hundred and fifty million of our pound and his million of silver talent each of which be three hundred seventy five pound to three hundred seventy five million beside thirteen million and five hundred thousand pound in gold and two million six hundred twenty five thousand pound in silver afterward by David offer to the same purpose and by his prince twenty two million five hundred thousand seven thousand and five hundred pound in gold and three million seven hundred and fifty thousand pound in silver * * the sum of all be eight hundred sixty and seven million three hundred eighty two thousand five hundred pound that I speak not all other provision of jewel metal and timber and the rest now all that Cyrus get by the * * plin. l. 33. c. 3. 1. chron. 22.14 conquest of a Asia be value but at one hundred twenty five million if we sum his five hundred thousand talent after the egyptian account which be a great deal more than Alexander find in the persian treasury so much renown both at Susis and Persopolis which as Strabo have number be but thirty two million and seven hundred and fifty thousand pound that sum of David I confess have often trouble i nor can I ever find satisfaction in that doubt but in my opinion master brerewood conjecture be probable that the Hebrew word in that place do not signify a talon or that the word talent do not always signify the same sum in scripture even as among other nation it also vary and sometime be use for a small sum as he show out of Homer Pollux and other howsoever therefore I will not so vilify this talon here as to esteem it with some * * Eupolem ap. Euseb. bud. ass but a shekel yet I will take it as the notation of the word may infer but for some massy piece of metal this beautiful frame I shall deform with my description if after a double narration of all the part form and content thereof in the history of the bible I shall recite the particular this temple fleece by some repair by other continue in variety of state till the sack and ruin of it together with the city by Nebuchodonosor and after their reture by the edict of Cyrus and other the persian king it be rebuild but far inferior in glory in the space as the jew say h h John 2.20 unto Christ of six and forty year after other it be long in hand by reason of impediment from their cavil and malicious neighbour but this error if we understand they of the building of Zorobabel proceed from the jewish ignorance of the persian i i with Drus prag 150. Seder Olam Rabath and s.o. Zuta reckon otherwise with a great absurdity ascribe to Cyrus three year to Assuerus who they think succeed fourteen and then Darius etc chronology which know no other persian Darius but one attribute to Cyrus one and thirty year to Cambyses nine to the magi seven month and in the six year of Darius which follow as they account be the temple finish all which amount to six and forty they confound Darius nothus to who time the most and best of our modern chronographer Scaliger junius Caluisius Lively and other refer this rebuild of the temple with that former Darius the son of Histaspes and from that second year of Darius nothus wherein the edict be make for the temple do k k scalig em. temp ed. ult. in Prolegom and lib. 6. Scaliger begin the reckon of daniel seventy week and a half as he interpret account from thence to the destruction of this temple four hundred fourscore and thirteen year and a half this second temple have receive access of magnificence in succession of time be spoil and pollute under Antiochus who dedicate the same to jupiter olympius but be free and dedicate anew by Maccabaeus it recover great part of the former beauty till as l l jash antiq. lib. 12. josipp bell jud. josephus say and his abbreviator josippus it be pull down by Herod and build anew herein both that allegation of the jew of six and forty year be against this assertion of josephus and the history also of m m egesip lib. 1. hegesippus who report that he only compass the circuit about the temple with a wall and beautify the same with costly building erect from the foundation the porch about the sanctuary and fortify it with the castle Antonia but some account this hegesippus a counterfeit chrusostom n n chrysost in joan. hom. 22. more probable understand those word of the jew forty and six year be this temple a building of the herodian temple and herein o o Hospinian temp. cap. 3. Caesar Baronius tom. 1. annal. an. 31. scal. e. t. lib. 6. Scaliger Hospinian and the great cardinal Baronius follow he account exclusive from the eighteen year of Herod reign which Funccius reckon an. m. 3947. to the year 3992. in which John baptize and Christ utter these word in all which they conjecture that some what be still a do about the new building thereof although the principal part thereof be perform and finish by Herod in eight year this they gather by josephus his own testimony that the building continue till the time of Nero and in another place where he affirm that the east porch which Luke call p p act. 5.12 Salomon porch be still remain of the ancient building in the day of nero. for thus he say in the last book of his antiquity speak of the time of Albinus fourscore and three year after Herod begin this work as Scaliger reckon now the building of the temple be finish the people therefore see eighteen hundred workman which have before be wont to live by that building idle and unwilling that the money shall be lay up lest it may become a prey to the roman careful also to provide for the workman persuade the q q Agrippa king to re-edify the east porch which close up the outside of the temple hang over a deep and narrow valley bear up by a wall of four hundred cubit height and the length of every stone be twenty cubit the thickness six the work of king Solomon which first build the temple but the king to who Claudius Caesar have commit the building of the temple see that it require much time great expense etc. refuse thus it be apparent that all the temple be not demolish till the final destruction thereof under Titus neither do the jew in the Talmud speak of any three temple nor can the prophecy of r r hag. 2.10 Haggeus be fulfil that the glory of the second temple shall exceed the glory of the former if Christ of who come it be interpret have not by his presence preach and miracle not only supply the defect before mention but make it surmount the other in effect of majesty and glory and the zeal unto this testimony not the mean which the christian verity s s morn Christ Relig. urge against the jewish incredulity and apostasy which be necessary demonstrate and evince while yet they continue their vain hope of a Messiah so many age after the desolation of that temple whereof Aggee prophesy have cause i to use so many word in this matter but to satisfy the fancy of great man their great work be common make great for howsoever it be very great in itself that Herod shall have eight year together many workman at work which josephus number for some part of the time ten thousand and a thousand priest yet sustain no doubt some intermission after his time either whole or in part it can not be so great as to have accomplish it whole from the foundation wherein Solomon spend seven year and beside what any of the natural israelite perform in this work he employ a hundred three and fifty thousand and six hundred workman of the stranger or foreigner find in the country and whereas the second temple be but half the height of the former perhaps it be true that according to josephus he perfect it to that height of a hundred and twenty cubit whereof twenty cubit sink down in the settle of the foundation if any yet will rather think this temple the work of Herod than Zorobabel as a thing which josephus by his own eye may observe Scaliger do nevertheless salve that prophecy of Aggee by distinction of the building and of the t t (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) continual sacrifice say that if it have be ten time re-edify yet the continual sacrifice continue cause that there be no interruption and that it shall still be call but one temple it be build by Herod of white stone five and twenty cubit long eight thick and twelve broad he that will further read the particular let he have recourse to josephus in his fifteen book of antiquity this temple be burn by Titus in the sack of the city the same day that before it have be fire by the chaldaean adrian the emperor u u Dion Eicaeus in Adriano do after destroy the relic thereof that a stone be not leave upon a stone and there in the same place dedicate another temple to jupiter that former be overwhelm with earth julian give leave to the jew to re-edify the temple in despite of christian religion and contribute frank thereto but ammianus Marcell 10 10 Amm. marcellinus lib. 23. a heathen writer witness that fire issue out of the earth y y and burn both work and workman when as a earthquake which have before say z z Sozomen lib. 5 Zozomen kill a great many in the very attempt of this work can not deter they from proceed in their purpose and cross miraculous fall on the garment of many do both teach they to forsake their Judaism and to become christian chrusostom a a Chrys. hom. 3. mention this and say that under Adrian the jew seek to recover their liberty and lose their country under Constantine they attempt the like who therefore cut off their ear and brand their body for rebel as the elder of you say he to his auditor do know and in our day about twenty year since julian the emperor be at great expense appoint officer send for workman from all place think to frustrate Christ prophecy concern the temple and to bring the jew to idolatry but so soon as they have attempt this business and bare the foundation have draw forth the earth and be now ready to begin their building a fire burst forth from the foundation and burn many which cause they to cease and if you now go to jerusalem you may see the foundation naked hereof we all be witness neither do this happen under christian emperor lest any shall impute it to the christian but under a ethnic when Christianity be persecute thus much in effect chrusostom Gregory Nazianzen b b greg. Naz. orat. 1. in julian also testify the same affirm that the earth as it be take a vomit from the divine hand spew out the stone which yet till this day have continue therein and disperse they to the great damage of the neighbour-building other holy place they have which the scripture mention as high place which be high hill or other open and lofty place shade for the most part with tree the prophet enuey against they and c c Deut. 12.3 they be command to be destroy together with the grove some yet be permit either by extraordinary command for a time as to Gedeon d d judg. 6.24 and to Manoah e e judg. 13.19 or because of the tabernacle at Gibeon or of the ark at jerusalem the not reform this toleration of high place be reckon as a eclipse of jehosaphat and asas glory which Ezekiah and josiah quite remove and pollute these high and open place it seem be consecrate as fit to the celestial body to which and to Baal who be interpret the sun they use for the most part on they to sacrifice they have also their house and temple for Baal in Israel and juda and dan and bethel be by ieroboam dedicate to his egyptian idolatry and gilgal be a place of request in this kind Solomon also build temple or house for his idolatrous wife and to reckon every particular in this kind be a work endless in the 2. reg. 17. and 23. and other place enough be of they record two other temple be erect of some reputation one by Sanballat at Samaria on mount garizin by licence obtain of Alexander the great who part he follow rebel against Darius his true lord the occasion be because Manasses brother of jaddi the high priest have marry contrary to God law Nicaso f f Ios. ant. l. 11. daughter of Sanballat and be force either to leave his priestly function or heathenish bed whereupon Sanballat have obtain licence to build that temple aforesaid constitute he the high priest thereof many other priest for the like fault resort thither to he but of these samaritan we shall have fit occasion to say more when we come to handle their sect Ptolemaeus philometor g g Ios. ant. l. 13.6 grant licence to Onias the son of the high-priest Onias who Antiochus have slay who for the same cause have here shroud himself to build a temple indueed hereunto by a false interpretation of the prophecy of Esay at leontopolis in the shire as I may term it or Nomus of heliopolis have priest and levite minister therein Esay 19.19 and other thing answer in some sort to that of jerusalem when the temple of jerusalem be burn by Titus this temple be shut up also by Lupus the deputy three hundred and thirty year after it have be build and after by his successor Paulinus utter despoil both of the wealth and the religion the city be call of Onias Onion h h Ios. l. 7. c. 30. bel. jud. it have a tower and a altar like that of jerusalem but in stead of a candlestick a lamp of gold hang on a chain of gold enrich by the king with large revenue synagogue i i call also Proseuchae so Iwenal in a oratory the jew have many both in jerusalem where be say to have be four hundred and fourscore and all city of judea and among the gentile where the jew be disperse when they first begin to be build be uncertain Cornelius Betramus k k cor. bet. de Pol. jud. c. 16. and 18. think that the eight and forty city of the levite have their fit place for assembly whence synagogue have beginning in these synagogue the be in place of levite and prophet sometime diverse in the same synagogue as sosthenes and crispus in that of Corinth which on festival day do perform the public pryer and read the law and the prophet expound the same themselves or authorise other hereunto so that they which first be call prophet be afterward scribe and lawyer and in the synagogue they have authority also as it seem of jurisdiction in punish offender the city of the levite be as nursery of learning and university for the study of divinity and in the reformation of religion by Elias and elisha 2. reg. 6.1 the school of the prophet be as college and the son of the prophet student of divinity which have a rector over they as may seem by 2. King 6. and other place where also their gesture in hear their lecture appear to be sit and therefore their school or academy be call session in their synagogue also they keep both their civil and ecclesiastical court the synagogue of foreigner * * act. 6.9 at jerusalem be also college of student l l car. sig. l. 2. c. 8. Sigonius conjecture that their babylonian exile minister occasion to they to help themselves with these house of prayer and instruction the word synagogue m m Erastus excommunicate Thesis be take both for the assembly whether in this place or out of it and for the place itself have a civil as well as a religious use and these synagogue they have in the place of their dispersion unto this day the order they observe in their synagogue be this they dispute and preach sit the * * Ambros in 1. cor. 14. elder sit in chair which be set in order of which Christ say they love the chief seat in synagogue those of mean sort sit in seat and the mean of all on the floor upon mat and not only one do dispute or interpret but other in order not of the elder alone but of the inferior rank also if any thing be reveal to they which tradition of they saint Paul say he apply to the christian assembly of those time they use to pray in their synagogue stand n n vid. Drus pag. 19 as do also the primitive christian beside these temple and house consecrate to God ambition the ape of devotion found some of other nature Herod the great erect a sumptuous temple and city in the honour of Caesar which sometime have be call stratonis turris and after Caesarea the temple of Caesar be conspicuous to they which sail far off in the sea and therein be two statue one of Rome the other of Caesar the sumptuousness of Herod ambition in this city temple theatre and amphitheatre etc. josephus ample describe o o ant. l. 15 13 he build another temple at panium the fountain of jordan in honour of Caesar and lest this shall stir up the people heart against he to see he thus devout profane and profane devout he remit to they the three part of the tribute he consecrate game after the like heathenish solemnity in honour of Caesar to be celebrate every five year at Caesarea he build also the pythian temple at Rhodes of his own cost he give yearly revenue to the olympyian game for maintenance of the sacrifice and solemnity thereof he rob his own to enrich or rather vain to lavish out on other he spare not the sepulcher of the dead for the sepulchre of David have lend before to Hyrcanus three thousand talentt of silver which fill he with hope of the like spoil and enter it with his choice friend he find no money but precious clothes and while he in a covetous curiosity search further he lose two of his company by flame as fame go break out upon they hereupon he leave the place and in recompense in the entry of the sepulchre build a monument of white marble he build also p p Ios. de bell. jud. l. 1. c. 16. sebaste in the region of Samaria wherein he erect a temple and dedicate a court of three furlong and a half of ground before it to caesar thus Caesar be make a god by he who will not allow Christ a place among man but that he may kill he spare not the infant of Bethleem no not his own son amongst the rest as this his god jest of he q q macrob. Saturn l. 2. say that he have rather be Herod swine then his son for his jewish devotion prohibit he to deal with swine but not religion not reason not nature can protect those innocent from slaughter chap. 4 of the jewish computation of time and of their festival day the day among the jew be as among we natural and artificial this from sunrising to sun-setting to which be oppose night the time of the sun absence from our hemisphere that comprehend both these call of the greek (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) contain one whole revolution of the sun motion to the same point of the horizon or meridian in twenty four hour this natural a a plin. l. 2. c. 77. fabrit Catena temp a 28. scal. de Emend temp. l. 1. day the babylonian begin at the rise of the sun the athenian at the set the umbrians as the astrologian at noon the egyptian and roman priest at midnight the jew agree in their reckon with the athenian as do the Galli in b b Caesar com. l. 6. Caesar time report Pluto to be the author of their nation and some relic hereof be in our name of time by a seven-night and a fortnight although otherwise we reckon the day between two midnight the most natural computation of this natural day be to follow that order of nature wherein darkness have the priority of time c c Gen. 1.5 and the evening and the morning be make one day or the first day which say d d Hospinian de fest ethnic l. 1.1 Hospinian the italian and bohemian clock do yet observe the day be not divide of the first hebrew before the babylonian captivity into hour but be distinguish by or * * junius in exo. 12. plane watch of which they have four the first begin at evening the second at midnight the three in the morning the four at noon neither be there any Hebrew word signify a hour although some interpret the degree of the dial of ahaz e e esa 38.8 to be hour some as Tremell half hour afterward it be divide into hour twelve in the night and as many in the day not equal as we but long or short according to so many equal portion of the day or night so that with they the first second three four five six seven eight nine ten eleven and twelve hour be answerable with our hour of seven eight nine ten eleven twelve one two three four five and six if we consider they in the equinoctial otherwise they differ from our equal hour more or less according to the unequal lengthen or shorten of the day but so that a easy capacity may conceive the proportion these hour sometime they reduce into four the first contain the first second and three or with we the seven eight and nine hour the second the four five and six or after our reckon ten eleven and twelve of the clock and so forward this be the ecclesiastical computation according to the time of prayer and sacrifice imitate still in the church of Rome in their canonical hour thus be mark reconcile to the other evangelist f f Marc 15.25 and 33. vid. Bez. annot. ib. in relate the time of Christ passion the first call it the three hour when they crucify he or lead he to be crucify whereas John say that it be g g John and 19 about the six hour when Pilate deliver he thus may the parable of the labourer in the vine-yard be understand matth. 20. and other place of scripture the night also be divide into four watch each contain three hour according they have three hour of prayer the three the six the nine as both the jewish and h h act. 2.10 and 3. vid. Drus in act. 3.1 and 10.3 evangelical writer mention the first of which they say Abraham institute the second Isaac it begin when it be half a hour past the six hour and continue till half a hour after the nine at this hour the disciple of the wiseman take their meat which before this prayer taste nothing the three begin when the former leave and continue till the evening and this be observe both for their public and private prayer although it be not likely that the whole time be that way spend especial in private devotion for than their particular calling have be frustrate and cancel by this exercise of the general seven day be a i i europaeis scal. de Emend t. l 1. Antiquiorest 7. horae a etc. lib 7. and causab athen. l. 1. Aristot week whereof the seven be call the sabbath other have no particular name but be call the first day of the week or the first day of or after the sabbath and so of the rest the christian call they k k scal. e t. l. 7. pag. 730. as the first second or three feria for Sunday Monday Tuesday the reason whereof be the keep of Easter week holy for that be make in their calendar the first week of the year and by law be whole free from work and sanctify to holy use therefore the day also of other week receive that name from this first week touch which there be a law of Constantine the great to keep both it and the week before it also (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) without work which for the late be by custom obtain and by a canon l l can. 66. in Trallo enjoy to spend it whole in the church with psalm and hymn and spiritual song yea the ancient christian observe a continual * * amb. ser. 61. 50. etc. vid. Hospin fest Christ festival from easter to Whitsuntide in which they neither kneel nor fast their month as with we and the grecian take their name of the moon and with they also their measure reckon the order of their day according to the age of the moon and by course they contain one thirty day the next twenty nine and therefore be constrain every second or three year to intercale or add as in a Leap-year one month of two and twenty day and in every four year of three and twenty day this they call m m Veadar that be and Adar or Adar double Veadar because it follow the twelve month Adar for the supply of ten day one and twenty hour and two hundred and four scruple which the twelve month of the moon come short of the year of the sun and this they be force to do for the observation of the Passover and their other feast n n hosp fest scal. em. t. l. 1. before their babylonian thraledome four only of these month be know by proper name the first call Ethavim the second bull the seven which after be make the first Abib the eight zif but afterward the rest receive name which have be before distinguish only by order and the former name also be alter that be reckon the first month of the year in which befall the fifteen day of the moon after the equinoctial vernal and their name follow nisan jar Sinan Thamuz Elul Marcheschuan Cisleu Tebeth Schebath Adar thus Hospinian but Scaliger and ar. Montanus in his Daniel or nine book of jewish antiquity say that the ancient year have twelve month as appear by the history of Noah but those month have no proper name but of their order the first second three month etc. those name which after they be know by be chaldean and so Elias in Thesbi they be all chaldean or persian name not mention in any of the prophet before the captivity and they also name but seven but in Thargum Hierosol they be all express in their order the japonite Chinois and indian have no name yet for their month but name they by their order and number the roman also name some of their month by their order other after their emperor as julius and Augustus to which Domitian add Germanicus for September his own name for October Commodus make a edict for the name of August Commodus September Herculeus October November December amazonius the Hebrew year before Moses begin o o Hospinian ar. Montanus in his Daniel and other begin the world in autumn but our english year do as also Scaliger do who in the last edition of em. t. have now alter his opinion and agree with the former suppose the world be create in the equinoctial vernal and of this opinion be r. jehosua Basil Ambrose Jerome Augustine beda Isidorus damascene and other late divine and astronomer who reason Hospinian jabore to confute at the new moon next before the autumnal equinoctial that be suppose by some to be the time wherein the world be first create every plant and tree have the fruit and seed ripe and this reckon of the year in civil affair be observe of the jew unto this day and from hence they begin their jubilee and seven Sabbatical year lest otherwise they shall have lose two year profit not reap the fruit of the old year nor sow in the next their ecclesiastical or festival year begin at the spring as we have say afore by the commandment of GOD at and in remembrance of their departure out of Egypt at the same time Exod. 12. as with we we have a ecclesiastical year movable according to the fall of easter differ from the civil beginning at our lady as with other at Christmas or newyear day p p Ios. scal. de Emend temp. l. 4. Scaliger thus observe concern the jewish year the jew say he use a double reckon of their year one after the course of the moon the other after the tekupha or course of the sun Tekupha * * Tekupha be the four part of a year jonathan paraph. chal. gen. 8. ult. in Tekupha Tisri in tek nisan in tek Tabeth in tek Tamuz ancient be that moment in which the pass year end and the follow begin but the late Jew divide the year of the sun into four equal part each whereof consist of ninety one day seven hour and a half and they divide the say year into twelve equal part each contain day thirty hour ten and thirty minute they begin at the fifteen of April move by the authority of r. Samuel a ancient critic who ascribe the first Tekupha to that month which before they begin in autumn the reason be because at that time Moses lead the israelite out of Egypt the modern jew be so superstitious in the observation of their tekupha that they esteem it danger of life to alter their reckon of they they also attribute to each of they his proper element as to the Tekupha Tamuz the summer solstice the fire and he which shall drink or eat in the moment of that Tekupha they think shall be take with a burn fever Tekupha nisan be on the fifteen of April Tekupha Tamuz on the fifteen of july Tekupha Tisri on the fourteen of October Tekupha Tebeth on the fourteen of January in time past they observe superstitious the beginning of every month think that then the sun enter into that sign which be attribute to that month now they only observe the four tropical sign such be their folly as though now the entrance of Aries be not more than five and thirty day before the Tekupha of Moses but their leaden brain know not what Tekupha be not why nor when it be institute so much Scaliger if the new moon happen afternoon than the month and their New-moon-feast begin the next day and the year likewise which begin at the new-moon they be so scrupulous concern the moon that Clemens alexand. out of another author object the worship thereof unto they they think say * * strom l. 6. he that they alone know GOD not know that they worship angel and archangel and the month and the moon and if the moon appear not they keep not that sabbath which they call the first nor the new-moon nor the unleavened nor the feast nor the great day this fabulous q q scal. prolegom in em. temp. edit ult. author cite by Clemens understand not himself say Scaliger for they still observe the appearance or first sight of the moon not to ordain the solemnity thereby which be do by a certain rule but to sanctify it and therefore as soon as they see the new-moon they say good luck or a good sign be it to we and to all Israel the same also do the Muhamedans observe by the first sabbath he mean the newyear day call a sabbath because it be holiday by the feast Pentecost by the great-day that of tabernacle although in regard of use some day be more holy than other yet have every day appoint r r exod. 29.38 num. 28. levit. 23. sacrifice morning and evening their feast be either weekly of which be the sabbath or monthly every new-moon or yearly of which be the easter or passover Pentecost or Whitsuntide the feast of tabernacle these be chief to which be add the feast of trumpet of expiation and of the great * * the octave at the end of the feast of tabernacle which be say Rambam to accomplish therein those kind of joy which require house and can not be do in booth Moreh neb. lib. 3. cap. 44. on the next day be the feast of the law call also blessing because they read then the last chapter but one of Deuteronomy see nehem. 9 congregation to these we may reckon the seven year sabbath and the year of jubilee these feast GOD have prescribe to they command that in those three principal feast every male as the jew interpret it that be clean and sound and from twenty year of their age to fifty shall appear there where the tabernacle or temple be with their offering as one great parish Deut. 16. hereby to retain a unity in divine worship and a great solemnity with increase of joy and charity be better confirm in that truth which they here see to be the same which at home they have learn and also better strengthen against the error of the heathen and idolatrous feast of devil to these be after add upon occasion by the church of the jew their four feast in memory of their calamity receive from the chaldean their feast of lot of dedication and other as shall follow in their order they begin to celebrate their feast at even so Moses be command s s leu. 23.32 from even to even shall you celebrate your sabbath imitate in the christian even-song on holy even yet the christian sabbath be by some suppose to begin in the morning because Christ do rise at that time as for the cause of feast many they be and great that the time itself shall in the revolution thereof be a place of argument to our dulness this be the * * psal. 118.24 day which the lord have make let we rejoice and be glad in it and what else be a festival day but a witness of time light of truth life of memory mistress of life a token of public thankfulness for great benefit pass a spur to the imitation of our noble ancestry the christian worthy a visible word to the ethnic and ignorant which thus by what we do may learn what we believe a visible heaven to the spiritual man that in festival joy do as it be open the veil and here be turn into a while in the best exercise of grace he taste the first fruit of glory and with his deum and hallelujah begin that bless song of the lamb while time itself put on her festival attire and act the pass admonish the present age teach by example quicken our faith strengthen hope incite charity and in this glimpse and dawn be the daystar to that sun of eternity when time shall be no long but the feast shall last for everlasting these the true cause of festival time chap. v. of the festival day institute by God in the Law as they be enjoin to offer a lamb in the morning and another in the evening every day with other prayer praise and rite so have the sabbath a double honour in that kind and be whole sequester and sanctify to religious duty which howsoever it be ceremonial in regard of that seven day design of the rite therein prescribe of that rigid and strait observation exact of the particular work prohibit and of the deadly penalty annex yet be we to think that the eternal lord who have all time in his hand have before this select some time proper to his service which in the abrogation of ceremony a a see l. 1. c. 4. legal be in moral and christian duty to be observe to the end of the world even as from the begin of the world he have sanctify the seven day to himself and in the moral law give not by Moses to the jew but by GOD himself as to all creoture be the remembrance of that sanctification urge frivolous be their reason who will renew the jewish sabbath among christian tie and tire we in a more than jewish servitude to observe both the last and first day of the week as some have preach and of the aethiopian church be practise neither can I subscribe to those who be so far from pay two that they acknowledge not the debt of one upon divine right but only in ecclesiastical courtesy and in regard of the church mere constitution and have thereupon obtrude on many other day as religious respect or more then on this which yet the apostle entitle in name and practice the lord day with the same spirit whereby they have equal tradition to the holy scripture thus cardinal b b Tolet. Instruct. lib. 4. cap. 24.25 Tolet allow on the lord day journey hunt work buy sell fair fence and other private and public work by he mention and say a man be tie to sanctify the sabbath but not to sanctify it well a new kind of distinction the one be in hear mass and cease from servile work the well-doing it in spiritual contemplation etc. another c c Bellarm. sanct. lib. 3. cap. 10. cardinal be as fast as he be loose affirm that other holy day also bind the conscience even in case void of contempt and scandal as be true more holy than other day and a part of divine worship and not only in respect of order and polity but to return to our jewish sabbath Plutarch thought that the sabbath be derive of (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) which signify to keep Revel-rout as be use in their bacchanal of (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) which be interpret Bacchus or the son of Bacchus as coelius rhodiginus d d Coel. Rhodig lect. antiq. l. 4. c. 15. show out of Amphithaeus and mnaseas who be therefore of opinion that Plutarch think the jew on their sabbath worship Bacchus because they do use on that day to drink somewhat more large a sabbatize too much by too many christian imitate which celebrate the same rather as a day of Bacchus than the lord day e e Apoc. 1.10 Bacchus his priest be call sabbi f f Plutarch sympos lib. 4. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) of this their revel and misrule such wide conjecture we find in other whereas the hebrew call it sabbath of (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) which signify to rest because of their vacation to divine office and not for idleness or worse employment and for this cause all the festival solemnity in the scripture g g Ezek. 20 12. be style with this general title and appellation as time of rest from their wont bodily service likewise their seven year be Sabbatical h h levit. 25.2 because of the rest from the labour of tillage in those feast also which consist of many day solemnity the first and last be sabbath i i levit. 23. in regard of the strictness of those day rest Luke k k luc. 6.1 have a obscure place which have much trouble interpreter with the difficulty thereof (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) our english read it the second sabbath after the first * * Isid. in thom. Catena Isidore say it be so call of the and come together chrusostom think as Sigonius city he it be when the l l car. sigon de rep. Heb. l. 3. c. 13. new-moon fall on the sabbath and make a double festival Sigonius when they keep their passover in the second month * * stella in luc. c. 6. Stella take it for allege josephus his author m m ambr. in luc. Ambrose for the sabbath next after the first day of the easter solemnity n n Hospin fest c. 3 Hospinian for the octave or last day of the same * * Maldonat in matth. 12. Maldonatus for the feast day of Pentecost which be the second of the chief feast but joseph Scaliger o o Scaliger can. Isag. l. 3. say that the second day of the feast be call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) be the sixteen day of the month call and the sabbath which fall betwixt that and Pentecost receive their denomination in order from the same secundo-primum secundo-secundum etc. and hence do Luke call that first sabbath which fall after that (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) or second day of the feast (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) of this we shall have occasion to say more when we come to the samaritan p p infra cap. 9 the name Sabbath be also take for the p p infra cap. 9 whole week q q luc. 18.12 Sabbat. but I listen not to stand on the diverse signification of the word r r Ios. de bell. jud. l. 7. c. 24. Arcas and Raphanaeas plin. l. 31. c. 2. in judaea josephus and Pliny tell of a river in Syria in the kingdom of Agrippa call Sabbaticus which on other day run full and swift on the sabbath rest from his course Petrus Galatinus s s p. galat. de arcan l. 11.9 allege the cease of the sabbatical stream for a argument of the abrogation of the jewish sabbath the jew be superstitious strict in the observation of their sabbath Ptolomey without resistance captivate their city and themselves by this advantage as do Pompey afterward and in the day of Matathias father of judas maccabeus a thousand be murder without resistance till that by he they be better advise which appear by the Pharisee that cavil at the pluck and rub of a few ear of corn by the hungry disciple and at their master for heal on that day though by his word which their superstition the jew that fall into a privy at Maidenbourg an. 1270. on his sabbath and another at Tewksburie 1220. and be the one by the bishop of the place the other by the earl of Gloucester constrain to abide the christian sabbath whence on their own they will not be free testify to the world by a stink penance and the late leave also his stink superstitious soul behind to seal his devotion they add of their own fast that day till noon their sabbath day journey which be say saint Jerome t t in vita josephi by the institution of Barachibas Simeon and hellis rabbin not above two thousand pace * * Drus say two thousand cubit his author be the Chaldee paraphrast jarius Theophil oecumenius give the reason because the ark and tabernacle do so far go before the people see Trem. in syr. act. 1.12 or two mile thus do this holy ordinance which GOD have institute for the refresh of their body the instruction of their soul and as a type of eternal happiness vanish into a smoky superstition among they the sacrifice and accustom rite of the sabbath be mention num. 28 and leu. 23. and 24. where we may read that the daily burnt-offering and meat-offering and drink-offering be double on the sabbath and the showbread renew etc. the sanctification of day and time be a u u hooker l. 5. ecclesiast polit. token of that thankfulness and a part of that public honour which we owe unto GOD he do not only enjoin by way of perpetual homage the sanctification of one day in seven which God immutable law do exact for ever but do require also some other part of time with as strict exaction but for less continuance beside accept that which be leave arbitrary to the church be by it consecrate voluntary unto like religious use of the first of these the sabbath we have speak of the Mosaical feast the New-moon be next to be consider the institution hereof we read Numb. 28. and the solemn sacrifice therein appoint so to glorify GOD the author of time and light which the darken conceit of the heathen ascribe to the planet and body celestial call the month by their name beside their sacrifice they banquet on this day as appear by 10 10 1. sam. 12.5 David and Saul where the day after be festival also either so to spend the surplusage of the former day sumptuous sacrifice or for a further pretext of religion and zeal as martyr y y p. mart. in 1. sam. have note Sigonias z z sigon de rep. heb l. 2. c. 4. make these new-moon day to be that be such wherein they may labour the sacrifice time except but those covetous penny-father seem of another mind a a amos 8.5 when say they will the new-moon be go that we may sell corn and the sabbath that we may sell wheat and Esay 1. the sabbath and New-moon be reckon together their Passeover call of they Pasach so call of the angel pass over the israelite in the common destruction of the egyptian firstborn for Pasach the grecian as some note use of (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) to suffer fit in regard of the body of that shadow Christ himself who b b 1. cor. 5.7 be our Paschal lamb in his suffering sacrifice for we the institution of this feast be set down Exod. 12. as Hospinian have note in the year after the creation of the world 2447. c c Scaliger and Caluisius account 2453. Lydyat 2509. other otherwise after the stoud 791. after the promise make to Abram 430. it be celebrate from the fifteen to the one and twenty day of the month Abib or nisan those two day be more special sanctify with a holy convocation and abstinence from work except the dress of their meat the other be observe with unleavened bread and the fourteen day be the or preparation in the evening of which fourteen day as some man hold opinion after sunset in the twilight other in the four hour or four part of the day as contain three hour space before the go down of the d d Ios. de bell. 7.17 say sun the Paschal lamb be slay about which time the nine hour Christ the true yield up the ghost e e Proleg in e. t. ed. ult. scal. have eat the passover on the night before which be the true time and be then alter by the jew which corruption continue to the destruction of their temple Christ suffer say Scaliger on the three of April the four year complete after his baptism from which nine hour the jew begin their or evening and therefore it be enjoin they f f jun. in ex. 12. to kill the passover in these vesper as also in the even of every feast and sabbath after the evening sacrifice they which do any work say the jewish canon shall never see good sign of a blessing which be the cause that they hasten so much the death of the thief which be crucify with Christ this lamb or kid be choose a male of a year old the ten day of the moon which they keep till the fourteen day tie after their tradition to the foot of some bench or form so to minister occasion to their child of question about it to themselves of preparation and meditation and to espy in this mean while if any default be in the lamb it be first a private sacrifice to be perform in every house after in that place only where the tabernacle or temple be they be disperse by company according to josephus not few than ten sometime twenty in a company with Christ there be thirteen and of these sacrifice and company in time of cestius be number two hundred fifty six thousand and five hundred so that reckon the least number there be ten time so many beside those that by disease or other manifold let be not partaker thereof and in regard of this feast be assemble thither through God just judgement their whole huge multitude be coup or cage together in the wall of this city to destruction under Titus the blood of the lamb they be to receive in a vessel and to sprinkle the same with a bunch of hyssop on the door post and to eat it in the night which be the beginning of the fifteen day roast with fire with sour herb and unleavened bread both the head foot and purtenance gird shod with staff in their hand in haste stand burn whatsoever be leave of the same after the eat the sacramental lamb stand they have other provision which they eat sit g g Lipsius or after their manner of lie at table in remembrance of their liberty as appear by john lean on his breast and judas his sop at Christ supper in the law it be command that they shall eat the passover stand which they only practise in the first celebration in Egypt for so the jew set forth the difference of the Paschall night from other night scal. em. t. l. 6. p. 536. in their twice wash which on other night they do but once in their unleavened in their endive or sour herb and whereas on other night they sit or lie now they lie only in token of their security the wash be therefore necessary lest they shall defile the bed whereon they lie with their dusty foot in which respect the h h Plautus Persa accumbe serte luk. 11. luk. 7. gentile also use to wash their foot the jew their whole body and the Pharise marvel at Christ (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that he be not thus baptize or wash before he sit down some content themselves only with wash of the foot the want of which office Christ object to another of his Pharisaical host but in the Paschall rite a double wash be requisite because of their double supper which in the flourish state of the jew be also use in other their chief solemnity of the Pentecost and tabernacle in the former they eat their sacrifice in the late certain praise be sing and it be call the supper dimissory but this second Paschall supper differ from that in other solemnity wherein they use junket which in this be forbid and instead thereof they have Endine and wild lettuce mingle with vinegar and other thing which now they make as thick as mustard the householder first dip his unleavened sop therein and eat it and then take from under the carpet or cloth another which he break into as many piece as he have communicant in his company every piece be as big as a olive which be give to each of they in order when he eat that sop first he say bless be thou lord our god king of the world which have sanctify we with thy commandment and have give we the precept of unleavened bread and when he have eat he say as he distribute to the rest this be the bread of affliction which our forefather eat in the land of Egypt every one which be hungry come and eat every one which have need come and observe the passover after the destruction of jerusalem they add these word now we be here servant but hereafter we shall be in the land of Israel now we be here servant hereafter in the land of Israel free after this he taste of the cup and deliver to the next and he to the three and so on through the company this be call the cup of thanksgiving or of sing the hymn which he deliver with these word bless art thou o lord our GOD king of the world creator of the fruit of the vine then do they sing a hymn and depart for the canon forbid they to eat or drink any thing after the hymn these be the Paschall rite in the time of CHRIST who also use that reiterate both wash say Scaliger and supper and also the hymn they be in the even of the fourteen day to purge their house of leaven and that throughout the land where the lamb may not be eat all the israelite be enjoin this duty and they which by occasion of journey or uncleanness can not now celebrate the passover be to observe it the next month Numb. 9 the day after or second day of this Paschall feast they be to bring to the priest a gomer of the first-fruit of their corn and a lamb with other duty for a burn offering to the lord before which time they may not eat of the new year fruit which at that time in those country begin to ripen and so to acknowledge GOD the giver thereof i i philo. jud. Mos. l. 3. philo say that each private man which otherwise bring in his sacrifice to the priest sacrifice or slay this sacrifice with his own hand and else where k k in Decalog he affirm the same Eleazarus l l Hospin jud. c. 3. Maldonat in mat. 26. or as other say the synedrium ordain three hundred and fifty year before the birth of Christ that the Passover shall not be solemnize on the second four or six day of the week and therefore when it fall on the six day which we call Friday it be defer to the seven at the time of Christ passion and he with his disciple eat it the night before according to the law of God this Eleazarus ordain that the feast of lot shall not be celebrate on the second four or seven or Pentecost on the three five or seven or that of the tabernacle on the first four and six or the fast of expiation on the first three or six or their newyear day on the first four and six which decree be extant in the book of gamaliel Paul master which they do superstitious to avoid two sabbath in so strict a rest together and carry bough on the sabbath if that feast fall thereon and on other such reasonless reason after this sixteen day of the month or second day of the unleavened bread in which first of all sickle be thrust into the harvest to offer the first fruit thereof unto GOD be number seven entire week and the next day which be the fifty account inclusive be celebrate the feast of Pentecost receive his name of that reckon of fifty and schefuoth that be of week because of this reckon of seven week it be call also the feast of the harvest of the first fruit the m m Exod. 13 16 act. 2.4 rite thereof be prescribe Levit. 23. the institution be in respect of the law then give on mount Sinai and a type of that evangelical law which Christ have ascend up on high do write not in table of stone but in fleshly table of the heart when at the same time he give the holy ghost to his disciple as a remembrance also of the author of their haruest-fruit and of their possession of that land where they have seed-time and harvest which in the wilderness they want as the seven day in the week so the seven month in the year be in a great part festival fit for that purpose as the fruit of the earth be now in the first day of this month be beside the ordinary kalend or festival new-moon n n these new-moon feast or sabbath it seem Horace serm. l. 1. sat. 9 sabbata vintu iudaeis the feast of trumpet in respect of that rite then observe of sound trumpet be their newyear day after the civil account the institution be read Levit. 23. and num. 29. whether as some of the rabbin will have it for isaak deliverance that in remembrance of that ram these Rams-horn trumpet shall be sound or in regard of the war or in respect of that spiritual war-fare which continue our whole life or that this be so festival a month or the begin of their year for civil account and for the sabbatical and jubilee year or for some other cause let the wise reader judge on that ten day of this month be the feast or fast of reconciliation or expiation a day of public penance fast and afflict themselves describe in Levit. 16. throughout the chapter and chap. 23. wherein be lively in that type show the office of jesus Christ the eternal high-priest who have alone wrought our atonement enter into the holy place of heaven and lay our sin on the Scape-goat bear they and satisfy for they in his own person on the cross and by the sprinkle of his blood sanctify we for ever to God his father Paul Heb. 9 do unfold the mystery of this day rite wherein only the high priest alone may enter into the holy-place and himself alone perform the other office of expiation the jew think that this fast and afflict themselves be in respect of their idolatry with the golden calf and therefore it seem that in Theodoret time they do not afflict themselves but sport rather in obscure and profane manner the sacrifice be set down theodoret. qu. 32. in Levit. num. 29.8 9 10 11. the next feast be that of tabernacle in remembrance that howsoever they now dwell in strong city goodly house etc. yet their father live in tent in the wilderness where GOD by a cloud in the day time and fire in the night protect that people it be express leu. 23. num. 29. Deut. 16. it be observe from the fifteen to the one and twenty the first and last of they be as at the passover more solemn festival with abstinence from labour and a general convocation they be the first day to take bough and branch of tree and to make therewith booth and to dwell in booth seven day this be neglect from the time of josuah till the day of Nehemiah o o nehem. 8. when he and ezra solemnize this feast seven day with booth on their housetop and in their court and street with lecture every day out of the law and a solemn assembly on the eight day the hebrew report that they make they bundle of that matter which they carry every day of the seven up and down in the morning before they may eat whereupon it be call the feast of palm or willow the seven day say Paulus Fagius p p fag in cap. leu. 23. they compass the altar with these bough seven time in remembrance of the fall of jericho Andrew Osiander affirm q q and. Osiand Annot. harmon euan. l. 3. c. 36 that they use this carry about bough every day especial the seven in which they observe a kind of procession or litany sing Ana jehova hosanna jehova elicha-na first reckon up a great number of the name of God then of his attribute three of the thing which they wish to be save then of themselves and other thing interlace every particular of these with sing hosanna like their in the popish litany then they altar it in another form pray redeem the vine of thy plant hosanna etc. then in another as thou save the strong in Egypt when thou go out for their deliverance so hosanna etc. then in a long form of prayer with this foot of the song hosanna and last all ring hosanna hosanna and hereupon the late Jew call this feast hosanna as also those bundle of bough and although that the late Jew have now add much the jew of Italy differ from they of Germany yet in Christ time the acclamation of hosanna when he come ride on a ass into jerusalem testify some such observation then among they the sacrifice of every day be design num. 29. the first day thirteen bullock the second twelve and every day one less to the seven in all seventy as the rabbin interpret it according to the number of the seventy language of the nation which shall be subdue to the Messiah and ninety eight lamb in respect of so many curse in the law against the transgress israelite job. 7.37 num. 29.35 the eight day be the feast which they call Haaziph and Azareth that be collection call also the great day of the feast in the two and twenty day of this month Tisri in this they be to contribute to the continual sacrifice and public thanksgiving be make for the stuite of the earth and the first fruit of the fruit be offer ieroboam r r Hospin fest cap. 7. in a irreligious policy remove the feast of tabernacle from the seven month to the eight from Tisri to Marchesuan the seven year be appoint a sabbatical year wherein they be neither to sow nor to reap but to leave that which shall voluntary grow in their field and yard to the poor and second shall not exact debt of their brethren of the same nation but remit it deu. 15. exod. 23. levit. 25. and the observation hereof be express in the time of Nehemiah nehem. 10.31 after seven time seven year which make forty nine they be to reckon jobel or year of jubilee leu. 25. beginning on the day of reconciliation wherein servant be free debt remit possession that have be alienate return the law allow no further sale proclaim with sound of a trumpet of a Rammes-horn and therefore call jobel which signify a ram or Rammes-horn touch this year of jubilee be much controversy the ancient author account it the fifty year Scaliger s s Ios. scal. animad. in euseb pag. 13. refuse their authority herein many modern writer hold the same opinion as t t Hospin temp. and fest jud. Hospinian u u melan. chron. lib. 5. Melanchton Fabritius 10 10 fab. pad Catena temp annul 40. Paduanus etc. y y caluis cap. 23. Caluisius have at large dispute this question against Crentzhemius and Bucholcerus by diverse argument prove that the jubilee be but forty nine year complete and that the fifty year be the first onward of another jubilee or sabbath of year yet be this space reckon by fifty as Ovid call the Olympiad Olympias Aristophanes z z Aristoph in Pluto and Ausonius a a Ausonius de ludis affirm the like and yet the Olympiad be but four year complete and reckon from the five to the five exclusive otherwise they shall have have two Sabbatical year together namely the forty nine be the seven year and the next which be the fifty year as for the late writer they may be deceive by follow the stream and beguile by the popish jubilee which Boniface the eight before call Benedictus and yet neither be good sayer nor doer institute anno. 1300. to be observe every hundred year and Clement the six abridge to the fifty as Auentinus Trithemius Crantzius and other have write whether they be heathenish in imitate the or jewish in follow the legal jubilee certain it be Rome thereby become a rich mart where the b b Apoc. 18.11 merchant of the earth resort from all place of the earth to buy heaven and Babylon c c v. 16. the great city be clothe in fine linen and purple and scarlet and gild with gold and precious stone and pearl with the gain of her ware give in exchange d d v. 13. the soul of man wash from their sin a thing more precious to Christ then his most precious blood but his pretend vicar have learned to effect it the fill of their purse with great ease devout pilgrim from all part visit saint Peter stair whence they go true saint Peter heir e e act. 3.6 silver and gold have I none and yet find their pardon too cheap to be good but to return to our pilgrimage and to observe the observation of the jewish jubilee this feast be partly civil in regard of the poor of the inheritance of the israelitish family special that of the Messiah and of the computation of time as among the greek by olympiad and among the roman by lustra and indiction partly also it be mystical in regard of the gospel of Christ preach liberty and peace to the conscience the acceptable year of the lord and thus much of those feast which GOD himself institute to this nation which how the jew of late time have corrupt and do now superstitious observe institute other also of their own devise shall be handle in due place we be next to speak of those feast which upon occasion they impose upon themselves before the come of CHRIST to which we will add a brief calendar of all their fast and feast chap. 5 of the feast and fast which the jew institute to themselves with a calendar of their feast and fast through the year as they be now observe the prophet Zachary in his seven and eight chapter mention certain fast day which the jew by ecclesiastical injunction observe one in the ten day of the ten month because on that day jerusalem begin to be besiege 2. reg. 24. a second fast be observe on the nine day of the four month in remembrance that then the chaldean enter the city a three fast they hold on the nine day of the five month in respect of the city and temple burn on that day first by Nabuchodonosor second by Titus on the same day which the jew do yet observe with strict penance go barefoot and sit on the ground read some sad history of the bible and the lamentation of Jeremy three time over their four fast they celebrate on the three day of the seven month in remembrance of Godoliah slay by Ishmael jere. 41.42.2 reg. ult. to these be reckon the fast of easter in the thirteen day of Adar their twelve month and on the seventeen day of the four month in the remembrance of the table of the law break by Moses the institution whereof seem to be late see the scripture do not mention it in this month the egyptian keep the feast or fast of their Osiris lament for he which seem to be the same that be mention ezech. 8. where woman be say to mourn for Tamuz who Plutarch call Amuz and from thence derive Jupiter title of Ammon of he be this four month call Tamuz on the a a ester 9.21 fourteen and fifteen day of Adar they keep the feast of Phurim or lot institute in remembrance of that deliverance from Haman by the authority of joachim the high-priest caluis 3477. as Functius relate out of philo an. m. 3463. Antonius Margarita a christen Jew report that on these day the jew read the history of ester and so often as Haman be mention they smite on their seat with their fist and hammer otherwise spend the time of this feast in bacchanal riot and excess they also have the feast of wood-carrying call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) mention by b b joseph jud. li. 1. c. 17. josephus in which the custom be for every one to carry wood to the temple to maintain the fire of the altar the feast of dedication otherwise call the feast of light and the institution thereof be large describe 2. Maccab. 4. in remembrance of the institution of divine worship and sacrifice in the temple which have be by Antiochus pollute and sacred to jupiter olympius all the service appoint by the law be abolish by judas maccabeus the temple and altar and other holy instrument be dedicate the same day three year after their first pollution call therefore the feast of light as I think say c c Ios. ant. 12. c. 2. josephus because so unexpected a light shine forth unto they but Franciscus junius in his annotation upon the syrian translation of the ten of John where this feast be mention allege out of the Tallmud another cause as follow when on the five and twentieth day of Cisleu they enter into the temple they find not pure oil except in one little vessel which contain sufficient for the lamp but one day of which oil they light the lamp in order which last eight day till they press out of the olive clean oil and therefore the wiseman of that time decree that yearly those eight day begin at the five and twentieth of Cisleu shall be day of joy and that every one in the door of their house every evening during those eigh day shall light lamp for declaration of that miracle wherein they must not fast nor lament likewise 1. mac. 13. be ordain festival the three and twenty day of jar for the expiation of the tower of jerusalem by Simon mac. on the last day of the feast of tabernacle they finish the read of the law with much joy and solemnity call it the feast of the joy of the Law the next sabbath begin their read of the first Parasch or section which be also read that day they make a end of the last lest they shall seem weary of it and glad it be end these parasch or section of the law as our lesson in our service be ancient as appear act. 15.21 in number fifty four for twice they put together two short one when Antiochus burn and prohibit the law they read in stead of Moses the prophet and after Antiochus his death they continue both as the first and second lesson with we that of the prophet they call haphtara that be a dismiss because after it the people be dismiss even as the name missa for like cause be give to the christian holy they read Moses not only on the sabbath but also on munday and Thursday which by they that will seem more holy be fast also as luc. 18. appear by the brag of that supercilious Pharise I fast twice in the week Sigonius reckon also the feast of jephta in the end of the year which yet be not like to have continue in succeed age fest jud. vid. phil. Ferdinand and of the fire that we find mention in 2. mac. 1. and the feast of judith for kill Holofernes and on the fourteen day of Adar for the victory against Nicanor Ios. l. 12. their late feast I shall mention and declare their several ceremony when we come to speak of their late time and of the present jewish superstition in the mean time I think it not amiss to set down here out of Scaliger a view or calendar of their month Ios. scal. can. Isag. l. 1. c. 6. TISRI diet 30. with the feast and fast as they be observe therein at this day Tisri die 1. 3. in Mazpa jer. 41.5 20. 7. 10. jejunium Kippurim 15. scenopegia 21. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 22. Scenopegias 23. march 29. march 7. 29. Casleu 25. 28. Casleu 30. 30. Tebeth 8. Tebeth 29. 9 10. 5. 23. sebat 30. 30. Adar 7. 9 Adar 29. 13. 14. Mardochaeus Phurim 1. Aaron 10. nisan 30. 14. die 14. pascha 15. 16. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 21. 23. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 26. 30. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) jiarcavus 7. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 10. jiar 29. Eli pont. max. and 14. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 21. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 23. Simon Gazam 28. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 6. Siwan 30. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 23. 25. rabban Simeon gamaliel rabbi Ishmael r. Hanania 27. Tamuz cavus 17 tabulae legis cessat (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Tamuz 29. 1. 9 ab. 30. 18. Elulcavus 17. 22. Xylophoria Elul 29. as for the sabbath New-moon and day not solemnize with feast or fast I have pass over this calendar as impertinent or needless chap. 7 of the ancient oblation gift and sacrifice of the jew of their tithe and of their priest and person ecclesiastical and religious @. i. of their oblation gift and sacrifice although Moses do handle this matter of their rite and sacrifice and be herein second and interpret by the succeed prophet so full that it may seem a pour of water into the sea to speak needeles or by our discourse to obscure rather than illustrate that which be so large and plain there express yet because of that subject which we have in hand I can altogether be silent at least of the kind and head refer the desirous reader for his more perfect satisfaction in particular to those clear prophetical fountain their rite for time and place we have already describe the next intend part of this jewish relation shall be of their oblation which be either gift or sacrifice their sacrifice be such oblation wherein the thing offer be in whole or part consume in divine worship for the most part by fire or shed of blood these be of eight a a car. sigon de Republ. Heb. l. 4. sort burnt-offering Meat-offering peace-offering sin-offering trespass-offering the offering of the consecration cleanse and expiation b b philo de sacrif philo reduce they to three burn peace and sin-offering according to the three cause of sacrifice the worship of God the obtain of good thing and freedom from evil the burnt-offering be by fire consume the rite and manner hereof be express leviticus 1. the fire be to be perpetual on the altar be that which GOD miraculous send from heaven to consume Abihu sacrifice for neglect which and use other his two son Nadab and Ahsbu be strike by a revenge fire from god. the meat-offering be make of fine flower without honey or leven and with oil and incense on the altar or fry pan or oven or caldron according to the rite prescribe levit 2. partly sacred to the lord by fire the rest to be the priest the peace-offering be with their proper ceremony enjoin Levit. 3. and 7 the fat and kidney be to be burn on the altar the fat and blood be universal forbid they for food the breast and right shoulder be the priest the rest to the sacrificer to be eat the first or at further on the second day or else on the three to be burn with fire the offer for sin of ignorance for the priest prince people or private man be set down Levit. 4 and 6. the sin-offering in case of contempt where the sin be commit against God and man willing with the due manner thereof be express Levit. 6. to these be adjoin prayer and praise with musical voice and instrument cymbal viol harp and trumpet resound for he be good for his mercy endure for ever the six kind of sacrifice be proper to the priest at their consecration record levit 6.20 the seven mention sacrifice be of purification or cleanse as of a woman after childbirth leu. 12. or of a leper 13.14 or for unclean issue of man and woman chap. 15. the eight be the sacrifice of expiation or reconciliation on that festival or fasting-day before speak of Levit. 16. hereunto may we add the light and the daily offering of incense morning and evening Exod. 30. on a golden altar whereunto the priest only have access with such perfume only as be there prescribe the gift which we have reckon a second sort of oblation that be not as the former in whole or in part consume in their offering but preserve whole and sound be give either according to the law or by vow or of free will the law prescribe first fruit and tithe and the personal half shekel the first fruit of man of beast and of the fruit of the earth the law exact Exod. 22.23 and be assign to the priest num. 5. and 18. which of man and unclean beast be to be redeem of other to be sacrifice @. 2 of tithe and their manner of tithe of tithe when we consider the assignment of they to the tribe of levi we must so far acknowledge they Levitical and ceremonial but consider the pay of they to a priest so soon as we read of a priest in scripture and that by the father of the faithful which the apostle urge against Levitical ceremony in that levi himself in Abraham pay they and his nephew jacob vow the payment thereof so soon as God shall give he whereof to pay tithe and that God require this duty of tithe Exod. 22.29 before the levite be call to the service of the tabernacle which be not so much as name till Exod. 38.21 the scripture also speak of they as ancient due nor have it any original commandment for give tithe to GOD yea the law of nature teach it the heathen which pay they to their idol and the first time of the christian church except b b Rebuffus item Tindari tract dec. Rebuffus q. 1. @. 12. Tindorus @. 25. etc. wherein there be no such settle order for thing of this and like nature tithe be constant pay to the church until the arch-enemy of God and his church in his antichristian supremacy rob the minister of that due which in God right they before hold impropriate the live of the altar to they that live not at the altar but yet ordinary leave they to the church as they then account the church some can so easy subscribe to that opinion perhaps more common than true which disannul divine right for the pay tithe as be then a jewish and Levitical ceremony but I leave the reader to discuss this matter further with a a carleton of tithe due by divine right and Roberts d. carleton Mr. Roberts and other in treatise of that argument not to speak of the canonist and let i here mention also that little book full of great learning and savour of great piety of s. Henry spelman knight a true knight of the temple that thus engage himself for the temple right that whereas the temple and ruin of the church have raise so many knight and cruel gentle at have peel and spill the man and mean of the church the church in that order have find a champion a spelman in name and deed who out of godspel so be the gospel and holy write significant style by our religious ancestor and man-spell that be the learning of man in the reason and authority of father counsel doctor in several age have show himself a spelman a oracle or man of hide knowledge as Verstegan interpret and spell this word spell these show also another argument beside this of the nature and practice of tithe almost beyond cavillation namely that tithe be due to christian minister by vow christian commonweal and counsel have consecrate they to GOD and his church wherein our king parliament and ecclesiastical law have add their confirmation neither be it now time after the vow to inquire and c c d. Downam and Levit. 27.28 without divine dispensation to alter it without satisfaction sufficient but leave this sore too tender to be touch and yet little touch and move some conscience pretend tender let we view the tithe as they then be jewish in Levit. 27.30 be a declaration of the lord right all tithe be the lord and a assignation of the same Numb. 18.21 behold I have give the child of levi all the ten etc. saint d d hierom. Ezach l. 14. c. 45. and num. 18.26 Jerome reckon four sort of tithe first that which the people pay to the levite second that which the levite hence pay to the priest e e Deut. 14.22 three that which they reserve for expense in their solemn feast when they go to the tabernacle or temple f f Deut. 14.28 the four be a three year ten which be then lay up for the Levite and the poor among they g g Ios. scal. in Opusc the practice hereof Nehemiah restore in the reformation of religion Nehemiah 10. when the first-fruit and ten be bring to the treasury or chamber of the house of god. h h Drus math. 23. lib praecep 145. and hier. in Ezec. 45. joseph Scaliger have write a treatise of tithe the sum whereof be this every thing which be food for man and be lay up for preservation if it receive increase from the earth be subject to offering and consequent to first fruit and tithe Garden-herb be not exempt they tithe mint and anise but i i Theruma (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Drusius say this be of tradition and not of the law for the law require only the ten of the increase under which name say he those come not out of these they first pay the first fruit second k k Deut. 18.4 this Theruma seem a second kind of first-fruit for the first be a offering in the ear etc. as appear levit. 23.10 s. hierom. sup. call it Theruma three a two fold tithe and these all in their due order the husbandman may not touch any of his increase before these deduction first fruit of corn grape and olive be offer in the basket but the Theruma and tithe only of the kind already dress and prepare as wheat fan oil and wine corn in the ear and so the rest be call Tabal after they be make ready the Theruma be take l l num. 18.12.25.26.27.28 from the heap and give to the priest this be call the great Theruma and be not define by Moses but the ancient lawyer determine that it may not be less than the forty or fifty or at least the 60 part the first they call the Theruma of a good eye the second indifferent the last of a evil eye and niggardly when this be take away for the priest the rest of the heap be tithe for the Levite m m tob. 1.7 this be call the first tithe n n num. 18.26 and the ten part thereof the levite o o which make it twelve of a hundred Deut. 14.24 levit. 27.51 give to the priest * * some interpret Nehemiah neh. 10.38 to the high priest alone for the maintenance of his state and partly so perhaps to establish the papal challenge since which be call the tithe of the tithe or the Theruma of the tithe for the former Theruma they name the great Theruma because it be more than this after this deduct the levite may free use the other nine part of the tithe which before they may not whether in or out of jerusalem the husbandman or layman be yet to pay another call the second tithe namely the ten part of that which remain to he after the first tithe and this also be holy nor may be spend but before GOD in the court of the temple and therefore it be to be carry to jerusalem or if the way be long or tedious they may be fold and a five p p p. ric. pr. aff. 133. Deut. 18.4 50. part be then to be add with this money they be to buy wine oil sacrifice and other necessary at jerusalem wherewith the husbandman and the Levite be to feast in the temple after this second tithe pay they may and not before use the rest a lie chattel to borrow the word of my learned friend master Selden Scaliger give they a latin name that be expose viz. to common or profane use for better view hereof if the husbandman have six thousand measure of wheat wine or oil he must pay a forty or fifty or at least a 60 part that be a hundred in the name of his q q r. ab ben Kattan praec. 87. Theruma of the five thousand and nine hundred remain the first tithe will deduct five hundred fourscore and ten of which the levite must pay to the priest fifty nine as tithe of the tithe now out of the five thousand three hundred and ten yet remain the husbandman be to pay the second tithe which come to five hundred thirty and one and then there remain to his own use expose or lie chattel four thousand seven hundred seventy and nine so that the first and second tithe be in proportion as nineteen of the hundred beside the great Theruma all these out of the corn ready fan before which also they pay the first fruit in the ear further r r Scaliger say that the levite observe their course herein according to their four and twenty family as the priest have their four and twenty Luke 1. the husbandman be bind to carry they to jerusalem and there to deliver they to the treasurer which be levite s s tob. 1.7.8 depute in diverse office to the custody of these thing as full appear 2. chron. 31. and if he do not carry they himself he must send they by his delegate touch who the Law exact that they shall not be of the gentile this opinion be reject by other and seem impossible that the tithe of so spacious a country shall with much cost and loss be carry to jerusalem which may with more ease and conveniency every way be receive at home in the several city of their tillage as it be write neh. 10.37 as for the second tithe they may redeem it with add a five part over and above the price Tobit be a perfect pattern of this the first tithe of all increase they be his own word I give to the son of Aaron who minister at jerusalem the second tithe I sell and go and spend it every year at jerusalem and the three I give unto they to who it be meet the vulgar latin read this last so that he minister every three year all his tithe to the proselyte and stranger and it ought faith Scaliger rather to be call the tithe of the three year than the t t joseph antiq. lib. 4.7 call it the three tithe of the three year which say he beside the two yearly tithe one to the Levite the other for sacrifice and feast be for the poor etc. every three year three tithe for this be no other but the first tithe so that what be pay in the first and second year and in the four and five of that week of year or seven year space the seven whereof be always Sabbatical and free from tillage first fruit Theruma and tithe in the name of the first tithe the same in the three and six year be not carry to jerusalem but lay up in the barn and storehouse of the husbandman who to use the word of Moses u u Deut. 14.28 29. be to lay they up within his gate and the Levite because he have no part nor inheritance with thou and the stranger and the fatherless and the widow which be within thy gate shall come and shall eat and be satisfy thus joseph Scaliger but other hold it due every year but only of such thing as be useful for man meat as be employ in feast and no other than that which Scaliger call the second tithe before mention the remainder of the surplusage to use the word of master Montague the three feast end serve for those priest and levite that dwell at jerusalem and have no abide in the country and for those that in their course come up and serve at the temple for want of which Malachi complain and in Nehemias time the levite flee to their land viz. where he have maintenance by payment of the first tithe every three year they add a three tithe to be distribute to the poor and Levite beside the former two for the levite and for feast as josephus have observe thus in all there be four payment or tithe as be before obserurd out of saint hierom. what I have say of the tithe of vegetable I understand also though some gainsay of the tithe of all they possess Luke 18. mat. 23. even of cattle in like payment as the former as of all other thing for man use Scaliger proceed the jew still in all place of their habitation observe the seven year Sabbatical and therefore pay not then any first fruit or Theruma as for tithe they be not to be as Scaliger hold pay but at the temple which be now destroy neither have they any certain stock of priest or levite howsoever many be so name and therefore be ask of we say Scaliger if they may repair the sanctuary in mount moriah whether they will offer any sacrifice they answeee no because there be now no priesthood in Israel so desperate be their desolation now lest any deceit may be use in tithe there be officer appoint which be call 10 10 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) faithful these search the house suspect of nonpayment that increase whereof the tithe be uncertain be call Eamai from the dedication of maccabaus to the time of John hyrcanus all pay their first fruit and Theruma but few their tithe because those faithful be unfaithful and corrupt with gift but then the great council decree that none shall be choose to that office but such as be as they be call from thence y y about one hundred and fifty year to the destruction of the temple they be true pay the first fruit and tithe be not pay all at one time but each kind at their own time as wheat in Sivan after Pentecost wine in Tisri oil in Tebeth and so of the rest thus far Scaliger for my own part I hold that division of saint Jerome the best and that of those four sort of tithe the first be natural moral divine tribute equal due though not alike exact in all age and then Levitical only by special designment of GOD which appoint levi for a time to the work and wage of his priest the second pay to the high-priest by the Levite be as that high priesthood itself mere ceremonial the pope covetousness reverse christianity recall Judaism make it canonical due to he which since with we be make judicial or statutarie and whereas Aaron alone and levi once receive now they must if not alone pay perpetual tent beside ten time as much subsiduary payment as temporal man all thing consider of their ability when the public need require and that notwithstanding our own inheritance be so many way divert pervert subvert this I speak not as grudge Caesar his due for GOD and man love a cheerful giver but to satisfy the evil eye of they that have evil will at Zion and grudge the remain of the ruin of levi will every way to further the priest hindrance ceremonial be the three tithe as dependent on the temple and feast the four judicial as relief to the poor of that jewish state whether levite or layman in their several habitation but if any lust to fill themselves with matter of this argument let they read what have be write by master Selden and his antagonist which maintain the portion of levi in the evangelical priesthood against his history of tithe seem by way of story to undermine it wherein sir james sempill labour that I mention not many of our own more interest deserve honourable mention in all leui tent and to all his generation @. 3 of their personal offering and of their and our ecclesiastical revenue beside first-fruit and tithe they pay to the treasury personal offering as Exod. 30.12 every man pay half a shekel a a Siclus 4. 6. 16. the sickle be tetradrachmus and weigh say Gerundensis half a ounce of silver who say he see one at Ptolemais it have on the one side the figure of Aaron almond-rod on the other the pot of manna write about with samaritan letter on the one side be a sickle of sicle on the other jerusalem the holy the price of a servant say Rambam be thirty sicle so they value Christ of a freeman it be twice so much on the five and twenty of Adar the nummularij or money-changer sit in the temple that they which have not this half shekel ready may have it of they for other money or for a pledge it be in figure like the whole shekel tract Thalmud that which be say of the pot of manna in this coin seem to i in one which I see rather a pot or vessel of perfume or incense with a smoky cloud above it which the hebrew interpret to be perpetual for the maintenance of the sacrifice other temporary then only put in practice as for that collection 2. King 21. make by joas for the repair of the temple and that after by Nehemiah chap. 10. the circumstance show much difference this treasury in regard of this poll-money grow very rich as appear in b b Ios. antiq. 14.12 Crassus rob the same often thousand talent at one time beside a great beam of gold which Eleazarus the treasurer upon Crassus his oath afterward violate nevertheless to redeem the rest deliver to he weigh three hundred mina every mina be two pound two ounce and a quarter Troy Tully c c cic. murena and other author mention these oblation of the jew to their treasury yearly these gift and offering the law exact they perform many other also either of their freewill or of vow otherwise little differ from the former many other ceremony of their meat garment fast trumpet and in other case I hope I shall have leave to omit in this place and remit he that will further know of they to the scripture itself have point out the principal but by this be apparent which doctor Downam d d downam sermon of the dignity etc. have observe that all these be deliver they in the lord treasury without their labour or cost together with their eight and forty city assign they amount to a far great proportion for the maintenance of that small tribe then all the bishopric benefice colledgeland or whatsoever other ecclesiastical endowment and profit in this land although the profane ammonite or hypocritical cloister have never conspire to shave off our e e 2. sam. 10. beard and our garment by the buttock not leave to f f d. smith far blacksmith cover our nakedness or their shame and yet how sick be ahab for naboth vineyard and will GOD we have no jezabel to play the too cunning physician in this disease let i have a little leave to say no more than other for the substance in book and sermon have say already although those belly to who we speak have no ear the first stroke that wound we and cause we still to halt be from Rome the mother of abomination and whoredom here as in the suburb of hell be found the church ruin our bull of bashan abbey-lubber and cloisterer with the leaden horn of those roman bull have push down our church our chancel at least and make they to fall into those g g Apoc. 12.2 cage of unclean bird the popish monastery of nine thousand two hundred eighty and four parish in England after h h Camden Britan. edit ult. master Camden account three thousand eight hundred forty five be it be proper term impropriate and who know whether those appropriation do not supplant their Supplanter and dispropriate they of that which in a just propriety be give they in their first foundation for that threefold maintenance of themselves of learning and of the poor yea happy yet if we observe the course of divine justice we may see many who former inheritance have by the addition of these as of a contagious garment be infect and have either die or be sick at the least of this plague the ark when it be in Dagon temple because imprison in a Idol-temple break Dagon neck and when it be thence translate to their city they also be fill with disease our ark have thus deal with the temple and can well brook the city and lay-hand which imprison or if they will appropriate it o that they will once send it home where it shall be how fit and full do those word of Habacuk i i hab. 2.9 10.11.12 agree to the house found for religion by this and like irreligion pervert and at last subvert k k gen. 31.47 they covet a evil covetousness to their house they consult shame to their own house by destroy many people and sin against their own soul the stone have cry out of the wall and the beam out of the timber have answer it woe unto he that build a town with blood and erect a city by iniquity thus we see the stone have cry out of their wall indeed and by their demolish heap may receive Laban name jegar schadutha the heap of witness their ruin remain testimony of God judgement a violent stream say master l l Camden break through all obstacle have rush out upon the ecclesiastic state of this land and overwhelm to the world wonder and England grief the great part of the english clergy with their most beautiful building and those riches which the christian piety of the english have from the time of their first christianity consecrate to God be as it be in a moment disperse and if I may so say profane and let not our temporal man pretend inheritance and human law in these thing of divine right for how can kyrke so call as (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that be the lord house before give up by solemn consecration into divine possession with their living become human without surrender of the owner or satisfaction to he as the word since have receive a double aspiration so the thing themselves a double and deceive alteration whereby we have rob our GOD as in Malachi * * mal. 3.8 he complain worse than the heathen which he there justify and which in that extreme egyptian * * gen. 47.22 famine alienate all lay possession but want this leave the priest land inviolate which yet be very large as in our egyptian relation shall appear poor Uzzah offer in a good intent which I also think of many which be forward in suppression of religious house in the day of king Henry and of other church land in king Edward time but GOD accept not such zeal and he by his untimely fate leave the name to the * * 2. sam. 6.8 place Perez Uzzah until this dvy nor do king Henry long enjoy that his ecclesiastical purchase or long continue much wealthy by it but be force to base money before his end that I speak not of the short reign of king Edward his son that virtuous prince who time rather than his holy hand cause the desolation of the chantry land and how many other vanish away in that cloud after the dissolution of the former and do not our eye see in other respect to the joy of our eye but to he a judgement notwithstanding so many wife a Perez Henry a rapture of the kingdom from his loin and that just so many year as some * * S.H.S. have observe after that his attempt as the golden head of the babylonian monarchy continue in that family after the temple profane and the holy vessel transport when belshazzar escape not though he can plead prescription of possession succession and inheritance as our proprietary with a dear purchase by costly siege than these thing cost the first purchaser after the suppression I may here also end with the tragical end of those that be forward in those enterprise but I spare their name and refer the reader to our history which yield to we example many of Salomon rule from Wolsey downward that it * * pro. 20.25 be a snare to devour that which be sanctify so sudden be they catch so sure be they hold in this snare and as their zeal do eat up God house devour that which be sanctify and get so many house of God in the land into lay possession so the divine zeal of God house do eat up they in bloody untimely morsel and let the present possessor hear and fear let none traduce i as a troubler of Israel and a traducer of our law and state which have thus both change and settle these thing I inveigh against absolom conspiracy and Achitophel device which be the troubler of Israel and so disturb the just heart of righteous David that on the sudden he a little forget the exact rule and command thou m m 2. sam. 19.29 and ziba divide the land so if loser may have leave to speak our parliament perhaps with some ecstasy of joy for remove the sink and stink of superstition have in those busy time but negligent consideration of mephibosheth right and our vicar mephibosheth the clergy then do not much urge it yea he will still say of these our halt ziba let they take all n n and all they challenge as they drive the poor vicar to show composition or prescription they know who cast at all Luke 4.7 and say you may english it here they be betray to i rather than we shall want our lord and his gospel to come home to we in peace and in peace let they rest which be author of this peace to we and let we pray that a worse generation of viper do not arise and that the o o let i have the like liberty to inveigh against vice here as Espensaeus be allow among the papist who speak of the romish proceed say I speak only against abuser of law and right cankerworm eat not what the grasshopper have leave and the caterpillar the residue of the cankerworm I mean those latron-patron and patron-latron whereof these extend to the utmost whatsoever may and whatsoever colour of right in exemption custom privilege and pravilege whereby every john-a-stile shall intercept the church due or by a weighty fee force a composition or wrangle out some break title or break the neck of the case with a prohibition the other have a trust commit make himself a bawd and sell his church which cost no mean price than the blood of Christ for money oh Christ overthrow the table of these money-changer and with some whip drive they scourge they out of thy temple which supplant thy plantation and hinder the gain of soul for gain withstand these Balaam which for balack blessing care not what curse they bring upon Israel which present for present and scrape to maintain their carnal live out of our spiritual living to bestow on their hawk their hound their but whether have this passion or zeal truth I be sure transport i true the fix star in our Westminster firmament and may not I so call it where be such a star-chamber shine with the bright beam of justice I admire and almost adore in silence only those wander planet which self guiltiness accuse do I here accuse and for these and all the church enemy let GOD arise and his enemy or their enmity be scatter that there be no more such p p 1. King 21. ahab as I mention which have more then enough seem to have nothing as long as Naboth have something which they can long for and that there be no q q nehem. 13. eliashib which shall provide Tobias the Ammonite a chamber in the house of the lord that neither any abuse the profession of law direct nor the possession of patronage indirect for abuse only I tax so to discover our church nakedness that every cham the profane atheist and superstitious Papist may espy and deride the same wherein themselves be the most guilty among we although none be more ready to r r 2. sam. 1.20 tell it in Gath or publish it in the street of Ashkalon that the daughter of Babylon may triumph @. 4 of their firstborn priest levite and other religious person after that we have speak of the time place and rite sacred to God order require next to speak of those person who office and function it be to procure and manage those divine and religious affair and first among the first hebrew we find no priest name before Abraham time in which Melchisedech be interpret by the most to be Shem the son of Noah father both of this and other nation and master Broughton have write a whole book in confirmation hereof the head of family then exercise the priestly office of teach pray and sacrifice in their own houshould as we read of a a gen. 18.19 Abraham b b gen. 37. Isaac c c gen. 49. etc. and jacob after that the first bear of all the tribe of Israel be consecrate to this business when as God have destroy the firstborn of Egypt d d exod. 13.2 and 15. and these offer sacrifice e e exod. 24.5 until that the levite be choose in their room f f num. 3.41 God turn the prophetical curse of jacob of g g gen. 49.7 scatter they in Israel into a blessing for the instruct of the israelite the cause of this their consecration be because they h h exod. 32.29 in a zeal of God glory have sanctify their hand to this ministry in the blood of the near of their idolatrous kindred that have sin in adore the golden calf now in the three of number where the firstborn of the israelite and the levite be number appear a difficulty which most of the interpreter which I have read of that place have neglect namely that of the israelitish firstborn there be find from a month-old upward two and twenty thousand two hundred seventy and three and of the levite but two and twenty thousand so that therefore there must be five shekel apiece pay for the redemption of every of those two hundred seventy and three in surplusage more than the levite whereas yet in the parcel of the Levitical account be find more of the levite then of the israelite as appear the family of the gershonite contain seven thousand and five hundred the kohathite eight thousand six hundred and the family of Merari six thousand and two hundred which be add together amount to two and twenty thousand and three hundred and therefore be seven and twenty more than the israelite to this i i lyra in num. Dionys Carthus jun. add also in the number of priest lyra Dionysius Carthusianus and junius for the most be whole silent answer that those three hundred over and above the two and twenty thousand be firstborn themselves and therefore in right of the former challenge of the firstborn be the lord already and if it seem as much wonder which author observe not that of two and twenty thousand be but three hundred firstborn k k but one of 74. that their exploit of execute their kindred for idolatry before mention in which sin the first bear as priest be likely to have follow Aaron a chief man of their tribe may answer for i and that cruel edict l l exod. 9 of Pharaoh and their miraculous fruitfulness may mae it less strange that both in these levite there be so few firstborn and in the other israelite also with who among 603550. man from twenty year old upward there be though reckon but from a month old as be say but two and twenty thousand two hundred seventy three which be little more than one of seven and twenty beside that inequality of the person number likewise as phil. Ferdinand have observe out of Abraham ben David if a woman first bring forth a female neither that nor the son if she have any after be of these sanctify firstborn this excursion upon this occasion wherein I have find diverse interpreter mute will I hope find pardon with the reader who happy himself may find some better resolution to return to our history God have before appoint Aaron to be high priest and his son m m exod. 28. levit 24.4 to be priest to who the levite be assign after as we have say as assistant in inferior office of the tabernacle aaron from who be reckon the succession of the high priest in the same office have appoint to he eight holy garment a breastplate a ephod a robe a broider coat a mitre a girdle a plate of gold and linen breech also his son have appoint to they coat and bonnet and girdle and breeches which their attire be describe at large 28. josephus write of the stone there mention that that on the priest right shoulder shine forth very bright when GOD be please with their sacrifice as do also those twelve in the breastplate when in the time of war GOD will assist they which cease miraculous to shine two hundred year before his time or as the talmudist say from the building of the second temple the consecration of the priest and rite thereof be mention 29. the condition require in the high priest as that he shall not have the bodily defect of blindness lameness maimedness etc. nor shall uncover his head and many other such like be express Levit. 21. his office be daily to light the light at the evening and to burn incense at morning and evening and once every sabbath to set the showbread before the lord to sacrifice and once a year to make reconciliation in the holy-place etc. this office they execute till the captivity after which they rule also in the commonwealth and the family of the maccabee obtain temporal and spiritual jurisdiction be both priest and king but the state be usurp by other they also appoint high priest at their pleasure and thus be Annas and Caiphas high priest although Caiphas alone administer the office which be abrogate to Annas the name only remain and thus josephus say that Annas be most happy who have himself be high priest and see all his son in that office whereas in the institution and before the captivity this office continue ordinary with their life which after they enjoy long or short at pleasure of the conqueror next unto the high priest be the priest lineal descend from Eleazar and ithamar the son of Aaron as in number many so in their priestly raiment consecration condition and office much differ from the former as appear for their garment levit. 28. their consecration 29. their condition require in they Levit. 10. and 21. and their office in some thing as preach pray sacrifice not much unlike to the former but in degree sometime assist he in these thing sometime alone and in some thing nothing participate as in Moses plain may be see these priestly family be of the house of Eleazar sixteen and of ithamar eight which David by lot distribute into four and twenty order according to the number of the head of family those four and twenty man chief of those order be to the high priest as Aaron son be unto he in their ministry 1. chron. 24. and take turn by course n n the course last from one sabbath to the next and so in order be renew every sabbath from hence Scaliger gather by demonstration that John bap. be bear about the begin of April of their academical time study degree etc. see jun. academia cap. 4. and 6. in perform of the same as Luke show o o Luke 1.5 in the example of Zachary josephus p p Ios. in app. and in testify the same and affirm that in each of these rank be more than five thousand man in his time and in the history of his life say that himself be of the first of these order betwixt which be no small difference and the head of these be also call chief priest q q ez. 8. mar. 14. act 4. in the old and new testament * * with his scal. can. Isag. l. 3. pag. 298. it be by their law forbid on pain of death to any priest or Levite to intermeddle in another function but at the three solemn feast any of the priest which will be permit to minister and to participate with those who course it then be only they may not offer the vow or freewill or ordinary offering the levite have the next place in the legal ministry all that descend of levi except the family of Aaron be thus call and num. 3. according to the descent of the three son of levi have their office assign they which so continue till the day of David he distribute they according to their family unto their several function twenty four thousand to the service of the temple six thousand to be judge and ruler four thousand porter and four thousand which praise the lord upon instrument these be divide under their head or principal according to their r r 1. chr. 23.24 family the Levitical musician with their office and order be reckon 1. chron. 25. and 2. chron. 7. these in stead of the silken stole which they wear obtain in the day of Agrippa to wear a linen one like the priest the porter be in the 26. of 1. chron. describe according to their family order and office they keep in their course the door and treasure of the temple to keep the same clean and to keep that which be unclean out of the same and these all be minister in their office 2. chron. 35. the gibeonite call after Nethanim be at hand unto the levite in the mean office about the tabernacle and temple Ios. 9.21 and 1. chron. 9 assign hereunto first by joshua after by David and the prince for the service of the levite to cut wood and draw water for the house of God ezra 8. beside these ecclesiastical person in the ordinary ministry of the temple be other which may no less be count holy either in regard of vow as the s s see the institution of they num. 6.2 nazarite for a time Samson be a especial example hereof and james the just brother of our lord or else they be prophet by extraordinary call as Samuel Esay Jeremy and other to who God manifest his will by dream vision and revelation who ordinary habit seem to be a rugged hairy garment by the example of t t 2. reg. 1.8 isa 20.2 elijah and the false u u Zach. 13.4 prophet and of 10 10 mat. 3.4 John Baptist afterward and thus much of those person which according to the law be sacred to God it follow that we shall observe their superstitious devote of themselves according to their own device and tradition unto a suppose service of God in a more strict manner then ordinary or somewhat in opinion and practice differ both from the law and the rest of the jewish people of this kind be many sect whereof we be next to speak chap. 8 of the diverse sect opinion and alteration of religion among the hebrew @. i. of their ancient division and idolatry in this matter of alteration and altercation among they about question and practice of religion we be in the first place to observe their often apostasy a a Philasirius reckon therein their idolatry number 28. jewish sect and as Scaliger observe and the scripture will bear it may by that rule have reckon many other from the truth of the law to the idolatrous superstition of the neighbour nation as the relic of the egyptian idolatry in the golden calf Exod. 32. their often murmur in the desert the presumption of Nadab and Abihu and after of Aaron and Miriam the conspiracy of Korah Dathan and Abiram baalam stumbling-block to couple they in idolatrous service to Baal-Peor the idol of the moabite and after their possession of the land when joshua and the elder be dead they serve b b jud. 2.12 13. the god of the people that be round about they as Baal and ashtaroth of the idol and their rite be before speak and although gideon cut down the grove and destroy the altar of Baal c c jud. 6.27 yet he make a ephod of the carering of the prey and put it in ophrah his city and all Israel go a whore there after it d d jud. 8.27 33. and after his death make paal-berith their God they serve also the god of aram Zidon moab Ammon e e jud. 10.6 and the Philistine Michah f f jud. 17. and 18. a ephramite make a house of god a ephod and Teraphim and consecrate one of his son to be his priest and after set a Levite jonathan in his room the occasion of apostasy to a great part of the tribe of dan all the while the house of God be in shiloh beside the corruption of state and religion by the g g jud. 19 beniamite and by h h 1. sam. 2.12 Hophni and phinehas the son of Elimine i i in rad. Theraphim Elias levita describe the form of sacring or hallow their Teraphim in this sort they kill a man which be a first bear wreathe his head from his body and embalm the same with salt and spice and then write upon a plate of gold the name of a unclean spirit and put the same under the head set it upon a wall and burn candle before it and worship the same r. Abraham k k ap. Pagnin say they be image of man make to receive power from above as the idolater conceive of they but after the reformation of religion by Samuel David and Solomon who yet become after a idolater befall their great apostasy to wit of the ten tribe from God their king and religion by the o'er-wise policy of ieroboam which corrupt and subvert both it and himself he lest those revolt israelite shall by frequent god appoint worship at jerusalem reacknowledge their former and true lord consecrate two egyptian calf at bethel and l l 1. King 12. Dan and make a house of high place and priest of the low of the people judah also make they in the same time high place image and grove on every high hill and under every green tree yet have the kingdom of judah their intercourse of corruption and reformation according as they have good or bad king but in Israel the commonwealth and church receive by that sin of ieroboam a uncurable wound and irrecoverable loss until that in God just punishment they be carry away by the assyrian king into Assyria and into Hala Habor and the city of the mede as 2. King 17. appear where be record a summary collection of these and other their idolatry of these exile israelite if we believe the report and conjecture of diverse author be descend those tartarian which since overtanne with their conquest a great part of Asia and Europe then ever any other nation before or since of which their original and exploit we shall in fit place further discourse but it be far more probable that in and after the babylonish captivity the israelite adjoin themselves in religion to the other jew at least the great part of they and though not many return with ezra yet those part remain full of jew have their university and some kind of government till the saracenicall deluge and in some tolerable condition after as Benjamin relate which continue till the time of the tartar which have they be of this nation they will have prefer they whereas ever since their time the estate of the jew have be more contemptible than before I deny not that many of they may mix themselves with the nation with who they live and grow into one people with they and that there may be in diverse place some remnant of this israelitish dispersion as Benjamin reckon some and Trigaut in China conjecture of other but this tale of the tartar and that m m the jew have a tale of Alexander open certain mountain by magic and therein enclose a multitude of jew beyond Babylon in the hill Cappion which have a king over they and be call red jew etc. vid. vict. carbens lib. 1. 23. other of the enclose jew seem but idle dream without any good ground of truth or credit the other kingdom of judah although it receive sometime some breathe and refresh under her more virtuous and religious king yet for the most part groan under tyranny and idolatry be at last a prey to the babylonian from which servitude be free by the persian monarch under variety of adverse and prosperous fortune it be afterward rend and tear by the macedonian be make a common stage for the arm and army of the successor of Ptolemey in Egypt and selencus in Asia remain meed unto the conqueror and receive no small impression and wound in soul as well as body in religion as in polity but be after deliver from macedonean thraldom by the family of the macchabee the government ecclesiastical and temporal become they but the mind of this jewish people be in those time divide in diversity of sect and opinion of which the evangelical and other history make mention one division * * vid. scal. in euseb pag. 124. and can. Isag. pag. 278. be of the whole nation not so much for opinion as for the differ habitation which bring also some circumstance of other difference the jew therefore be general thus distinguish the hebrew which dwell in Palestina and the scatter stranger n n (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 1. pet. 1.1 as Peter call they to wit the grecian these two sort be mention by Luke act 6.1 and the (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) or the remainder of the deportation of Babylon the metropolis whereof be Babylon while it remain and after bagde the metropolis or head of the o o job. 7.35 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) or (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) be Alexandria where also in Benjamin Tudelensis his time there be a synagogue of the babylonian dispersion the asian jew be most of this babylonian sort to these saint Peter write from Babylon which therefore he name not in the inscription the hellenist be so call of hellenize or use the greek tongue in their synagogue in which they have the scripture translate in Egypt Greece and Italy by reason of this translation p p the hebrew ordain a fast in remembrance of the translation of the 70. the hebrew and hellenist often disagree for the hebrew call it a backward read because it be read from the left hand to the right which sometime break forth into open violence r. Eleazar q q in fine cap. Meghillah assault the synagogue of the alexandrian at jerusalem and commit therein much outrage and Christian charity can scarce combine they as Luke mention act. 6.1 this greek translation be use by they throughout Europe they have it in Hebrew letter as Tertullian testify in the serapium at Alexandria thus philo and other of these learned hellenist be ignorant of the Hebrew likewise of those hebrew there be small reckon have of the galilaean by their supercilious and superstitious brethren of judaea as the gospel have teach we @. 2 of the Karraim and Babbinists and of the Hasidai the opinion of the jew may be reduce a a d hall Phariaism and Christianity Judaic cap. 2. into these two general head the one be such as content themselves with the law of God and be call Karraim or Koraim of which sort there be diverse at this day in Constantinople and other where the other rabbinist supererogatory as doctor hall call they and popish jew call Hasidim profess a more strict holiness than the law require yet at first these both please themselves and do not by opposition of science displease each other and disagree in opinion they yet in affection agree but when these voluntary service begin to be draw in canon and of arbitrary become necessary they be rend into sundry sect of these and their original let we hear Scaliger speak there be b b Ios. scal. eelench nich. Serar c. 22. he call these two sect cap 2. Karraim of Kara which signify the scripture and rabbanim which be the wiseman (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) after call Pharisee say he before the time of Hasmonaei two kind of dogmatist man hold differ opinion among the jew the one only accept the write law the other tradition or the addition to the Law of the former kind arise the Karraim of who come the Sadducee of the latter the Pharisee these Pharisee be the issue of the hasidee the hasidee be a corporation guild or fraternity which voluntary addict themselves to the office of the law 1. macchabee chap. 2. verse 42. c c junius translate it Aschidaei and say they be such as for religion be scatter and disperse about for fear of the King cont. Drus and Serar triher li. 3. c. 7. their original be from the time of Ezrah or esdras Haggai and Zachary the prophet be author of this order these in regard of their institution be call holy Hasidin and in regard of their combination Hasidaei and beside that which the law enjoin which be just debt they supererogate and of their own free accord disburse upon the temple and sacrifice they profess not only to live according to the prescript of the law but if any thing can by interpretation and consequence be draw thence they hold themselves bind to satisfy it and when they have do all to seem to have do nothing but account themselves unprofitable servant notwithstanding every one pay a tribute to the reparation of the temple from the time of esdras and Nehemias d d Nehe. 10.32 the hasidaean add further of their own freewill to the sanctuary wall and porch never almost go from the temple which they seem to hold peculiar to themselves and by which they use to swear by this habitacle or by this house which the Pharisee their posterity also do e e Mat 23.16 and 29. as likewise they learn of they to build the sepulcher of the prophet they be therefore call Hasidim either because their college be institute of the prophet or of their holy and religious work and the sacred building by they either repair or rear from the foundation and therefore when wicked alcimus have kill threescore man of this corporation or guild the people think their death be prophesy in the f f psal. 79.2 psalm such reputation be there of their holiness these Hasidaei be not in proper sense a sect but a fraternity which every day assemble in the temple and offer in daily sacrifice a lamb which be call the sin offer of the Hasidim one day be except the eleven of Tisri in which that sacrifice be omit they offer not themselves for they be not priest but the priest in their name Abraham zacuth g g abr. zacuth lib. johasin say that Baba the son of Buta daily of his own accord offer a ram for a sin-offering except one day which be the day after the expiation and this be call the sacrifice of the saint for sin and he swear by this habitacle that be the temple of this kind or much like thereto Scaliger h h scal. ibid. cap. 24. think the rechabite be which jeremia i i jer. 35.19 mention who immediate father he account jonadab not he which k k 2. reg. 10.15 live in the day of jehu but another of that name and that their austere order begin but a little before it end namely in the same prophet time quick end because of the captivity after the captivity these son of jonadab renew their former observation be call Hasidaei which go not from the temple and observe the order above mention so Scaliger interpret jeremy prophecy that jonadab shall not want one to stand before the lord that be to minister and attend holy duty in the temple like to Anna the prophet l l Luke 2.37 this say he be the true beginning of the Hasidaei which abstain from wine as do also the priest as long as they minister in the temple thus much Scaliger as for that which Serarius have write against Scaliger and Drusius in this argument both in his Trihaeresium and his minerval or elsewhere I refer the reader to himself choose rather to express what I think probable than entertainman with long unnecessary dispute Drusius m m Drus 3. ser. li. c. 11. prove that diverse of the Pharisee and essee also be of these Hasidaei whereby it appear that it be rather a brotherhood as scal. call it than a Sect he show their rite and Discipline out of juchasin n n or jehasin ab. Zec. they spend 9 hour of the day in prayer they believe that a man may sin in thought and therefore they have care thereof their will be not without the will of heaven that be of God ten thing be peculiar to they not to lift up their eye above ten cubit 2. not to go bareheaded 3. to establish three refection 4. to dispose their heart to prayer 5. not to look on either side six to go about that they may not be troublesome to any company seven not to eat at the table of great man eight if they have anger any man quick to appease he ninth to have a pleasant voice and to descend to the interpretation of the law tenthly to accustom themselves to their thread and phylactery rab one of his fraternity do not lift up his eye above four cubit ten or twenty day before their death they be disease with the colic and so all clear and clean they depart into the other life to return unto Scaliger touch the original of sect and to leave those hosidaean observant as long say he as supererogation only be use there be no sect in the people of GOD but when the precept thereof be bring into canon and commit to write than arise many doubt disputation altercation grow and succeed daily from whence spring two sect differ in opinion the one admit only the law the other embrace the interpretation and exposition of their rabbin the former in process of time be divide into two for at first the Karraim be only such as observe the law and the prophet till the time of Sadok and Boethi or Baithi who first doubt of the punishment of sin and reward of good work from who spring the heresy of the Sadducee the Karraim be not before this divide in sect from the Hasidim but only in those voluntary function and supererogation wherein the law by injunction rule the former and these as be say supererogate but when canon and injunction begin to be write then of these Hasidim arise dogmatist which call themselves Perushim holy and separate both from the other Hasidim and from the vulgar make a necessity of that observation which before be voluntary this sort be again divide into those which retain the name Perushim or Pharisee and the Essene both receive from their author the rule and precept of their Sect after this the Pharisee be divide into many kind the jew reckon seven the Essene also be divide first into cloisterer or collegian which live in a common society and eremite or solitary person and those former into such as marry and other which remain continent @ 3 of the Pharisee now let we consider of these more particular and first of the Pharisee Drusius a a Drusius 3 sect l. 2. derive the name from the syrian as most of the name of the new testament be and not from the Hebrew for than it shall not be Pharisee but pharuse as after the Hebrew it shall rather be Masias than Messiah the etymology some fetch from phares which signify division as epiphanius and Origen with other b b Ambros in luc. li. 3. Damascen suidas against which Drusius except because in phares the last letter be Tsaddi here it be Schin other c c f. Forerius Es. 1. io. Forsterus derive it from parash signify to explain because they do all thing open to be see of man it be not likely for hypocrisy love her work shall be see but not her humour than shall it be hypocrisy she will not be see in her affection to be see and this name in this sense will have be to their infamy and not to their reputation which they most aim at a three derivation of this name be from another signification of the same verb * * sic jansen in conc. euan. c. 13. serar l. 2. c. 1. to expound but to expound the law be more ptope to the scribe and some of the Pharisee be not expositor howbeit the most probable opinion be that they be so call of separation because they be or will seem to be separate from other d d judaeorum aug. s 30 verb. dom. first in cleanness of life second in dignity three in regard of the exquisiteness of those observation whereto they be separate four in their habit wherein they be as our monk distinguish from the people yea they do abhor the garment of the people their opinion be gather by e e joseph Antiq. l. 18. bell jud li. 2. josephus and other out of who Drusius Serarius Scaliger and other they attribute say josephus all thing to fate Abraham zacuth interpret their opinion thus they believe that God know and dispose all thing and the star help yet so as freewill be leave in the hand of man and if a man by his freewill choose the good God will help he * * serarius in cline to a more stoical interpretation in his good way they say that there be no herb in earth which have not his proper planet in heaven the ascribe immortality to the soul hold that judgement pass on it under the earth and that if it have do evil it be adjudge to perpetual prison if well it have easy return unto life by a f f (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) thus Christ be after this opinion call Elias or one of the prophet transmigration or go into another body so zacuth the good soul take delight of their good work the bad descend and ascend not they believe that there be both devil and good angel they conceive that he which keep the most of the commandment although he transgress in some be just before GOD against which opinion g g burgen 1. in Epist. jac. 2.10 Burgensis think that james allege that say in his epistle he that fail in one be guilty of all he cite rab. Moses for his Pharisaical opinion that GOD judge according to the plurality or paucity to use his own word of merit or demerit like stuff have I read in s. Francis legend of the balance wherein man deed be weigh and the devil lose his prey by the weight of a chalice which one have give to the saint which heavy metal cause the scale wherein his good deed be put before too light to weigh heavy they the ancient Pharisee confess the resurrection of the flesh here of be three opinion h h Drus l. 2. c. 14. one that all good and bad shall rise again another that the just only shall rise a three that the just and part of the wicked shall rise they call their tradition the law give by word and the unwritten law which they equal to the write derive both from Moses as more full elsewhere shall be say these tradition they call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) as both epiphanius and hieronymus witness the teacher thereof (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) or wiseman and when they lecture they be wont to say (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the wiseman teach tradition of these tradition be hier. Algas concern the sabbath that they may journey from their place two thousand cubit Jerome i i Hierom ep. alg. account foot Origen k k Orig. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) l. 4. c. 2. elnes that none may carry any burden that day but they interpret if one carry on one shoulder it be a burden if on both it be none if his shoe have nail they be a burden otherwise not concern fast the Pharise boast Luke 18.12 I fast twice in the week which they observe say Theophilact l l theoph. in luc. 18. on the second and five day munday and Thursday happy our wednesday and friday succeed in this penance that we may not seem to be behind they in duty howsoever we disagree with they in their time and yet Mercerus say the jew fast the four day Wednesday because they hold that unlucky in which child be take with the squinancy further the Pharisee eat not unwashed (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) mark 7.3 except they wash with the fist as Beza translate Scaliger m m scal. Elench. ser. cap. 7. serar Triber lib. 2. c. 2. expound it not by wash one fist in the other but compose the finger into such a frame that all their end meet on the top of the thumb which for want of another name be call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) a fist although it be not proper so in this form they hold up their hand in wash that the water may slide down to the elbow and thence fall to the ground as the jew use to this day they wash n n mar. 7.4 when they come from market because sinner and unclean person be there who touch may pollute they they wash also cup and brazen vessel and bed not chamber-bed to lie on Drusius o o Drus lib. 2. expound but dining-bed which they use in stead of table they will not p p luk. 7.39 esd 65.5 eat with publican or sinner yea they account themselves pollute with their touch their hypocrisy in prayer Christ mention that it be long and open in the street etc. it be thrice in the day at the three six and nine hour their word submiss and soft as of Hannah 1. sam. 1. and towards the temple they tithe all Luke 18. math. 23. even the small matter for tithe say Akiba be the hedge of thy riches and another proverb learn it tithe that thou may be rich epiphanius q q Epiph. haer. 16. add they pay first fruit thirtieth and fiftieth sacrifice and vow their phylactery or seruatory defensives so the word signify in Hebrew r r of these read the 25. chapter follow Totaphoth they use as preseruative or remembrancer of the law and wear they large than other man Jerome call they Pittaciola resemble to they herein some simple superstitious woman wear little gospel and the wood of the cross and such like of zeal not according to knowledge strain a gnat and swallow a camel this superstition then complain of by Jerome yet remain say s s scal. Elench. cap. 8. Scaliger among christian and mahometans which wear about they the gospel of s. John Christ condemn not the rite but their ambition for dilate not for wear they to which all the jew be bind and all the jew and samaritan observe they use the like ambition in their fringe or twist tassel which the jew call Zizis and use they still as after shall appear their oath be by jerusalem the temple the heaven earth their head by the Law t t fag Onk. ap Dr. Fagius observe that the jew in swear lay their hand on the book of the law at this day other oath be little esteem hence it seem come our corporal oath on a book the jew say u u capit Hos. capito think it no oath if one forswear by heaven or earth unless he say by he which dwell there etc. and none be subject to that curse in which the name of God be not add that of Corban pertain to this place mention math. 15.5 and mark 7.11 which some interpret as if a jew shall say to his 10 10 they otherwise acknowledge much piety to their parent so Hiscuni God be to be honour with thy good if thou have any but for thy parent if thou have not thou must beg from door to door but their traditional piety disannul this textual vid. Drus in mat. 15. parent that he have already dedicate all that to God to who vow be to be perform wherewith he may have help they doctor Rainolds y y rain and hart. c. 7 d. 4. say that the jew as they be prone to ungodly vow so this be a usual vow among they and they will bind it with a oath that such or such a man shall have no profit by they the oath which they herein use as most solemn be by the gift for so they be instruct z z matth. 23. that if any swear by the altar it be nothing but if by the gift he be a debtor the Pharisee therefore teach if any have say to his father by the gift thou shall have no profit by i than he may in no case do they any good against the commandment honour thy father etc. the jew use to bind their vow with a curse as they which vow a a act. 23.14 Paul death use yet to suppress the curse itself as b b Heb. 3.11 if they shall enter into my rest so these by the gift if they have any profit by i mean they shall have none thus the Talmud say he the book of their canon law and School-divinity say that a man be bind to honour his father unless he vow the contrary Masius c c Mas. in Ios. ap. dr. explain it thus that they do consecrate by say Corban all wherewith they shall have benefit their parent as if they have say let it be anathema or devote whatsoever it be with which I may profit thou and therefore those rabbin under pretext of religion allow not to spend on his parent that which he have thus vow to God Scaliger d d scal. Elench. cap. 9 thus interpret the place as if a son be by his parent admonish of his duty shall put they off with this exception unless that which I have offer for thou free i of this burden but let the more curious read it in himself and what Masius Serarius and other have write hereof the Pharisee be esteem pitiful the Sadducee more * * the one after the letter of the law exact eye for eye etc. the other accept a price in lieu thereof Deus in mat. 5. and Hircanus of a Pharise become a Sadduce and his son Alexander slay six thousand Pharisee and persecute the rest that they flee into other country p. ric. de coelesti agricultura l. 1. cruel e e n. Lyra. in mat. 16. they be much addict to astrology and the mathematics who name of the planet epiphanius f f Epipha haer. 6. rehearse as also the twelve sign there be g g Drus 3. sec. l. 2. c. 22. seven sort of the Pharisee which the Talmud reckon first Sichemita which measure piety by honour and profit as the sichemite which for the marriage of Dina endure circumcision second Nacphi which lift not his foot from the ground the three Kisai drawblood which smite his head to the wall to cause the blood to come and also shut his eye that he behold not a woman the four that stand on his perfection call mahchobathi what be my sin as if there want nothing to his righteousness the five Meduchia which go lowly and stoop the six the Pharisee of love which obey the law for love of virtue or reward the seven the Pharisee of fear which be hold in obedience by fear of punishment this they call job Pharisee the former abraham epiphanius h h epiph haer. 16. describe their strict observation some say he prescribe to themselves ten year or eight or four year continence some lay on plank which be only nine inch broad that when they sleep they may fall to the pavement so to be awaken again to prayer and keep themselves wake other put stone under they for the same end by prick to awake they other lay on thorn for that purpose Scaliger i i scal. el. c. 13. reprove epiphanius for affirm that the Pharisee ware woman attire as not agree to their austerity which despise all bed beat themselves against wall and put thorn in the fringe of their garment to prick they he think he deceive by some jew report and add that the modern jew have little or no knowledge of those ancient Pharisee but as they learn it of the christian or of pseudo-gorionides so he call the Hebrew book ascribe to joseph Ben Gorion who Drusius esteem and Scaliger prove to be a counterfeit wherein Serarius and ribera concur with they the Pharisee in a self-conceit and singularity call all but themselves in a disgraceful scorn k k ar. mont. in Euang. mat. 23. other man so say he Luke 18. I be not as other man whereas they account themselves master of other on who also they bind heavy burden in their rule and case the breach whereof they judge sin in the people but yet hold not themselves bind thereto for example every Israelite ought every day by their rule to say over the ten commandment and that in the first watch which may not be defer for danger of sin and yet among themselves they esteem it lawful at any hour of the night but upon the proselyte they impose more than on the other israelite all which they be bind to in their censure under pain of hell fire and therefore Christ say they make they twofold more the child of hell than themselves for they free themselves from many of those imposition they lay on the conscience of other and these proselyte the less trust and therefore burden they with more observation @. 4 of the sadducee after we have speak of the pharisee which love the first room which they have here obtain it follow to speak next of the sadducee a a sadducee who in the new testament be often mention b b beda in act. 5. beda give a unjust interpretation of their name say the sadducee be interpret iust. epiphanius c c Epiph. haer. 14. also fetch their name from Sedec which signify justice lyra d d lyra in act. 5. allege a reason because they be severe and rigorous in judgement they give this name of just not just to themselves Burgensis e e burgen ibid. otherwise as of arrius be the arrian so of one Sadoch say he be the sadducee call who be the first inventor of their heresy Serarius derive the name from both the pharisee be esteem more just than they as appear luke 18.9 they count themselves just and despise other their rigorous justice be unjust rigour f f Drus 3. sec. l. 3. c. 3. Elias Thisb. rad. Sadoc Pirke aboth c. 3. vid. ser. tr. l. 2. c. 19 this Sadoc or rather Saduc live under Antigonus Sochaeus who succeed to Simeon the just his fellow scholar be Baithos of who come the baithosaeans so say Abraham be David in his historical Cabal Antigonus say be you not as servant which minister to their prince on condition to receive reward Sadoc and Baithos ask he of this thing and he answer that they shall not put confidence in the reward of this life but in the world to come but they deny his word and say we never hear any thing of the world to come for they have be his disciple and they dissent from he and go to the sanctuary of mount garizim where the prince be they upbraid the pharisee with their tradition say the tradition be in the hand of the pharisee to vex themselves in this world whereas in the world to come they have no reward antigonus his word be in the treatise Pirke aboth be you not servant which minister to a prince to receive of he reward but be you as servant which minister to their prince with this condition that they receive no reward and let the fear of God be upon you g g el. in rad. Zadok Elias levita thus report it Antigonus Sochaeus have two disciple Zadok and Baiethos which leave their master to follow wicked man first begin to deny the law which be give by word of mouth and believe nothing but that which be write in the law wherefore they be call Karraim that be bible-man or textual and in the roman tongue they call they sadducee these two be report also to have forsake their master Antigonus and as apostatical heretic to have embrace sanballat new Samaritane religion at Carizim Baithos have a certain family from Sadoc otherwise hold the same opinion as hillel and Sammai among the pharisee so these be two chief master of the sadducaean school the baithucaeans minister to Baithos in vessel of silver and gold these Sadducee be call minim or Minei that be heretic they be call Karraim because they will seem Textual and scripture-man disallow tradition h h Scalig. Elenc trihaer cap. 2. of Kara which signify the scripture which be call Kara or cara of cara to read say Drusius i i Drus quaest. lib. 1. quaest. 44. because of the diligence which ought to be use in read the scripture whereunto man shall design after the jewish precept the three part of their life Abraham Zachuth call they epicure the scripture they interpret after their own sense nor regard they the word of the wiseman that be the pharisee they be of the ancient caraeans or Karraim but not of those which now be so term which as Zachuth confess confess the resurrection and reward Scaliger k k scal. sup. it seem that Philip Ferdinandus by his pharisee sadducee and intend the rabbanim and Karraim affirm by the testimony of Philip Fredrick a christian jew who have great familiarity with these Karraim at Constantinople and have be often present at their synagogue that they differ nothing from the other jew but in reject tradition and be far more honest and faithful than the rabbanim of who they be no less hate for their integrity then for reject tradition but in comparison of the l l scal. e. t. l. 2. rabbanim there be but few of the Karraim and these be of the relic of the old sadducee these two sect have nothing common between they but the text of the scripture they have a differ account of their New-moon the other jew reckon from the conjunction these Karraim from the time of apparition as do the arabian concern the Karraim now remain it be report that the other jew and they will not speak one to another so inexpiable hatred do the other jew conceive against they and postellus say m m g. Postel Alpbab 12. ling. ap. dr. there be three principal sect of the jew in the eastern part thalmudist Carraim which reject those gloss they be rich but so hate of the rest that a great part of their virgin remain unmarried and if say the common jew it shall so happen that a Caraim and a christian shall fall together into the water with like possibility of save either he will make a bridge of the Carraim to save the Christian the three sort be the samaritan of which afterward Buxdorf n n Buxdorf synagogue jud. c. 2. say that there be of these Caraim also in Poland and Leo o o leo Africa Benjamin Tudel found in his time forty of they at Beniabera at Damascus two hundred mention some place in Barbary where this sort of jew do inhabit as you may hereafter read in our six book and the eleven chapter some also be in Palestina first their difference from the pharisee be about the future reward which be deny they by consequence of that error fall into the rest to deny the resurrection the subsistence spiritual etc. they coop up God in heaven without all behold of evil they deny fate which the pharisee hold they deny spirit altogether say Lira p p lyra in act. 23. for they hold God to be corporeal the soul to die with the body angel and devil they deny good and evil they ascribe to a man freewill q q joseph de bel. jud. lib. 2. c. 7. they be inhospitall and cruel and as cruel hate of the people they be charge the devil may be slander to deny all scripture but Moses r r read this argument handle by Scaliger Elench. ca. 16. and Serar in Trihaer and m. but first in scripture this opinion of they be not mention and josephus affirm that they receive the scripture and reject tradition neither will the zealous people of the jew have endure they in the temple if they have deny their prophet for fear of who they dare not profess otherwise of John Baptist although he have leave no monument of miracle or scripture Drusius s s Drus 3. Sect. l. 3. cap. 10. will reconcile this opinion of the father which say they deny all but Moses and the other say that some of the Sadducee live in judaea other in Samaria these late happy with the samaritan deny all save Moses among these be the apostata which live in sichem mention by josephus antiq. lib. 11. cap. 8. and Eccles. 50.27 junius think that they fall from the jewish religion with Manasses in the time of Nehemias the sect of the Sadducee be diminish if not wear out after the destruction of the temple till in the year 4523. or after Scaliger 4515. and dom. 755. one Anan and Saul his son renew that doctrine because he have not receive his expect promotion to the degree of Gaon t t Gaon be a degree as a doctor with we create by imposition of hand etc. he write book against the other jew the like do one Carcasnai but of these Sadducee too much @. v. of the hessee of the a a esseni essee essen or hessee follow in the next place their name Scaliger b b Scalig. Elenc cap. 26. derive of a c c (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) to be write hessee not essee count serar l. 3. cap. 3. word which signify rest or quietness and silence both which well agree to their institution he disprove that opinion of Eusebius and other that therein follow he which think these jewish heretic be christian monk and catholic such catholic let Baronius d d Baron. annal. tom. 1. and Bellarmine f f cent. 1. lib. 2. cap. 3. boast of as the author of their monk for so they will have they which you may believe as well as before the flood Enosh and after Elias John Baptist the nazarite and rechabite be monkish votary as the cardinal will have you as for these essee he make no small ado against the century @ for understanding philo of jewish and not of christian monk e e Bellar. de men. lib. 2. cap. 5. but the love to monkery have dazzle the eye of man too much and even their history which follow will convince that opinion of falsehood beside Christianity shall have small credit of such associate indeed the late monk be much like they in superstition and idolatry though far behind in other thing but he that will see this argument dispute let he read Scaliger his confutation of Serarius the jesuite he show also that the ossen sampsaeans messalian and diverse heresy among the christian spring from these essee that the egyptian essee of which philo speak out of who Eusebius first collect that conceit and that philo himself have no skill in the Hebrew but know only the greek tongue that Paulus the eremite in Thebais be the first author of monastical live but now to come to our history of these man these essee hessee or Essene be place by Pliny on the west of dead sea g g plin. l. 5. c. 17. a people solitary and in the whole world most admirable without woman without money a nation eternal in which none be bear the weariness of other fortune be the cause of their fruitful multiplying philo in that book which he entitle that all good man be free say that there be of they above four thousand call Essaei (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that be holy not sacrifice other creature but their mind unto God some of they be husbandman some artificer for necessity not for abundance they make no weapon of war nor meddle with merchandise they have no servant but be all both free and mutual servant to each other they live perpetual chaste swear not at all nor lie esteem God the giver of all good and author of no evil their society be such that one garment one house one food one treasury one get one spend one life be in common to they all careful provide for their sick and hold the elder man in place of parent josephus who himself live among they do more large describe they h h joseph de bel. jud. lib. 2. cap. 7. he report that they be by nation Jew avoid pleasure and riches as sin account continence and contentedness great virtue they marry not but instruct the child of other respect they as their kindred in their manner not deny the lawfulness of marriage but the honesty of woman he which become one of their fraternity must make his good common oil and neatness they shun yet wear always a white garment they have officer for their common provision they have no one certain city but in each many of they have their house to stranger of their own sect they communicate their good and acquaintance and therefore carry nothing with they in their journey but weapon for fear of thief and in every city have of the same college a especial officer which provide for stranger the child under tuition of master be alike provide for nor do they change their raiment till the old be wear they neither buy nor sell but mutual communicate devout they be in the service of God for before the sun rise they speak of no profane or worldly matter but celebrate certain prayer as i i the essee be worshipper of the sun hence come the (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and sampsaei pray he to rise then by their officer be each appoint to their work till the five hour at which time they assemble together and be gird with linen garment wash themselves with cold water then do they go into their dining-room as into a temple where no man of another sect may be admit and there stay with silence the pantler set they bread in order and the cook one vessel of broth the priest give thanks as after dinner also then lay aside those their holy garment they ply their work till the evening and then sup in like manner there be never cry or tumult they speak in order and observe even without the house a venerable silence in other thing they be subject to their overseer but at their own choice may help and show mercy to other to their kindred they can give without licence what they say be certain but a oath they hate no less than perjury they study the writing of the ancient thence collect such thing as may benefit the manner of the mind or health of the body they which be studious of their sect must a year space endure trial and then after that probation of their continency must be probationer yet two year long and then upon allowance of their manner be assume into their fellowship make first deep protestation of religion towards God and justice towards man to keep faith to all but especial to prince and if they shall come to rule over other not to abuse their power not to exceed other in habit not to steal not to keep any thing secret from they of their own sect or cummunicate it to another although upon peril of life not to devise new doctrine to keep the book of their own opinion and the name of the angel offender they put from their fellowship and he which be thus excommunicate may not receive food offer of any other but eat grass and herb be consume with famine except they in compassion receive he again in extremity they give no sentence of judgement be few than a hundred if ten sit together one speak not without consent of the rest they may not spit in the midst or on the right hand they will not so much as purge nature on the sabbath k k they go not to stool on the sabbath because of that instrument which they can not use to dig and cover their excrement without sabbath break Scaliger and on other day do it very close for offend the divine light and cover it with a instrument in the earth and that in the most secret place and be wash after they be of four rank according to the time of their profession and the young sort of these be so far inferior to the rest that if one of these do touch they he wash himself as if he have touch a stranger they live long fear not death not by any torture of the roman can be compel to transgress their law but deride their tormentor rather believe to receive their soul again present hold the body to be corruptible and the prison of the immortal soul which if they have be good have a pleasant place assign they beyond the ocean but the evil to be in tempestuous stormy place of punishment some of these Essene also foretell thing to come and another sort be of they which allow of marriage but make a three year trial first of the woman and if by a constant purgation they appear fit for childbearing they wed they not for pleasure but procreation and therefore after conception do not accompany with they these woman when they wash have their sacred linen garment also as the man thus far josephus who in his l l Ios. antiq. lib. 18. cap. 2. antiq. add to these their opinion of God providence rule all thing and that they think their ceremony more holy than those of the temple and therefore send thither their gift but do not there sacrifice but by themselves follow the same course of life which the plisti m m Scaliger read not Plisti but Polistae call also ctistae scythian Nomades do among the dacian some of these essee live solitary like to hermit as be say before happy that Baenus be of this sort to who josephus n n in josep resort for imitation he live in the wilderness clothing and feed himself with such thing as the tree and plant of their own accord yield he and with often cold wash in the night and day cool the heat of lust with he josephus abode three year @. 5 of the scribe the gaulonite or galilaan a a galilaean have their b b joseph de antiq lib. 18. cap. 2. de bello jud. lib. 2. cap 7. beginning of judas elsewhere he call he Simon a galilaean who doctrine be that only GOD be to be account their lord and prince in other thing they agree with the Pharisee but for their liberty they will rather endure any the most exquisite torture together with their kindred and friend then call any mortal man their lord theudas happy mention act. 5. and that egyptian act. 21. be of this rebellious and traitorous sect and those sicarij which wear short weapon under their garment therewith murder man in assembly that egyptian c c Joseph de bell. lib. 2. ca. 2I josephus call a false prophet who under pretence of religion and name of a prophet assemble almost thirty thousand man to mount Olivet he be defeat by foelix the governor such be their zelotae in the siege of jerusalem under the mantle of religion all of they harbour and cloak treason and villainy the scribe d d scribe be not a sect but a function of which be two sort (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the one expounder of the law the other public notary or actuary recorder secretary epiphanius make difference betwixt the scribe that be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) teacher of the law and the (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) or lawyer which prescribe form of law lawcase and teach civil action but these be often take one for the other ezra be call a scribe who pulpit be mention nehem. 8. and e e Rainolds and hart. Moses chair be the seat of the scribe that be they teach the law of Moses which they use to do sit as Christ also do math. 5.2 their exposition epiphanius f f Epiph. haer. 15. say be of four sort one in the name of Moses the second in the name of their rabbin Akiba he be say to have live a hundred and twenty year and to be standard-bearer to Barchozba the three in Andan or annan the four after the Assamonai but little be to be say of these scribe more than what be before say of the Pharisee this be not a differ sect but a office or ministry whereof the Pharisee also be capable and be for false teach blame by our saviour together with the scribe the scribe be say in their exposition g g d. hall pharis and Christian to have be more textual the Pharisee more in their gloss and tradition the scribe have chief reputation for learning the Pharisee for holiness take more pain say our english josephus to go to hell the scribe profess both disputation and observation of many thing say Arias Montanus h h ar. mont. in Euang. mat. 15. but not so exact as the Pharisee for the Pharisee though not so learned as the other think themselves more holy than they because they observe not only those thing which in the common opinion be think meet but those thing which be least which the people observe not which other have add this they be ambitious of as of some great perfection for there be a threefold state of man the doctor Pharisee and people of the land the proverb be the people of the land be the footstool of the Pharisee and this i i Vid. Drus in io. 7.49 the people of the land be not holy and they discern not the law nor wisdom yea say the book Musar he shall not take the daughter of the people of the land because they be abomination and their wife be abomination and of their daughter it be say curse be he that lie with a beast thus do these proud doctor and Pharisee tread the way to the popish clergy in contemn the laiety as unworthy of the law and scripture which in a unknown tongue be seal from they and feast they at high feast with a half sacrament and in their ordinary private mass with none at all be not these fair reason k k Gerson l. 2. connisun spec. the laiety may if they have a whole communion touch the cup and some of they have beard and some have the palsy and their dignity be inferior to the priestly etc. the book aboth show how the people of the lord require this supercilious generation talk of they and scoff at they for their observation when I be of the people of the land r. Aquiba there say I say who will give i a disciple of the wise I will bite he as a ass for that insolence and because they will not suffer themselves to be touch of they the people be tie to observe the precept mention or by necessity of consequence draw out of the bible the Pharisee as be say add their tradition the scribe manner l l ar. mont. in marc. 1.22 of teach be cold and weak consist in certain argument which rather afflict then affect the mind of the hearer in certain nicety and scrupulous question and sometime inextricable and therefore the people hear Christ as speak with authority and not as the scribe but to let pass these schoolman and those canonist let we come to their other sect and sort of profession @. 7 of many other jewish sect and heresy the hemerobaptist a a hemerobaptist be number by epiphanius b b Epiph. haer. 17. among the jewish heresy which say he in other thing differ not from the scribe and pharisee but in their doctrine of the resurrection and in infidelity be like to the Sadducee and every day in all time of the year they be baptize or wash whence they have their name but this custom of daily wash say Scaliger c c scal. Elench. cap. 31. be common to all the ancient jew which will seem better than their fellow and not only observe of the Pharisee essee and hemerobaptist if such a sect may be add at this time in Palestina many do it not once but often in the day the mahometans observe it the jew as a d d Manahem ap. Drus l. 2 jew have write be so zealous herein that they will not eat with he that do eat with unwashed hand and one of their holy man be invite by such a host rise up and go his way allege to he when he will have recall he that he must not eat the bread of he which have a evil eye and beside his meat be unclean the priest when they keep their course in the temple abstain from wine and eat not of the tithe before they have wash their whole body the Pharisee and essee compose themselves to this sanctity the great part of the Pharisee and all the essee abstain from wine and both use daily wash especial before they eat and as many heretic profess themselves christian retain many thing of Judaism so these hemerobaptist learn they this daily wash it seem by he that these be christian rather then jewish heretic and so be the nazaraean e e nazaraean also which some reckon among the jewish sect who embrace the gospel of Christ but will not relinquish their Judaism unless we say with Jerome that while they will be both jew and christian they be neither jew nor christian these nazaraean or nazoraeans Scaliger affirm be mere Karraim scripture Jew but because of their obstinacy in the law the first council of the apostle determine against they as for the nazarite of the old testament Moses describe they and their observation not to cut their hair not to drink wine strong drink etc. such be Samson but these can be no sect hold in every thing the same doctrine with the jew and only for a time be bind by vow to these rite but for those nazaraean epiphanius f f Epiph. haer. 18. make they a jewish sect not without cause if such be their opinion as he describe they their dwell be beyond jordan in gilead and bashan as the fame go say he by nation Jew and by observe many thing like to the jew herein they differ they do not eat any thing which have life they offer not sacrifice for they count it unlawful to sacrifice or to eat flesh they disallow the five book of Moses they indeed confess Moses and the father by he mention and that he have receive the law not this yet which be write but another g g phil. Brix Philastrius say they accept the law and prophet but place all righteousness in carnal observation and nourish the hair of their head place therein all their virtue profess to imitate Samson who be call a Nazarite from who the pagan afterward name their valiant man Hercules next to these do h h Haeres. 19 epiphanius place the ossen i i Ossen dwell in ituraea moab and beyond the salt or dead sea to these one elixai in the time of Trajan join himself he have a brother name jexai Scaliger here and every where acute say k k scal. Elenc cap. 27. that the Essene and ossen be the same name as be write with the selfsame Hebrew letter differ only in pronunciation as the abyssyne pronounce Osrael Chrostos for Israel christus and the arabian Elxai and his brother jexai be not proper name but the appellation of the sect itself as he prove but they agree not so well in profession as in name with the Essene for they be but a issue of those ancient essen hold some thing of they other of their own as concern the worship of angel reprove by the apostle Coloss. 2.21 in which the Essene and ossen agree and other thing there mention touch not taste not handle not and in worship of the sun whereof they be call sampsaeans or sunner sun-man as epiphanius interpret that name those thing wherein they differ be bring in by that who of this his sect be call Elxai he be say epiphanius a jew he ordain salt and water and earth and bread and heaven and the sky and the wind to be swear by in divine worship and sometime he prescribe other seven witness heaven and water and spirit and the holy angel of prayer and oil and salt and earth he hate continency and enjoin marriage of necessity many imagination he have as receive by revelation he teach hypocrisy as in time of persecution to worship idol so as they keep their conscience free and if they confess any thing with their mouth but not in their heart thus ancient be that changeling aequivocation he bring his author one phineas of the stock of the ancient phineas the son of Eleazar who have worship Diana in Babylon to save his life his follower esteem he a secret virtue or power until the time of Constantine marthus and Marthana two woman of his stock remain in succession of his honour and be worship in that country for god because they be of his seed marthus die a while since but Marthana still live their spital and other excrement of their body those heretic esteem and reserve for relic to the cure of disease which yet prevail nothing he mention Christ but it be uncertain whether he mean the lord jesus he forbid pray to the eastward and bid turn towards jerusalem from all part he detest sacrifice as never offer by the father he deny the eat of flesh among the jew and the altar and fire as contrary to God but water be fit he describe Christ after his measure four and twenty Schaem in length that be fourscore and sixteen mile and the four part thereof in breadth to wit six or four and twenty mile beside the thickness and other fable he acknowledge a holy ghost but of the female sex like to Christ stand like a statue above the cloud and in the midst of two mountain he bid none shall seek the interpretation but only say these thing in prayer word which he have take out of the Hebrew tongue as in part we have find his prayer be this l l Scaliger think they be three sentence and not a prayer thus epiphanius relate it and thus construe I can say expound although they like our devout catholic need no exposition let the humility pass from my father of their condemnation and conculcation and labour the conculcation in condemnation by my father from the humility pass in the apostleship of perfection thus be Elxai with his follower opinionate otherwise jewish epiphanius speak of his sect else where often as when he mention the ebonite m m Epiph. haer. 53. and the sampsaeans this book both the ossee and nazoraeans and ebionite use the sampsaeans n n samsaeans have another book they say of his brother they acknowledge one God and worship he use certain wash some of they abstain from live creature and they will die for elxai his posterity which they have in such honour that if they go abroad the people will gather up the dust of their foot for cure and their spital and use they for amulet and preservative they admit neither the apostle nor prophet they worship water esteem it as a god believe that life be from thence Scaliger also affirm that the o o massalian massalian which word epiphanius interper (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) such as pray according to the opinion and practice of those heretic be * * scal. ele. c. 28. first a jewish sect and a slip of the essee and after by marriage with some false christian make such a gallimaufry as after when we come to speak of the pseudochristian sect shall God will be relate for of jewish they become christian heretic the p p herodian herodian q q Epiph. haer. 20 otherwise agree with the rest thought Herod to be the Messiah move by Jacob prophecy false interpret that the sceptre shall not depart from juda till Shilo come when as therefore they see Herod a stranger to possess the kingdom they in-terpreted as aforesaid some make question whether this be the name of a sect or of Herod soldier Drus r r Drus 3. sec. 1. lib. cap. 3. observe out of a commenter upon Persius sat. 5. these word Herod reign among the jew in the part of Syria in the day of Augustus the herodian therefore observe the birthday of Herod as also the sabbath in the which day they set lamp burn and crown with violet in the window elsewhere he cite out of a lexicon of the Hebrew law that they be call herodian of Herod name and dorsians of the place whence they be bring for by nation they be Greek so say the author of Baal Aruch Herod the king bring greek out of the desert scal. euseb pag. 150. and bring they up in the habitable land Scaliger say that they be a corporation or guild and beside their heretical opinion that he be the Messiah enter into society for cost and charge in common to be bestow on sacrifice and other solemnity wherewith they honour Herod alive and dead Arias Montanus s s ar. mont. in Euang. matth. 22.6 think that the herodian be politician that little respect religion they think the commonwealth shall be establish and that can not stand without prince nor can prince nourish themselves or they without money and therefore propound that question to our saviour touch Caesar tribute other think they make hotchpotch of Judaism and gentilism as Herod have do in which it be like his successor succeed he this conjecture be mention by t t Beza Annot. in matth. 22. Beza who yet rather think that the herodian be Herod courtier move thereto by the syrian translation which have debeth hiraudis Herod domestical thus think u u jun. in Annot. syr. tran. junius of they also who say that when the Pharisee can not entrap he in the law they send their disciple to question he of tribute have before agree which usual they do not with the herodian to stand by unknown as witness if he have answer any thing whereat Caesar may have be offend and this seem most likely for after Herod death how can they hold he for Messiah another sect among these of the circumcision 10 10 euseb hist Eccles. 4. c. 21. Eusebius out of hegesippus name the y y Masbothaei Masbothaei or masbotheani for say hegesippus be of their number which arise out of seven sect in the jewish people which sect have their beginning Simon of who the symonian and cleobius of who the cleobian dositheus of who the dosithean and Gortheus of who the gorthean and Mashotheus of who the masbothean and from the same fountain issue the menandrian marcionist carpocratian valentinian basilidian and saturnilian and a little after there be diverse sect among the israelite essee galilaean hemerobaptist masbothean samaritan Sadducee Pharisee the word Masbothaei z z Scalig. Elene cap. 9 Scaliger say signify sabbatist or sabbatarian because they profess to have learn the observation of the sabbath from Christ and therein differ from the other jew he there name and little else have we but their name even the name also of the wicked shall rot diverse other sect if they may bear that name as the genite a a Genites or genist which stand upon their stock and kindred the reason breidenbachius allege because in the babylonish captivity or after they marry not strange wife and therefore boast themselves of the purity of Abraham seed the b b merissaeans merissaeans or merist which be as the name import sprinkler of their holy-water Breidenbach say they make a division of the scripture and receive only some part of they the morbonei he add sabbatise in every thing the c c hellenian helienians of hellenius d d cleobians the cleobian and e e theobulian theobulians we can but mention of the f f tubiens tubiens as little save that they be say to be a college or fellowship and less of g g Ganaei Ganaei and such like if there be any other name that remain as the rot bone of the consume carcase of heresy and heretic and either be unknown or degenerate into some or other sect of pseudo-christian which require another task the h h coelicolae coelicolae be Jew i i scal. Elench. serar cap. 31. but corrupt embrace Christianity for they be massalian which have their house or place of prayer abroad in the open air of who Iwenal be understand so Scaliger read not and these also be a offspring of the essee and from these proceed the massalian they be baptize revolt to their former Judaism and bear the name of christian retain the rite of those coelicolae or heaven-worshipper the k k Cannaei Cannaei be a devout society and order give to holiness of life and observation of the law of who be Simon Kannaeus mat. 10. call zealot the interpretation of the former as l l Beza Annot. in matth. 10. Beza and m m scal. el. c. 1. Scaliger show suidas call they observant of the law who ananus shut in the temple their (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) or n n mourner mourner be such as lament with continual fast pray and weep the destruction of their city * * see cap. 10. philast Episc. lib. haeresib Ophila temple and nation as elsewhere be say I may add out of that ancient father Philastrius who s. Augustine say he have see at Milan with s. Ambrose diverse other heresy among the people of the jew before the incarnation of Christ no few than eight and twenty of which we have already mention the most and principal he add the Ophitae or serpentine which worship a serpent say that he first procure we the knowledge of good and evil for which GOD envy he and cast he from the first heaven into the second whence they expect his come esteem he some virtue of GOD and to be worship another sort be the Caiani which commend Cain for fratricide say Caiaeni that Cain be make of the power of the devil Abel of another power but the great power prevail in Cain to slay Abel a three sort reckon by Philastrius be the Sethiani Sethiani worshipper of Seth the son of Adam who affirm that two man be create in the beginning and the angel dissent the feminine power prevail in o o here our author be obscure heaven for with they be male and female god and goddess Eve perceive that bring forth Seth and place in he a spirit of great power that the adversary power may be destroy of Seth they say that Christ shall come of his stock yea some of they conceive he to be the very Christ the Heliognosti call also Devictaci Devictaci worship the sun which say they know all the thing of GOD and yield all necessary to man other there be which worship frog thereby think to appease divine wrath Frog worshipper which in pharaoh time bring frog upon the land of Egypt he reckon the accaronite which worship a fly of which else where be speak as also the Thamuzites of Thamuz which he say be the son of a heathen king who image the jewish woman worship with tear and continual sacrifice and that Pharaoh which rule Egypt in Moses time be of that name Astar also and Astarot he say be king of Syria and Egypt worship after their death but perhaps more true we have express these thing in our former book Benjamin Teudelensis speak of a sect in his time which he call cyprian and epicure who profane the evening before the sabbath and observe the evening of the first day I may add to their sect the diverse Christ or messiase which in diverse age they have but that I have refer to the ten chapter chap. 9 of the samaritan it remain to speak of the samaritan sect Samaria be the city royal of the ten tribe after that Omri who as other his predecessor have reign before at Ticzah have buy the mountain Shomron a a 1. reg. 16.24 of one shemer for two talent of silver and build thereon this city which he call after the name shemer lord of the mountain in vain therefore be it to seek the name of the samaritan from the signification of the b b Epiph. har. 9 Chytr Onomast. word which be keep see they be so call of the place and the place of this their ancient lord it remain the chief seat of the kingdom as long as the same endure and namely till the day of Hoshea their last king in who time c c 2. reg. 17. Salmanasar the assyrian carry the israelite thence Esarhaddon the son of Senacherib otherwise call Osnappar thus say d d Ezr. 4.2.10 Hezra and therefore epiphanius be deceive in ascribe this act to Nabuchodonosor in the time of the captivity forty year before the return send to inhabit that region colony from Babel and from Cuthan and from avarice and from Hannah and from sepharuaim Babel be know Cutha and avarice e e Tremel annot. in reg. 22. 7. josephus think Cutha to be persian be esteem part of the desert of Arabia the other of Syria and Mesopotamia it seem that most of they be of Cutha because all of they after pass into that name and be of the jew call Cuthaei as witness f f joseph antiq. l. 9 14. and l. 11. 4. josephus * * Elias Thisrad cuth Elias levita give the same reason and add that a jew may not say amen to a samaritan or cuthan blessing the cuthi say he be the subtle beggar of all man in the world and from they as he think come those cosine rogue gipsy or egyptian which so many age have trouble so many country of Europe these heathen serve not the lord and therefore the lord send lion among they which slay they wherefore they send to the king of Assyria who send thither one of the captive priest of Israel to teach they how to worship GOD epiphanius call his name g g the hebrew call he Dosthai as Drusius cite Senacherib send to Samaria r. Dosthai the son of jannai to teach they the law Drus l. 3. 4. Tertullian call he dositheus and so do Jerome father the samaritan sect on he esdras he dwell at bethel and as some conceive teach rather that idolatrous worship whereof bethel have be before the beth-aven where ieroboam have place his golden calf than the true worship of the true jehovah howsoever every nation say the text make they god and put they in the house of the high place which the samaritan have make the man of Babel make succoth Benoth and the man of Cutha make nergal and the man of Hamath ashima and the auim Nibhaz and tartak and the sepharuam burn their child in the fire to Adrammelech and Anammelech their god thus they fear the lord and serve their god after the manner of the nation and so continue a mongrel religion beget of a bastard or heretical Judaism and wild paganism what those god be it be uncertain and interpreter agree not of succoth Benoth be h h l. 1. c. 13. already speak Wolphius interpret i i Wolph in 2. reg 17. nergal a wild hen ashima a goat Nibhaz a dog tarkak a ass Adramelech a mule Anamelech a horse thus say he the hebrew expound they and he suppose these creature be among they canonize and sacred as the persian be say to worship a cock the Proembari of Africa a dog other people other creature some be of opinion that nergal be that continual fire which these cuthaean after the persian manner keep in their pyraeth place enclose for that purpose as in our persian relation shall follow and Kimchi say that Adramelech have the form of a peacock Anamelech of a pheasant * * seld. de d. Syris but neither be the trifle rr. too far to be trust nor have we any other good testimony thus their religion continue till after the return of the jew from captivity to who they will have be officious helper in building of the temple which be refuse they be come their enemy ezra 4. and hinder a building the long time but the temple be build and religion establish among the jew and their state flourish k k Ios. antiq. 11.7 Sanballat give his daughter Nicaso to Manasses the brother of jaddus the high priest in the time of Darius the last persian monarch this Nehemiah mention but deign not to name he affirm that he chase he from he of which some l l Wolph in Neheus descant whether it be by exile or excommunication or some other punishment r. Salomo interpret it of exile pelican of excommunication Drusius m m Drus 3. sec. l. 3. c. 2. have a discourse out of a jewish author which relate the form of that first anathema and judicial curse not unmeet here to be mention denounce against the samaritan for hinder the work of the temple Zorobabel and joshua say he gather all the congregation into the temple of the lord and bring three hundred priest and three hundred trumpet and three hundred book of the law and as many child and sound and the levite sing and play on instrument curse with all kind of anathema the chuthean in the secret of the name tetragrammaton and in write write upon table and with the anathema of the house of the high judgement and the anathema of the house of the low judgement that none of Israel shall eat the bread of the cuthean whereupon it be say he which eat a Samaritan bread be as he that eat swine flesh and that a cuthean shall not be a proselyte in Israel nor shall have part in the resurrection of the dead thus they write and seal and send unto all Israel which be in Babylonia which heap upon they anathema upon anathema that concern their become proselyte Drusius doubt whether it may not be translate that a stranger cuthaean shall not abide in Israel which be more likely the other have be more impious their zeal to make proselyte of all nation be know to return to Manasses josephus say that the high priest and the elder put he from the altar who therefore go to Sanballat his father in law and tell he that he love his daughter well but will not for she lose his priesthood Sanballat reply that if he will retain his daughter he will not only maintain he in his priesthood but procure he a high-priest place and make he prince of all his province and will build a temple like to that of jerusalem in mount garizim which look over Samaria high than the other hill and that with the consent of k. Darius hereupon Manasses abide with he and many priest and israelite be entangle with like marriage revolt to he and be maintain by Sanballat but now alexander prevail against Darius Sanballat who religion be policy rebel and take part with Alexander and in reward thereof obtain leave to build his temple whereof Manasses enjoy to he and his successor the pontifical dignity then be the circumcision divide some as say the samaritan woman n n joh. 4.20 worship in this mountain other at jerusalem the zeal which the samatitans have to their temple appear o o Jos. antiq. li. 13. c. 6. in the time of Ptolomaeus philometor when at Alexandria Sabbaeus and Theodosius with their samaritan contend with Andronicus and the jew these challenge to jerusalem those to garizim the lawful honour of a temple both party swear by God and the king to bring proof of their assertion out of the law and beseech the king to do he to death that shall not make his part good and thereupon the samaritan fail in proof be adjudge to punishment the samaritan in the prosperity of the jew profess themselves their kinsman and ally in adversity disclaim they and their god also as appear p p antiq. l. 12. c. 7. in their epistle to Antiochus that figure of Antichrist and persecuter of the jewish religion in which they call themselves sidonian dwell in sichem and say that move by ancient superstition they have embrace the feast of the sabbath and build a temple of a nameless deity have offer therein solemn sacrifice whereas therefore their original be sidonian and not jewish please he to enact that their temple may bear name of jupiter graecanicus and they may live after the greekish rite these thing Antiochus easy grant this sichem be call Sichar io. 4.5 it be after that call neapolis and last of the colony which Vespasian or Domitian place there Flavia Caesarea of that colony be it be scaliger testimony animal euseb pag. 201. which occasion epiphanius his error that of a samaritan he become a christian whereas he be never a samaritan in religion but only of this samaritan colony in this be in the age of Benjamin * * Itin. beniam one hundred Samaritan the word of Benjamin be worthy the insert I come say he to Samaria in which the palace of ahab be yet to be know a place very delectable with spring Rivers garden etc. and have not one jew inhabit two league from hence be Nables sometime call sichem in mount Ephraim where be no jew the city be situate between the hill of garizim and Heball there be about a hundred cuthaean which observe only the law of Moses they be call Samaritan they have priest of the posterity of Aaron which rest in peace who marry not with any other but the man or woman of their own stock and be there common call Aaronites they sacrifice and burn their offering in a synagogue which they have on mount garizim cite out of the law thou shall give a blessing upon the mount gerizim this say they be the house of the sanctuary and on the Paschall and other solemnity they sacrifice on a altar in mount garizim make of stone take by the israelite out of jordan they boast themselves to be of the tribe of Ephraim with they be the sepulchre of joseph he add which Scaliger say be a slender that they want three letter he ch Ain whereas they read the pentateuch in so many and the same letter in which Moses write they as Postel and Scaliger affirm and those which the jew use be late counterfeit the example whereof Scaliger have give we in their computation in the last edition of his emendation yea they be now also further from idolatry then the jew themselves howsoever in their Talmud and else where they brand they with false and odious imputation Benjamin also testify that they abstain from pollution by the dead or bone the slay and the sepulcher and every day when they go into the synagogue they put off their usual clothes and have wash their body with water put on other clothes sacred only to this purpose Benjamin find of these cuthaean two hundred in Caesarea at Benibera or new Ascalon three hundred and at Damascus four hundred Hircanus by force take both sichem and garizim two hundred year after the foundation of this temple as testify josephus q q antiq. l. 13. cap. 17. happen this desolation thereof the zeal yet continue as appear by many testimony of scripture the jew meddle not with the samaritan which make r r io. 4.9 the woman wonder that Christ ask drink of a samaritan another time the samaritan will not receive he because his s s Luke 9.52 behaviour be as though he will go to jerusalem for which fact of they the son of thunder will have bring lightning from heaven upon they and the jewish despite can not object worse in their most venomous slander then t t joh. 8.42 thou be a samaritan this jerusalem-iourney through the samaritan country cause bloody war and slaughter betwixt the galilaean u u Ios. antiq. l. 20. c. 5. and they in the time of cumanus to the destruction of many and before that in the day of Pilate a cosine prophet abuse their zeal bid they to assemble in mount garizim 10 10 antiq. l. 18. c. 5. with promise there to show they the sacred vessel which say he Moses have there hide whereupon they seditious assemble and besiege Tirabatha Pilate come upon they with his force and cut they in piece their opinion beside those aforesaid be y y Epiphan. haeres. 9 that only the five book of Moses be canonical scripture the rest they receive not they acknowledge not the resurrection nor the trinity and in zeal of one GOD abandon all idolatry which it seem be receive of they after the building of the temple and mixture with the apostate jew the scripture testify otherwise of their former devotion they wash themselves with urine when they come from any stranger be forsooth pollute and if they have touch one of another nation they dive themselves garment and all in water such a profanation be the touch of one of another faith they have a dead corpse in abomination present the samaritan z z Drus 3. sect. l. 2. if he meet a jew Christian or mahometan he say unto they touch i not Scaliger out of the arabian geographer a a scal. em. tem. l. 7. tell of a island still inhabit with these samaritan in the red sea which appear by their custom when any come on shore forbid to touch they this arrogant superstition remain with they the samaritan chronicle be cite by Eusebius chron. l. 1. b b scal. Annot. in eus chron. and in Isag. can. see em. t. ult. edit pag 616. Scaliger say he have a copy of their great chronicle translate out of Hebrew into arabian but in samaritan letter it differ somewhat from the Hebrew account the jew confound c c Ios. albo. say they deny the resurrection and immortality of the soul the samaritan and sadducee as if they be but one Sect the difference have appear for the sadducee accept all the bible the samaritan Moses only the sadducee deny the soul immortality and reward the samaritan in their chronicle acknowledge both a place of reward and punishment after this life but whether they believe the resurrection or no he doubt the sadducee deny spirit angel devil the samaritan confess they the samaritan also use still those ancient letter call phoenician which the hebrew use before the captivity which whoso list to view let he see their character and scaliger large note thereon in his annotation upon Eusebius chronicle and a brief of their chronicle and calendar therein write in his emendation as before be say which they begin very religious after their manner in the name of jah the GOD of Israel there be none like to jah our god. one jehova GOD of God lord of lord a great GOD strong and terrible there be none like to the GOD jeschurun the GOD of Abraham Isaac Jacob JOSEPH and our lord Moses Eleazar and phineas he confirm unto you the blessing of our lord Moses Jehova GOD of our father add unto you as many as you be a thousand time and bless you this inscription the great synagogue of garizim always use when they write to other samaritan-synagogue the calendar of the year follow they be very ignorant of antiquity and know none other but that they come thither with Moses out of Egypt neither can they tell any thing of the old king or defection of the ten tribe under ieroboam they light touch the name of Samson Samuel David and other in their chronicle which they call the book of joshua Ptolemaus Lagi convey colony of they into the city of Egypt the relic whereof be those samaritan which have a synagogue in the great city cairo and those also in the island before mention in respect of the mount garizim the seat and sanctuary of their holy the samaritan call themselves man which belong to the bless hill and still every year they in Egypt receive from the great synod of garizim the type of the year follow two of which Scaliger have see and have express one of they the samaritan be divide also into diverse sect as epiphanius * * Epiph. haeres. 13. rehearse one whereof be call d d dosithaeans dosithean if it be lawful to reckon they samaritan which acknowledge as epiphanius acknowledge of they the resurrection of the dead they abstain from such thing as have life some of they from marriage after they have be before marry and some continue in virginity they observe circumcision and the sabbath and they touch no man but hold every man in abomination report go also of their fast and exercise they have name of dositheus who be a jew and have well profit in their law but not receive promotion suitable to his ambition revolt to the samaritan and hatch this sect among they and when afterward in a singularity he have go aside into a cave and there mew up himself and persist in hypocrisy and fast he there die as the fame go through his wilful want of bread and water after a few day some resort to he find his dead body crawl with worm and compass with fly of this name dositheus there be diverse e e Drus 3. sect. l. 3. 6. two of they live after the come of Christ one a jew son of r. jannai the other a samaritan which endeavour to persuade his countryman that he be the Christ which Moses have prophesy of as f f Orig. cont. cell l. 2. Origen report and say of he be the dosithean name another be mention in g g johasin ab. Zach. johasin who live in the time of Christ the disciple of Sammai and before these be another Dosthai the son also of janna of who it be say in h h lib. Ilmednu that Senacherib send r. Dostha to Samaria to teach the samaritan the Law this seem to be he who before out of epiphanius we have call esdras the first founder of the samaritan heresy and so Tertullian i i tert. proscrip adverse haer. l. 1. say of he dositheus the samaritan be the first that reject the prophet as not have speak by the holy ghost the like testimony Jerome give of he his colleague and companion be say to be one Sebua the suppose author of the sebuaean in Ilmedenu k k ap. Drus pag. 260. he be call Sebaia or Sebuia l l Orig. princip 4. c. 2. dositheus also teach that how and in what position of body he be in the sabbath morning in the same he ought to continue all that day without change of gesture or place that if he do sit he shall sit in the same place all day long and so of lie or other habit of body the author of this dosithean sect proper so call live as Scaliger m m scal. Elench. trihar cap. 15. think about or at the destruction of the temple and can not be that first Dustai or Dosthai the sebuaeans n n sebuaean you have hear in Drusius opinion have their name of Sebuia the companion of Dosthai send by Senacherib or rather by Esarhaddon which if it be so it seem this sect be ancient haply nothing differ from the other samaritan epiphanius make a difference o o Epiph. haer. 11 but the cause he allege be the jew refusal of their help at jerusalem which be common to all the samaritan the difference he allege be the transpose of their solemnity for that quarrel betwixt they and the jew from the jewish time so that they keep their Passover in August which they make the beginning of their year Pentecost in autumn and that of tabernacle when the jew keep their Passover neither may they sacrifice in garizim observe such differ solemnity * * scal. canon Isagog l. 3. pag. 218. 219. Scaliger who I shame not thus often to name in relation of these thing too intricate for i own or for common wit to find both in his treatise against Serarius cap. 1. and 21. and in his canon Isagog lib. 3. dissent from epiphanius say that they dissent not from the other samaritan but that the name be a common name which the jew ascribe to the samaritan it signify (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) weeker which name they give they because that every week between the Passover and Pentecost they observe that day of the week in which the computation of the fifty day begin with as great solemnity as the feast of Pentecost itself this day from which the reckon begin be call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the second because it be the next day after the or feast day but the samaritan reckon the second after the sabbath and so in all that space of fifty day keep the first day of the week that be Sunday holy thus they keep seven Pentecosts in a year and perhaps he but conjecture as they have these imaginary Pentecosts so they may at other time of the year have such imaginary solemnity of other feast from that word (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the second day and next to the feast of unleavened bread the sabbath say Scaliger in the same place be call in order the first (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the second sabbath after that day (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and so the rest and thus he expound those word of Luke cap. 6. v. 1. that be the first sabbath after that (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) or first day of the fifty which begin to be reckon the next day after easter till Pentecost a place hitherto very obscure epiphanius do number for samaritan sect the Essene p p esseni of which be before show that they be jew and otherwise heretical and idolatrous in respect of their morning devotion to the sun for which it seem they may not certain they do not communicate with other jew in the temple and sacrifice these pertain not to this place as not Samaritan a four samaritan sect he account the Gortheni q q Gortheni or Gorthaieni scal. de E.T. l. 5. which differ from the rest at least from the sebuians in keep their solemnity Paschal Pentecost and of tabernacle at the jewish time and observe but one day holy as likewise the fast day the jew still observe the sabbatical year and so do the samaritan also but not at the same time for that which be the four of the seven with the jew be the sabbatical of the samaritan chap. x. the miserable destruction and dispersion of the jew from the time of the desolation of their city and temple to this day @. i. of the destruction of the jew under TITUS the curse threaten unto this superstitious and rebellious nation a a Deut. 28.28 madness blindness astonishment of heart to grope at noon-day as the blind grope in darkness to be a wonder a proverb and a common talk among all people among which they shall be scatter from one end of the world to the other be this day fulfil in our eye both in respect of their polity and religion God just judgement seal that their own imprecation b b math. 27.25 his blood be on we and on our child and pursue they in all place of their dispersion through the revolution of so many age odious be they not to the christian alone but to the heathen people that know not GOD c c p. galat. l. 4. c. 28. Bidulph letter nor will the Turk receive a jew into the fellowship of their Mahometan superstition except he have pass first from his Judaism through the purgation of a christian profession unto that their no less ridiculous and miserable devotion d d 1. thes. 2.15 God they please not say Paul and be contrary unto all man this their wretchedness although it seem to begin when Herod a stranger seize their state yet be that infinite more then recompense when their messiah so long before prophesy and expect come among his own but his own receive he not yea they crucify the lord of glory but even then also do not the long-suffering GOD reject they Christ pray for they the apostle preach to they remission of this and all their sin till that as Paul charge they they e e act. 13.46 put these thing from they and judge themselves unworthy of eternal life GOD remove this golden candlestick from among they to the gentile and let out his vineyard to other husbandman famine sword and pestilence at once assail they and what shall not assail what will not prevail against the enemy of GOD jerusalem sometime the glory of the earth the type of heaven the city of the great king and Mother-city of the jewish kingdom from this incomparable height receive as irrecoverable a fall besiege and sack by Titus and yet more violent torture with inward convulsion and civil gripe then by outward disease or foreign hostility josephus and josippus f f joseph bel. jud. and antiq. josippus Hebr. both english have handle the same at large both which can acquaint the english reader with the particular beside many thousand by Vespasian and the roman slay in other place of judaea jerusalem the holy city be make a prison slaughter-house and grave of her own people first have divine mercy g g euseb hist Eccles. lib. 3. c. 5. by oracle remove the christian to Pella out of the danger that without any impediment the floodgate of vengeance may be set wide open for desolation blackguard to enter here may you see the strong wall shake and fall with the push of the iron ram there the roman bathe their sword in jewish entrale here the seditious captain disagree in mutual quarrel write in blood there agree in rob and burn the city and in slaughter of the citizen here hunger paint with pale colour in the ghastly countenance of the starve inhabitant there dyed in red with the blood of their dear child which the tyranny of famine force to re-enter into the tendrest-hearted mother womb sometime the place of conception now of burial every where the eye be entertain with differ spectacle of diversify death the ear with cry of the insult soldier of the famish child of man and woman even now feel the torment or murder hand of the seditious the scent receive infectious plague and contagion from those human body with inhumanity butcher who no humanity bury the taste be leave a mere and idle faculty save that it always taste the more distasteful poison of not-tasting and emptiness what then do they feel or what do they not feel where all sense seem to be reserve that they may have sense of punishment where all outward inward public private bodily ghostly plague be so ready executioner of the divine sentence the continual sacrifice first cease for want of priest of the last course to who in order it have descend after for want of a temple before pollute with ethnic sacrifice and murder of the priest and soldier and last ruin the sacred vessel thereof be carry to Rome for ornament of the temple of peace which Vespasian have there h h Ios. de bel. jud. l. 7. c. 24. erect eleven hundred thousand be number of they which perish in this destruction the remnant that escape the roman sword for the most part perish after in war or kill themselves or be reserve either for solemnity of triumph or if they be under seventeen year of age sell unto perpetual slavery i i josep bell. jud. l. 7. c. 17. ninety seven thousand of these jewish slave be number Galatinus k k p. galat. de arcan l. 4. c. 21. account two hundred thousand and that the hand of GOD may be the more manifest they which at their Passover feast have crucify the son of GOD be at the same time gather together in jerusalem as to a common prisonhouse of that whole nation and they which have buy Christ of the traitor judas for thirty piece of silver be sell thirty of they for one piece thus be these man forsake of GOD that have forsake GOD make man who for man have vouchsafe to cry to GOD why have thou forsake i their own Talmud relate how GOD have before forsake their holy in these word forty year before the desolation of the temple the lot no more ascend on the right hand nor do the piece of scarlet grow white nor the evening lampe burn and the door of the temple open of themselves the time be the passion of Christ when the veil of the temple be rend which be here call a self-opening of the door the lot be that levit. 16.8 which be cast for the two goat that on the right hand be sacrifice the other be send into the wilderness and a piece of scarlet put between his horn at the door of the temple which if it look white they rejoice as have their sin pardon according to that Es. 1.18 their scarlet sin shall be as white as snow these sign cease argue a cease of that ceremonial religion which then die when Christ die although for the more honourable funeral they be not quite bury so soon till the apostle have preach and by miracle confirm the gospel and God justice have make the temple itself sometime the throne now the sepulchre of those ceremony bury in the ruin of that holy city and temple not thence to be rake or revive by any without antichristian sacrilege but let we see what follow among the jew which reject Christ the truth body and substance of their typical ceremony @. 2 of the destruction of the jew under adrian GAlatinus tell we of two false prophet who come in their own name they receive for their Messiah have before refuse JESUS that come in his father name both these be call Ben or Barchosba that be the son of lie Sanbedrin lib. 2. Helech r. Moses ben. Maimon the one not long after the passion of CHRIST if the jew be not the son of lie which write it the other in the time of Adrian rabbi Akiba famous for his wisdom for his twenty four thousand disciple and for his long life receive both in their succeed age and interpret to the first that place of a a hag. 2.7 8. Haggai I will shake the heaven etc. but afterward the slay he as the Salmud witness which also affirm b b Tractat. megbila that Titus enjoin the jew which he suffer to remain that from thence they shall no more observe sabbath nor abstain from menstruous woman forty eight year after the destruction of jerusalem the jew make the city * * Betharon hierom. adverse Ruffin l. 3. c. 9 bitter to be their chief city and rebel by the persuasion of Benecochab so he call himself that be the son of the star of he Jerome testify that he have a juggle trick to kindle straw in his mouth and breathe it forth as if he have spit fire of he do r. Akiba which have be armour-bearer to the former interpret c c Talmud jerosol l. Taanith that prophecy of Balaam num. 23. there shall arise a star of jacob adrian then emperor besiege they in bitter where if you believe the jewish d d tract Beeressith rabb fable be 80000. which sound trumpet every one of they captain of many band which help Barchosba so they call he after that be the son of lie who have two hundred thousand soldier which to testify their love and valour have cut off every man a finger from his hand after three year and six month the city be take and e e lib echa this their Messiah slay together with such multitude that the blood reach to the horse mouth and carry down great stream with the stream thereof run to the sea four mile from bitter and Adrian have a vine-yard eighteen mile square which he hedge with those slay carcase as high as a man can reach a reacher I think there be two river f f lib. massech Ghittin in the region of ierico and the three part of they by estimation of the wiseman be the blood of the slay and seven year together do the people of the gentile fatten and hearten their vine only with the blood of the jew Adrian slay also at Alexandria in Egypt seven hundred thousand jew Dion Niceus g g Dion Nicaei adrianus a more credible author affirm that Adrian send Severus against the jew who in regard of their multitude will not try it with their joint force in set battle but take his occasion and best opportunity proceed more slow and more sure take fifty of their fortify castle raze nine hundred and fourscore of their best town slay at sundry time five hundred and eighty thousand of their man beside innumerable multitude which perish of famine sickness and fire these glean being great than the other harvest Salomon sepulchre by fall down have fore-signify this their downfall and Hyaena and wolf prodigious enter their city seem to howl their funeral obsequy all judaea be leave almost desolate h h euseb hist Eccles. l. 4. cap. 6. Niceph. lib. 3.24 Caes Baron. anal Eusebius out of ariston pellaeus add that Adrian prohibit the jew by a edict to come near to jerusalem or once from any high place to look towards the same or the region adjoin never do Nabuchodonosor i i Drus ex. lib. m. s. and Inchasin or Titus so afflict the jew as Adrian do salmanticensit say there be a decree make at Rome that no Jew shall ever enter Cyprus where the rebellion begin and that Adrian destroy twice as many jew as have come out of Egypt with Moses we have already show how he destroy this city and build a new the present jerusalem call of his own name Aelia he make swine over the gate of this new city which image be most faithful porter to prohibit the jew faithful superstitious in their faithless superstition to enter and as he have erect a temple to jupiter in or near the place where the temple have stand so to afflict the christian also he build another temple of jupiter in Golgatha and of Venus at Bethleem which continue till the time of Constantine the christian jew gain by this loss for when as they may not come to jerusalem they afterward relinquish their wont jewish ceremony this be the end of Barchosba and such be the end of all which fight against GOD and their sovereign their arrow which they shoot against the cloud fall down upon themselves he prove a fall star which be but a grosser elementary exhalation be elevate by his own aspire course not to the firmament but to some high region of the air where it shine with the fire which burn it and move with some short glance till with self-ruin it return whence it have beginning to the earth thus have we see the jew banish their country about the year 135. agree to which their miserable estate be that order of man mention by k k Ios. scal. Elench. trihaer ser. cap. 13. Scaliger call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) mourner Heraclitus his heir which spend their time in weep and intend nothing but lamentation for the desolation of their sanctuary these have be among the jew say he ever since this destruction and be once a year on the nine day of the month allow entrance into jerusalem by adrian edict but then also say saint Jerome Hieron soph. c. 1. they be force to pay for it that they which sometime buy the blood of Christ now must buy their own tear there may you see say he on that day whereon jerusalem be take by the roman decrepit woman and old ragged man and many wretched people but pity of none with blubber cheek black arm dishevel hair howl and lament for the ruin of their sanctuary in their body and habit bear and wear the mark of divine vengeance of who the soldier exact his fee also for liberty of further weep it be write in a ancient journal of Bordeaux * * Burdegal that not far from the image there be a stone bore through to which the jew come yearly and anoint it lament grievous and rent their garment and then depart Benjamin l l Benjamin Tudelensis translate by ar. mont. a Hebrew author relate that one and twenty day journey from Kupha through the wilderness he travel to the region of Seba where dwell jew call the child of rechab or man of Theima which give tithe to the disciple of the wise who continual apply themselves to learning and to sermon always sit in the school and to the humble israelite and devout person which lament Zion and bewail jerusalem these dwell in cave or in ruin house fast all the day of their life except on the sabbath and festival beseech mercy continual at the hand of God touch the banishment and deportation of Israel they never eat flesh nor drink wine the same also do all the jew of the country Theima and of Talmaas pray all which go with rend clothes and fast forty day for the jewish captivity and so let they mourn which refuse m m luc. 2.11 the glad tiding of great joy to all people that unto we be bear JESUS a saviour which be Christ the lord but yet what rocky heart can but mourn with they and for they thus make spectacle to the world of bodily and spiritual misery which both in these time mention and before in the time of Trajan and in all age since have pursue they in all place of their habitation if that name may be give to this world-wandring and vagabond-people in the time of Trajan n n euseb l. 4. c. 2. adrian predecessor the jew have rebel in Egypt and Cyrene where they commit much outrage and mischief under one Luke their captain against who the emperor send Martius turbo who destroy many thousand of they and fear that the jew in Mesopotamia will do the like command Lucius quietus to destroy they utter in recompense of which service execute to his mind he make he precedent of judaea Dion o o Dion n. traianus say that the captain of the jew be name Andrew and that they slay many greek and roman do eat their flesh gird themselves with their gut be imbrue with their blood and clothe with their skin many they saw asunder from the crown downward many they cast to the beast and many be find to kill one another with mutual combat so that two hundred and twenty thousand person perish by this unspeakable cruelty in Egypt and Cyprus under their captain Artemion they destroy two hundred and forty thousand they be subdue by Traian captain special by Lucius and it be make a capital crime for a Jew although force by tempest to set foot in Cyprus Africa be repeople where they have destroy with new colony no marvel if the roman thus provoke both in the time of Trajan and Hadrian destroy so many thousand of they julian afterward give they leave to return into their country and rebuild their temple more for hatred of the christian then for love to their nation who wickedness and answerable success herein be plain detect and detest by Gregory Nazianzene p p greg. Naz. orat. 4. cont julian. and other father as q q cap. 3. we have before relate @. 3 of other their false Christ and seduce prophet to add further of their bodily confusion and the illusion of their bewitch mind Nicephorus mention a Pseudo-Moses of the jew in the part of Arabia destroy by the force of the empire together with his complice in a like rebellion Socrates a a socr. l. 7. c. 37. describe a further madness of they for true be that say of saint Paul that they which will not believe the truth be give over to strong delusion to believe lie in the i will of Crete be * * 434. a false prophet that affirm himself to be Moses which lead the israelite through the red-sea and to be send from heaven to those jew to conduct they through the red-sea into the continent of the holy land this he persuade they for the space of a whole year go from city to city and at last induce they to leave their riches to they that will take they and to follow he at a day appoint he go afore they unto a promontory of the sea and there bid they leap in which many obey perish in the wave and many more have perish have not some christian merchant and fisher be at land which save some and forbid the rest to follow the jew seek to be revenge of this counterfeit Moses can nowhere find he and therefore think he to be some devil in human shape which seek their destruction and thereupon many of they become christian Benjamin Teudelensis report of one in Persia call David Elroi sometime the disciple of Hasdai which be b b see append to this chap. head of the captivity one learned in the law and Talmud in foreign learning in the ismaelite tongue and in magic who gather together the jew in Hhapthon and will needs war on all nation and win jerusalem affirm that GOD have send he therefore and to free they from the gentile many believe he to be the Messiah the king of Persia send for he imprison he in the city Dabasthan whence they be not free during life but he three day after when the king and his council sit to examine and take order for this business come among they and when the king ask who bring he thither he say his own wisdom and industry the king bid lay hold on he but his servant answer they can hear he but not see he and away he go the king follow he to a river over which David stretch his handkerchief pass over and be then see of they all who in vain pursue he with their boat this David the same day go ten day journey from thence to Elghamaria and declare to the jew there all which have pass the persian send to the Calipha of bagde that he shall cause the head of the captivity to persuade he to other course otherwise threaten destruction to all the jew in Persia which Jew likewise for fear thereof write to the head of the captivity he therefore write to David we will have thou to know that the time of our deliverance be not yet come nor have we yet see our sign and therefore enjoin thou to desist from these attempt otherwise be thou cast out from all Israel but he proceed nevertheless till Zinaldin a turkish king subject to the persian corrupt his father in law with ten thousand piece of gold who according with a sword slay he in his bed and thus end David but not his design for the jew in Persia be force by many talent of gold to buy their peace with the king in Epist. Marsil. about the same time Rambam tell of another which take he to be the messenger of the Messiah which shall direct his way before he preach that the Messiah will appear in the south to he resort many jew and arabian who he lead alongst the mountain profess to go meet the Messiah who have send he our brethren in the south country write to i a long letter hereof declare the innovation he make in their prayer and his preach among they ask my advice and I write a book say Rambam for their sake touch the sign of the come of the Messiah this seducer be take after a year space and bring before one of the king of the arabian which examine he of his course who answer that he have so do at the commandment of GOD in witness whereof he bid he cut off his head and he will rise again and revive which the king cause to be do without any such miraculous effect ensue the like tell Isaac levita Isaac levita Epist. sup. of one Lemlen a jew in the year 1500. as also of r. David which about the same time be burn for like cause the jew have legend as that of Eldad Eldad Danius hist. de judaeis clausis translate by Genebrard of multitude of jew in Aethiopia who when we come thither we will visit but alas it be small comfort be burn in the fire to make themselves merry with smoke of their misery sustain in all place of their abode all history make mention and yet their superstition be more lamentable than their dispersion as also their pertinacy and stubbornness in their superstition and certain i think that even to he that will walk by sight and not by faith not oblige his credit to meet authority as the case stand betwixt we and the scripture but will be draw by the cord of reason only and sense even to such a one i think this history of the jew may be a visible demonstration of the truth of christian religion not only because the truth of the prophecy of d d genes 49. jaacob of e e Deut. 28. Moses of f f esa 6. Esay and other the prophet be fulfil in they and because God justice still exact the punishment of the betray and murder that just one but especial in this that the bitter enemy cruel persecutor and wilful hater that ever be of the christian truth be disperse into so many part of the world as witness of the same truth hold and maintain to death the scripture of Moses and the prophet than which even reason be judge as be say before we will not desire sound and full proof of our profession neither be our gospel wherein we differ from they any other than the fulfil of their law and Christ come not to destroy the law but to fulfil the same the same truth be deliver in both veil in the one and reveal in the other in he the promise in he the figure in he the righteousness of the law righteousness in doctrine righteousness in practice righteousness of do righteousness of suffer to satisfy the debt to merit the inheritance be the witness that in he they be all yea and amen have receive their perfect be and accomplishment but g g 2. cor. 3.15 the veil be over their heart eye they have and see not ear and hear not they hold out to we the light of scripture themselves walk in darkness and reserve to darkness like to a lamp lanthorne or candlestick communicate light to other whereof themselves be not capable nor can make any use @. 4 of the miserable dispersion of the jew we have show how they be utter cast out of their country and Italy and the empire be fill with jewish slave nor be this their first dispersion but as the assyrian have carry away the other ten tribe so the babylonian carry away the two tribe remain which may have return under the persian monarchy but many remain in those country till the dissolution of that jewish state and after they have there diverse famous university and that at Bagdet endure till the year of Christ one thousand three hundred so write a a g. Botero ben. Terza part lib. 2. viz. first at bab. after at Bagdet Boterus at which time they flee the persecution of the arabian disperse themselves into b b Ramb. mor. no. l. 1. c. 70. and l. 3. c. 18. and 24. tell of certain sect of jew call separatist and incelligent or understander which they learn of the moor and therefore in our Muhammodan report will be fit place for they vid. l. 3. c 7. India where many be find at this day these through continual converse with the gentile and christian have small knowledge of the law and less will have but for other jew that resort thither out of Egypt before that time also if we believe the ethiopian history twelve thousand c c damian a go ludovic carretus jew of each tribe a thousand go with the Queen of saba son which they say she have by Solomon into that country and there remain their posterity to this day thus be Asia and Africa fraught with they but EUROPE much more Adrian d d boter ibid. banish five hundred thousand into Spain where they multiply infinite and found a university at Corduba about the year of our lord one thousand and at Toledo be a school of twelve thousand jew about the year of our lord one thousand two hundred thirty and six as write e e rab. Mosche Buxd. c. 1. rabbi Mosche Mikkatzi from hence it seem they swarm into England and France * * Lambert Schafnaburg Sigeb Gemblac Otto Frising fred. l. 1. c. 37. 1096. innumerable number of man and woman of diverse nation according to the zeal of those time travel to jerusalem compel the jew in place whereby they pass to be baptize every where make terrible massacre and slaughter of such as refuse may of the jew also kill themselves in zeal of their Law at Mentz they slay of they 1014. of both sex and fire the great part of the city the rest rest not long in their impose christianity but * * marianus Scotus say that hen. 4. emperor give they leave willing renounce that which against their will they have accept Auentinus number 12000. Jew slay in Germany in this irreligious quarrel Otto Frisingensis attribute these jewish slaughter to the zealous preach of rodolph a monk which fury be appease by the preach and authority of saint BERNARD these pilgrim say Albertus aquensis which then live be a gallimaufry of all nation in pretence of this holy quarrel against the turk give themselves to all unholy and filthy course among themselves and against the christian where they pass may whore attend and follow the camp to which they add excess in diet robbery especial all cruelty against the jew chief in the kingdom of Lorraine thus begin the rudiment of that war against the enemy of the Faith first they destroy they and their synagogue in Collen and take two hundred of they fly by night to Nuis they slay and rob they all at Mentz the jew commit themselves and they to the bishop Rothard who bestow they with their infinite mass of treasure in his own house which yet can not protect they from the murder and spoil soldier who enter by force slay seven hundred of they add also the like butchery on their wife and child the jew hereat jewish move pardon the want of a fit word lay violent hand on each other and slay their own child wife and brethren the tender mother eschew the soldier cruelty by a great in cut the throat of her own child and with obdurate concision prevent the sword of the uncircumcised lade with these spoil they pass by the way of Hungary where for some outrage GOD punish both those and these with the hungarian force their misery here in our land endure be by our author mention f f fox act and monument history of barnwell etc. and you shall anon hear a particular discourse thereof by itself g g inf. @. 7. out of France they be thrice banish by three Philip although in Auinion there still remain some of they be expel France they seek habitation in Germany where conradus the emperor admit they into the country of Suevia and thence they flow into other part into Bohemia in the city of prague be about fifteen thousand of they and into Austria and into Hungaria whence for the crucify of a child they be banish by king Mathias as at Trent for the like fact and poison of welles they sustain much trouble in Germany and many pass to Venice many also go from thence into Russia where the people can abide to hear they name and Poland where Cassimere he great for love of a Hebrew lass give they many privilege they live disperse in the town and village occupy in handi-craft and husbandry they have great synagogue in Craconia Leopolis and at Trochi a town of Lituania and master Barkeley a merchant of London who have spend many year in livonia Polonia they here in Poland print what book they listen and other of those cold country tell i that the jew farm the custom of the king and at samaiden in cur-land one of these jewish customer beat out the brain of a polonish merchant for defer to open his pack but in regard of the people hatred provision be make under great penalty for their security and yet many jew be there execute by occasion of a murrain procure as be suspect by jewish exorcism intend a plague to the man and not a murrain to the beast if their work have sort but the jew say it be but a pretence to deprive they of their riches they be cast out of Spain by Ferdinand and Isabel in the year 1492. it be think h h joannes Reuclinus cabal l. 1. say 420000. person that there go out of Spain a hundred and twenty thousand family of they beside Moor and out of their kingdom of Naples and Sicill hence they pass 1539. into tuscan and the pope dominion whence they be banish by Paul the four and Pius the five and receive again by Pius the four and Sistus the five Rome and Venice have great store of they this be the pope holiness he that will not willing endure a Protestant in the world beside the stew under his holiness nose can endure the grecian yea and these jew Rome itself have ten thousand or i i Relat. of Relig. west after other reckon twenty thousand of they privilege with heir five synagogue liturgy and public sermon and to strain up their usury to eighteen in the hundred have also in some place it may be in all a peculiar magistrate to decide controversy between christian and they with particular direction to favour they in their trade the beastly trade of courtesan and cruel trade of jew be suffer for gain these pay a yearly rent for the head they wear beside other mean to rack and wrack they in their purse at pleasure they be use as the spunge-like friar to suck from the mean to be squeeze of the great insomuch that the pope beside their certain tribute do sometime as be say impose on they a subsidy for ten thousand crown extraordinary for some service of State so well be the rule of Paul observe by this bishop not to be a lover of filthy lucre from filthy stew from filthy jew out of Spain they go into Barbary and diverse other country and some into Portugal where John the second make they pay eight crown for a poll and yet limit they short time of departure Emanuel his successor do the like 1497. except they will become christian for which he assay diverse mean but not prevail he cause their child under the age of four and twenty year to be baptize some rather hurl their child into pit some kill themselves many for fear be baptize some go into Italy and abode in Ferrara Mantua Venetia in the name of Maranes and have a synagogue at Pisa but the great part of they go into the east to Constantinople and Salonichi in which two city there be about a hundred and sixty thousand of they there be of they in all the chief city of traffic in the turkish empire k k rom. tyberias be whole inhabit with jew l l there be report to be a university of jewish study to have be as Drus cry out of juchasin and Elias in rad. Tiberias say that the jew the have the most elegant language of all the hebrew and from thence be the author of the masore which city Zelim give to Gratiola a jewish matron in jerusalem there be about a hundred house of they there abide not many because of a superstitious opinion that before the Messiah shall come a great fire from heaven will consume that city and country to purge it of the abomination commit there by profane nation at zante they be so hate that from Maundie Thursday until Saturday noon they dare not come abroad for the people in a foolish zeal will stone they and some refuse to eat of their meat or bread the turk in their reproach use such a kind of imprecation if this be not true will God I may die a jew. the old testament be read of they in these part in the Hebrew * * let. Bidulph but their kakamin and cohen that be their wiseman and priest preach in spanish only at Salonichi ancient thessalonica in Macedonia and at Safetta in the holy land two university they speak Hebrew they will rather in blasphemy testify their hatred of Christ than any ability to dispute @. v. of the estate of the jew and their disperse habitation in the time of Benjamin Tudelensis Benjamin TUDELENSIS a jew of Navarre who have travel Spain France Italy Greece Anatolia Syria and many other country of Asia Africa and Europe worthy reckon one of the great traveller that ever live at his return into Spain above four hundred and forty year since relate what jewish synagogue he have see in the world one chief end as it seem of his travel and because it appertain to this matter we have in hand and the book translate out of Hebrew by Arias Montanus be very rare I think meet to add here a brief of those thing which concern the jew out of the same at Barchinon they find a populous synagogue another but small at gerunda Narbone be as it be ensign-bearer of the law to all the country about where be chief Kalonymus of the seed of David there be three hundred jew four league thence be the city Bidrach where be a university store with disciple of the wise whereof also there be at Mompelier Lunel be a famous university where live asser the Pharisee which study night and day fast and perpetual abstain from flesh with messulam joseph jacob Aaron which by the bounty of the university give food raiment and teach to such as come from far to study there as long as they stay a synagogue of three hundred jew at bothiaquier forty at noghere about a hundred at Arles two hundred at Massilia two college and three hundred jew at Rome two hundred free from tribute at Salern six hundred at benevent a university of two hundred at Taraam two hundred at Tarentum three hundred at Ornedo five hundred at Thebes two thousand at Corinth three hundred there be people live in the mountain which rob and spoil all but deal more favourable with the jew who life they spare then with christian who they not only rob but slay also these say they be descend of the jew they be call Balachi at Arimbon be four hundred at Seleuca five hundred Constantinople will not suffer a jew to dwell in the city nor to ride on horseback except one Solomon the king physician yea the people will beat they in the street at pera live two thousand jew two day sail from thence at Dorostum be a university of four hundred at Rhodes be four hundred at Dophros be Jew and cyprian epicure before mention at Behalgad be a sect of ismaelite with a peculiar prophet of their own at Tripoli many jew and gentile have a little before perish with a earthquake whereof die in all Israel twenty thousand at Gebal be a place where the ammonite have sometime a temple and it be a idol of stone cover with gold sit with two image of woman sit by and a altar before there be a hundred and twenty jew at beeroth fifty at Sidon twenty Here-aways live a people call Dogzijn of who we shall speak more fit in another place at Caesarea be few jew but two hundred samaritan at sebaste a hundred this be between garizim a hill fertile and well water and Gebal a hill stony and dry in the place of the sometime sanctuary at jerusalem be a fair and large temple call the temple of the lord build of Ghemar be alchetab there the christian have no image but resort hither only for prayer over-against it be a wall make of the wall of the sanctuary this they call the gate of mercy to this place the jew come to pray the pillar of lois wife be then continue which be say to grow to the former bigness if at any time the flock have diminish it with lick at a a Hebron Hebron be a great temple and in a vault six sepulcher of Abraham and Sara Isaac and Rebecca jacob and Leah a lamp perpetual burn and in the cave itself be tub full of bone of the ancient israelite at Benibera or new Ascalon in the border of Egypt be two hundred jew forty Carraim and three hundred samaritan at Tiberias be fifty jew and the synagogue of Caleb son of jephunneh at b b Damascus Damascus be three thousand there dwell the head of the land of Israel call esdras and his brother Sarsalem which be over the judgement and joseph the five of the Synedrian and Matsliah head of the order of reader there be two hundred Carraim and four hundred samaritan among all which be peace but no intercourse of marriage in differ sect in Thadmar be four thousand Jew here and at Baghala be building of stone so great that it be say to be the work of asmodaeus with as good reason as devil dike with we at Hamath be a earth quake in those time which destroy fifteen thousand people in one day and only a hundred and seventy remain Haleb in old time call aram Tezoba have fifteen hundred israelite at Petra in the desert be two thousand at Dakia sometime chalne seven hundred here be a synagogue build by esdras in the return from Babylon and another also of his building at Charan two day journey thence the place where Abraham have dwell have no building on it but be frequent by the israelite to pray there at Alchabor be two thousand jew at nisibis one thousand at gezir ben Ghamar a city on the bank of Tigris be four thousand it be four mile from the place where Noah ark rest which ark Ghamar son of alchetab bring from the top of the hill to the use of a Moschee near to which be the synagogue of esdras whither the jew on festival day resort to prayer two day journey thence be c c mosal al-mutsal sometime call assur the beginning of the kingdom of Persia retain her ancient greatness situate on Tigris a bridge only be between that and ninive now whole destroy only castle and street remain in the circuit thereof at al-mutsal be seven thousand Jew and three synagogue of the three prophet abdias jonas and nahum in Rahaban ancient rehoboth be two thousand at Karkesia on the same bank of Euphrates with the former five hundred at Aliobar two thousand at Hhardan fifteen thousand at Ghukbera build by jectronia ten thousand two day journey thence be d d bagdad bagdad of the kingdom of the Calipha name e e and moeste degun vid. li. 3. cap. 2. Amir almumanim Alghabassi Hhaphtsi the chief of the Ismaelite Sect here be a thousand jew and ten Synedria or court the head or chief whereof he name they be call vacantes because they attend no other function but the administer of the society they give judgement to all jew which resort unto they on any day of the week but the second in which they all meet together before Samuel the head of the synedrium but over all these be Daniel son of Hhasdai entitle the head of the f f captivity descend from David who the jew call our lord the ismaelite Sydna ben David our l. son of David he have great authority over all congregation of israelite warrant to he with the amir seal who cause that all israelite and ismaelite shall rise to he under pain of a hundred stripe when he go to see the king it be with very great pomp this dignity be buy with a great sum of money give to the king and prince at his confirmation and then be the second chariot of the king provide for he he exercise imposition of hand on the man of the synedrium there be eight and twenty synagogue in bagdad and the suburb on the other side Tigris but the synagogue which pertain to the head of the captivity be of marble of diverse colour adorn with gold and silver spacious and on the pillar be verse of the psalm write in gold before the ark be ten row of seat with marble step in the high whereof sit the head of the captivity with the jew of the family of David in Gehiagan sometime Rezen two day journey from thence be five thousand israelite one day journey from hence be g g Babylon Babel now whole ruinate in which be yet see the ruin of nabuchodonosor palace but inaccessible by reason of diverse kind of serpent twenty mile from these ruin dwell twenty thousand israelite which there pray in the synagogue the chief whereof be that of Daniel of square stone there be at Hhilah five mile thence ten thousand jew in four synagogue four mile thence it be to the tower which the son of division build with brick which the arabian call Lagzar the length of the foundation be about two mile the breadth of the wall two hundred and forty cubit where it be broad it be a hundred reed and between every ten reed space be way in manner of spire continue through the whole building on the top of which one may see twenty mile about half a day journey from hence be naphahh where be two hundred jew and three league thence the synagogue of h h Ezechiel Ezechiel near Euphrates and in the same place sixty tower one against another and a synagogue between every one the monument of Ezechiel be build by jechonias with five and thirty thousand jew and this be a holy place whither they resort from the begin of the year to the day of expiation to pray and keep festival thither come the head of the captivity and other chief man from bagdad and two and twenty mile about they pitch their tent here and there and the arabian keep then and there a great fair at this time they read on the expiation day out of a book which Ezechiel write and there be a holy house full of book since the time of the first and second temple the custom be that they which die without child shall bequeath their book hither the jew in Persia and Media make vow to be perform in this place to which also the ismaelite resort to pray the sepulchre of the three saint companion of i i Daniel 3. Daniel be half a day journey from hence with fair and great arch three mile thence be Alkotsonath and in it three hundred jew at Kupha the sepulchre of jeconia and seven thousand jew one and twenty day journey through the wilderness be the region of Seba now call the land of Aliman where dwell jew the child of k k rechabite or man of Theima rechab this region extend sixteen day along the mountain subject to no foreign nation have therein four hundred strong city two hundred town a hundred castle the metropolis be Themai in all those city be about three hundred thousand jew in the region of Tilmaas a hundred thousand three day journey hence be Chibar in it fifty thousand these they say be of the deportation of Reuben gad and Manasses from hence twenty five day journey be which be a river run into Eliman where be three thousand and seven journey from thence Neasar and in it seven thousand five day journey from thence Bosra upon Tigris and in it one thousand two day journey from thence the river Samura the beginning of Persia with a town of the same name wherein be fifteen hundred the place be famous by the sepulchre of esdras who in his return to Babylon in embassage here die there be a synagogue honour also by the ismaelite in Susan be seven thousand jew in fourteen synagogue before one of which be the sepulchre of Daniel about which rise a controversy between the inhabitant of the one and other side of the river they which dwell on that side where the sepulchre be seem to the other the more fortunate this cause blow but be after agree that every year it shall be remove by course which be do with solemn procession till l l senigark of Persia Senigar the persian king think it a profanation to the holy coffin cause it to be hang in a chest of glass for all man to see and forbid to take fish within two mile of that place in the river from hence be three day journey to robad-bar where be twenty thousand jew two journey from hence be the river Vaanath where be four thousand jew four journey further Malhhaath here they be not ismaelite nor under the persian they have two college of israelite which acknowledge nevertheless the head of the captivity in bagdad at Ghaarian five journey beyond be five and twenty thousand here begin the mountain of Hhaphthon wherein be a hundred synagogue this be the begin of Media they speak Chaldee and there be among they the m m student of the Talmud under the rr. disciple of the wise Ghamaria be under the persian where David Elroi be it be ten day journey thence to hhamdan chief city of Media there be fifty thousand jew in that region and the sepulchre of mordecai and Esther four journey further be Debarzethaan near this river gozen in it four thousand jew beyond that seven journey Asbahan the chief city twelve mile in compass and therein fifteen thousand israelite over who and all the persian jew be Salome by authority from the head of the captivity four journey hence be Siaphaz call of old persis whence the whole region be name Persia therein ten thousand seven day journey thence Ginah upon gozen a famous mart in which be eight thousand samarchen be the further city of that kingdom five journey from Ginah where be fifty thousand four journey thence tubot and twenty eight further I pass to the mountain Nisbon which over look the river gozen where be many israelite and they say there dwell the four tribe of dan Zabulon asser Naphthali their country extend twenty day journey and have many city free from subjection to any heathen they be govern of joseph Armacala levita they till the ground and hold war with the child of Chus travel through the desert thither they be in league with the Copher Althorech a people that worship the wind and live in the wilderness they have neither bread nor wine but eat raw flesh either new or dry they have no * * the Tartar esteem it beauty to press down their nose flat and hence perhaps be this opinion of Nonose nose but only two hole fifteen year since they take and sack Rai a chief city in Persia whereupon the king war against they and pass through the wilderness to they be deceive by his guide and his people almost starve and after force to fly with who pass into Persia Moses one of the jew in those part which tell i Benjamin our author all this hence I go to Chevazthaan upon the river Tigris which run thence into hoduor the indian sea have in the mouth the island nekrokin a famous mart where be five hundred jew I sail ten day thence to Kathiphan where be five thousand israelite thence to the kingdom of haaulem a people of Chus which worship the sun thence after twenty two day sail I come to the i will chenerag where they worship the fire where be twenty three thousand jew forty day sail from thence be the kingdom of sin from which to Gingalan be fifteen day there be ten thousand israelite thence I go to ethiopian India which they call Baghdaan in which be high mountain and in they many israelite subject to none which war on the hamaghtani that be the libyan from thence to Azzan be twenty day journey through the wilderness Sebor the king whereof be sultan Alhabas a Ismaelite twelve day thence be Hhalavan where be three hundred jew from which they pass in troop through the desartal-tsahaca into Zevila in the tract of Geena or Ginaea where they encounter shower of sand this region be in the land of Chus and be call Alhhabas towards the west thirteen day journey from Hhaluan be kit the begin of Egypt and five from thence once Python where be twenty jew and many monument of our father to be see Misraim or cairo thence to Misraim be four journey where be two thousand jew in two synagogue which differ in their distribution of the lecture of their law the babylonian finish it in a year as in Spain the israelite in three but twice a year they assemble together in prayer on the feast Laetitia legis and on the feast be chief over all the university or synagogue of Egypt and appoint master and Aeditui he be familiar with the king Amir Almumanin Eli son of Abitalib at Alexandria be three thousand israelite but for his travel in Egypt and the synagogue which there he find as also back again into Sicilia Germany Boheme Prussia etc. because there be yet know synagogue of they I surcease relation and much may I fear I have too much weary the reader in so long a jewish pilgrimage but see author of best note Scaliger Drusius Lipsius etc. cite he and Arias mont. have take the pain to translate he and his travel be such ample testimony of this our present subject of jewish dispersion I have be bold to annex these thing if any listen not to believe such multitude of jew I will not urge he howsoever that deluge of tartar in all those asian region soon after benjamin day bring a new face of all thing in these easterly part as a jew and relate these thing to jew and by jew pass to we it be like he report and we have receive with the most for his geography some of his name be easy reconcile to the present some hardly which I leave to the reader industry @. 5 of some jew late find in China and of their late accident in Germany nic. Trigaut exped. Sinlus l. 1. after these relation of Benjamin I think it not unfit to insert out of Ricci and Trigautius jesuit late reside in China somewhat appertain to these jewish affair it be but few year since the jesuit can settle themselves at Paquin the royal city of China thither do a certain jew move with report of these stranger have a imagination that they be Jew resort unto they this jew be bear at Chaifamfu the mother-city of the province Honan his name be Ngai his countenance not resemble the Chinois he neglect Judaism have addict himself to the China study and now come to Paquin to the examination in hope of proceed doctor there do he enter the jesuit house profess that he be of their law and religion Ricci lead he into the chapel where on the altar stand the image of the virgin jesus and John Baptist kneel which he take to be the image of Rebecca and her twin do worship unto they contrary he say unto their custom the image of the evangelist he suppose to be so many of Jacob son but upon further question the jesuite perceive that he be a professor of the law of Moses he confess himself a Israelite and know not the name of jew so that it seem the dispersion of the ten tribe have pierce thus far see the Hebrew bible he know the letter but can not read they he tell they that in Caifamfu be ten or twelve family of israelite and a fair synagogue which have late cost they ten thousand crown therein the pentateuch in roll which have be with great veneration preserve five or six hundred year in hamcheu the chief city of Chequian he affirm be many more family with their synagogue many also in other place but without synagogue and by degree wear out his pronunciation of Hebrew name differ from we as * * so the abyssines call Osrael Chrostos Herusoloim Moscia for Messia jerusalem his brother he say be skilful in the Hebrew which he in affection to the China preferment have neglect and therefore be hardly censure by the ruler of the synagogue to this city do Ricci send one of he to inquire who find these report true which also copy the beginning and end of their book which they compare and find to agree with their own pentateuch save that they want prick or point he write also in China character to the ruler of their synagogue that he have the rest of the book of the old testament and other book of the new which contain the act of the Messiah be already come the ruler doubt say that he will not come till ten thousand year be expire he also promise that because he have hear much good of he if he will come thither and abstain from swines-flesh they will make he ruler of their synagogue after this three jew come from thence to Paquin and be almost persuade to become christian these complain that through ignorance of the Hebrew their religion decay and that they be likely all of they in a short time to become Saracen or ethnic the old archisynagogue be now dead his son a young man succeed in place but ignorant of their Law and that their jewish religion be indeed languish appear by this that they both worship the popish image and complain that in their synagogue and private house they have none they be offend that they be forbid the eat of any creature which themselves have * * see inf c. 19 not kill which have they observe in this journey have cost they their life their wife and neighbour esteem circumcision of their infant on the eight day a cruel thing which they can be willing to altar with acceptation of the christian law nor will much stand about swines-flesh they tell they of certain christian also or worshipper of the cross in China which with the jew and saracen be all call by the Chinois Hoei add some distinction from their differ rite call the saracen Hoei which refuse swine flesh the jew Hoei which abstain from the sinew the Cross-worshipper hoei which abstain from round-footed beast whereas the jew saracen and Chinois eat the flesh of horse ass and the like this history I have add to show how the jew have be disperse into the further part and how time the devourer of all thing have almost eat they out or their religion at least somewhat also may be hence conjecture touch the deportation of the ten tribe the Hebrew prick and modern character * * some think the Hebrew letter which now we have to be invent by ezra since the captivity which I leave to other discuss once it be by all history manifest that by the inundation of saracen tartar turk etc. both the jewish and christian religion sometime frequent have be by degree consume and almost wear out of many part of Asia the late misery inflict on the jew in frankfort and worm may here be insert in aug. 1614 at the same time * * merc. Gallob Arthus and Janson which they solemnize with fast for the destruction of jerusalem their little jerusalem so they call the jew street in frankfort be spoil by the unruly citizen and give they a new cause of mourn the jew at first defend themselves and the magistrate seek to allay the fury of the people but at last consent to depart the city one thousand and four hundred present pass down the Maene in boat and the rest follow they the next day it seem a prodigious and dismal sign unto they that the ox which they use to keep all the year in their churchyard or burial place now be shut up for the slaughter break away from they the mother give fatal example to the daughter for frankfort they account the mother of Israel which lead the way to worm in expulsion of the jew this shall have happen the seven of April 1615. be good Friday but be defer till Monday follow when early in the morning they send word to the jew into their street that truss up their choice good they shall within one hour depart which with much lamentation they do neither can the magistrate prevail in their defence so odious have their usurious exaction of long time be to the citizen thus the jew take their way to the Rhine and the same day be the roof of their synagogue pull down and a decree make not to leave one stone thereof upon another six hundred of they present put the same in execution these spare not the monument and gravestone but break they in piece notwithstanding some of they seem scarce possible to be raise from the earth the jew hear this ruin of their synagogue which they say if you believe it have continue one thousand and eight hundred year rend their garment and mourn in sackcloth and ash @. 7 of the jew sometime live in England collect out of ancient record by master John Selden of the inner temple although I have have already a long tedious journey wearisome to my reader and myself while I have accompany these miserable jew in their dispersion yet do I conceive this follow relation will rather seem as a welcome recreation then irksome progress because we shall contain ourselves in our own country wherein I must acknowledge the laborious industry of our learned countryman and antiquary master Selden who out of ancient record have thus trace the foot-print of this antiquate and outwear people i be but the transcribe and abbreviate of the jew first come to this land be uncertain it seem that some little notice be take of they before the conquest after which we have diverse testimony and beside other the statute both before and after their state and condition be very servile as appear in legib confess cap. 29. judae and etc. the jew and all they have be the king what they suffer in succeed age our common story discover there be one among they which have the office of which I take to be their chief priesthood in their synagogue for if it have signify a mere lay eldership I guess I shall have meet with it in the plea of their Excheker and this lay in the king grant as by king john charter of it may be see in rot. chart. 1. johan. reg. ch. 171. memb 28. 31. therein be also mention of a former charter grant by rich. 1. certain justice be appoint before who plea betwixt they and other and they be hold and matter adjudge judaismi as the entry often be in most town of note be two christian and two jew or one of both side appoint as public notary for all their deed of contract and those notary have one chest and several key for the safekeeping of such deed and they be call cyrographarij Christiani and judaei or other such town and hence must you interpret houche cyrograffe in statuto de judaismo and by these notary or cyrographer the deed of the jew be try these deed and such like they call usual starra of their hebrew word shetar that be a deed or contract as Solomon de stanford and the like and however land be not subject to execution for debt till 13. ed. 1. yet it seem by 52. hen. 3. that for debt of the jew land be be seize by writ for the debtor when any man have deal much with they and after all discharge doubt further ill measure by any such Star or deed lie hide the course be to send out a process to the sheriff of the county or constable of the castle of great town to make proclamation on their sabbath summon all jew of this or that synagogue to be at their exchequer to account with such as doubt in that kind thus 52. hen. 3. that then he or she shall come so do all other sheriff and constable return in Hebrew and latin for in those time both language be use not only in deed of the jew which I have often see with the Hebrew on the one side and the same in latin on the other but also in record of law as in 43. hen. 3. in regist boxgrave in Sussex etc. and as both tongue be use so in trial betwixt christian and they the be as often appear what oath be give they I find not but r. Moses Mikkotxi that live in the time of hen. 3. write in 123. that hold the book of the pentateuch between their arm they call to witness the god of Israel which be merciful etc. upon their conversion their good be confiscate which be it seem after such time as the that which be now the roll be in 17. hen. 3. build for they where they may live as the word of mat. Paris be in 52. hen. 3. jospin ben Solomon a jew of Marleborow show to the court of the justice of the jew that one joicet his sister be marry to one Salon the son of Lombard of Kirklade and Cyrograph Merlebrigie Cyrograph 32 which upon her conversion become the king as the roll say and which all be confiscate for not prosecute the suit but in the time of e. 1. it be grant that the house shall have one half of the good of the convert and that he himself shall have the other half so 9 ed 1. io. de sancto Dionys have a writ for the moiety of the good of beleaguer and Huccoth jewesses of Oxford late convert etc. the other half allow to they one cruel and to speak the proper phrase jewish crime be usual among they every year towards easter though it be not always know see mat. Paris in 39 h. 3. to steal a young boy circumcise he and after a solemn judgement make one of their own nation a Pilate to crucify he out of their devilish malice to Christ and christian for their circumcise alone take this record 18. h. 3. rot. 21. 5. that four year before that james the jew have take his son ed. as he be play in the street and carry he to his house circumcise he and there detain he one day and night till by force of christian he recover he have his circumcise member then swell etc. the child be examine confess that they take and carry he to the house of james aforesaid where while one hold he and cover his eye another circumcise he with a knife the piece cut off they put in a basin of sand and there they with small puff of wind out of their mouth seek it and the jew which first find it be call jurnepin and therefore they give the same name to the child call he jurnepin the archdeacon official come to testify this with a great company of priest all in the word of GOD say as aforesaid that they see his member swell and the coroner of Norwich with thirty six of the citizen testify as much hereupon the jew be all put in prison and find accessory except mossy the son of Solomon order be take that because the case be strange and they have no precedent of the like it shall first be inquire of by the ecclesiastical ordinary and that he shall certify to the king the jew after procure the boy to be see and his member be find cover but this be not repugnant to the former testimony see by chirurgery * * cell remed. l. 7. c. 25. Epiphan. pond and 1 cor. 7.18 the skin may be draw forth to a uncircumcision in the year follow of hen. 3. mat. Paris report such a deed of the jew of Norwich and in 24. h. 3. that they circumcise a christian child and call he jurnin and mean to have crucify he all the jew of the city be question about it and when they will have refer themselves to lay authority William de Ralegh the bishop say four jew convict hereof be draw at horse tail and hang on a gibbet in 39 h. 3. the case of Hugh Lincoln crucify be in the same author and for it eighteen jew be at once draw and hang this Hugh be reckon as a saint in Chaucer prioress tale by reason of their exaction and usury they be all banish their moveable allow they but Walsingham say only their expense for passage in 18. ed. 1. math. westm number they one hundred and sixty thousand five hundred and eleven the house of convert in pat. 51. ed. 3. memb 20. be give to the master of the roll by the statute Judaism they be to wear every one be past seven year old a cognisance of yellow upon their upper garment thereby to be know some such distinction have be general enjoin in the council of Lateran see the statute and cap. jud. 6. r. 1. rog. de Hoveden fol. 424. they be forbid to build new synagogue make subject to the payment of tithe and be to wear on their upper garment on the breast two piece of woollen cloth of another colour plain to be discern each of they two finger broad and four in length by the provincial council of Oxford under Stephan archbishop of Canterbury in 8. hen. 3. chap. 11 a chronology of the jewish history from the begin of the world brief collect the flood happen as Moses reckon the parcel in the age of the patriarch in the year of the world 1656. which be thus account Adam at the hundred and thirty year beget Seth Seth at a hundred and five beget enos enos at ninety Kainan he at seventy Mahalaleel who at sixty five beget Iared Iared be one hundred sixty two year old beget Henoch who at sixty five beget methuselah and he at a hundred eighty seven beget Lamech who in his hundred eighty two year beget Noah in the six hundred year of who life the flood come whereof every nation almost in the world have some tradition howsoever as Censorinus cite out of Varro from the begin of the world to that first deluge be call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) or unknown as from thence to the first olympiad be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) or fabulous only that deserve the title of (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) from the olympiad forward if we regard human history but the divine have make the former more clear than the late some difference be in what part of the year the world be create which be suppose to be autumn because the tree be then in those part of Eden lade with fruit and the jew still observe that time Scaliger also sometime of a contrary opinion have now yield to this and the egyptian in the time of fermicus hold that the world be create in the thirty part of Libra the flood after Scaliger begin in the year 1657. on Saturday the seven of November the second age of the world be reckon from the flood to Abraham who birth be after the flood 292. year sem two year after the flood beget arpacsad he at thirty five year selah who in the thirty year beget Heber Heber at thirty four peleg who be thirty year old beget Regu and he at thirty two serug in who thirty year Nahor be bear who at nine and twenty beget Terah who at seventy year beget Abram thus Scaliger Caluisius Buntingus Arias Montanus Genebrard Pererius Adrichomius Opmeerus etc. but junius Broughton Lydayt codomannus etc. add sixty year more for Moses say gen. 11.32 that Terah die in Charan age two hundred and five year and then Abram as it be in the next chapter be seventy five year old so that Terah when Abram be bear be a hundred thirty year old whereas therefore he be say at seventy year to beget Abram Nahor and Haran it be to be understand that he then begin to beget a a 2008. abram bear Abram be name first for divine privilege not because he be elder the like phrase be use gen. 5.32 Noah be five hundred year old beget Shem Ham and japhet and yet neither be they all bear at once nor be Shem the elder let the reader choose whether of these opinion he best like in the seventy five year Abram go out of Charan have receive the promise from whence to the departure of the israelite out of Egypt be number 430. year rather herein we be to follow Paul interpretation of Moses then genebrard who Gal. 3.17 account those four hundred and thirty year mention by Moses Exod. 12.40 from the promise make to Abraham and not from the time that jacob go down with his family into Egypt so that the departure out of Egypt after scaliger computation and some other Perkins Adrichomius etc. happen in the year of the world 2453. whereto if we add those sixty year of terah life before mention it amount to two thousand five hundred and thirteen and so Broughton reckon junius and Lydyat account two thousand five hundred and nine the difference seem to arise from hence that one account from Abraham depart out of ur of the chaldee the other from his departure from Haran after his father death about five year after but it be a endless work to reconcile chronologer in their different computation some reckon the five and twenty b b Jos. Scaliger annot. in euseb Scaliger the fifteen of April the day of their departure and then the hebrew begin their year at the Spring-equinoctial which before they begin in autumn from this departure to the building of Salomon temple c c Ios. Scaliger em t. lib. 5. and in opusc p. 131. Lydyat 2988. Troy be take by the grecian a. m. 2767. scal. e. t. l. 5. Scaliger reckon four hundred and eighty year who first foundation he say be lay the nine and twenty of May be Wednesday 2933. and of the great julian period which differ seven hundred sixty four year from the year of the world 3697. in this computation of four hundred and eighty year betwixt the departure and foundation of the temple many chronologer agree Arias Montanus Adrichomius Broughton Perkyn Lydyat etc. although some dissent much the sum arise of these parcel Moses die forty year after their deliverance joshua rule seventeen Othoniel forty Ehud fourscore gideon forty Abimelech three Thola twenty three ja twenty two jephte six Ibsan seven elam ten abdon eight sampson twenty Heli forty Samuel and Saul forty David forty Solomon in the four year and second month begin to build his temple after which he reign thirty seven year * * an. m. 3360. from thence to the destruction of the temple under Zedekias be account four hundred twenty and seven this agree with d d Ezek. 4.5 Lydy 3417. ezekiel account reckon a day for a year three hundred and ninety day or year after the apostasy of Israel from God the rebellion against the house of David in the begin of rehoboam reign by the mean of ieroboam to which if we add seven and thirty year which Solomon reign after the foundation of the temple the sum be four hundred twenty seven the same appear thus Roboam reign seventeen year three asa forty one jehoshaphat twenty five jehoram eight Ahaziah one Athaliah six joash forty Amazia twenty nine Azaria or Uzzia fifty two betwixt Amazia and Azaria the kingdom be rule eleven year by the state as some gather out of 2. reg. 15.1 other reckon it not jotham sixteen ahaz sixteen Ezekiah twenty nine Manasses fifty five Amon two josias thirty one jehoahaz three month eliakim or jehoiakim eleven year jehoiachin three month Zedechiah or Mattaniah eleven year the little difference from the former number may be ascribe to the current and unfinished year of some of their reign from this time of Sedekias ruin some begin the reckon of the seventy year captivity in which time other comprehend all Sedekias reign and account the return under Cyrus to be fifty nine year after this desolation and from thence a hundred and eight to the edict of Darius nothus from which time be number two hundred fifty nine to the dedication of judas maccabeus and from thence a hundred sixty two year to the birth of Christ so e e scal. em. lib. 7. Scaliger it be a work irksome to myself and tedious to the reader to recite the variable opinion of chronologer or to traverse their argument about these point they which listen to see the variety of opinion of jewish greek latin old and new chronologer may see Genebr chron. lib. 1. in fine likewise see our four book cap. 4. to recite here their high priest and late king with the time of their pontificality and reign out of Arias Montanus I hold not unfit first jesus return with Zorobabel and build the temple who time of priesthood after Scaliger junius and those that reckon upon the edict of Darius nothus must needs be very long to leave that therefore his son joacim f f joseph antiq. and car. Sigo republ hebr l. 5. have set down the catalogue of high priest from the first to the last jun in 1. mac. 1. scal. e. t. l. 5. succeed in the priesthood twenty eight year beside twenty year with his father Eliasib hold the priesthood one and forty year joiada twenty five jonathan twenty four jeddoa twenty seven till the time of Alexander Onias twenty seven after philo but Eusebius say twenty three Simon justus thirteen Eleazar twenty Manasses twenty seven Onias thirty nine afterward the syrian king appoint high-priest of who jason be priest three year Menelaus twelve year in who seven year judas maccabeus begin to administer the commonwealth jonathas brother of judas rule eighteen year Simon his brother be both priest and captain eight year joannes Hircanus his son thirty one whereas they have use to date their contract according to the year from Alexander as we read in the book of maccabee when Simon Hircanus be high priest that order be abolish and another take that every date shall be express in such or such a year of n. high priest of the great God but lest the writing be cancel shall be neglect and perhaps the name of God cast with it on the dunghill the wiseman abolish that order on the three of Tisri which they institute a holiday as for the name of maccabee junius say it come from the inscription of those four letter m. c. b. i. in the banner of those prince which deliver the jew from the macedonian thraldom Scaliger say that judas only and proper be so call but by abuse of speech be not only give to all of that kindred but to all which suffer in those time persecution for religion as the seven brethren and other the name Hasmonaei begin with that Hircanus Scaliger think because in the sixty eight psalm it be by the jew interpret prince Aristobulus son of Hircanus first after the captivity call himself king and reign one year joannes Alexander his brother twenty seven after he his wife Alexandra nine Hircanus her son three month Aristobulus his brother three year jerusalem be take of Pompey and Hircanus recover the priesthood which he hold two and twenty year Antigonus by aid of the parthian possess judae a five year and in his second year Herod be proclaim king by the roman who take the city the five year of Antigonus and reign four and thirty Scaliger d d can. Isagog.. l. 2. ascribe to Herod kingdom the number after Eusebius account reckon from the birth of Abram 1977. he die 2016. Archelaus his son be make by Augustus tetrarch of jerusalem 2016. and be banish 2025. Agricola be make king by Caligula 2053. agrippa his son by Claudius 2060. and die 2116. thirty year after the destruction of the temple the dynasty of the herodian last 139. year thus Scaliger he attribute the nativity of Christ to the 3948. year of the world here we must leave the chronologer contend of the year of the world in which this bless nativity happen some add many more year some not allow so many it be certain by the scripture that he be bear in the one and forty or two and forty of Augustus baptize in the fifteen of Tiberius then begin to be about thirty year of age in the thirty three year he be crucify in the seventy two as Baronius and seventy one year of Christ as Buntingus and Lively account jerusalem be destroy by Titus in the second of Vespasian Arias Montanus reckon this the year of the world 3989. and say that the hebrew reckon it the 3841. which must needs be false the fault arise from the false computation of the Persian and grecian monarchy e e Ios. antiq. lib. 20. josephus count from the time of Herod to the destruction of the temple twenty eight high priest and a hundred and seven year after Scaliger in his can. Isag. l. 3. this year 1612. be the 1614 of Christ of the world 5461. after the jewish account of hillel 5372. of the armenian 1061. of the julian period 6325. of the Hegira 1021. 4. Olymp. 597. the dionysian account which we usual follow scal. e. t. 5. l. be not general receive till after the time of Charles the great chap. 12 of the jewish Talmud and the composition and estimation thereof also of the jewish learned man their succession their cabalist masorite their rabbin university student Rabbinical creation their scripture and the translation of they @. i. of the Talmud rabbi Mosche Mikkotzi a a r. Mos. in Sopher gadol. in a work of he set forth 1236. as Buxdorfius cite he b b Synag judaic. Buxd. latin herm. Germberg c. 1. say that the write law which GOD give to Moses and Moses to the israelite be obscure and hard because it speak some thing contradictory which he seek to prove by some place c c exod. 12.15 Deut. 16.3 and Levit. 23.6 ex. 19.11 and Exod. 20.22 etc. misinterpret and because it be imperfect and contain not all thing meet to be know for who shall teach we say he the note of bird and beast a franciscan may answer he d d legend of saint Francis where he be say to preach to the beast and speak to the swallow out of the legend of saint Francis the patron of his order who shall teach they the propriety and nature of point and accent of letter also what fat may be eat what not etc. many such thing be defective in the law and therefore there be need of some other exposition of the write law whence these thing may be learn this exposition forsooth must be their Talmud the generation of which viper touch before we will here more full declare they say that Moses on mount Sinai be not with GOD forty day and forty night to keep goose and GOD can have write those table of the law in a hour and send he away with they so to have prevent that idolatry with the golden calf but GOD bring Moses into a school e e pircke r. Eliezer cap. 1. and there give he the law in write first and then in all that long time expound f f Radicalia p. ric. epit. Talmudica praefat. rambam the same show the cause manner measure foundation and intention thereof in the true sense this unwritten and verbal law do Moses g g r. Aben. ezra r. Solom jarchi and in Deut. 4.14 teach joshua be the elder from these it be derive to the prophet after Zachary and Malachi the last of these it come to the great sanhedrib and after they by Tradion from father to son and * * r. Bechai exod. 34. rabbi Bechai say that Moses learn the law write in the day time and this traditional law by night for than he can not see to write rabbi Mosche Mikkotzi show the cause why God will deliver the same by mouth only and not in writing lest I wis the gentile shall pervert this as they do the other which be write and in the day of judgement when GOD shall demand who be the israelite the gentile shall make challenge because of the law write but the jew only shall be accepe as have this Simani this verbal exposition GOD also say they give they chachamim wiseman author of diverse ordinance among they as to bless GOD at the sunrising and sun-setting and of school where child shall be teach the law of Moses in every city and where the law of Moses shall be read weekly and that the israelite shall not eat or drink with the gentile nor what they have dress after the example of * * dan. 1.8 Daniel etc. but when the temple be destroy and the jew carry away captive than arise up rabbi juda Hannasi who be call for his humility and godliness our great master to who GOD procure such favour in the eye of Antoninus the emperor that he have authority to assemble out of all place of the empire the most learned jew to consult in this their almost desperate estate what course to take for the preservation of the law among the people and although this Kabala or law give by word of mouth may not be commit to writing yet in consideration and commiseration of their misery whatsoever thereof be remain in memory he write in a book which he call Mischna that be a h h (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Deuteronomy or law reiterate contain six sum divide into sixty less part or tractate and these into five hundred thirty two chapter thus far r. Mikkotzi the content of the six sum and their several tractate you may see in * * Buxt. op. Talm. Buxtorfius in this book be contain the tradition and ordinance of the elder according to the prescript whereof the jewish synagogue be to be order and it be receive and approve of the jewish synagogue i i chron. Heb. tzemach David in the year of Christ 219. k k the Talmud be in manner say Rambam nothing but a commentary on that Misna a work full of divine natural and political wisedom say Galatinus of the part thereof see his first book c. 5. and Buxd. Recons op. talm and Sixt. sen. Bib. l. 2 i. Picus say it be compose about the year 150 other say in the year 120. io. Wolf lection Memorab Centenar 2. Scalig. otherwise vid. E.T. pag. 614. some year after rabbi jochanan rector of the university of jerusalem for the space of eighty year enlarge that book and call it the Talmud of jerusalem be fit for their use which dwell in the land of Israel as the other for foreigner which for the difficulty and obscurity thereof be not have in such estimation as the former nor be it at this day after he rabbi ass read in the school those tractate handle every year two of they so in the sixty year of his rector-ship he go twice through it all but finish in write only five and thirty tractate after he in the year l l pet. galat. have 436. 427. Maremar be make rector to who mar the son of rabbi ass adjoin himself these perfect that which rabbi ass have leave unfinished and that which they thus add be call Gemara or the compliment thus the mischnaios and Gemara make up the whole Talmud m m Talmud be the same that or Elias this rad. Thalmud these two spend in their labour threescore and thirteen year and so in the year of our lord 500 the Talmud be perfect receive for authentical and call the babylonian Talmud according to which the jew to this day behave themselves in case spiritual and temporal account it as their civil and cannon Law the jew ascribe the jerusalem Talmud to the year of the world 4229. the other 4265. this be call the Talmud of jerusalem say serarius not because it be write there but be compile not in the babylonian university but in one of Israel and in the jerusalem language which at that time be very corrupt and confuse with greekish persian and roman mixture this be both begin and end by r. jochanan aforesaid between the time of the Misna and Gemara about the year 4860. and 1100. year after Christ r. Isaac ben jaccb in Spain write so it be call the little Talmud and in the great and true Thalmud be the addition of r. Barkaphra Eldad Danius fable that it be in Hebrew among his enclose jew note also that the name Thalmud or Talmud be give sometime to the whole work sometime and often to the Gemara noly call it the book of the Misna and Talmud and this be that law verbal or deliver by word of mouth which be equal to the other without which the write law can be conceive or understand the joy of the hart say o o ab. ezra in prooem pentateuch Aben ezra and refresh of the bone betwixt which and the write law he can find no p p tridentina ses 4. 1 and difference but be deliver to they from their elder in one of their book q q Semak katon r. Isaac print at Cremona 1556. be this sentence think not that the law write be the foundation but rather the law traditional be the right foundation and according to this law do God r r exod. 34.27 make covenant with the israelite for God foresee their captivity in time to come and therefore lest the people among who they shall dwell shall write out and interpret this law as they do the other God will not have it write and although in process of time this law be now write yet it be not explain by the christian because it be hard and require a sharp wit that which be speak of the law be apply to commend their Talmud if you can frustrate say the lord my covenant with the s s psal. 1.2 esa 59 ult. jerem 32.25 day and the night that be according to their book Tanchuma when you will no long learn and observe the Talmud and in the t t tractat. Bavamaziah Talmud be thus record to study and read in the bible be a virtue and not a virtue that be a small virtue but to learn their Mischna or Talmud text be a virtue worthy reward and to learn by heart Gemara the compliment of the Talmud be a virtue so great that none can be great the u u Vid. ap. Buxd. syn. jud. and in lib. talmud impress 1613. wise man say they be more excellent than the prophet and the word of the scribe more lovely than those of the prophet and therefore the one force to confirm they with miracle the other simple to be believe as be say Deut. 17.10 when some of his scholar visit r. eliazer in his sickness and say rabbi teach we the way of life that we may find everlasting life his answer be give honour to your fellow student and turn away your child from the study of the bible and place they betwixt the knee of the wise neither can he say the Talmud in other place have a quiet conscience which return from the study of the Talmud to the study of the bible and nothing be more excellent than the most holy Talmud and it be impossible to stand on the foundation of the write law but by the traditional and to dissent from his doctor be as to dissent from God to believe the word of the wise be as to believe God himself they say the law be like to water the Misna to wine the Gemara or Talmud to preserve the law like to salt the Misna to pepper the Talmud to spice they blaspheme that God study the bible in the day time and the six order of the Talmud by night hence it be that the rabbin be more exercise in their Talmud then in the bible as on which their faith be found more than on the other and according to this do they expound the scripture and as their Talmud be most certain so also be that whatsoever exposition of their rabbin according to the same thus say rabbi Isaac Abhuhabh whatsoever our rabbin in their sermon and mystical explaination have speak we be no less firm to believe then the law of Moses and if any thing therein seem repugnant to our sense we must impute it to the weakness of our conceit and not to their word as for example it be write in the Talmud 10 10 tract sabbat c. 2. p. 30. that a rabbin once preach that the time will come when a woman shall every day be deliver of her burden according to the say jere. 31.7 one not believe this the rabbin answer that he speak not of a common woman but of a hen which shall every day lie a egg such be their exposition I know not whether fit to be hear of Heraclitus or Democritus more lamentable or ridiculous and yet be it there say that their word be the word of the live God whereof not one shall fall to the ground and must not be deride either in word or thought whether you respect the person or work of their rabbin therefore in a dutch book print in hebrew character at Cracovia 1597. it be write that the jew be bind to say amen not only to their prayer but to all their sermon and exposition according to the prophet Esay y y Cap. 26.2 open the gate the people come schomer amunim which keep righteousness that be say they which say amen believe all thing which the wise rabbin have write and if any be so simple that he can understand yet must he believe when two rabbin say their Talmud maintain contrary opinion yet must not man contradict they because both of they have his Kabala or tradition for the same and this be a rule in their rabbin remember rather the word of the scribe than of the law of Moses r. Solomon jarchi upon Deuteronomie chap. 17. verse 12. thou shall not decline from the word that they shall show thou to the right hand or to the left have these word and when he say unto thou of the right hand that it be the left and of the left hand that it be z z A.R. must be believe though he say the right hand be the left the right thou must believe it how much more if he say the right hand be the right etc. they have a story in their a a Talmud tract sabbat legend for the same that there come a goi a gentile to Sammai and ask how many law they have who answer two a write and a verbal he reply the write law I acknowledge no less than thou make i therefore a jew and teach i the other Sammai refuse and he go to hillel these both live a little before the time of Christ who admit and instruct he after he bid he pronounce the letter in order aleph Beth Gimel etc. which he do the next day he bid he say the same letter backward Gimel Beth aleph the gentile say rabbi yesterday you teach i otherwise and yet say hillel you believe i and so learn of i which you must no less do in the traditional law believe all that be therein I have almost think in read of this hillel I have hear the catechise of some romish convert that with a implicit faith believe and worship he know not what catholicus be fool catholic in a hour resign himself to whatsoever that church teach upon a or else that I have be read the life and precept of b b l. 3. c. 7. p. Massaeum Ignatius Leiola the jesuit-founder so like be the story though the name differ who practise himself and train up other say Maffaeus in a large discourse hereof Paul probate be in those day but and thus write Ignatius himself ignatij loiolae in Lusitania and Kibadeneire ignat. l. 5. c. 4. to obey in outward execution and effect the command of a superior may prove no virtue of patience but a cloak of malice a very imperfect perfection not worthy the name of virtue until the inward affect be join to the outward effect neither be this a whole sacrifice except he not only will the same but judge and be of the same sentence with his superior he must in the person of his superior behold Christ who can neither deceive nor be deceive ready always to defend never to mislike his command yea whatsoever his superior enjoin he must accept as the precept and will of God and as he be ready to believe the catholic faith so c c to be carry without further search with a blind force of the will desirous to obey thus do Abraham when he be command to offer Isaac and therefore thus must the jesuite do when a Ignatian superior command or else he be no holocaust for the Loiolan altar even as a carcase say the Jesuitical constitution d d vid. reg. soc. jesus constitut. 31. 37. etc. Ribad sup. which will be draw any way or a staff in a old man hand pliant as he please so and so must e e jesuit state divinity our waxen jesuit be ass without understanding nay carcase without life staff and slave and block guide by their guide though it be to crack the crown of king and as his legacy he bequeath this a little before his death to the society that they shall be as pliant wax as a image flexible at pleasure yea though it seem against conscience yet must a man believe his superior rather then himself and if the pope shall bid he cross the sea in the next boat he meet with though destitute of sail oar mast and helm and without all kind of provision he will do it willing this he call mortification other which be not thus blind have their sin still remain and have but one foot in religion this obedience say another f f Orlandini trist. l. 12. of they be the character imprint by divine and not human hand in this society what devil of hell can ever have teach murder and treason to be tolerable nay commendable nay meritorious if his scholar shall not first pass this Jesuitical retrograde from a christian and a man with the loss of religion and reason to become as these rome-rabbin term it a carcase indeed a image or a staff in the hand of that old one which like the egyptian enchanter he may make a serpent at his pleasure but let the truth prevail and Moses rod eat up these serpent-rod of the egyptian and what more can old hillel say to his disciple or do God himself exact Bernard throughout his seven epistle teach more sound of the pope and those religious superior g g bern. Epist. 7. but to leave this question and our jesuit till fit time jewish rabbin aver that whosoever mock or contemn their say shall be punish in hot and boil Zoah or excrement in hell and thus much of their Talmud the original and authority thereof more modest yet be those father h h Sess. 4 dec. 1. of Trent that will ascribe but equality of reverence and respect to their tradition with the sripture with equal affection and esteem say they we receive and reverence tradition and the book of the old and new testament which must needs acknowledge themselves behold to they lest if they complain they follow not their traditionary master in make sit low and they have their anathema as ready as the rabbin their Zoah and their tradition canon and constitution must interpret as well as their Kabala and some of that hot society i i costeri Enchirid. scrip have find five privilege of tradition above scripture as be write in the heart of man by the finger of God be more ancient give confirmation to the scripture not subject to wrest and contain all truth whereas poor scripture for no better defend of the Jesuitical jebusiticall jezabelicall assertion be condemn first of her mean original as be write but by the apostle not the finger of God second as a late upstart and three as receive upon the church authority and four a dead letter write in paper or parchment with ink subject to wrest like a sheath which admit any blade whether of lead wood or brass as well as the true one and last not contain all the mystery of religion explicit as be not therefore give to prescribe a exact form of faith but write by some upon some occasion to some church and therefore in controversy as of image invocation of saint and the like where scripture seem to speak for heretic we must have recourse to the other kind of scripture write in the heart of the church as interpreter of all scripture judge of all opinion and whatsoever else foul-mouthed blasphemy with fair pretext can arrogate to this or derogate from the other o that man will therefore hate that whore which these impudent pander prostitute thus deck with the spoil of divine scripture which have another testimony of themselves and therefore the testimony of God that k k 2. tim. 3.16 all scripture be give by inspiration of God and be profitable for doctrine for reproof for correction for instruction in righteousness yea and hereunto sufficient that the man of God who man who emissary be these gainsayer may be perfect thorough perfect unto all good work but leave we Simeon and levi brethren in evil together yet before we leave their Talmud though high esteem among they I think meet also to speak more large both of that and of their learned rabbin out of Petrus Galatinus sixtus Senensis Paulus ricius rambam and other that write thereof the l l galat. de arcanis lib. 1. vid. and p. ric. epit Talmud doct and praefat. 613. prac r. Mos. aeg. misraios Reuchlin de arte cabal lib. 1. etc. traditional law they call Tora scebealpe that be the law which be in the mouth or deliver by word of mouth rabbi Moses Aegyptius tell the passage thereof thus joshua receive it of Moses deliver it to phineas the son of Eleazar the priest phineas to Heli the priest he to Samuel the prophet Samuel to David he to Achias the prophet who deliver the same to Elias the teacher of elisha elisha or Elisaeus to joiada the priest this joiada to zacharias zacharias to hosea and he to amos amos to Esay of who Micheas receive it and of he joel nahum from he and from he again Habacuck who teach it Sephanie the instructor of Jeremy of who Baruch the scribe learn it Baruch teach it ezra until this time the jew have none other but the write scripture now for their scripture they call the same Arbaa veefrim that be the four and twenty of the m m d. Whitak script quaest. c. 6. show that the jew account so many book of the bible as they have letter in the alphabet to wit two and twenty he allege author Gregor. Naz. Hilary cyrillus Hierosol Epiph. Hieron Isidorus Niceph. Leontius etc. as all we write and speak be express by 22. letter so all our christian doctrine in 22. volume say Hugo as for 24. or 27. as some number Epiph. haer. 8. and Mens. and pond ruth be say he reckon with the book of judge Nehemia with ezra and Samuel king and chronicle be not divide 777. 5845 9294. Hagiog 8064. with Sixt. s. Bibliothec. l. 1. the division into chapter be first by st. Lagton Archb.. of cant. for old book be after the canon of euseb c. r. number of the book after their computation all which they reduce to four part the first of which they call Tora the law or humas the pentateuch or five book and they call every book after the first word in the begin thereof the second part have four book joshua judge Samuel and king the three part comprehend four other which they call the last prophet Esay Jeremy Ezekiel and the book of the twelve small prophet the four part be call Chettwim and hth eleven book Paralipomenon or chronicle the psalm the proverb job ruth Ecclesiastes lamentation canticle ester Daniel ezra which they make one with Nehemia ecclesiasticus judith and Tobias and the first book of maccabee they have but reckon not among the four and twenty the three and four book of ezra I have not see say Galatinus in Hebrew but some of they say that they be late find at Constantinople but the second of maccabee and the book of philo call the wisdom of Solomon I never see but in greek nor those addition to Daniel but after the babylonian captivity ezra write out the law which have be burn in the destruction of the city other wiseman write out the exposition of the law lest if another destruction shall happen the same may perish and from that time all the wiseman which be call the man of the great synagogue in their teach the law deliver the same both in word and writing until the Talmud be write it be then say Picus in seventy book after the number of the seventy elder these man authority have the next place to the prophet and be in this order mention in their Talmud ezra deliver the same to Simon the priest call jaddus who be honour of Alexander this Simon deliver this explaination to Antigonus Antigonus to josephus the son of John and to josephus the son of jehezer they to Nuaeus Arbulensis and joshua the son of Peratria who auditor the jew false affirm that jesus our bless saviour n n the Talmud blame Helisaeus for too much severity to Gehezi and r. josben Prahcia for the like towards jesus of Nazareth who have follow this his master to Alexandria be persecute by king jannai who return to jerusalem and commend his inn that his scholar think he have speak of his hostess say she have round eye what varlet say the r. have thou such a thought and present command he to be proclaim a anathema with the sound of four hundred trumpet nor will after upon his repentance admit he whereupon he become a idolater a magician etc. this jannai be Hircanus son of Simon 110. year before our saviour and therefore it be another jesus or else this be a malicious device of the Talmudist which confute itself with the foolish computation of time be which live a hundred and ten year after those two deliver the same to juda the son of tibaeus and Simon the son of sata these to Samaia and Abatalion and they to hillel and samaeus hillel flourish a hundred year before the destruction of the second temple and have eighty scholar or disciple all of excellent wit and learning thirty of they for their excellence have the divinity descend upon they as Moses and other thirty obtain that the sun shall stand still for they as joshua the rest be account mean of these the great be jonothas son of Uziel the least John the son of zacheus which yet know the scripture and Talmud and all thing else to the example of fox and narration of devil hillel and samaeus deliver this explaination to this John and to * * luk. 2.28 Simeon the just son of the say hillel who after receive Christ in his arm and prophesy of he in the temple rabbi Moses proceed and say that Simeon teach gamaliel Paul master and gamaliel instruct his son rabban Simeon who be slay of Hadrian the emperor after he have teach his son judas who the jew for his learning and holiness call rahbenu haccado that be our holy master of which honourable name there have be another in the time of the roman consul these for the most part beside almost infinite other of their hearer have leave many thing write of the explaination of the law of which the Talmud be compact of the unreasonable absurdity and impious blasphemy of the Talmud howsoever abominable in themselves yet let it not be irksome to the reader to see some mention therein to observe the depth of divine vengeance which in this blind nation we may hear and fear for who will think it possible that any can entertain in his heart that which there they have write of GOD as that * * Vid. Sixt. sen. Bib. l. 2. and before the creation of this world to keep himself from idleness he make and mar many other world that he spend three hour every day in read the jewish law that Moses one day ascend to heaven find he write accent therein that GOD every day make devout prayer that GOD have a place apart wherein he afflict himself with weep for bring so much evil on the jew that every day he put on their Tephilin and Zizis and so fall down and pray that as oft as he remember their misery he let fall two tear into the ocean and knock his breast with both his hand that the last three hour of the day he recreate himself in play with the fish Leviathan which once in his anger he slay and powder for the feast whereof you shall after o o cap. 20. hear that he create the element of fire on the sabbath day that the rr. one day reason against r. Eliezar because GOD with a voice from a heaven interpose his sentence for for Eliezer the other rr. anathematise GOD who thereat smile say my child have overcome i but I be weary to add the rest of their restless impiety against the almighty neither have the creature escape they thus the Talmud tell that GOD once whip Gabriel for a great fault with a whip of fire that as Adam before Eve be make have carnal use both male and female of other creature so the raven p p Lyr. in gen. 8. mention this and vict. Carb lib. 1. c. 10. have a long jewish tale of the raven even still jealous etc. which No send out of the ark be jealous of Noah lest he shall lie with his mate that job story be feign that David sin not in his murder and adultery and they which think he do sin be heretic that unnatural copulation with a man wife be lawful that he be unworthy the name of a rabbin which hate not his enemy to death that GOD command they by any manner of mean to spoil the christian of their good and to use they as beast yea they may kill they and burn their gospel which they entitle iniquity reveal iniquity reveal indeed be the declaration of these thing as of their opinion of the * * (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) soul if it sin in one body it pass into a second if there also into three if it continue sin it be cast into hell the soul of Abel pass into Seth and the same after into Moses the soul of the unlearned shall never recover their body two rr. every week on Friday create two calf and then do eat they nothing ought to be eat by even number but by uneven wherewith GOD be please perhaps they have read in but this be common to all magician and what do I weary you and myself anticipate the follow discourse wherein we shall have further occasion to relate the like absurdity which yet if any deny they say he deny god. @. 2 of the ancient jewish author and their kabalist after the time of Christ philo and josephus be famous and after the resurrection of Christ the jew be of three sort some true believer other absolute denier the three will have the christian religion and the jewish ceremony to be conjoin in equal observation against which three sort the first council act. 15. be summon the modern jew insist principal on the literal sense of scripture the elder seek out a spiritual and mystical sense account this a great matter the literal but small like to a candle of small value q q r. Moses Masmonius in proaem Moreh neb. with the light whereof the other as a pearl hide in a dark room be find the talmudist follow the allegorical sense the cabalist the anagogical as concern this cabala in old time r r if the wiseman will not a long time write the Talmud how much less the secret of the law idem l. 1. cap 70. they communicate not that skill to any but to such as be age and learned and therefore nothing thereof or very little be find write of the ancient except of rabbi Simeon Ben johai but the doctor of the late jew lest that learning shall perish have leave somewhat thereof in writing but so obscure that few know it and they which do account it a great secret and hold it in great regard so say Elias s s Thisbi rad. Kibhel in the book of the Kabala be contain the secret of the law and the prophet which man receive from the mouth of man unto our t t yea Raziel the angel teach it Adam from who it pass to Enoch Noah sem Heber Abraham etc. if you believe the cabalist vid. reuch lib. 1. Leon Heb. dial. 3 master Moses on he be peace and therefore it be so call and be divide into two part speculative and practic but I be not worthy to explain this business and by reason of my sin have not learn this wisdom nor know this knowledge of those saint the word cabala signify a receive and in that respect may be supply to all their traditional receipt but in use which be the law of speech it be appropriate to that faculty which as u u ric. de Coelest agricult l. 4. ricius describe it by the type of the Mosaical law insinuate the secret of divine and human thing and because it be not ground on reason nor deliver by writing but by the faith of the hearer receive it be call cabala or if you have rather have it in 10 10 Reuchlin de arte cabal l. 1. pag. 620. and 632 and d. Edit. Basil Reuchlin word it be a symbolical receive of divine revelation deliver to the wholesome contemplation of GOD and of the separate form and they which receive it be call Cabalici their disciple Cabalaei and they which any way imitate they Cabalistae the talmudist therefore and the cabalist be of two faculty both agree in this that they grow from tradition whereunto they give credit without render any reason herein differ that the cabalist as a supersubtle transcendent mount with all his industry and intention from this sensible world unto that other intellectual but the y y the Talmudist also go no high than Moses the cabalist begin with Adam for his tradition leo h. d. 3. in dial. 2. he play the cabalist also with the ethnic theology more to the praise of his learning then their divinity grosser Talmudist abide in this and if at any time he consider of GOD or the bless spirit yet it be with relation to his work and their function not in any abstract contemplation bend his whole study to the explaination of the law according to the intent of the lawgiver consider what be to be do what eschew whereas the cabalist most endeavour themselves to contemplation leave the care of public and private affair to the talmudist and reserve only to themselves those thing which pertain to the tranquillity of the mind as therefore the mind be more excellent than the body so you must think the cabalist superior to the Talmudist for example in the beginning God create heaven and earth say Moses heaven z z vid. cap. 14. leon. Heb. amore dial. 3. gen. 1.1 here after the Talmudist be all that part of the world which be above the moon and all beneath it earth also by heaven he understand form and by earth matter the composition whereof he effect not by labour of the hand but by that nine-fold oracle of his word for so often be it mention a a gen. 1. and God say likewise he find the four element in those word darkness spirit water dry land but the cabalist frame to himself two world the visible and invisible sensible and mental material and Ideall superior and inferior and according gather out of the former word God create heaven and earth that he make the high and low thing mean by the high the immaterial by the low this material and this be gather out of the first letter Beth which in number signify two and insinuate there these two world yea they also find two paradise and two hell one in this world and the other in the other and future for the body here and the soul hereafter even as say r. Saadia the white of the egg comprehend the yolk so that first intelligible world infold the second in this be nine sphere move of the immovable Empyreon in that nine order of angel b b theorem 26. ricius reckon ten hayes Hakadesch offanim Erelim Hasmalim seraphim Malachim Elohim be Elohim cherubin some divine count they thus out of Dionysius seraphim cherubin throni dominationes virtutes principatus archangel angeli the ten order the peripatetike term anamastica the cabalist Ischim that be man move of the unchangeable GOD who in unmoveable silence first create altogether and after by nine time speak move and promote each thing to its own distinction the talmudist dream of a earthly Messiah to free they from this their slavery the cabalist if our cabalist have not see these thing through spectacle expect a spiritual delivery from sin doubtless they deliver many excellent assertion howsoever their collection seem curious and uncertain gather the same on ground without ground beyond all sense reason scripture and therefore often leaven with other superfine absurdity Buxtorfius in his Heb. say that by his abbreviation (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) they use to signify the three part of the art cabalastica Notarkon Temurah Gematria be that part which by like number contain in the letter of diverse word explain one by the other as tzemach Zach. 3.8 have in the numeral letter 138. and so many be in Menachem a name which they give to the Messiah and therefore by tremach they there understand the Messiah so in gen. 49.10 Shilo shall come contain 358. and so do messiah which be therefore there mean and many like example Notaricon be when every letter in one word shall note so many other word and make up a sentence thus the maccabee be so call of these four letter which they inscribe in their banner m. c. b. i. the first letter of so many word exo. 15.11 who be like thou among the god o lord so in Adam name they find as the cause thereof word beginning with the same letter signify ash blood gall whence be note his corruption loss and calamity as the greek in the same name find the the east west north and south a (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) d (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) a (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) m (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Temurah be when one or two word be change into one or more other by transposition of letter or inversion of quality so out of the Hebrew word psal. 21.2 the king shall rejoice in thy strength o lord they expound the king Messiah for this be gather by transposition of the letter so Chrerem anathema be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) mercy and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) which in the numeral letter have 248. the just number in their anatomy of the member of man body the gloss be he which be anathematise if he repent shall have for (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that be mercy if not it pierce his 248. member and destroy the whole man hence come our anagrammatisme and chronogrammatisme wherein some do sometime learned trifle and spend their wit foolish this of all their cabal be true that it may better serve to convince the jew with testimony of their own then for a instruction to we who can enforce argument out of symbolical sense if any be in love with these mystery let he resort to Paulus ricius his theorem to John Reuchlin to johannes Picus and his commenter Archangelus to Abraham suppose book of the creation c c Sepher jezira to r. joseph castiliensis his porta which ricius have also translate and epitomise to Galatinus and other d d vid. catalogue cabalist script in reuch lib. 1. pag. 6.0 commendable be the labour of some of these and of many e e r. Samuel maroch victor carretus Hieron s. fide etc. morn de Verit. c. r. other both convert jew which have seek to reclaim their perverse brethren and of our own as Mornaeus gregentius Pomeranus out of who they which please may borrow argument to convince the jewish incredulity and stubbornness and to confound they by their own testimony both from these elder writer above mention and also from the late so great be the truth and mighty it prevail that it extort not only she own weapon usurp and steal by her enemy but their own also wherewith they come arm against the truth and retort they on themselves as David serve the Philistine f f 1. sam. 17.51 who cut off goliah head with goliah sword as g g 1. Chro. 11.23 Benaiah one of his worthy slay a egyptian a man of great stature five cubit long and in the egyptian hand be a spear like a weaver beam and he go down to he with a staff and pluck the spear out of the egyptian hand and slay he with his own spear thus do h h q. curt. li. 9 dioxippus the champion if foreigner delight any deal with Horratus the macedonian in a set combat and thus have our i i d. mor. apolog. Cotholica etc. worthy and champion come often into the field against the popish giant arm inward with truth outward with argument wrest without wrest from his enemy he in his latin and english work have observe the twofold rule of policy divide and rule against the papist unite and rule for the protestant which breere will have bring into the like brier but those his troop be show not to be man but ape like those that hold Alexander army in suspense and like Semiramis elephant which be but stuff Ox-hides kill-cow-fray but worthy Deane even so go on still and fight the lord battle that thy Sparta so happy undertake still adorn and show the confusion of Babel babbler divide that society which now in their last age have hiss with their fork venomous tongue fear and envy at home for their arrogance no less than hate abroad for their heresy and treason let saint john let England and the whole church still sing the ten thousand that thou do thus slay with their own weapon and let the apostolical truth escape while her apostatical enemy the pharisee and sadducee be set together by the ear a happy and divine stratagem which not to detract from other just praise in this or other part of the battle have be single and singular manage by thy prowess which speak more just than he which use those word to these babylonian k k 2. reg. 18. in their own language that they may eat their own dung and drink their own piss together doctor white also in that his milkwhite l l pag. 342. way to the true church challenge in all point of popery both authority of scripture father and late romanist and to produce the same against the Trent-council and the jesuit but how have that fatal name of Babel confound i true the likeness of these traditionary cabalist muddy talmudist and legendary as will appear to a easy observer and comparer of this ensue history to their practice which have be muster from the eastern and western m m both Bellar. and Baronius approve and prove Rome to be Babylon Babel and the like manner of their confusion have almost make i forget the history and myself but never a whit the truth and this will be further manifest in the rest of this book where their superstitious devotion be relate as for those testimony of the jew against themselves beside the scripture which in regard of the true sense the veil over their heart will not suffer they to read but it be a seal book unto they and they leave the riches thereof unto unto we as the n n 2. reg. 7.7 aramite leave their tent with their horse and treasure to the pine israelite their other author be so plain and plentiful in the mystery of our religion as I know not whether it cause great pleasure to read their write or astonishment and wonder at the nation so strike with madness and with blindness and with astonishment of heart since they have shut their eye against the sun of righteousness on who that threaten plague be come o o Deut. 28.29 thou shall grope at Noon-day as the blind do grope in darkness for out of their talmud-author be plain deliver the mystery of the trinity the incarnation of the son of GOD his two nature his birth of a virgin his spirival kingdom the time of his come the truth of his prophecy and power of his miracle the redemption of mankind by his death his crucify descent resurrection and ascension and that their nation be to be reject the old law to cease new to succeed etc. all which as they agree unto that sweet and bless name and person of jesus which name and that of Emanuel be also find in their write so do they argue the severity of God judgement when man will not believe the truth that by the efficacy of error they shall have eye and see not ear and hear not neither we nor their own as Paul and CHRIST himself often tell they but those particular as rather appertain to disputation than history and therefore too much impertinent to our purpose the desirous reader may at large find in Morney and Galatinus not to mention p p lud. Viu v. c. f. seb. Munster Christ and jud. censura other the witness of josephus be one who name we oftten use in this history may just challenge i if I shall omit he especial see he live in the very day of the apostle who as he witness of John Baptist and of many other thing mention in the gospel full agree therewith so concern our lord and saviour have this testimony q q Ios. 18. cap. 4. in the time of Tiberius there be one jesus a wise man if at leastwise he be to be call a man who be a worker of great miracle and a teacher of such as love the truth and have many follower as well of jew as of gentile this be Christ nevertheless be accuse unto Pilate by the chief of the jew he be crucify but yet for all that those which have love he from the beginning cease not to continue still for he show himself alive unto they three day after his death as the prophet have foretell of he both this and diverse other thing and even unto this day do those continue still which after his name be call christian thus much josephus thus do the truth force he to confess who history of the destruction of his nation what be it but as a commentary on jesus prophesy thereof and their fearful imprecation r r mat. 27.15 his blood be upon we and our child show that the wrath of God be come upon they to the utmost from mount Olivet where jesus be first apprehend and where last those bless foot touch the earth as if there mercy have leave a print of justice be jerusalem besiege and at their feast of passover when they have crucify Christ they be coop up as it be assemble by divine justice from all quarter to destructron together with that their city where they have slay the lord but of this before it will not be unsavoury to the reader observe herein divine vengeance to relate as unsavoury a tale as ever be devise which their Talmud tell in derogation of Christ miracle in which I know not whether to call they beast or devil so witless and withal so wicked be their blasphemy forsooth in Salomon temple there be s s vict. de Carben lib. 1. c. 13. the jew have a horrible and blasphemous curse direct against our bless saviour who they will not call by his name full pronounce but abbreviate with relation to the curse of which for I loath to mention it let he which will see Bux Heb. say they a certain stove of very rare virtue wherein Solomon by his singular wisdom have engrave the very true name of GOD which it be lawful for every man to read but not to con by heart nor to write out and at the temple door be two lion tie at two chain which roar terrible that the fear thereof make he to forget the name that have commit the same to memory and he to burst asunder in the midst that have put it in writing but JESUS the son of Mary say they regard neither the curse annex to the prohibition nor the roar of the lion write it out in a bill and go his way with it joyful and lest he may be take with the thing about he he have a little open the skin of his leg and put it in there and afterward wrought his miracle by the virtue of that name I shall be almost as absurd as they if I shall dispute against it see in this and most of their brainsick dream the very recitation be sufficient refutation it can be deny that there have be many rabbin very learned as r. Moses Aegyptius Abben Tibbon which translate Euclid and other author out of arabic into Hebrew and some part also of Aristotle translate into Hebrew be account his do many other of they write in philosophy likewise and for physic who have be more famous but he which will have notice of the rr. and their work let he read Buxdorfius his bibliotheca Rabbinica print 1613. yet even the best of they have much chaff which need much fan from the corn many wise sentence and proverb have be by t t Drus vet. sap. Drusius and other gather out of some of their work which will have beautify this discourse as these for a taste vow be the hedge or wall of defence to holiness tithe be the same to riches he which increase his flesh increase worm who be wise he which learn of every one who be valiant he which bridle his affection who be rich he which be content with his portion if I care not for myself who shall care for i and if I what be I and if not now when the day be short and the work much and the labourer slow and the wage great and the householder call upon we but i think you call upon i to proceed but of these and such like say there be a whole treatise call Pirke auoth which be as it be their Medulla patrum or flores doctorum gather by r. Nathan Babylonius set forth by Fagius and since by Drusius yet have speak thus much of their learned man I think it will to some lover of learn not be unsavoury to add somewhat of their university degree of school and the like in the next section @. 3 of the rabbin the rite of their creation the jewish university and student serar Rabbinus prior. c. 1. and seqq Buxtorf Heb. affirm that none of these title be use till Christ time Serarius think they more ancient among the jew all these title be of one root rab Rabath rabbi rabban Rabbana Rabbanan Ribbi Ribbun ribbon Ribbona Ribbuni Rabboni some of which be more usual than other but all of they in general signification betoken either a prince or lord or a master and doctor of the former signification be few example in scripture in their thargumim many and those common with some word annex signify the thing or main subject of the late the new testament be full the root from whence these title spring be Rabab or rab which signify to multiply for a prince multiply his power a doctor his learning and one such be as many according to the modern use which speak to great man and they of themselves in plural u u we see pronoun of rab be Rabbim and Rabboth in the plural number that use for any multitude in other thing this appropriate to signify rabbin some also of those title be Hebrew some Chaldee or Syriac some indifferent signify a lord or master some more especial the one or the other also in regard of place one of Babylon be call rabbi of Israel Ribbi of those two famous university in Babylonia and judaea in regard of excellence one of low esteem be style rab of high rabbi or ribbi of of high Rabbenu rabban and Rabbanan yet do not these rule always hold for they have much altercation among themselves why some be name without any title as hillel Shamai and diverse other and why some more eminent be call rab or rabbi as rabbi Eliezer rabbi juda Hakkadosh r. Hakiba rab Ascanio author of the Gemara rab Haai rab Baruch and why the title of rabban be appropriate to some few rabban gamaliel r. simeon etc. this be affirm for currant that he which have disciple may be call rab or rabbi that the young be not so call by the elder that they which want imposition of hand may not be so call that the ruler among the people call Nesijm be in manner only call rabban and for Rabbenu that be our master it be ascribe to very few as to Moses first and after to Hakkadosh hillel gamaliel etc. Buxtorf Abbreu dict. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) those Rabban be only seven all of the posterity of hillel as Buxtorfius witness and these be so call rather because they be prince or lord than doctor other title beside these be also give they as Chacham that be wise so hierom. the doctor of the jew be call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) from which greeke word perhaps come that other title give they Sopher so that which Esay have Sopher Es. 33.18 1. cor. 1.20 the apostle interpret (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) they be also call by other doctorly title as Mascilim Malphan and Malphana Moreh whence come the modern title Morenu that be our master attribute to their archrabbine mar abba and Abbothenu zekkenim that be our father old man and the like the rr. be of two sort one number by a succession of time another name of their study and employment of the first kind be the Thanaei Amoraei Seboraei Geonim Marbithe Thoraz chechame Thalmudim of the other the masorite cabalist thalmudist Medakdekim Methargemim and other for the former rank thana signify to learn whence those master which follow the time of the last prophet till the reign of Commodus be call Thanaim of these be number twelve generation r. Abraham Davidicus reckon from Zorobabel to the destruction of the temple ten and five after these Thanaei be sometime reckon by couple of which before the destruction of the temple one be call nasi 10 10 vid. sup. c. 2. or prince the other din the father of the council of these colleague or pair they reckon five the last of which be hillel nasi and Schamai ab din. hillel have thousand of disciple but eighty principal the chief of which be jonathan author of the Chaldee paraphrase he and his house or sect hold many peculiar opinion to which Shamai and his house or school oppose themselves and maintain the contrary to these succeed the Amoraim which be so name because hain omerim memoroth they utter wise sentence of these they account seven generation these continue till about five hundred year after Christ the Seboraei succeed so call of Sabar that be to be of opinion for they make not canon and constitution as the former but only show their opinion of they be five generation which end about a. d. 680. and then follow the Geonim the word gaon signify both proud and magnificent of these they number eight generation continue till dom. 1038. some of they be of Europe in France Germany and especial in Spain their eastern academy then decay of their chachime Thalmidim afterward the other rank or of rr. have first the masorite of Masor to deliver so call in respect of their traditional law in a general sense and more especial of their tradition of read the bible as the distinction accent and prick observe prescribe and that other tradition of marginal note concern the diverse Readins of the Text they which commit this masore y y see the next @. follow to writing be before deliver by word of mouth only be call masorite these masorite by caninius Genebrard Galatinus Bellarmine and who in this part of our discourse we principal follow Serarius that I speak not of Scaliger Martinius and other be acknowledge author of the prick and accent as they be now in use howsoever there be some other use before which some ascribe to ezra and some to Moses so do Sohar Chadasch print at Cracovia 1603. which say the point be deliver by the secret of the law in Sinai and without they word be as woman without clothes may not come abroad there be no light in they etc. these masorite be hold to have live after the Talmud be finish and therefore to be of the Seboraei rabbin and that at Tiberias where they have many synagogue and library sometime also if zacuth testimony be true the Sanhedrin itself sup. @. praece of the Kabbala and the kabbalist call Kabbelan and Mekubbal you have hear a little before and likewise of the Thalmud and Thalmudist the Medakdekim be the grammarian as Dikduk signify grammar r. juda be report to be the first Hammedakdek or grammarian before who be no Dikduk of the holy tongue after he r. jonah and after he r. saadia Haggaon after who innumerable other joseph Moses and David all kimchi Elias etc. that which be say of r. juda be to be conceive of the modern prick and accent for before his time r. joseph caecus the Amoraei the scribe and Moses himself be therein expert Thargum signify a interpretation and thence Thurgemana and mechurgeman a interpreter as dargoman with the arab and turk at this day and as the body of scripture be divide into three part the pentateuch Hagiographa and prophet so have they three thargum of Onkelos jonathas and r. joseph the blind which live about dom. 400. and as the Thalmud so the Thargum be of two dialect the babylonian and of jerusalem of this the author be unknown the babylonian be write the pentateuch by Onkelos the prophet by jonathan the Hagiographa by r. joseph caecus as for the jewish fable of a voice to jonathan and of the consume with fire from heaven any fly that shall disturb he in his writing his super-excellence among the most excellent learned scholar of hillel etc and of their many other suppose thargum with other Rabbinical work testify true of Christ collect and relate by Galatinus and other I forbear further recital I may here among their doctoral title reckon the archiperecitae mention by justinian z z novel 146. a stile give to such as be skilful either in time or rather in the Thalmud as chief master and archrabbine of their Sanhedrin be already speak sup. cap. 2. the name be if we receive Serarius borrow of the greek with who (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) signify senator these may well be reckon among their learned man Bahal Midrasch be the author of a commentary or a preacher as Darsan also but I have too long examine title if in the next place we observe the power of the rabbin they be have in great reverence and respect they sit in lofty and stately seat have power to create other master and doctor to wear ring and hood and enjoy other privilege differ according to the time place and differ estate of the jew under diverse lord for as we have observe in this country of England so in other country their power be less or more after the will of their lord in Babylonia Egypt and Spain somewhat in some place nothing in justinian time they challenge power of excommunication which the emperor forbid under pain of bodily punishment and loss of all their good the like ecclesiastical censure be late seek by the jew of Frankford examine by the emperor commissioner at Mentz now for the rite of create the r. in this doctoral or Rabbinical degree first there be some trial of his worth so lampridius testify of the emperor Alexander that he nominate those which be to be send to govern the province and to will such as can say aught against they to make good proof thereof or else as slanderer to lose their head allege that if the jew and christian make such trial of the priest it be necessary in these to who the life and good of man be to be commit by the jewish priest we understand the rr. as the chief of they at worm be by the vulgar call juden bischoff receive some jurisdiction under the bishop next after this trial follow imposition of hand call by they Semicah which be do by some rabbin who they style somech neither before this imposition may any right be term rab rabbi rabban or Gaon num. 27.23 act 8 etc. this rite be ancient Moses have use it to joshua and the apostle and christian bishop still observe he be also place in a chair which the hebrew call whence come those phrase he sit in the seat of such or such a rabbin as of r. jose a a in kab 75 b. the hand be impose he be there in Babylon make Gaon and place in the throne rab Haai to this seem to allude the sit in Moses chair a four rite be a set form of word ancient these any somech otheca thihieh Samuch that be I lay hand on thou be thou he on who hand be lay or I make thou master be thou a master r. juda who Adrian the emperor slay add a full form of word this imposition be public do in their school where their chair be this imposition of hand some conceive may not be do the present manner of make a rabbin but only in the land of Israel which howsoever it be true or false this be certain that now in their Rabbinical creation it be omit as the chief rr. of Frankford in their epistle to other jew complain and therefore they ordain than none in Germany be esteem a Morenu our master without the approbation of their archrabbine which keep a academy in Germany none shall be Chaber which have receive imposition of hand out of Germany none Bachur till the second year after his marriage especial if he dwell in a place where be not a academy that trial may be have of his life and learning these be three degree Morenu as a doctor Chaber as a licentiate Bachur as a bachellour b b or with we a Master of art bachelor and doctor in divinity in the christian university of the there be difference one be chief the rest under he and these be make of the rr. and if a rabbin will be a he must be examine usual of three but to become a rabbin needs no examination their master testimony be sufficient who be a or else one choose by the congregation to this purpose for one simple r. can make another the place be in the synagogue the day common the sabbath at which time and place the morenu stand before the ark or place where the law be keep speak to the assembly say that such and such have now spend many year profitable in study of the law and be think worthy of the honour of a rabbin or a and then call the party forth by name and appoint he to read present to the people and then be he account a r. or Morenu and if he be to travel into any place far distant he carry the testimonial of this doctor of the chair or father of the act which confer his degree upon he a Chaber be the colleague or companion of a rabbin but inferior to he scal. Elench. cap. 10. for as in university there be regent and non-regent so a or as one which actual teach and as it be a regent be more than a rab or rabbi Scaliger say that he be not present after this his commencement or proceed entitle master but Chaber which have also his relative annex as r. Ishmael Chaber of r. Eleazar which be the same with (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) among the greek as speusippus (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) platonis and while he be so call he never sit while his master sit but be prostrate on the pavement and when they be both master the young stand while the elder sit and teach as in the primitive church the young bishop call the elder Papa Serarius and he can agree about these point Elias say el. Thesbi rad. Gaon and Aben. that the doctoral title of Gaon be give they for their perfection in the Talmud for Gaon signify sixty and so many part be there of the Misna these wiseman in Spain add Aben to their title as r. Abraham Aben ezra his father name be meir but Aben the name of the family as Paul and Aquila sometime so many of those jewish master exercise some handicraft to sustain themselves without trouble of other so be r. jose a dresser of leather nahum and meir scrivener jochanan a shoemaker and r. juda a baker next unto the master it be meet to say somewhat of the scholar Thalmidim if he be a boy he be call janik and katon rather for his little learning than age or stature a forward scholar be name Bechir and Bachur in which time Scaliger affirm Serarius deny that he be call by his father name his own not add as Ben Bethira before after imposition r. josua ben Bethira Thalmid be speak of Benjamin often mention in his journal the disciple of the wise Thalmidim which some think to be a name attribute to themselves in modesty as the name (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) in greek turn to philosophi but general all student be call the son of the wise as sometime the son of the prophet in Pirke auoth be this speech of Bagbag a boy of five year to mikra or the text of scripture at ten year to Misna at thirteen year to the precept at fifteen to the Thalmud or Gemara as Paul say he be bring up at the foot of gamaliel act 22.3 so it be a rule in their Pirke auoth that the student shall all to bedust himself in the dust of his master foot and with assidious diligence attend his say drink his word with thirst that person of who he have learn but one chapter or lesson or verse or word be to be have in honour the student be to be obsequious and serviceable to his master they hear with great silence sit or else prostrate on the floor or pavement at the foot of the doctor and if at any time they stand it be a good distance from he for reverence sake yea the Chaber dare scarce if scarce sit while the rabbin sit the disciple say they must arise to his master as far as he can see he and if he do not stand up to he he be wicked shorten his life and forget the Thalmud they may not reprehend their master nor depart from their assertion and when they recite any thing which they have learn of they they do it in their master name every way seek to win they credit yea they call he a epicure which do sit before his master or cite he do it by his bare name without some honourable title annex as my lord or master etc. exclude such out of the world to come to conclude this sentence of r. Eleazar ben Shamua in their Pirke auoth brief express these mutual duty let the credit of thy disciple be as dear unto thou as thou own and let the honour of thy companion Chaber be as the fear of thy master and the fear of thy master or rabbin as the fear of God as for the jewish c c some say this name academy be so call of Cadmus inventor of learning and letter in Greece some of a god academus etc. vid. jun. de acad. academy they call they Mekom thorah the place of the law and the holy congregation of they which be occupy in the law and usual jeschibah and Methibata of sit for there be the Rabbinical chair it seem all the forty eight city of the levite be such and all the school of the prophet where the son or scholar of the prophet abode as in the day of Samuel Elias etc. be mention jerusalem can not but be most eminent and after the babylonian captivity they have two university famous one Nehardea in Babylonia upon Euphrates by josephus call Nearda the other jerusalem which be destroy with the city it be call the university of Israel of which the first rector be r. jochanan the second rabban gamaliel the three r. Akiba and when Adrian have forbid all jew to enter the land it be like it be subvert yet after renew and the rector thereof r. jochanan the author of the jerosolymitan Thalmud who die dom. 279. in mean while two other university be famous in Babylonia one at Sura and the other at Pombaditha betwixt which in process of time grow great contention faction and remove to Kamisin five day journey eastward and to Neres that of Sura somewhat eclipse that of Nehardeha because there for the most part reside the chief of the jewish captive these decay and almost vanish about dom. 668. which it seem happen by the fatal alteration of the world in that new saracenicall deluge although many age after the jew hold up their head high in these part as appear by benjamin head of the captivity resident in Bagdat before mention but the jew now disperse have through the world erect in place of their abode such academy as they can d d Tiberias of old and thessalonica since be of principal note as you have see in benjamin relation already and Rabad mention some in Spain and Africa and some yet remain at Constantinople cairo Cracovia in Poland prague in Bohemia and late the synagogue of Frankford which call itself the mother of Israel in Germany constitute five viz. frankfort worm Fridberg fulda Kinsbirg yet e e Buxt de Abbr. these three be account the ancient synagogue in Germany spire worm Mentz and therefore their matrimonial contract be sign with these three letter s. w. m. if they write short to show that it be according to the ancient custom and constitution of spire worm and Mentz the jew have school wheresoever be any store of they but ten say Rambam be a number fit to have a synagogue they call their school Midrasch the house of exercise Gymnasium the Synagogue Beth cenese the congregation house sometime these be distinguish for in the synagogue they must pray for he that neese in the school they may not sometime the same and their synagogue in Germany be now call school of these be report four hundred eighty one in jerusalem before the destruction the ruler thereof be call archisynagogus as they use to give glorious title one to another according to their supercilious conceit of themselves as the glory of thy excellence for the second person thou or the glory of their excellence for they so especial their rr. name be not mention without smoky fume of arrogance as the glory of our master doctor etc. for a instance take these title give to the author of the Talmudical Lexicon Aruch in the title thereof so vast ambitious be their heart so wide gape mouth in their have these thrasonical Pyrgopolynicetical braggadochio after so long captivity and so extreme servitude and baseness that it may appear how far God have forsake they so far from humility in this humiliation that they swell every day into great vanity as the sun than great when low and bladder than big when they have nothing but wind to fill they even their glorious title so much insist on in this discourse then seem to have have beginning or at least to be in great use when they be near the end and sunset of their glory and since have increase to this rabble of Rabbinical style here deliver and that which in these day be of great reckon Buxt. Abbr. Heb. the title our doctor have be hatch say Buxtorfius in Germany within these two hundred year and thence pass into Italy in imitation of our academical degree of doctor say some or else as other it be ordain to be a special title of honour with a kind of jurisdiction over other r r. to prevent their lavish looseness in grant bill of divorce that this power shall be appropriate to the the first which enjoy this title in this proper sense for in a common it be common before as in rambam Moreh Nebuchim appear be Maharasch and his scholar Maharil who die dom. 1427. @. 4 of the scripture and their interpretation before we shake hand with the learned writer of the jew it be not unmeet in my opinion here to meet with some question which some have move concern they and their deal in and with the scripture for since that the council of Trent have decree in the year 1546. both the divine authority of scripture canonical to the Apocrypha-book which the jew receive not nor ever do and have make the vulgar translation f f Sesse 4. in and authentical in public lecture disputation preach and exposition that none under any pretence whatsoever shall presume to reject it it be wonder to see how eager that I say not impudent diverse of they have seek to slander the original text and have blame as author thereof in the new testament heretic and in the old Jew cover their malice to we with pretence of the malice of heretic and jew and forget the true rule that it be a shame to belie the devil thus have * * lib. 2. cap. 13. Canus and pintus and gregorius de Valentia Sacroboscus and other traduce the jew in this behalf themselves refute by their own which yet by consequent overthrow that former decree sixtus Senensis ribera cardinal Bellarmine himself andradius Andreas Masius Arias Montanus Isaac levita etc. beside of we many and especial our own learned countryman Whitaker reynolds Morton etc. h h Bellar. ver. lib. cap. 1. Bellarmine have both teach we the vanity of their opinion that hold that the scripture be all lose in the babylonian captivity and be by ezra renew miraculous who be rather i i ezra 4.14 commend for his industry in interpret and observe they and for order and compact they in one volume then for such needless revelation to find that which be never lose a author rather as k k hier. prologue Jerome have observe of the present Hebrew letter then of their ancient scripture and have also prove the absurdity of their conceit that imagine the Hebrew fountain corrupt first by l l bel. ibid. cap. 2. the argument of Origen and Jerome that such corruption must have be either before or after Christ if that Christ will have reprove and not commend the scripture to their search if this how come it that the testimony cite by he and his apostle be find now in Moses and the prophet as they be then cite second out of Augustine that it be not likely they will put out both their eye in deprive their scripture of truth that they may put out one of we nor be it possible that such a general conspiracy can be make three from their more than reverent estimation of their scripture for which they will die if it be possible a hundred death and even still as Isaac m m Isaac levita def heb. ver. in epist. ded. answer b. Lindan his scholar they proclaim a fast to expiate if by some accident that book but fall to the ground four some place in the Hebrew be more strong against the jew then our translation be and the prophecy which make most against they remain there uncorrupted and last the providence of GOD will never herein fail his church but have leave they with their book to be disperse through the world to bear witness to that truth which they hate and persecute these be Bellarmine argument which because they be the truth be also we and therefore we have be bold with the reader to insert they levita n n I.S. Leu. l. 2. add that the Hebrew text concern Christ be more clear and perspicuous then in any translation whatsoever who affirm also of himself that read the fifty three chapter of esaias 1000 time by which he be convert to the christian faith and compare it diligent with many translation he find a hundred time more touch the mystery of Christ in that then in these many prophecy be in the Hebrew which make for the christian and yet in the 70. be omit the jew hold it a crime inexpiable to alter any thing therein which if any say they shall do but in one word of ignorance or malice it will bring the whole world in danger of perish they will not lay their bible but in a pure place nor touch it but with pure hand and be not religious alone but superstitious also in respect thereto as for that emendation or correction of the scribe which Galatinus mention wherein they have corrupt the text he prove it to be a late dream of the Talmud and answer the argument of his fellow herein not so catholic as himself now although this may seem more then enough to convince that folly yet it shall not be impertinent to add out of Arias Montanus somewhat touch the same because it open another mystery touch the Hebrew learning and the masore o o Refort Renoldus Bibl. part 6. Aniverp when the jew say he return into their country after the captivity threescore and ten year in Babylon it befall they partly by occasion of their long trouble which do distract their mind partly by corruption of their native tongue which be grow out of kind first into the Chaldee and afterward into the syriac that they neither know nor pronounce so well the word of the scripture write as the manner be without vowel whereby it come to pass that in the write of they there creep in some fault either through injury of the time or by reason of trouble which fall upon the people or by negligence of some scrivener but this inconvenience be meet withal afterward by most learned man such as esdras be and afterward gamaliel joseus Eleazar and other of great name who provide by common travel with great care and industry that the text of scripture and the true read thereof shall be preserve most sound and uncorrupt and from these man or from their instruction be receive and polish by their scholar in the age follow there come as we judge that most profitable treasure which be call masore that be to say a delivery or traditional because it do deliver abundant and faithful all the diverse Readins that ever be of the Hebrew bible wherein there appear a evident token of the providence of GOD for the preservation of the sacred book of scripture whole and sound that the masore have be keep till our time these many hundred year with such care and diligence that in sundry copy of it which have be write no difference be ever find and it have be add in all the write bible that be in Europe Africa or Asia each of they agree thorough therein with other even as it be print in the Venice bible to the great wonder of they who read it thus far Montanus and by this masoer their objection of Caari and Caaru in the two and twenty psalm be answer in that certain Readins have the late and true as the masoer testify we have already show that these masorite invent p p mart. gram. Heb. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) vid. Drus in luc. 16.17 phil. Ferdinand ait 2. tiberitae Majoritae Elias in Mazoret Hamozoret vid. Buxdorf thes. Grammat the prick wherewith the Hebrew be now read to supply the lack of vowel herein use religious care lest by invent new letter to that purpose they shall have change that ancient form of writing and somewhat impair the majesty thereof they tell q q Isaac levita defence Heb. v. that when a certain rabbin have read zacar for zecer he be slay of his scholar joab for violate scripture r r Genebrard chron. 4. Genebrard deny their opinion that make ezra or esdras author of these Hebrew prick and accent say that they be invent after the time of honorius the emperor in the year after the temple be destroy 436. which be say he from Christ 476. in tyberias a city of Galilee the chief author be Aaron asery and james son of Nephthali who dissent one from another cause a division among the jew the western jew follow the former the eastern which dwell in Babylonia the late the Syriac tongue some hold to have spring from the corruption of the Chaldee and Hebrew mix the edition and translation of the scripture out of the Hebrew into the greek be s s bell. q. sup. c. 5 Strom. l. 1. reckon nine beside that which Clement alexandrinus say be before the time of Alexander whereof Plato and the philosopher borrow not a little the first already mention of the seventie the second of Aquila first a gentile after a christian and now last a jew in the time of Adrian who Serarius think to be Onkelos or Ankelos author of the targum the three of theodotian a Marcionist under Commodus the four of symmachus first a samaritan and after that a jew. of the five and six be not know the author of all these Origen compound his Hexapla the seven be the correction rather than a translation the eight be of Lucian priest and martyr the nine of hesychius but the most famous and ancient which the spirit of GOD have by often allegation in some measure confirm be that of the seventie as for that conceit of the cell which t t paran gen. justine say be threescore and ten in which they be divide and which u u Epiph. de pon. epiphanius place by couple and number six and thirty cell in which by miracle these thus divide do all agree in word and sense 10 10 hier. praefat. in pentatench Bellar. l. 2. c. 6. vid. praefat. and. masq in Ios. Jerome deride the same as a fable because neither aristaeus which then live nor josephus do ever mention it now whereas josephus mention only the law translate by they justinus irenaeus Clemens Eusubius write that they translate all and although aristaeus name but the law yet who know not that by this general name they sometime comprehend all the scripture as in the new testament be see as 1. cor. 14.21 and John 10.34 some y y scal. in Epist. Arist. in Bibl. accuse this aristaeus for a counterfeit chap. 13 of the modern Jew creed or the article of their faith with their interpretation of the same and their affirmative and negative precept @. i. of their creed stay a a Esay 29.9 yourselves and wonder say the lord of this people they be blind and make blind they be drunken but not with wine they stagger but not by strong drink etc. and after because of their hypocrisy and their fear towards i be teach by the precept of b b verse 14. men. therefore behold I will again do a marvelous work in this people even a marvelous work and a wonder for the wisdom of their wiseman shall perish and the understanding of their prudent man shall be hide this day be this scripture as it have be many age heretofore fulfil in our eye as it have appear by our former declaration of the Talmud and further follow in rehearse the thirteen article of their creed c c Bux syn. c. 1. thus brief express in their daily Prayer-book 1. I believe with a true and perfect faith that GOD be the creator governor and preserver of all creature and that he have wrought all thing work hitherto and shall work for ever 2. I believe with a perfect faith that GOD the creator be one and that such a unity as be in he can be find in none other who alone have be our GOD be yet and for ever shall continue our god. 3. I believe with a perfect faith that GOD the creator be not bodily nor endue with bodily property and that no bodily essence can be compare to he 4. I believe that GOD the creator be the first and last and that nothing be before he that he shall abide the last for ever 5. I believe that he alone be to be adore and that none else may be worship 6. I believe that all whatsoever the propht have teach and speak be sincere truth 7. I believe that the doctrine and prophecy of Moses d d he attain say r. Moses hereon to the height of human perfection and be reckon among the troop of angel neither sensitive faculty nor appetite be amiss in he nothing leave but only spirit and spiritual understanding the difference between he and other prophet he handle Morch neb. lib. 2. cap. 36. that the name of the prophet be of he and other and his sign be of another kind than other thereunto apply those word Exod. 6.3 etc. they allege four excellency in Moses first that he prophesy not by mediation of a angel second other prophesy in the night and in dream the scripture say God appear in vision but Moses in the day stand between the two cherubim three their member be in manner disjoin and their mind distract but God speak to Moses as one do to his friend four they prophesy not at their will but when the spirit be send Moses always when he will Moses otherwise Deuteronomy 18.15 act 3.21 and Paul Hebr. 1.1 2. and 2.2 3. be true that he be the father and chief of wise man that live then or before his time or shall be in time to come after 8. I believe that all the law as it be this day in our hand be so deliver by GOD himself to Moses 9 I believe that the same law be never to be change nor any other to be give we of god. 10. I believe that he know and understand all the work and thought of man as it be write in the prophet he have fashion their heart together consider all their work psal. 33.15 11. I believe that GOD will recompense to all man their work to all I say which keep his commandment and will punish all transgresser whosoever 12. I believe that the Messiah be yet to come and although he do long defer his come yet will I hope that he will come wait for he every day till he do come 13. I believe with a perfect faith that there shall be a awaken of the dead at that time which shall seem fit to GOD the creator the name of which GOD the creator be much bless and celebrate for evermore amen Genebrard out of the spanish breviary have annex this their creed-prayer o GOD and king which sit on the throne of mercy forgive iniquity etc. o GOD which have teach the thirteen article of faith remember this day the covenant of thy thirteen property as thou reveal they to Moses in thy Law 1. lord Lord 2. strong 3. merciful 4. gracious 5. long-suffering 6. and of great goodness 7. and truth 8. which keep mercy for thousand 9 which take away the iniquity 10. transgression 11. and sin 12. which absolve not 13. but rendre the iniquity of the father upon the child to the three and four generation then follow those thirteen article in form of a hymn with the exposition of r. Moses which also you may read in the treatise of Philip Ferdinand a polonian christen jew. and he which thus believe say Ferdinand be a jew and as a brother to be love and though he commit all the sin of the world howsoever he shall be punish for his sin yet shall he have part in the kingdom of heaven though he be reckon among the sinner of Israel but he which shall overturn one of these precept shall be blot out of the number of the saint and be reckon a heretic apostata epicure worthy to be hate of all this be the jewish faith in which with much vexation doubt and lamentation they live and die upon which their religion have be always found but it be first put in writing and bring into this order by r. Mosche bar Maimon e e patria cordubensis in Egypto mosen Moses vid. Bux Heb. and scal. ep. who die in the year after their reckon 4964. dom. 1104. and straight charge be give that the jew thenceforth for ever confess it in this order shall according to the same live and die this their creed howsoever charity may construe much of it to a better sense yet according to their understanding do it principal aim at the subversion of christian religion as appear in a more strait examination after their sense of the 2 3 4 and 5 the 7 8 9 10 11 12. article all which make against the person or the office of the son of GOD as they understand they deny his godhead and disannul his office affirm as a jew shame not to profess and utter unto m. Buxdorfius that it need not that any shall satisfy for they for every fox must yield his own skin and hair to the flayer and the jewish faith say r. joseph Albu be found upon three foundation upon the unity of the divine essence upon the law of Moses and upon the eternal reward of good work and punishment of evil contemn the passion of Christ f f Esay 53.5 6. by who stripe we be heal and on who GOD have lay the iniquity of we all it be write also in their g g tract Sanhedrin cap. 13. Talmud that all the israelite have their portion in the world to come not all alike but he shall have a great part that have do more good work and the wicked and impenitent shall be punish twelve month in hell or purgatory after which time they also and some soon if they have be less sinner shall have their part but a less than the former but to they which deny GOD which become christian their foreskin grow again and as uncircumcised eternal be punish in Hell and the son of a decease jew be bind to say for the space of one year h h see cap. 19 a prayer call Kiddisch thereby to redeem he from purgatory in which respect the father die with joy a good woman may do the like for her husband but r. Bechai who exclude all other nation from their part in the resurrection prefer the jew in a fourfold privilege viz. the land of Canaan the law the prophet and the resurrection recite out of the great i i tract cap. 1. Talmud that three sort of man shall rise again at the day of judgement one of the best israelite a second sort of the wicked and worst the three of a mean who have do as much good as evil the good shall present go into life eternal the wicked shall be cast into hell as in the twelve of Daniel and shall be for ever in torment of body and soul the three and mean sort of sinner shall be torment for twelve month space for their sin in hell at the end of which time their body shall be consume and the wind shall scatter their ash under the sole of the foot of the just etc. and as worthy do they prove it out of the k k Zach. 13. 8 prophet and in that day two part shall be cut off and die and the three shall be leave therein and I will bring that three part through the fire and will fine they as silver be fine and will try they as gold be try and in another place l l 1. sam. 2.6 the lord kill and make alive bring down to hell and raise up just as fit apply as 1. cor. 3. and such like place by our purgatory spirit r. David Kimchi upon the first psalm and Esay 26. comment that the wicked shall not rise but in the day of death their soul shall die together with their body and Aben ezra in his exposition of dan. 12. write out of r. Higgaon that many shall rise and many not rise but suffer everlasting reproach and expound it thus that the good Jew which die in exile shall rise again when the Messiah shall come and shall live as long as the patriarch before the flood and then they shall make merry with the great fish Leviathan and the great bird Ziz and the great ox Behemoth m m see cap. 20. of which we shall speak after when this be do they shall die and at the last day shall be raise up again and shall possess eternal life where shall be no eat nor drink but glory etc. jacob n n gen. 47.30 desire to be bury in Canaan not in Egypt for three cause say r. Solomon jarchi because he foresee that of the o o exod. 8.17 dust of Egypt shall be make louse second because the israelite which die out of Canaan shall not rise again without much pain of their roll through the deep and hide vault of the earth three leave the egyptian shall make a idol of he for the better understanding hereof let we hear what be say out of the book Tanchum a exposition of the pentateuch concern this subject the patriarch say he desire to be bury in Canaan because they which be there bury shall first rise in the time of the Messiah and r. Hananiah say that they which die out of Canaan must endure two death and the same appear jer. 20. where it be say Pashur shall go into Babel and shall there die and there be bury what quoth R. Simon shall then all the just perish which die out of Canaan no but God will make they p p note that the modern jew pronounce thaulene like the letter s Buxtorf in fine Bibliot rab. and therefore I have follow he in set down many word end with s. which have thou in the Hebrew termination as mekillo lilis so we as he see say have foresee say have mechillo that be deep cliff and cave under the earth by which they may pass into the land of promise whither when they be come GOD shall inspire into they the breath of life that they may rise again as it be write q q Ezek. 37.12 I will open your grave and cause you to come out of your sepulcher etc. the like be write in their targum or chaldaean interpretation of the canticle when the dead shall rise mount Olivet shall cleave asunder and the israelite which have be dead shall come out of the same and they which have die in strange land come thither by hole under the earth shall come forth and for this cause I myself say our author have hear the jew say that sometime some of the wealthy and devout among they go into the land of Canaan that their body may there sleep and so be free from this miserable passage under so many deep sea and rough mountain there be three sort of r r Drus in io. 5.24 and 31. man say Salmanticensis in the book juchasin which see not the face of hell those which be extreme poor those which be in debt those which be trouble with the colic the Hasidaei chastise themselves ten or twenty day before their death with this pain of the bowel that so they may cleanse all and go s s shrew purgatory pure to the other world some add in this exemption from hell or come to judgement he which have a evil wife and some also magistrate but in Paul time they themselves do allow say t t act 24.15 he a resurrection of the dead both of the just and unjust they do then hold also a (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) in which sense it be likely the jew think u u mat. 16.24 Christ to be Elias or Jeremy or one of the prophet and the disciple somewhat sour with this leaven ask of the blind man 10 10 io. 9 whether he have sin understanding as it seem according to the jewish error when his soul have be in some former body and the cabalistical author say y y this rad. Gilgul Elias levita be of opinion that every soul be three time create they mean it roll or pass through three man body according to that of z z job. 33. job GOD work all these thing with a man thrice so the soul of the first man say he roll itself into the body of David and shall thence return into the body of the Messiah so they say that the soul of sinner pass into the body of beast as if a man commit sodomy his soul pass into a hare because that creature be sometime male sometime female the soul of the adulterer pass into a camel now to come from their faith to their work the wise rabbin persuade the silly people that they be the only elect people of God who easy can keep not the decalogue or ten commandment alone but the whole law of Moses they divide the whole law into six hundred and thirteen commandment and they again into precept and prohibition of the command precept they number two hundred forty and eight just so many as according to the rabbin anatomy a man have member in his body of the prohibit commandment they reckon three hundred threescore and five a a rambam praec. as many as be day in the year b b Brandsp or as in the book Brandspiegel vein in a man body therefore if every member of a man do every day perform one of the precept and omit one of the thing prohibit the whole law of Moses shall be every year and so for ever fulfil their wise rabbin say further that the man only be to observe those six hundred and thirteen commandment the woman be only subject to the prohibition yea of those prohibitory mandate only to threescore and four be they oblige by some and to six and thirty of the former and this because of their other houshold-business and subjection to their imperious husband some of their deeply-wise rabbin add to those six hundred and thirteen seven other commandment make up the number of six hundred and twenty just so many as be p letter in the decalogue c c in biblijs sc. 613 and 7. 7. levit. 26.28 Moses 613. praec. and r. Abben Kattan. 21. and as arise of the word Keter signify a crown for be it not for the law God will not have create the world and for the observation thereof it yet subsist and they which keep all the commandment do set a crown on the head of God and he upon the head of those which crown he shall set seven crown and make they to inherit seven chamber in paradise and will keep they from the seven infernal dungeon because they have obtain the seven heaven and the seven earth their wiseman affirm that every vein of the body of a man do provoke he to omit that which be forbid and he which do omit such their vain vein-warning have no good vein in he every of his member also do provoke he to perform those iussory invention but as vein shall I be as they if I shall not make some end where they can find none we will now from these generality proceed to the particular of their superstition trace they herein from their birth to their grave religion be in the pretence of their law the square of all their otherwise civil action at lest to speak of their superstition in the same but first see sebastian Munster have write a whole book both in Hebrew and latin of those six hundred and thirteen precept take out of Moses with the exposition of their rabbin as also p. ricius have do and Philip Ferdinand likewise out of Ben Kattain I think good to cull out some which seem most remarkable and strange to entertain our reader @. 2 of the negative precept expound by the q q Praec. mof exp rab. Munster Rambam in fine Moreb n. and p. and Genebrard and r. Abben Kattani phil. Ferdin rabbin 1. thou shall have no strange god in my sight Exod. 20. the name of God be forbid to be communicate to any creature 2. thou shall not violate r r levit. 22.32 my holy name thou shall not destroy a synagogue or temple be it never so old nor shall blot out one of the holy name wheresoever thou find it write the rabbin say if any do against any affirmative precept and repent his sin be forgive he but he which transgress a negative precept be not cleanse by repentance but it remain to the day of expiation which be the day of their solemn fast and reconciliation but he which commit a sin whereby he deserve death or excommunication be not then purge but must abide thereunto the divine chastisement and he which violate the name of GOD can be absolve from that sin but by death 5. thou shall not s s levit. 19.17 hate thy brother in thy heart he which be wrong by another shall not hate he and hold his peace but reprove he open and if he repent he ought not to be cruel to he but if any be often reprove and will not amend it be lawful to hate he this Christ t t matth. 5.43 confute 12. no u u exod. 34 14. vid. ap p. pap. idol as to be adore if a man have a thorn in his foot he may not bow before a image to pull it out and if money fall out of his hand he may not there before a image stoop to take it up lest he may seem to adore it but he must sit down on the ground to do it and if the water of a fountain be cause to pass through the mouth of a image he may not drink thereat lest he shall seem to kiss the image 22. a 10 10 exod. 20.23 image may not be make viz. the image of a man in silver or gold if it be emboss or set out but if it be stamp in metal in manner of a seal it be lawful but of beast bird tree and flower those prominent image which be make stand out be lawful otherwise of the sun moon and star 45. no y y Deut. 7. commodity be to be raise from idol if a tree be plant near a image one may not sit under the shadow thereof nor pass under it if there be any other way and if he must pass it must be run thing employ to idolatry may be use of we if the gentile have first profane they it be not lawful to sell they wax or frankincense especial at their Candlemas feast nor book to use in their service our woman may not perform a midwife office to they nor nurse their child 65. thou shall z z exod. 20.10 do no work on the seven day nothing that belong to the get of food or raiment it be unlawful to walk on the grass lest thou pull it up with thy foot or to hang any thing on the bough of a tree lest it break or to eat a apple pluck on the sabbath especial if the tail or wooden substance whereby it grow be on it or to mount on a horse lest he be gall or to go into water lest thou wipe thy clothes which hold also if they be moisten with wine or oil but not in a woman that give suck who may wipe her clothes for the more purity of her prayer the stopple of a vessel if it be of hemp or flax may not be thrust in though it run especial if any other vessel be under to mix mustardseed with wine or water to lay a apple to the fire to roast to wash the body chief with hot water to sweat to wash the hand to do any thing in private which may not be public do but some say it be lawful private to rub off the dirt with his nail from his clothes which public he may not to read by a light except two read together to set sail but if thou enter three day before it be not necessary to go forth on the sabbath to be carry in a wagon though a gentile drive it if fire happen on the sabbath to carry any thing out but thy food raiment and necessary for that day and that wherein the holy book lie to put to pasture horse or ass couple together to receive any good by the light or fire which a gentile have make for the jew otherwise if he do it for himself to play on any instrument to make a bed to number measure judge or marry lest they shall write any thing to read at home when other be at the synagogue to speak of buy and sell which it seem they observe not to visit field or garden to run leap or tell tale etc. all these on the sabbath day be unlawful for dangerous disease it be lawful to violate the a a imminente ric. in praec. sabbath such be the three first day after a woman travel etc. but of this see b b cap. 17. also the observation of their sabbath it be not lawful to walk out of the city but their limit space but within the city as far as they will though it be as big as Niniveh 120. it be forbid c c levit. 22. r. ben. Kattan pr. 186. to hurt the seed-member of man or beast neither Males nor female may be geld or spay and yet we may use such beast 126. it be punishable to know kiss or embrace one which be forbid by the law Levit. 18. therefore our master have forbid to smile on such or use any mean or token of lust likewise they have forbid man to know their wife in the daytime unless it be in the dark or under some cover the same be forbid to a drunken man and to he which hate his wife lest they get wicked child between they also to follow a woman in the street but either to go before or beside she and he which be not marry may not put his hand beneath his navel nor touch his flesh when he make water and because d d a man may not wear woman attire neither may he look in a glass because that be womanish 138. the fat may not be eat the fat of the heart may but not that which be on the innards and reins and stomach and gut and bladder the rest may be eat 176. if thy brother be e e levit. 25.39 poor thou may not abuse he to wit to base office as to untie the shoe or to carry vessel to the bath concern liberality f f r. levi ex. 33. ap. Drus 5.8 to the poor they limit it at the five part of a man good lest man shall become poor by relieve the poor 191. thou may g g Deut. 23 19 not lend to a Israelite on usury nor borrow on usury nor be a witness or surety in case of usury nor receive any thing beside the principal especial on any covenant go before 201. he that by constraint do any thing worthy of death although he violate the name of God ought not be slay 213. wicked h h exod. 23.1 man be not competent witness he be account wicked which transgress any precept for which he be worthy to be beat a thief and a robber be not sufficient to be a witness after he have make restitution nor a usurer nor a publican nor he which be enrich by play nor child till they have beard except he be twenty year old 222. the i i Deut. 17.17 ph. ferde 500 king ought not to multiply wife our master say that the king may have eighteen wife 225. if any of the seven Canaanitish nation shall come in the hand of a jew he ought to slay he 242. the father or the husband may disannul the vow of their child or wife and the wiseman may release the vow of those which repent of their vow a son of thirteen year and a day and a daughter of twelve and a day if they be out of their parent tuition have power to vow k k Deut. 23.3 a bastard may not marry a israelite daughter to the ten generation 308. their be fifty defect which make a man or beast uncapable of sacred function to be either sacrificer or sacrifice five in the ear three in the eyelid eight in the eye three in the nose six in the mouth twelve in the seed-vessel six in the hand and foot and in the body four etc. beside there be fourscore and ten defect in man which be not in a beast no defect unless it be outward make a man unfit @. 3 of their l l Praec. Mos. Exp. rah affirmative precept 12. every one m m Deut. 11.19 ought to teach his son the law likewise his nephew and wiseman their disciple and he which be not teach it of his father must learn it as he can he which teach another the write law may receive a reward but not for teach the traditional 13. rise before thy n n leu. 19.32 elder that be say R. josi a wiseman although young in year to he thou must rise when he be four cubit distant and when he be pass by thou may sit down again 16. the sinner must turn from his o o Numb. 5.7 sin unto God and be return he must say I beseech thou o lord I have sin and do wicked before thy face so and so have I do and behold it repent i of my wickedness I be confound for my work I will do so no more and thus ought all to say which offer sacrifice for sin and they which be condemn to death for their crime if they will that death do away their offence but he which have sin against his neighbour aught to make restitution and ask pardon otherwise his sin be not remit and if his neighbour will not pardon he let he bring three other to entreat for he if he then grant not he be to be account cruel if the offend party be dead before let the offender bring ten man to his grave and say before they I have sin against God and this man and let restitution be make to his heir 19 prayer p p Deut. 11.1 must be use every day therefore they of the great synogogue ezra zerubbabel and the rest ordain eighteen blessing and other prayer to be say with every sacrifice they ordain these rite of prayer the eye cast down to the ground the foot set together the hand on the heart in fear and tremble as a servant speak to his master a place where be no dung especial of a ass and a hen a window in the room which look towards jerusalem turn his body that way he which be blind let he direct his heart to his father which be in heaven 23. the sentence hear Israel etc. and another sentence be to be q q Deut. 6.9 write on the post of the house he which have his phylactery on his head and arm and his knot on his garment and his schedule on his door be so fence that he can easy sin 24. every Israelite be bind to write for himself a book of the r r Deut. 31.11 Law 29. sanctify the sabbath that be remember those thing on the sabbath which make to the honour and holiness of that day and we be persuade that Satan and the devil fly into dark mountain abhor the holiness of the day and after it be past return to hurt the child of man s s Drus to apply spital to the eye be then prohibit because it be a medicine 40. he which be twenty year old and marry not break the precept of increase and multiply except it be for contemplation and study of the Law but if he feel in himself jezer lust to prevail he must marry leave he fall into transgression 52. if a man refuse to marry the wife of his brother decease without issue he must by the sentence of the judge pull off his shoe which must not be make of linen but of the hide of a clean beast and the woman while she be yet fast for then it be most true spital shall spit in his face say so let it be do to he which will not build his brother house 63. he which will eat the flesh of beast or bird must kill they after the due manner nor may any be allow to be a butcher except he know our rite 98. when the judge dissent in any case t t exod. 23. vid. sup. c. 2. the great part be to be follow when sentence be past execution must follow the same day and the crier must go before proclaim the crime and penalty with the circumstance of time place and witness if any can say any thing for his innocence he may cause he to be carry back to the judge if he be lead again to death he must have two wiseman by to hear his word that if they see cause he may be carry back to the judge if he yet be find guilty he must be lead to the place of execution and there slay by two witness but before his death let they exhort he to say let my death be unto i for the remission of all my sin after this confession let they give he a cup of wine with a grain of frankincense to drink that he may be deprive of the use of reason and make drink and so slay 112. honour thy father and mother r. Simeon say that the scripture more esteem the honour of parent then of GOD for we be bid honour GOD with our substance but for thy parent if thou have nothing thou ought to labour in the mill to succour they yea say u u Hiscuni ap. Drus in mat. 15. another thou must beg for they from door to door 132. at this time we can sanctify nothing because we have no temple I may add diverse other thing of like moment which to avoid prolixity I omit and for the same cause I let pass many thing which I may hither bring out of 10 10 s. Munster Euang. matth. Annotat. Munster in his note upon Matthew by he set forth in Hebrew and latin where he both relate and refute diverse of the jewish vanity especial their blasphemous cavil against CHRIST such be that their foolery by he y y Annot. in matth. 15. recite in matth. 15. Annotat. about their scrupulous nicety in their festival they may not then take fish goose and hen they may when one make fire and set on the pot he must order the stick so under it that it may not resemble a building no more than shall be spend that day may then be make ready no cheese may then be make nor herb cut heat water to wash thy foot not so for thy whole body touch not much less may thou eat a egg lay on a festival day yea if it be doubtful whether it be then lay and if it be mix with other all be prohibit but he which kill a hen and find egg in the belly may eat they according to the number of the three patriarch Abraham Isaac and jacob they expect a three temple after those two already perish z z in mat. 22. interpret the scripture of the first he hear i from his holy hill of the second Isaac go to meditate in the field of the three the glory of this last house shall be great than of the first etc. fit jewish handle of the scripture but I have be so plentiful of their barrenness that I fear to over-lade or over-loath the reader Munster * * munsteri tractatus Heb. and lat. have likewise write several small treatise of the faith of the christian and of the faith of the jew and of the jewish cavil against our religion and of diverse fabulous fiction which they have devise in disgrace thereof they that will may in they further see their blindness for what great blindness then to think that their Messiah be bear that day the temple be destroy and to remain at Rome till that time when he shall say to the pope let my people go as Moses bear so long before at last say to Pharaoh that he shall be anoint by Elias that he shall destroy Rome that Elias shall reunite the soul to the body in the resurrection which shall be of all the just but not of all the wicked not in the same body but another create like to the former which resurrection shall be effect by messiah prayer that the temple at jerusalem shall be the very middle of the world that in the messiah day wheat shall grow without renew by seed as the vine but of these and the like more than enough in this book follow l. carretus a convert from the jew set down these size l. carretus iudaus as the main difference betwixt they and we the trinity the incarnation the manner of his come whether in humility or royalty the law ceremonial which the jew hold eternal salvation by and for our own work which the christian ascribe to faith in Christ crucify and last of the time of his come whether past or present to these he think all other may be refer but let we examine the particular chap. 14 of the jewish opinion of the creation their ceremony about the birth of a child of their circumcision purification and redemption of the firstborn and education of their child @. i. of their exposition of scripture a taste in gen. 1.1 their exposition of scripture be so absurd that we have hence a manifest argument that as they deny the son that eternal word and truth who write word this be so that spirit which indite the same the spirit of truth have put a veil on their heart and just suffer the spirit of error to blind their eye that see they shall see and not understand this will appear general in our ensue discourse but for a taste let we begin with the begin of Moses whereon R. jacob Baal Hatturim have leave to the world these smoky speculation a a of this their Cabalastical interpret scripture see before cap. 12. @ 2. r. jac. B.H. in gen. 1. vid. ph. ferd. the bible begin with Beth the second letter in the alphabet and not with aleph the first because that it be the first letter of Beracha which signify blessing this of arour that be a curse second Beth signify two insinuate b b two world be hence gather by the cabalist material and immaterial vid. Reuchlin lib. 1. I may have add other as strange conceit of the cabalist on these word out of p. ric. l. 4. we find the father in Beth the son in beresh Bara Elohim the spirit and wisdom etc. the twofold law write and unwritten for Bereshith have the letter of Barashetei first he make second law three Bereshith the first word of genesis have as many letter as aleph be Tishrei that be the first of Tishrei or Tisri on which the jew say the world begin four Bereshith have the letter of baijth that be the first temple which he know the jew will build and therefore create the world five it have the letter of jare shabbath that be to keep the sabbath for God create the world for the israelite which keep the sabbath six also of Berith which signify the covenant of fire to wit circumcision and the law another cause of the creation seven likewise it have the letter of Bara iesh that be he create as many world as be in the number jesh that be three hundred and ten that the saint may c c jesh pro. 8. 21. rejoice therein now if I shall follow they from these letter and spell to their mystical sententious exposition of great part of the sentence you shall hear Moses tell you out of his first word that the world be create for the talmudist for the six hundred and thirteen precept because he love the israelite more than the other people again that he foresee the israelite will receive the law but he be now a ass say he which bear wine and drink water there be in the first verse seven word which signify the seven day of the week seven year of rest seven time seven the jubilee seventimes seven jubilee seven heaven seven land of promise and seven orb or planet which cause David to say I will praise thou seven time a day there be 28. letter in it which show the 28. time of the world of which Solomon speak Eccles. 3.1 there be in it six Alephs and therefore the world shall last six thousand year so in the second verse the earth be without form and void be two Alephs which show the world shall be two thousand year void now in the three d d let there be light thus be the light darken verse be four Alephs which show other four thousand year two of which shall be under the law and two under Messiah @. 2 their dream of Adam now for the first man his body say r. Osia in the e e tract Sanhedrin Talmud be make of the earth of Babylon his head of the land of Israel his other member of other part of the world so r. meir think he be compact of the earth gather out of the whole earth as it be write thy eye do see my substance now it be elsewhere write f f psal. 139.16 the eye of the lord be over all the earth there be twelve hour of the day say r. aha in the first whereof the earth of Adam or earthly matter be gather in the second the trunk of his body fashion in the three his member stretch forth in the four his soul infuse in the five he stand upon his foot in the six he give name to the creature in the seven Eve be give he in marriage in the eight they ascend the bed two and descend four in the nine he receive the precept which in the ten he break and therefore be judge in the eleven and in the twelve be cast out of paradise as it be write man continue not one night in honour the stature of Adam be from one end of the world to the other and for his transgression the creator by lay on his hand lessen he for before faith r. Eleazar with his head he reach a reacher indeed the very firmament his language be syriac or aramitish say r. juda and as Reschlakis add the creator show he all generation and the wiseman in they his sin after r. jehuda be heresy r. Isaac think the nourish his foreskin he know or use g g Reuchlin cabal l. 1. carnal filthiness with all the beast which GOD bring unto he before Eve be make as some interpret r. Eleazar and r. Solomon but Reuchline labour to purge they of that sense who affirm that he have a angel for his master or instructor and when he be exceed deject with remorse of his sin GOD send the angel Raziel to tell he that there shall be one of his progeny which shall have the four letter of jehovah in his name and shall expiate original sin and here be the beginning of their cabala and also present hereupon do he and Eve build a altar and offer sacrifice the like office of other angel they mention h h so say they jophiel another angel instruct Shem Zadkiel Abraham Raphael Isaac Peliel jacob Gabriel joseph etc. vid. rench l. 1. and archangeli comment in cabalist dogm to other patriarch and tell that every three month be set new watch of these watchman yea every three hour yea and every hour be some change of they and therefore we may have more favour of they in one hour then another for they follow the disposition of the star so say the angel Samael which wrestle with he unto jacob i i gen. 32.26 let i go for the day break for his power be in the night but let i return to Adam of who they further tell k k victor de Carben l. 1. c. 10. gen. 1.27 and 5.1 2. leo Hebr. dial. 3. rambam mor. neh. l. 2. c. 3. that he be a hermaphrodite a man-woman have both sex and a double body the female part join at the shoulder and back part to the male their countenance turn from each other this be prove by Moses his word so GOD create man in his image male and female create he they and he call their name ADAM yet after this be mention of Adam solitariness and form of Eve out of his side that be cut the female part from the male and so fit they to generation thus do Leo Hebraus reconcile the fable of Plato with Moses narration out of which he think it borrow for as he tell that jupiter in the first form of mankind make they such Androgyni with two body of two sex join in the breast divide for their pride the navel still remain as a scar of the wound then make so with little difference be this their interpretation of Moses @. 3 of the jewesses conception and travel and of Lilith when a jewish woman l l Buxdorf syn. jud. c. 2. Elias this rad. Lilith be great with child and near her time her chamber be furnish with necessary and then some holy and devout man if any such may be have with chalk make a circular line round in the chamber upon all the wall and write on the door and within and without on every wall and about the bed in Hebrew letter Adam Chava chut Lilith or after the jewish pronunciation Lilis that be adam Eve away hence Lilis hereby they signify their desire that if a woman shall be deliver of a son GOD may one day give he a wife like to Eve and not a shrew like Lilis this word Lilis be read in the m m Jsa. 34.14 prophet interpret a skritchowle but the jew seem to mean by it a devilish spectrum in woman shape that use to slay or carry away child which be on the eight day to be circumcise Elias levita write that he have read that a hundred and twenty year Adam contain himself from his wife Eve and in that space there come to he devil which conceive of he whence be engender devil and spirit fairy and goblin and there be four mother or dam of devil Lilith Naemah oger and Machalath thus be it read in Ben sirrah when GOD have make Adam and see it be not good for he to be alone ben. sirrah quaest. 60. he make he a woman of the earth like unto he and call she Lilis these disagree for superiority not suffer n n Lucan lib. 1. Lilis make of the same mould will not be underling and Adam will not endure she his equal lilis see no hope of agreement utter that sacred word Jehova with the cabalistical interpretation thereof and present do fly into the air Adam plain his case GOD send three angel after she viz. Senoi Sensenoi Sanmangeleph either to bring her back or to denounce unto she that a hundred of her child shall die in a day these overtake she over the troublesome sea where one day the egyptian shall be drown and do their message to she she refuse to obey they threaten she drown but she beseech they to let she alone because she be create to vex and kill child on the eight day if they be man if woman child on the twenty day they nevertheless force she to go Lilis swear to they that whensoever she shall find the name or figure of those angel write or paint on schedule parchment or any thing she will do infant no harm and that she will not refuse that punishment to lose a hundred child in a day and according a hundred of her child or young devil die in a day and for this cause do they write these name on a scroll of parchment and hang they on their infant neck thus far be sirrah in their chamber always be find such a scroll or paint and the name of the angel of health this office they ascribe to they be write over the chamber door in their book o o Brandsp Brandspiegel print at Cracovia 1597. be show the authority of this history collect by their wiseman out of those word p p gen. 1.27 male and female create he they compare with the form of Eve of a rib in the next chapter say that Lilis the former be divorce from Adam for her pride which she conceive because she be make of earth as well as he and GOD give he another flesh of his flesh and concern she r. Moses q q Moreh neb. lib. 2. c. 31. tell that Samael the devil come ride upon a serpent which be as big as a camel and cast water upon she and deceive she when this jewess be in travel she must not send for a christian midwife except no jewish can be get and then the jewish woman must be very thick about she for fear of negligence or injury and if she be happy deliver of a son there be exceed joy through all the house and the father present make festival provision against the circumcision on the eight day in the mean time ten person be invite neither more nor few which be all past thirteen year of age the night after her delivery seven of the invite party and some other sometime meet at the child-house and make there great cheer and sport all night dice drink fable so to solace the mother that she shall not grieve too much for the child circumcision @. 4 of the jewish manner of circumcision the circumciser be call Mohel who must be a jew and a man and well exercise in that faculty and he that will perform this office at the beginning give money to some poor jew to be admit hereunto in his child that after his better experience he may be use of the rich and this Mohel may thence-forwards be know by his thumb on which he wear the nail long r r in Buxd. and sharp and narrow-pointed the circumcise instrument be of stone glass iron or any matter that will cut common sharp knife like razor among the rich jew close in silver and set with stone before the infant be circumcise he must be wash and wrap in clout that in the time of the circumcision he may lie clean for otherwise they may use no prayer over he and if in the time of circumcision for pain he defile himself the mohel must suspend his pray till he be wash and lay clean again this be perform common in the morning while the child be fast to prevent much flux of blood in the morning therefore of the eight day all thing be make ready first be two seat place or one so frame that two may sit in the same apart adorn costly with carpet and that either in the synagogue or some private parlour if it be in the synagogue than the seat be place near the holy ark or chest where the book of the law be keep then come the surety or godfather for the child and place himself at the say seat and near he the Mohel or circumciser other jew follow they one of which cry with a loud voice that they shall bring present whatsoever be needful for this business then come other child whereof one bring a great torch in which be light twelve wax candle to represent the twelve tribe of Israel after he two other boy carry cup full of red wine after they another carry the circumcise knife another bring a dish with sand another bring another dish with oil in which be clean and fine clout which after the Mohel apply to the wound of the child these stand in a ring about the Mohel the better to mark and learn and these their office be buy with money by those child some come thither also with spice clove cinnamon strong wine to refresh if any happen to swoon these be thus assemble the godfather sit down upon one of those two seat right against he the Mohel place himself and sing the s s exod. 15.1 song of the israelite and other then the woman bring the child to the door all the congregation present rise up the godfather go to the door take the child sit down on his seat and cry out Baruch that be bless be he that come in their cabalistical sense be apply either to the eight day which be the day of circumcision or the come of Elias who they call the angel of the covenant so they interpret t t mal 3.1 the prophet and say that Elias come with the infant and sit down on that other empty seat for when the israelite be prohibit circumcision and Elias complain thus u u 1. reg. 19.10 the child of Israel have forsake the covenant that be circumcision God promise he that from thence-forwards he shall be present at circumcision to see it right perform and when they make ready that seat for Elias than they be bind in set word to say this seat be for the 10 10 simile r. David Malach. 23. israelem Drus io. 1. the rabbin have another as senseless a dream that phineas be Elias and therefore Elias in his Thisbi gather that Elias live when jabe gilead be destroy jud. 21. and be one of the inhabitant thereof which escape and after return rad. thischbi prophet Elias otherwise as a unbidden guest he come not this seat remain for he three whole day together then when the godfather hold the child in his lap the Mohel take he out of his clout and lay hold on his member and hold the foreskin put back the top thereof and rub the foreskin so to make it have the less sense of pain then he take from the boy the circumcising-knife and say with a loud voice bless be thou o God our lord king of the world which have sanctify we with thy commandment and give we the covenant of circumcision and while he thus speak cut off the forepart of the skin that the head of the yard may be see and present hurl it into the y y the eastern jew circumcise over water the inhabitant of the city call Mattha Mahasi^ and Sura use water wherein be boil myrtle and some kind of spice altar ap. Drus sand-dish and restore his knife to the boy again take from another a cup of red wine and drink his mouthful which he present spit out on the infant and therewith wash away the blood and if he see the child begin to faint he spit out some thereof on his face present he take the member of the child in his mouth and suck z z if the circumciser do not suck in this fashion he be degrade from his office and if he do not rend the skin of the yard it be as no circumcision Drus praet. l. 7. out the blood to make it stay from bleed the soon and spit out that blood so suck into the other cup full of wine or into the dish of Sand this he do at least thrice after the blood be stay the Mohel with his sharp-pointed thin nail rend the skin of the yard and put it back so far that the head thereof be bare he be more painful to the infant with this rend of the remain skin which action be call Priah then with the former this be do he lay the clout dip in oil aforesaid to the wound and bind they three or four time about and then wrap up the infant again in his clout then say the father of the child bless be thou o God our lord king of the world which have sanctify we in thy commandment and have command we to succeed into the covenant of our father Abraham to which all the congregation answerth as this infant have happy succeed into the covenant of our father Abraham so happy shall he succeed into the possession of the law of Moses into marriage also and other good work then do the Mohel wash his bloody mouth and his hand the godfather rise with he and stand over-against he who take the other cup of wine say a certain prayer and pray also over the infant say o our God God of our father strengthen and keep this infant to his father and mother and make that his name in the people of Israel may be name here he first name the child call he Isaac Isaac which be the son of Abraham let his father rejoice in he that have come out of his loin let his mother rejoice in the fruit of her womb as it be write a a prou. 23.25 make glad thy father and mother and she that bear thou to rejoice and GOD say by the prophet b b ezech. 16.6 I pass by thou and see thou tread in thy blood and I say unto thou in thy blood thou shall live yea I say unto thou in thy blood thou shall live here the Mohel put his finger into the other cup of wine wherein he have spit the blood and moisten the child lip three time with that wine hope that according to the former sentence of the prophet he shall live long in the blood of his circumcision than otherwise he shall David also say c c psal. 105.8 he be mindful of his marvelous act which he have do and of his wonder and the judgement of his mouth etc. then he continue his prayer for the present assembly and that God will give long life to the father and mother of the boy and bless the child this do he offer the bless cup to all the young man and bid they drink then with the child who be thus make a jew they return to the father house and restore he to his mother arm this last prayer he make near the ark and some of the devout jew before and after circumcision take the child and lay he upon Elias pillow that Elias may touch he d d glos Talmud the skin cast into the sand be in memory of that promise e e gen. 32.12 I will make thy seed as the sand of the sea and of Balam say f f num. 23.10 who can number the dust of Jacob that be his posterity who foreskin be cast in the sand or dust and because the curse g g gen. 3.14 on the serpent be thus fulfil dust thou shall eat that be this skin in the dust thus to their enemy the serpent fulfil also that precept h h prou. 25.21 if thy enemy hunger feed he and by this mean the serpent can no more seduce this man if a child be sick on the eight day they defer circumcision till his recovery they hold also the blow of the north necessary to this action and therefore think that their father for bare circumcision those forty year in the wilderness because the north wind blow not all that time lest it shall have blow away the pillar of smoke and fire and beside this wind be wholesome for wound which else be dangerous but lest they shall stay beyond the eight day expect this northern breath their Talmud tell that every day there blow four wind and that the north be mix with they all and therefore they may circumcise every day if the child die before the eight day he be circumcise at the grave without any prayer but a sign be erect in memory of he that GOD may have mercy upon he and raise he at the day of the resurrection in some place all the people stand except the godfather because it be write all the people stand in the covenant but to pursue the rest of their nicety ground upon such interpretation will be endless we will follow the child home if you be not already weary and see what rout be there keep ten must be the number you have hear of the invite guest and one or two of these learned rabbin who must make a long prayer and sermon at the table although other mean while be more busy in toss the cup of wine I be once present say i i cap. 2. pag. 94. Buxdorsius at one of their circumcision feast and one of their rabbin preach on pro. 3.18 wisdom be a tree of life but more wooden or ridiculous stuff I never hear in all my life this feast they observe by example of Abraham who k k gen. 21.8 make a great feast when the child be wean their kabal pervert it when he be circumcise l l ph. Ferdinan praec. 164. the circumciser abide sometime with the mother lest the blood shall again issue from the child the mother keep within six week whether it be a male or female all which time her husband must not so much as touch she or eat meat in the same dish with she if a female child m m the jew make small account of woman because they be not circumcise and because it be write pro. 8. o man I call unto you they think woman be not worthy of life eternal yet be they more eager zealous of their superstition then the man vict. carb lib. 1. cap. 15. be bear there be small solemnity only at six week age some young wench stand about the cradle and lift it up with the child in it and name it she which stand at the head be godmother and after this they iunket together @. v. of the jewish purification redemption and education when the forty day be accomplish before the wife may accompany or have any fellowship with her husband she must be purify in cold water and put on white and clean garment their wash be with great scrupulosity in a common water or in private cistern or fountain which must be so deep that they must stand up to the neck in water and if it be muddy in the bottom they must have a square stone to stand on that their whole foot may stand in clear water and that the water may pass betwixt their toe for the least part not cover with water will frustrate the whole action and for this cause they lie aside all their hair-lace necklace ring they dive under the water so that no part may be free from the same some jewess must stand by for witness hereof which be twelve year old and a day at least n n the redeem of the first bear they redeem their firstborn in this sort when the child be one and thirty day old his father send for the priest o o there be none of they now so impudent that dare swear he be a true priest or Levite and therefore this be but a shadow of that which itself be but a shadow and now be nothing as appear by their own doubtful if that follow vid. Schal Diatrib dec. with other friend and set the child on a table before he add so much money or monies-worth as amount to two florin of gold or two dollar and a half my wife say he have bring i forth my firstborn and the law bid i give he to thou do thou then give i he say the priest he answer Yea. the priest ask the mother if she ever before have a child or abortion if she answer no then the priest ask the father whether the child or the money be dear to he he answer the child then do the priest take the money and lay it on the head of the infant say this be a first beget child which God command shall be redeem and now say he to the child thou be in my power but thy parent desire to redeem thou now this money shall be give to the priest for thy redemption and if I have redeem thou as be right thou shall be redeem if not yet thou be redeem according to the law and custom of the jew shall grow up to the fear of God to marriage and good work amen if the father die before the child be one and thirty day old the mother hang a scroll about his neck wherein be write this be the firstborn and not redeem and this child when he come of age must redeem himself the jewish chachamim or wiseman have leave no part of life unprovided of their superstitious care as we have see concern the birth and circumcision of their child with the purification of the mother and redemption of the firstborn to proceed with they they enjoin the mother while she give suck to eat wholesome food of easy digestion that the infant may suck good milk so that the heart and stomach be not stop but may come so much more easy to obtain wisdom and virtue for God have great care of child and have therefore give a woman two breast and place they next her heart yea in the dangerous persecution under Pharaoh Exod. 1. he p p in the book Medrasch cause the earth to open it self and receive their male child and create therein two stone from one of which the infant suck milk and from the other honey till they be grow and may go to their parent yea and if you believe their Gemara can you choose a poor jew have bury his wife and not able to hire a nurse for his child have his own breast miraculous fill with milk and become nurse himself yea Mardochaeus say their Medrasch suck the breast of Hester and for this cause do she after her exaltation so prefer he the conclusion be if she give gross food to her infant she shall be cast into hell she must not go naked breasted nor too long fast in a morning nor carry her infant or suffer they to go or be naked lest q q psal. 121.6 the sun hurt they if it be in the day or the moon in the night and that they may soon learn that the earth be fill with the majesty of divine glory and for this cause must they beware that they never go bareheaded for this be a sign of impudency and ill disposition and as religious they must provide that they be always gird with a girdle for the girdle distinguish betwixt the heart and the privity and in his morning prayer he say bless be thou o God which girde Israel with the girdle of strength which if he shall not have a girdle on will be in vain their mother therefore sow their girdle to their coat with great care they avoid go barefoot especial in january and February when they can speak they be teach sentence out of scripture and to salute their parent with good-morrow good-sabbath etc. and after seven year they add the name of God God give you good-morrow etc. but they must not name the name of God but in a pure place these teach they the name of thing in the vulgar and some Hebrew name among that so they may not common be understand for pure Hebrew they can speak except their most learned rabbin only their child must not converse with child of christian and their parent make all thing in christian odious to they that they may season they from their childhood with hatred of they when they be seven year old they learn to write and read and when they can read they learn to construe the text of Moses in their vulgar tongue when the mother carry he first to the school to the rabbi she make he cake season with honey and sugar and as this cake so say she let the law be sweet to thy heart speak not vain trifle word in the school but only the word of God for if they so do than the glorious majesty of God dwell in they and delight itself with the air of their breath for their breathe be yet holy not yet pollute with sin neither be he r r filius bind to obey the commandment till he be thirteen year old when he be ten year old and have now some smattering in Moses he proceed to learn the Talmud at thirteen year his father call ten jew and testify in their presence that this his son be now of just age and have be bring up in their manner and custom their daily manner of pray and blessing and he will not further stand charge with the sin of his son who be now and must himself bear this burden then in their presence he thank God that he have discharge he from the punishment of his son desire that his son by divine grace may be long safe and endeavour to good work at the fifteen year of their life they be compel to learn their Gemara or the compliment of their Talmud disputation and subtle decision about the text of their Talmud and in these they spend the great part of their life seldom read any of the prophet and some not in the whole space of a long life read one prophet through and therefore know so little of the Mossias at eighteen year their male child marry according to their talmud-constitution and sometime soon to avoid fornication their maiden may marry when s s R. David a (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Drus r. Mos. Cotsi be twelve year old and a day at twenty year they may traffic buy sell and circumvent all they can for their neighbour in the law be in their sense such a jew as you have hear describe but because these thing be join together in one of their sentence or apophtheme of the r r. call Pirke aboth I think good to add the same as contain a map of the jew life a son of five year to the bible a son of ten year to the Mischna a son of thirteen year to the precept a son of fifteen year to the Thalmud a son of eighteen year to marriage a son of twenty year to follow the affair of the world a son of thirty year to strength a son of forty year to wisdom a son of fifty year to counsel a son of sixty year to old age a son of seventy year to gray hair a son of eighty to the height a son of ninety to the grave a son of one hundred year be as a dead man depart out of the world chap. 15 * * Pirke ab. and fag not of their morning prayer with their fringe phylactery and other ceremony thereof @. i. of their behaviour before they go to the synagogue the goodwife be to waken her husband Buxdorf syn. jud. c. 5. ter in and mane and and etc. ph. ferd. praec. 89. p. ric. praec. affirm 19 and the parent to awaken their child when after thirteen year they be subject to the jewish precept before their Penticost they rise before it be light and after the night be short when it be now day they be to awaken the day not to tarry till it awaken they for their morning-prayer must be make while the sun be rise and not late for than be the time of hear as they interpret Lamen. 2.19 and he which be devout ought at that time to be sad for jerusalem and to pray every morning for the re-edify of the temple and city if in the nighttime any shed tear for their long captivity God will hear his prayer for then the star and planet mourn with he and if he suffer the tear to trickle down his cheek God will arise and gather they into his bottle and if any decree be by their enemy enact against they with those tear he will blot out the same witness a a psal. 56.9 ric. epit. t. and etc. lib. 3. cap. 50. m. n. Lingua hebraea cap. 9 David put my tear in thy bottle be they not in thy book and if any rub his forehead with his tear it be good to blot out certain sin that be there write in there begin of the night God cause all the gate of heaven to be shut and the angel stay at they in silence and send evil spirit into the world which hurt all they meet but after midnight they be command to open the same this command and call be hear of the cock and therefore they clap their wing and crow to awaken man and then the evil spirit lose their power of hurt and in this respect the wiseman have ordain they a thanksgiving to be say at cock-crowing bless art thou o God lord of the whole world who have give understand to the cock they must not rise up in their bed naked nor put on their shirt sit but put their head and arm into the same as they lie lest the wall and beam shall see their nakedness it be a brag of rabbi jose that in all his life he have not herein fault but to go or stand naked in the chamber be more than piacular and much more to make water stand naked before his bed although it be night he must not put on his garment wrong nor his left shoe before the right and yet he must put off the left foot shoe first when he be clothe with his head incline to the earth and a devout mind in remembrance of the destruction of the temple he go out of the chamber with his head foot and all cover because of the holy Schechinam divine glory over his head then he go to stool in some privy place for so have amos command * * amos 4.12 prepare thyself o Israel to meet thy god and DAVID b b psal. 103.1 all that be within i praise his holy name that be all within the body empty and clean for else must not God be name and therefore his garment must not be spot and foul to restrain nature too long be a sin and will cause the soul to stink and save your reverence he must wipe with the left hand for with the right he write the name of God and the angel and in this place and business he must take heed he think not of God or his word much less name he for God will shorten the day of such a one r. sirrah tell his scholar that the cause of his long life be that in a impure place he never tho of the word nor name the name of God beside he must turn his face and not his hinder-part towards the temple of jerusalem he ought not to touch his body with unwashen hand in regard of the evil spirit which rest thereon till they be wash and if he shall touch his eye he will be blind his ear deaf his nose drop his mouth stink his hand scab with these unwashed and therefore venomous hand and when he wash he must pour water three time on his right hand and as oft on the left before one hand may touch the other he must not be spare in his water for store of water store of health after the hand the mouth and face must be wash because they be create after the image of God and how shall the name of God be utter out of a foul mouth he must wash over a basin not over the ground he must dry his face very well for fear of weal and wrinkle and that with a clean towel not with his shirt for this will make they blockish and forgetful after all this follow his Brachah or blessing bless be thou o God our god king of the whole world who have command we to wash our hand their hand they must always wash on these occasion in the morning at their return from the stool from bathe when they have cut their nail have scratch their naked body have pull off their shoe with their hand have touch a dead body have go among the dead have company with their wife or have kill a louse if he respect not wash after these if he be learned he shall forget his learning if unlearned he shall lose his sense @. 2 of their Zizis and Tephillim and holy vestment they b b of the jew arbacanphos and Zizis they call this garment Talish vid. el. thisb rad. Talith vid. r. Mos. m. n. l. 3. c. 33. have a four-cornered garment which some put on with the rest when they rise other then when they will pray the four corner part thereof be make of linen silk tie together with two wind band of such length that they may draw through their head betwixt they so that those two quadrangular piece may hang down one on his breast the other on his back in every of those four corner hang a label make of white woollen thread by a little knot downward to the ground and the same be four or eight or twelve finger broad these label they call Zizis those which be devout wear this garment every day under a long outward coat in such sort that those label may appear out a little so that they may always see they as monitory of the commandment of God when they put they on they praise God that have command they to wear these Zizis he say they that keep due this precept c c num. 15.38 fringe and phylactery of Zizis do as much as if he keep the whole law for there be in all five knot compare to the five book of Moses eight thread add to they make thirteen and the word Zizis make six hundred altogether amount to six hund and thirteen the number as you have hear of God commandment they ascribe the continency of joseph in potiphar house and of boaz when ruth sleep by he to the Zizis may it please your patience a story out of the Talmud one rab. jochanan see a box full of jewel which one of his scholar bar-emorai purpose to steal but be forbid by a voice sound out of the air let it alone bar-emorai for it belong to r. Chaninas wife which in the other world shall put into the same violet wool to make thread for Zizis that of they the just man there may have their fringe garment sew once he which wear this garment without intermission be fortify against the devil and all evil spirit d d of their Tephillim beside this memorable vestment they wear a certain knot near their nose out of Deut. 6.8 they shall be frontlet between thy eye they make it thus they take a little black foursquare calf-skin which they fold eight time that it may have four double fold and distinct breadth they put into these distinct scripture the same be fourfold of parchment these scripture be take e e the fourteen first verse in Exod. 13. and 4 5 6 7 8 9 of Deut. 6. pagn out of Exod. 13. and Deut. 6. then take they hair out of a cow or calf tail and wash they clean and bind they about those writing of scripture so that any one may see that they be good by the end of they appear out of the skin this skin they sew with clean and fine string take out of calf or Kines body or make of bull sinew or if such string can be have with string of calf-skin-parchment then do they sew a long and black thong to that thick hide or skin and knit a knot about it this piece of work they call Tephillim to put they in mind of often prayer and tie it so about their head that the thick knot wherein the scripture be may hang betwixt the eye after this they take another four-cornered skin which they fold as the former and write certain verse out of exodus in parchment and put it into a little hollow skin and sew it upon the thick-folded skin to which they add a long thong and call it the Tephillim of the hand this they tie to the bare skin above the elbow of the left arm that so that which be write may be over-against the heart which may hereby be the more inflame to prayer that long string be so fasten that it come to the forepart of the hand thus fulfil that commandment f f Deut. 6.6 8. the word which I command thou this day shall be on thy heart and thou shall tie they for a sign in thy hand they tie on first this Tephillim of the hand and then that of the head and make their brachah or prayer say bless be thou o God our lord who have sanctify we in thy commandment and have command we to put on Tephillim look while he speak diligent on the knot on his forehead in fold sew knit and tie they they very subtle frame the name of God Schaddai other their manifold ceremony about these Tephillim I willing omit their sanctity be such that he which wear they must be pure within and without and if he let they fall on the ground all that shall see they so lie must fast with he one whole day they must not be hang up bare but in a bag nor may they be leave in a chamber where a man and his wife lie together except in a triple chest or bag a man must not sleep while he have they on nor may he break wind and if he have list to the stool he must lay they four else from the place of his easement or lay they against his heart in a double bag their woman servant and sick folk be free from wear they it be sufficient for woman to say amen to their prayer and all this Moses learn in mount Sinai @. 3 of their school or synagogue rite and their matin we have be tedious in furnish our jew to his matin at sunrising be their hour as you have hear but their rabbin have enlarge and lengthen that time to about nine of the clock where many of the jew live together they resort at a set hour to their synagogue thither they must go cheerful before their synagogue they have a iron fasten to make clean their shoe according to Salomon counsel g g Eccles. 4.17 keep thy foot when thou go into the house of God he that have pantofle must put they off as it be write h h exod. 3. 5 for the place where thou stand be holy ground at the entrance in at the door he pronounce some thing out of David psalm they must enter with fear and tremble consider who presence it be and for a while suspend their pray for the better attention and every jew must cast in a halfpenny at least into the treasury as it be write I will see thy face in righteousness that be in alm as they interpret it in this attention they bow themselves towards the ark in which be the book of the law and say i i num. 24.5 how fair be thy tent o Jacob and thy dwelling o Israel and k k psal. 5.7 I will enter into thy house in the multitude of thy mercy I will bow down in thy holy temple in thy fear and l l psal. 26.28 it seem 1. cor. 11.4 that they pray bare head but in the book Musar cap. 4. it be say a man ought to cover his head when he pray because he stand before God with fear and tremble and cap. 6. he give a reason why a man be bare a woman cover because say he Eve first sin o lord I have love the habitation of thy house and the place of the tabernacle of thy glory and diverse other verse out of the psalm after these thing they begin to pray as be contain in their common prayer-book and because these prayer be very many therefore they run they over he that can read must attend and say amen to all their prayer these prayer be in Hebrew rhyme their first prayer be the lord of the world which reign before any thing be create at that time when according to his will they be create be call king to who shall be give fear and honour he always have be be and shall remain in his beauty for ever he be one and beside he there be none other which may be compare or associate to he without beginning and end with he be rule and strength he be my GOD and my deliverer which live he be my rock in my need and time of my trouble my banner my refuge my hereditary portion in that day when I implore his help into his hand I commend my spirit whether I wake or sleep he be with i therefore I will not be afraid this do they say then their hundred m m ground on Deut. 10.12 now Israel what do God require of thou they read not Mahschoel but Meahschoel he require a hundred and in the treatise porta be hereof a cabalistical speculation that he which any day shall miss any of his hundred benediction he shall not have one blessing to his mind etc. see p. ric. de Coelest agric. lib 4. benediction one after another which be short and twice a day repeat first for the wash of their hand that if he than forget it he may now in the congregation recite it then for the creation of man and for that he be make full of hole whereof if one shall be stop he shall die then a confession of the resurrection then for understand give to the cock as you have hear to discern day and night a sunder and with his crow to awaken they and in order bless etc. that he have make i a Israelite or jew blessed etc. that he have not make i a servant bless etc. that he have not make i a woman the woman here say that he have make i according to his will bless etc. that exalt the lowly bless etc. that make the blind to see which they shall say at their first waken blessed etc. that raise the crooked at his rise bless etc. that clothe the naked at his apparel bless etc. that raise they up that fall bless etc. that bring the prisoner out of prison bless etc. that stretch the world upon the water when he set his foot on the ground bless etc. that prepare and order the go of man when he go out of his chamber bless etc. that have create all thing necessary to life when he put on his shoe bless etc. that gird Israel with strength his girdle bless etc. that crow Israel with comeliness when he put on his hat bless etc. that give strength to the weary bless be thou God our lord king of the world who take sleep from my eye and slumber from my eyelid then add they two prayer to be preserve against sin evil spirit and man and all evil after this humble themselves before GOD they confess their sin and again comfort themselves in the covenant make to Abraham we be thy people and the child of thy covenant etc. o happy we how good be our portion how sweet be our lot how fair be our heritage oh happy we who every morning and evening may say hear Israel the lord our lord be one God gather we that hope in thou from the four end of all the earth that all the inhabitant of the earth may know that thou be our god etc. our father which be in heaven be merciful unto we for thy name sake which be call upon we and confirm in we that which be write n n Zephan 3.20 at that time will I bring you and gather you and make you for a name and praise among all the people of the earth when I shall turn your captivity say the lord then follow two short prayer for the law give they and then they go on to the sacrifice which because they can execute in action out of the temple they redeem with word read the precept concern sacrifice according to their time comfort themselves with the say of hose o o Hos. 14.3 we will sacrifice the calf of our lip then repeat they a history of sacrifice and a prayer of the use of the law and how many way it may be expound this do they with a still voice that none can hear pray for the re-edify of the temple in these word let thy will be before thy face o GOD our lord lord of our father that the holy house of thy temple may be restore in our day and grant we thy will in thy Law after rise with great joy and clamour they sing a prayer of praise in hope hereof and sit down again they read a long prayer gather here and there out of the psalm and some whole psalm and part of 1. chron. 30. and last the last word of obadiah p p Obad. ver. 21. the saviour shall ascend into mount Zion to judge the mount of Esau and the kingdom shall be the lord which they speak in hope of the destruction of the christian who they call edomite and of their own restitution in some of their close writing which they will not suffer to come into the hand of christian they say that the soul of edom enter into the body of Christ and that both he and we be no better than Esau they proceed q q monster precept Mes. expos. rab. sing and God shall be king over all the earth in that day GOD shall be one and his name one as it be write in thy law o GOD hear Israel GOD our GOD be one GOD and these word in their next prayer they repeat resound that last word r r Echad one by the half or whole hour together look up to heaven and when they come to the last letter thereof d. they all turn their head to the four corner and wind of the world signify that GOD be king of the whole world have in the word Echad many superstitious subtlety that the letter in regard of his place in the alphabet signify four and the word Echad contain in numeral letter two hundred forty and five whereunto add three hael God our lord be true they make up the number of two hundred forty and eight and so many member there be in man body for every member a prayer secure they all and this verse thrice recite secure against the ill spirit they s s they may not say it within four cubit of a grave nor in sight of a unclean place where dung or urine be except they be harden and dry up or else cover they must not stir their eye or finger it be a preservation against devil Munster esteem it a holy prayer by which miracle may be wrought and therefore use it morning and evening they have another prayer call Schone esre that be eighteen because it contain so many thanksgiving which they say twice a day and the chief chanter of the synagogue sing it twice by himself they think by this prayer to obtain remission of their sin they must pray it stand so that one foot must not stand more on the ground then the other like the angel t t Ezek. 1.7 and their foot be a right foot when they come to those word in it holy holy holy lord God of host they leap up three time aloft and he say their chachamim which speak a word during this prayer shall have burn coal give he to eat after his death these eighteen thanksgiving be for the eighteen bone in the chine or backbone which must in say hereof be bend after this follow a prayer against the jew revolt to Christianity and against all christian say these which be blot out that be revolter shall have no more hope and all unbeliever shall perish in the twinkle of a eye and all thy enemy which hate thou o GOD shall be destroy and the proud and presumptuous kingdom shall quick be root out break lay even with the ground and at last shall utter perish and thou shall make they present in our day obedient to we bless be thou God which break and subdue they which be rebellious they call the turkish empire the kingdom of Ishmael the roman Edomitical proud etc. they be u u tract Sanhedrin themselves indeed exceed proud impatient and desirous of revenge the Talmud say that the lie spirit in the mouth of Ahab prophet which persuade he to go and fall at ramoth gilead be none other but the spirit of 10 10 1. kin. 22.22 Naboth who he have before slay and y y vict. de Carben lib. 1. cont jud. cap. 8. victor Carbensis a christian jew testify that there be not under heaven a more quarrelsome people themselves acknowledge the christian far meek than themselves when they have this proverb that the modesty of the christian the wisdom and industry of the heathen and faith of the jew be the three pillar which sustain the world but to return to their devotion after those other before mention follow a prayer for the good sort for proselyte re-edify of the temple for send the Messiah and restauration of their kingdom in the end they pray GOD to keep they in peace and when they come to these word he that make peace above shall make peace over all Israel amen they go back three pace bow themselves downward bend their head on the right hand then on the leave if some christian be there with a image they must not bow but lift up their heart this they do for honour sake not to turn their hinder part on the ark and thus they go like crab out of the synagogue use certain prayer not run but with a slow pace lest they shall seem glad that their matin be do other their nicety in pray as lay the right hand on the left over the heart p. ric. praec. 19 not spit nor break wind up or down not interrupt by a king to cease prayer to shake his body this way and that way not to touch his naked body and to say amen with all his heart for they that say amen be worthy to say it in the world to come and therefore z z psal. 72.19 David end a psalm with amen amen signify that one be to be say here and the other in the other world also in a plain eminent place purge from all filth free from the sight of woman his face to the east stand his foot close together fix his eye on the ground elevate the heart to heaven etc. I hold it enough thus to mention their pray to the east must be understand from our western part because jerusalem stand that way for otherwise Rambam * * mor. neb. l. 3. cap. 64. show that Abraham pray in mount moriah towards the west and the be in the west which place also Abraham set forth and determine and because the gentile worship the sun towards the rise therefore Abraham worship westward and appoint the sanctuary so to stand the Talmud say pray to the south bring wisdom towards the north riches I may here also add their litany and commemoration of their saint almost after the popish fashion as thus for a taste we have sin before thou have mercy on we o lord do it for thy name sake and spare Israel thy people lord do it for Abraham thy perfect one and spare Israel thy people lord do it for he which be bind in thy porch to wit in mount moriah where the temple be afterward build and spare Israel thy people lord do it for he which be hear in the ladder jacob from thy high place and spare Israel thy people lord do it for the merit of joseph thy holy one etc. lord do it for he which be draw out of the water Moses and spare etc. lord do it for aaron the priest with and Thummim lord grant it for he that be zealous for thy name phineas lord do it for the sweet singer David lord do it for he which build thy house they name not any but express he after this sort and then proceed in like manner with the title attribute and work of god. do it for thy name do it for thy goodness for thy covenant thy law thy glory etc. in several versicle and then to their saint in a new passage do it for Abraham Isaac and jacob do it for Moses and Aaron for David and Solomon as if their combine force shall effect more than single do it for jerusalem the holy city for Zion for the destruction of thy house for the poor israelite for the bare israelite for the miserable israelite for the widow and orphan for the suck and wean and if not for our sake yet for thy own sake then in another form thou which hear the poor hear we thou which hear the oppress hear we thou which hear Abraham etc. with renew a commemoration of their saint large than before and after some repeat the divine title in another tune they oppose their saint and wicked one together as remember not the lie of achan but remember josua forgive he and remember Heli and Samuel and so on in a tedious length chap. 16 of their ceremony at home after their return at their meal and otherwise and of their evening prayer Buxdorf c 6 7. thus have we see the jewish matin which they chant say a a Relation of religion in the west another in a strange wild hallow tune imitate sometime trumpet and one echo to the other and wind up by degree from a soft and silent whisper to the high and loud note that their voice will bear with much variety of gesture kneel they use none no more than do the grecian they burn lamp but for show of devotion or elevation of spirit that yet in Jew can I never discern for they be reverend in their synagogue as grammar boy be at school when their master be absent in sum their holiness be the very outward work itself be a brainless head and a soulless body meanwhile the goodwife at home against her husband return sweep the house that nothing may disturb his holy cogitation and lay he a book on the table either the pentateuch of Moses or a book of manner to read therein the space of a hour before he go out of the house about his business this study be require of every devout jew either in his own house or else in their school or synagogue and be thus come home they lie up their Tephillim in a chest first that of the head then that of the hand they account it healthful also to eat somewhat in the morning before they go to work for whereas there be threescore and three disease of the gall a bit of bread or a draught of wine can cure they all about eleven of clock his wife have prepare his dinner pure meat pure dress but if she have pullen or cattle she must first feed they for it be say b b Deut. 11.13 I will give grass in thy field for thy cattle and thou shall eat and be satisfy you see the cattle be first mention and to keep such domestical cattle be good in respect of the disastrous motion of the planet which must some way sort to effect but if they be studious of alm and good work than Saphyra Rabath the great chancellor some angel according to his office register the same and commend they unto GOD say turn away that planetary misfortune from such a one for he have do these and these good work and then do it befall some wicked man or else some of the cattle before they come to the table they must make trial again in the privy what they can do for it be write c c levit. 26.10 thou shall carry out the old because of the new especial let there be clean water wherein the household must first wash than the wife and last the goodman who present without touch or speak aught else may more pure give thanks he say R. jose in the d d Talmud tract Sotah cap. 1. Talmud that eat with unwashen hand be as he that lie with a harlot for it be write e e prou. 6.26 for the strange woman a man come to a morsel of bread they must wash before meat and after so strict that they may not keep on a ring on their finger for fear of some uncleanness remain under it I have rather say r. Akiba die for thirst then neglect this wash tradition of the elder when he have only so much water bring he into prison as may serve he but to one use of wash or drink at his own choice on the table clean spread must be set a whole loaf well bake and the salt and then the householder or the chief rabbi at table take the loaf into his hand and in the clean and best bake part thereof make a cut into it and then set it down and spread his hand on it say bless be thou lord God king of the world who bring bread out of the earth and then break off that piece of bread which he have cut before and dip it into the salt or broth eat it without speak a word for if he speak he must say over his grace again after this he take the loaf and cut for the rest then he take a cup of wine f f they may not drink any wine with the gentile because it be doubtful whether it have be offer to idol or no and though it be allege that the gentile now do not serve idol yet because it be determine by a certain number of rabbin till by a counsel of so many that decree be disannul it must stand Elias this rad. Nesech if they have any with both hand and with the right hand hold it up a handful high than the table and look steadfast on the cup say bless etc. who have make the fruit of the vine over water they pronounce no blessing and if there be not three at least at the table each man must bless for himself if three or more the rest say amen salt be religious set on in remembrance of the sacrifice if when they cut they shall cut off the piece of bread it will offend god. both hand they spread over the loaf in memory of the ten commandment which GOD have publish concern wheat of which bread be make the bread must be have in special honour no vessel support with it or set upon it and a spirit g g Robin goodfellow or the spirit of the buttery among the jew concern angel it be thus write in the book aboth fol. 83. from the earth to the firmament all be full of troop and ruler and below be many hurtful and accuse creature which all have their abode in the air no place be free of which some be for peace some for war some provoke to good some to evil to life and death etc. Drus lib. 7. they say the angel Raeziel be God secretary of which name be two cabalistical book Elias this Samael be the devil every one have two angel one at his right hand the other at his left rambam m. n. lib. 3.23 call Nabal give attendance as depute to observe such as through negligence tread it under foot and to bring they into poverty and another man dog by this spirit which seek to bring he to poverty eat victual one day on the grass in the field the spirit hope to effect his purpose but this devout jew after he have eat pare away the grass and throw it with the crumb scatter into it into the sea for the fish and present hear a voice say woe be i fool who have attend to punish this man and can have occasion they dream that Elias and every man proper angel attend at table to hear what be say if they talk of the law otherwise a ill angel come and cause brawl and disease and in respect of these spiritual attendant they cast not their bone beside or behind they they be curious not to eat flesh and fish together but first flesh and then scour their tooth from the flesh and eat a bit of bread and drink a draught of drink before they eat the fish they must not use the same knife to meat make of milk which they use in eat flesh milk must not stand on the table with flesh nor touch it beside the 23. psalm set before they in the meal time they testify their devotion by multitude of new grace or thanksgiving if any better wine or dainty be set before they yea beside the particular of their cate even for every good send as of oil rose spice etc. and be of opinion that to use any thing without thanksgiving be to usurp and steal it let this be speak to the shame of many profane Esau with we that will rather sell God blessing for their meat then seek they to their meat although in they the payment of these by tale and not by weight be no better than a bead-superstition they make a religion of leave some leave of their bread on the h h he that leave nothing on the table shall not be prosperous Sanhed c. helek table but to leave a knife there be dangerous ever since that a jew once in the rehearse that part of their grace after meat which concern the re-edify of jerusalem in a deep agony take his knife so leave and thrust into his heart this their grace be long contain a commemoration of the benefit vouchsafe their forefather and a prayer for regrant the same to send Elias and the Messiah and that they may not be bring to beg or borrow of the christian and for his blessing upon all that house etc. whereunto be answer with a loud voice amen and they say to themselves i i psal. 39.10 11 fear the lord you his saint for they that fear he have no want the lion lack and suffer hunger but they which seek the lord shall want nothing that be good and while this be say there must not a crumb be leave in their mouth the prayer must be in that place where they have eat or else they shall lose the benefit of burial and a certain devout jew in the field remember that he have forget his grace return back to the house and there perform his duty have miraculous send unto he a dove of gold in city where be synagogue about five in the afternoon their k k among the jew be as our sexton they will not admit of bell because it be a invention of the christian and because say Carbensis they be baptize they use this proverb therof he which ring a bell let he fall in the dunghill and he which hang on the belrope may he hang in hell vict. carb lib. 1. cap. 11. clerk or some such officer go about and with knock at their door give they notice of evening prayer thither be come they sit down and say this prayer of the first word call aschre l l psal. 84 4. and 144.15 and 145.5 bless be they which dwell in thy house praise thou continual selah bless be the people that be thus bless be the people who god be the lord I will magnify thou o God my king etc. all that 145. psalm throughout he which say this psalm thrice a day shall have his portion in eternal life then the chief chorister or chanter sing half their prayer call Kaddesch and then all say those eighteen praise mention in morning prayer then go their chorister out of his pulpit and kneel down upon the step before the ark and fall down with his face on his left hand all the people do likewise say o merciful and gracious God I have sin in thy sight but thou be full of mercy be merciful unto i and receive my prayer proceed from a humble heart reprove i not o lord in thy wrath nor correct i in thy anger and so proceed through that whole six psalm his countenance cover and incline to the ground this be do in imitation m m Iosh 7.6 of joshua then the precantor or chief chorister again rise up say and we know not what to do but that we direct our eye unto thou and then they say up the other half of their Kaddesch and so end their evensong now shall they go home and after supper return to perform their night-devotion but because a full belly will rather be at rest and may easy forget his duty after some pause and stay they proceed before they go to their other task and in that time of pause between their vesper and nocturne if there be any strife between any and reconciliation can be make than he which can reconcile his neighbour go to the common prayer-book and shut it knock thereon with his hand say anikelao I conclude the business as if he shall say I conclude pray till my adversary be reconcile to i until which thing be effect they may not pray further and so sometime their prayer be intermit then and diverse day together if one party will be stubborn these prayer be for substance much like the former as against the christian and for their own restitution by their Messiah they depart out of the synagogue with repetition of those sentence mention in the former chapter at supper they behave themselves as at dinner go to bed they put off the left shoe before the right their shirt they put off when they be cover in their bed for fear of the wall behold their nakedness he that make water naked in his chamber shall be a poor man and the prayer n n Deut. 6.4 hear Israel must be his last word on his bed and sleep on the same as in psal. 4.5 speak in your heart on your bed and be silent selah if he can by and by sleep he must repeat it till he can and so his sleep shall prove good to he the bed must be pure for how else shall they think on the name of GOD and it must be so place that they must lie with their head to the south their foot towards the north for by this mean they shall be fruitful in male child they have also their chamber moral instruct of duty betwixt the man and wife unmeet for sober and chaste ear it be time for our pen to sleep with they and end this chapter chap. 17 their weekly observation of time viz. their monday and thursday and sabbath @. i. of their monday and thursday hitherto have we hear of their prayer every day observe they have also their time design to the read of the Law in the a a tract Rabath Kama c. 7. Talmud be report that ezra in the babylonian captivity be author unto the jew of ten commandment first that on the sabbath second on Monday and Thursday with singular solemnity some part of the law shall be read three that Thursday shall be court or law-day for decide controversy four that it shall be a day of wash sweep and cleanse in honour of the sabbath five that man shall then eat leek the six that woman shall arise and bake their bread so early that at sun rise they may give a poor man a piece of bread the seven that they shall for modesty sake gird their linen to they the eight that in the bath they shall comb and part their hair very careful the nine about sell their commodity to merchant and buy womanly ornament for the honour of their feast and please their husband the last be of cleanse after unclean issue their learned man confirm this institution of ezra by authority of scripture b b exod. 15.22 they go three day in the desert and find no water by water they understand the law for so it be say Esay 55.1 come you to the water that be to the law and therefore they ought not to let three day pass without some solemn read of the Law Monday and Thursday be choose to be the day because on c c li. Musar c. 4 Thursday Moses go the second time into the mount and return with the two table on the Monday on which day d d Princip. sap. ap. Drus also the temple be destroy and the law burn this their devotion be as ancient as that Pharisee Luke 18. I fast twice in the week that which e e the devout Jew fast every Monday and Thursday vid. Buxdor sin cap. 9 and Drus in luc. 1.8 and 18.2 the most devout among they do to this day observe yea it seem the devout sort fast four day say f f li. Musar 26. another on Monday Tuesday Wednesday and Thursday the first for mariner and traveller by sea the next for such as pass through desert place the three for child which be trouble with the squinancy of this g g in thisb rad. sacar Elias levita testify that after the begin of the world it first assail child and after that man so that sometime when they sneeze their spirit flee away and they die whence come that custom of salute and pray well to man h h in their synagogue they may do this but not in their school see c. 12. sup. @. 3. in sneeze the strangle of Achitophel they also interpret of this sneeze farewell the four day fast be for woman which be with child or give suck but the Tuesday and Wednesday in likelihood be not ordinary as the other Sunday may not be thus honour be the christian sabbath and Friday be the preparative to their own those two day be general half holy-day assemble early in their synagogue beside their ordinary prayer they annex many other among other they use one prayer call Uchurachum of miraculous effect as appear in Vespasian time who commit three ship full of jew without oar or mariner to the wide sea which arrive in three several region Lovanda Arlado burdeli work for geographer those which arrive in this last port by tyrannical edict of the king be to be try whether they be true jew as Hananias Misael and Azarias make proof of their religion whereupon three day be require as they say Nabuchadnezzar have grant they wherein to betake themselves to fast and prayer in this time of respite three devout jew joseph Benjamin and Samuel inven each of they a prayer which they join into one and continue in pray the same three day at the end whereof they cast themselves into the fire and there continue till it be consume hence arise this ordinance every Monday and Thursday to use the same prayer which be this and he be merciful and pardon sin do not destroy the sinner he often turn his anger from we and do not kindle all his wrath thou o my God suffer i not to want thy mercy let thy gentleness and truth keep i always help we o God our god and gather we from the gentile etc. for their restitution as in other their prayer and destruction of their enemy the christian after this they prostrate themselves on their face as before with many other orison to the like effect @. 2 of their law-lecture their solemn ceremony of the law-lecture follow in all i i the manner of the law-lecture their synagogue they have the five book of Moses write in great letter on parchment of calves-skin sow together in length which at both end be fasten to piece of wood by which the book may be lift and carry this book be keep in a ark or chest set in some wall of the synagogue before the door of the ark be a hang of tapestry more or less precious according to the quality of their feast and for the most part wrought with Bird-work the book be wrap in a linen-cloth wrought with hebrew word without that be hang about some other cloth of linen silk velvet or gold to which be fasten a plate of silver by a chain of gold upon the which be write the crown of the law or holiness of the lord then go one about cry who will buy k k the fold of the wood of life Gelilah this be a office whereby they be authorize to handle those piece of wood and to open the book of the Law he which give most for it have it the money be reserve for the poor the piece of wood be call tree of life according to l l prou. 3.18 Solomon wisdom be a tree of life to they that lie hold thereon when the m m precantor chief chanter have take out the book and go with it into the pulpit they all sing out of num. 10.35 arise o lord and let thy enemy be scatter and let they that hate thou fly before thou and out of Esay 2.3 many people shall go and say come let we ascend to the mount of the lord to the house of the god of Jacob and he shall teach we his way and we will walk in his path for the law shall go out of Zion and the word of the lord from jerusalem when this precantor lay the book on his arm he say n n psal. 34.4 magnify the lord with i and let we exalt his name together to which all the people answer o o psalm 99.9 primumm Sacerdos levita postreme Israel Drus li. Musar exalt you the lord our god and bow before his footstool for it be holy exalt you the lord our god and bow to the mountain of his holiness for jehovah our god be holy there upon a table cover with silk he lay down the book and he which have buy the office take from it the clothes wherein it be wrap then these two call some one of the congregation by his own and his father name who come forth and kiss the book not on the bare parchment for that be a sin but on the clothes which cover it and take it by those piece of wood say aloud praise the lord etc. bless be thou o lord who have choose we before any other people and give we thy Law blessed be thou o God the lawgiver then the precantor read a chapter out of the book and then he which be call forth with like kiss and blessing return then another be call forth and do likewise after he another who have need be of strong arm for he lift up and carry this book that all may see it all cry this be the law which Moses give to the israelite this office be call Hagbahah and be sell as the former woman have a synagogue apart from the man the woman meanwhile contend among themselves in this synagogue by some lattice to have a sight of the law for the woman have a synagogue apart sever with lattice so beside their pretence of modesty to fulfil the say of Zachary p p Zach. 12.2 the family of David shall mourn apart and their wife apart etc. if he which carry the book shall stumble or fall it be ominous and shall portend much evil these two officer fold up the book as before and then come all and kiss the same and then it be carry to his place with sing after this they end their prayer as at other time say lord lead i in thy righteousness because of my enemy direct thy way before i and the lord keep my go out and come in from henceforth for ever which they also say when they go forth on a journey or to work @. 3 of the jewish sabbath they prepare q q this preparation or they observe before the sabbath and other feast Tertullian call they themselves to the observation of their sabbath by diligent provision on the Friday before night of the best meat well dress especial the woman provide they good cake they honour the sabbath with three banquet first on the Friday night when their sabbath begin another on the sabbath day at noon the three before sunset r r exod. 16.25 eat you it to day to day be the sabbath of the lord to day you shall not find it manna in the field do you not see to day thrice mention and therefore by Moses own ordain that manna must so often be eat on the sabbath the rich Jew and most learned rabbin disdain not some or other office at chap of herb kindle the fire or somewhat towards this preparation the table remain cover all that night and day they wash and if need be shave their head on the Friday and very religious cut their nail begin with the four finger of the left hand and next with the second then with the five thence to the three and last to the thumb still leap over one in the right hand they begin with the second finger and after proceed to the four and so forth these pare if they tread underfoot it be a great sin but he which bury they be a just man or which burn they now must they also whet their knife and put on their Sabbath-holiday-raiment to salute Malchah the queen so they term the sabbath the clerk go about and give warning of the sabbath and when the sun be now ready to set the woman light their Sabbath-lamp in their dine room and stretch out their hand towards it say over a blessing if they can see the sun they take warning by the hen fly to roost the cause why the woman now and at other feast light the lamp be magistral determine by the s s Orach cap. 2. rabbin because Eve cause her husband to sin yea with a cudgel belabour he and compel he to eat which they gather out of his word t t gen. 3.12 the woman give i of the tree to wit a sound rib-rosting and I do eat now after they have eat the sun which before shine as it shall do in the other life diminish his light and for dim that light she lighten this and for three cause you shall believe their u u de sab. c. 21. Talmud woman die in travel for forget their dough wherewith to make cake with oil Exod. 25. for neglect their term and not light the Sabbath-lamp which their cabalist gather out of three letter of the name of Eve or Chavah these light be two or more according to condition of the room they begin their sabbath thus soon and end it also late than the just time in commiseration of the Purgatory-soul which begin and end with they this sabbaths-rest be the whole week beside torment in that fire judas himself in honour of the christian sabbath from Saturday Even-song obtain like privilege witness saint Brandon in the legend can you refuse he who find he cool himself in the sea sit upon a stone which he have sometime remove out of a place where it be needless into the highway so meritorious even in judas be any the least good work 10 10 like to this be the story of Turnus and r. Akiba in the Talmud tract Sanhed cap. 7. there do judas acquaint Brandon with this sunday-refreshing of the hellish prisoner and desire his holy company to scar away the devil when they shall after Sunday Even-song come to fetch he again which for that time Brandon grant and perform the jew will not quite empty any place of water that on the sabbath these fiery soul may find where to cool they two angel attend they home from the synagogue one good and the other evil which if they find all thing well that be jewish prepare for the sabbath honour the good angel say it shall be so the next sabbath and the evil angel will he nill he answer amen if otherwise the good angel be force to say amen to the evil angel denunciation of the contrary they feast it with much ceremony pronounce their blessing on the wine with look on the lamp to repair that fifty part of their eyesight which they say in the week time ordinary be waste they cover the bread meanwhile that it shall not see the shame thereof in that the wine be bless for the sabbath use before it this good cheer on the sabbath be of such consequence that for this cause in their y y de sab. c. 16. Talmud be report that a butcher in Cyprus which still reserve his best meat for the sabbath grow by divine reward so rich that his table and all his table-furniture be of gold you may receive with like credit the legend of joseph follow who buy continual the best fish to honour the sabbath with it find in the belly of one of these sabbath-fish a hatband of pearl worth no less than a kingdom the table remain spread till the next night the lamp must not be put out nor the light thereof apply to the kill of flea to read or write etc. the good man must honour that night with more kindness to his wife then on other night therefore eat they leek before therefore also they marry on the sabbath and the child then conceive must needs be z z sabbato and tale n and and tale eunuchi Malcut Archang. in cabal tipher and Malch pag. 769. wise and fortunate if a jew travel and on Friday eevening be further from his home than a Sabbaths-days-journey he must there abide be it in the midst of a wood or wilderness till the sabbath be past they sleep long on the sabbath morning so with their great pleasure to honour it they then use more prayer in their synagogue and read seven lecture of the Law they now also read the prophet they stay here till noon and no long lest by long fast and pray they shall break the prophetical commandment a a esa 58.13 thou shall call my sabbath a delight after dinner also they read in their law for b b minhagam pag. 13. on a time the sabbath and the law put up their complaint to God for want of a companion and learner and the israelite be give as a companion to the sabbath and on the sabbath a learner of the Law but for all this they talk not more busy all the week through of usury buy and sell then on the sabbath and have their trick to deceive God almighty their Even-song they have soon do that they may return and while the day yet last make a end of their three banquet by which they be secure against hell and against gog and Magog they conclude it with blessing and sing till it be late to prolong the return of the soul into hell for present after they have end there be proclamation through hell to recall they to their dungeon in these song they call upon Elias to come so just be they delude who scoff impute unto c c math. 27.47 Christ the call of Elias but their Elias be busy as he sometime say of ahab Baal and not come than they request he to come the next sabbath but he it seem be loath to leave his place under the tree of life in paradise where he stand say they enrol their good work in the keep of the sabbath when this their devotion be do the woman in haste run to draw water because the fountain of Mirriam num. 20. flow into the sea of Tiberias do from thence empty itself in the end of the sabbath into all fountain and be very medicinable after this do the jew make a division between the sabbath and the new week the householder light a great candle call the candle of distinction at who light he view his wall d d this holy wine they sprinkle about their house and themselves as effectual against disease and devil bless a cup of wine and a little silver box full of sweet spice pour a little of the wine on the ground and apply the box to every one nose to smell to thus to remedy the stink which be cause at the new open of hell for the return of the soul or else to keep they from swoon at the departure of one of their soul for they be of opinion that themselves have a superfluous Sabbatharie soul which on that day be plentiful send into they to in large their heart and to expel care and sorrow Antonius Margarita affirm that they dream of three soul in each man beside the Sabbatharie soul two of which leave he in his sleep one mount to heaven where it learn thing to come the other call brutish contemplate sin and vanity the view of their nail at the candle be in remembrance of Adam nakedness all save where the nail cover his finger and toe end the wine they pour on the ground to refresh Corah and his complice under the ground for their Sabbath-work they be determine rabbinical a horse may have a halter or a bridle to lead but not a saddle to lade he and he that lead he must not let it hang so loose that it may seem he rather carry it then lead the horse a hen may not wear her hose sew about her leg but this mark must on Friday be take off and if any cattle fall into a pit yet may they not help it out on the sabbath so spiteful have their Talmudical rabbin endeavour to make where they can not find a falsehood in the e e Math 12 11. word of Christ testify the contrary but from the beginning it be not thus the jew may not milk his cattle nor eat of the milk when he have procure a christian to milk they except he first buy it but at his own price a Taylor may not wear a needle stick on his garment the lame may use a staff the blind may not clog or patten to keep they out of the dirt they may not burden themselves with it be lawful to carry a plaster on their sore but if it fall f f job. 9 they accuse Christ for anoint the eye of the blind etc. yet they except the danger of life Thanchuma 8.1 and Imeden fol. 41. Aquiba say one may raise the dead by necromancy except on the sabbath and misuoth 100 he determine a sabbath journey out of town for within though as wide as ninive it have none at 2000 cubit which there be a measure mile off they may not lay it on again nor may they bind up a wound a new nor carry money in their purse or garment nor rub their dirty shoe against the ground though they may wipe it off against a wall nor wipe their hand foul with dirt on a towel but with a cow or horse-tail they may do it if a flea bite he may remove it but not kill it a louse he may but their doctor disagree in this lousy question for r. Eluzer say one may as well kill a camel if a file g g five ct caro^ns l. 1. light on meat or a spider run thereon it may not be remove they will let man take their money upon pawn but not deliver it themselves as the franciscan have his boy to take your alm which his vow will not suffer his holy finger to touch he must take heed of leave more corn to fowl that day than they shall eat if it be in a open place lest it may there grow and he be say to sow corn on the sabbath to whistle a tune with his mouth or play it on a instrument be unlawful as also to knock with the ring or hammer of a door and therefore the clerk knock with his hand when he call they to the synagogue to knock on a table to still a child to draw a letter in dust or ash or a moisten table be unlawful in the air not so of these sabbath-labour they have nine and thirty chief article whereto the small as these be refer with much ridiculous nicety as the first article be of till ground wherein be reserve dig fill up ditch etc. and to this go over a fallow rub his dirty shoe on the ground etc. it be time this ditch be now fill and we proceed further chap. 18 the jewish Passover as they now observe it and other their feast and fast @. i. of their Passover Buxdorf syn. jud. of the jewish feast as they be celebrate before the come of Christ we have already speak in these day they blind and stubborn persist in like observation of time though with some variation of ceremony their Talmud reckon four newyear day one a a of their Tekuphas see sup. c. 4. in march and another in September whereof we have speak the first of August begin their year of breed cattle account from thence their time of Tything in January the first or as r. hillel will have it the fifteen begin their new year for tree in reckon the time of lawfulness to eat or tithe their fruit their month and movable feast be guide by the moon of which they tell b b scal. em. tem. l. 7. p. 592. this story the moon say they expostulate with God because the sun shine with she whereas no kingdom can endure a partner whereat God be angry darken her light that from the four day wherein she be create till man be make on the six she shine not hence it come to pass that at the change in two day space she be never see this be the Rabbinical custom if they can untie the knot they have not a cutting-sword as Alexander for that gordian but some leaden legend or fable Rabbinic-all-ly to determine it hieronimus a s fide who about two hundred year since be the pope physician and turn from Judaism to Christianity thus relate it the moon before equal with the sun expostulate with God for the reason above recite and therefore be command to go lessen herself she like some shrewish jewess reply she have wrong and have speak but reason he to satisfy she say the sun shall not shine by night and yet shall she appear in the day what say she be a candle before the sun he then promise that his people Israel shall observe their solemn festival according to her designment but when all this will not content she as yield himself guilty he enjoin a peculiar meat-offering every new-moon for indulgence of that sin thus do they both dream ridiculous and blaspheme also beyond all name of impiety in their Talmudical tract Holyn and this they prove out of num. 18. as true as in another place out of esa 40. that God have pollute himself with bury of Moses purge himself with fire the water not be sufficient thereto the c c their order of celebrate the Passover at this day rich Jew prepare thirty day before for their Passover good wheat for their unleavened cake the sabbath before the Passover be solemn and sacred wherein they have a sermon concern the Paschall lamb two or three day before the Passover they scour their household implement of wood and mettle with much curiosity and variety of rite for he that in this feast use a impure vessel be as he that have lie by a unclean woman the night before the feast the goodman of the house with a wax candle a dish and wing begin his search for unleavened bread and with other man or boy to help he after their amen to his blessing with wax candle in their hand they leave not a d d thus curious be the roman woman in the tite of Bana not leave a mousehole unsearched lest some male mouse may mar the solemnity mousehole unsearched and hide that bread which they mean to eat that night lest they shall find that and be force to burn it that which they find they curious cover lest some mouse by carry it shall make they have new work and for this cause sup also in a corner with great care that nothing fall to the ground when he have end his search whatsoever leaven say he be under my hand which I have not see let it be toss too and fro like the dust of the earth in the morning they make their unleavened cake of meal ground three day at least the kneading-trough must be line with linen lest some of the leaven meal shall cleave thereto the goodman himself must draw the liquor that it be knead with and that at sun-setting the cake be make with as much scruple round and prick full of hole in a cold place etc. to keep they from leaven they eat little and the firstborn nothing till night that then they may have the better Paschal-stomach at the Even-song they observe muchwhat the same ceremony as at the sabbath they make at home the fair show of their plate and riches and seat themselves on chair as it be of state and account now of themselves as great lord triumph over their late egyptian servitude at their return from the synagogue they have a dish with three cake set before they represent the high priest the tribe of levi and the people of Israel another dish have in it a loin of lamb or kid with a hard egg another contain a gallimawfrey of apple nut fig almond etc. dress with wine in Brick-fashion with cinnamon strew on it in remembrance of the egyptian furnace they have also a salad of herb and a saucer of vinegar set on the table then sit they down and every one to the child in the cradle have his cup fill with wine and here with a carouse after a blessing begin the feast with a scrupulous use of these thing mention then follow the supper itself with much riot till midnight with such cheer as they have with diverse ceremony curse their enemy call for Elias pray for the re-edify of the temple use many divine attribute as merciful God great God bountiful God high God fair God sweet God mighty God and God of the jew now build thy temple short very soon very soon in our day very soon very soon now build now build now build now build now build thy temple quick strong God live God etc. over and over with such bartology this night they think themselves secure against man and devil they leave their door open all night to entertain Elias and one to their solace play Elias in a white linen garment each man drink four cup full of the bless e e pas aeg. and 4 and and daunt mactassent phil. Ferdinand praec. 19 wine in regard of four deliverance which the rabbin find in exod. 6. ver. 6 7. the ceremony of Moses they be not yet tie to forsooth because they be not in Canaan in the morning they visit the synagogue with their sabbath-rite they bring two book out of the ark and call forth five man and if this feast be on the sabbath seven to read out of the same nice be their determination what work they may do on this day and what not they may dress no more meat than be this day eat if they beat spice the mortar must lie side-wise for distinction sake of the day etc. fast and weep must be avoid if any farce a hen the needle must be three the day before and the thread must be burn not bite or break asunder in such trifle the school of Schammai license to eat the same day a egg lay on a festival day hillel deny it and betwixt they they have set the rabbin by the ear in this and such profane question their Even-song have a short dispatch and then the next day they f f abundans reiterate the same ceremony and that for certainty because they doubt of the first day of the month and therefore observe two the four day follow be half-holy day some work may be do in they and not some and what they do to make a difference must be do otherwise as write crooked etc. and that which can without loss be defer may now be do the seven day they observe in more complete holiness and the eight too for the reason before allege to be more secure of the true day after the feast end they satisfy with fast their feasting-riot and that on two munday and one Thursday unto the three and thirty day after they be sad and heavy in remembrance of r. Akiba of who disciple four and twenty thousand die in that space and be bury by woman in the night and therefore after sunset all this while the woman lay aside their work on the three and thirty day the man bathe they and shave their beard and be merry because than his disciple cease die @. 2 of Pentecost from the second night of their Pisach they number to their Pentecost g g Pentecost fifty day inclusive and say bless be thou etc. which have sanctify we by thy precept and command we to number the day before harvest of which this be the first or second etc. they number the same stand h h so the primitive church neither fast nor kneel all the day between easter and Pentecost in token of joyful hope of the resurrection Iust. mart. quaest. 115. amb. sir 61. hier. aug. etc. perhaps in imitation of this jewish rite apply to that mystery pray withal for the restitution of jerusalem they let not blood on the even of the Pentecost because of a suppose wind Tabbach which shall have slay all the israelite if they have refuse next day to accept of the Law they keep it two day for the former doubt they take the book twice out of the ark and read there-out the precept concern this feast sacrifice now that they can perform the thing in remembrance of receive the law they strew the pavement of their house street and synagogue with grass they eat meat make of milk and cake one cake they make seven time fold in thickness in remembrance of the seven heaven by which GOD descend to mount Sinai now they must have good cheer because at this time the king marry his daughter that be the law unto they @. 3 of the feast of tabernacle the i i tabernacle feast of tabernacle be observe eight day the two first and two k k the last day they may kindle fire from another not strike fire with stone or metal nor quench it although to save their good nor blow it with bellows but with a reed they may with many trifle observation else mention by Munst precept Mos. expos. rab. last more solemn the middle four be half holy they mutter over their prayer with such haste that he be the perfect who speak most with a breath they make they tabernacle with bough of four kind l l palm and willow and pomecitron and myrtle the cause hereof Rambam deliver Moreb neb. p. 3. c. 44. of tree more scrupulous than the law in which they sup but do not lodge the precantor in the synagogue take a bundle of bough and bless and shake they for it be write m m psal. 96.12 the tree shall clap their hand and move they three time to the east and as often to the west and to the north and south and then up and down like a fencer and then shake they again as have now put the devil to flight than one take out the book and lay it on the pulpit which they all with their bough compass seven time a day during the feast in hope of like destruction to the christian as befall jericho and then renew the shake of their bough the seven day be most solemn call by they Hoschana the great hosanna as if one shall say n n Bux the great feast of salvation or help because than they pray for the salvation of all the people and for a prosperous new-year and all the prayer of this feast have in they the word of save as o God save we and o God of our salvation and as thou have save the israelite and such like the prayer be therefore call Hosannoth then they produce seven book and in every of their seven compass lay up one again this night they know their fortune by the moon for stretch out their arm if they see not the shadow of their head by moonlight they must die that year if a finger want he lose a friend if the shadow yield he not a hand he lose a son the want of the left hand portend loss of a daughter if no shadow no life shall abide with he for it be write o o num. 14.9 they say also that on that day God foreshoweth how much it shall rain all the year follow of plenty also and dearth etc. and direct their prayer according their shadow be depart from they some jew go yearly into Spain to provide pome-citrons and other necessary for the furnish this feast which they sell in Germany and other place to the jew at excessive price they keep their tabernacle in all weather except a very vehement storm drive they with a heavy countenance into their house their wife and servant be not so strict tie hereto @. 4 of their new moon and newyear day the p p new-moon day New-moon be at this day but half festival to the jew account themselves free to work or not in they but the woman keep it entire festival because they deny their earring to the melt calf which after they bestow willing on their tabernacle the devout Jew fast the day before their matin be with more prayer their dinner with more cheer than on other day and a great part of the day after they sit at card or tell of tale that day when the moon be eclipse they fast when they may first see the new-moon they assemble and the chief rabbi pronounce a long prayer the rest say after he the jew believe that GOD create the world in September or Tisri conceit also that at the revolution of the same time yearly he sit in judgment and out of the book take reckon of every man life and pronounce sentence according that day q q newyear day vict. de Carben l. 1. c. 16. where he rehearse these ceremony say some r r. believe the world begin in March which their great Sanhedrin ordain the newyear festival God receive thereof intelligence by his angel send thither to know the same cause the same day a senate of angel to be assemble as it be write Daniel 12. all thing provide in the solemn manner the three book be open one of the most wicked who be present register into the book of death the second of the just who be enrol into the book of life and the three of the mean sort who judgement be demur until the day of reconciliation the ten of Tisri that if in the mean time they serious repent they so that their good may exceed their evil then be they enter into the book of life if otherwise they be record into the black bill of death their scripture be produce by r. Aben let r r psal. 69.28 they be blot out of the book of the live and not be write with the Iust. blot point you to the book of death live that of life and not write with the just be the three book of indifferent all the work which a man have do through the year be this day examine the good work be put in one balance the bad in the other what help a silver chalice or such heavy metal can afford in this case you may find by experience in saint Francis legend who when the bad deed of a great man late dead outweigh the good at a dead lift cast in a silver chalice which the dead party have sometime bestow on franciscan devotion and weigh up the other side and so the devil lose their prey GOD say they pronounce sentence of punishment or reward sometime in this life to be execute sometime in the other in respect hereof their rabbin ordain the month before to be spend in penance and morning and eevening to sound a trumpet of a Rams-horn as Marie bell to warn they of this judgement that they may think of their sin and beside to befool the devil that with this often sound be perplex he may not know when this newyear day shall be to come into the court to give evidence against they the day before they rise soon in the morning to mutter over their prayer for remission and when they have do in the synagogue they go to the grave in the churchyard testify that if GOD do not pardon they they be like to the dead and pray that for the good work of the saint the just jew there bury he will pity they and there they give large alm after noon they shave adorn and bathe themselves that they may be pure the next day for some angel soil with impurity here below be fain to purge themselves in the fiery brook Dinor before they can praise GOD how much more they and in the water they make confession of their sin the confession contain two and twenty word p. ric. de Coelest agricult l. 3. Reuchlin l. 1 c. 1 mirifico the number of their alphabet and at the pronounce of every word give a knock on their breast and then dive whole under water the feast itself they begin with a cup of wine and New-year salutation and on their table have a ram head in remembrance of s s gen. 22.18 that ram which be offer in isaack stead and for this cause be their trumpet of Rams-horn fish they eat to signify the multiplication of their good work they eat sweet fruit of all sort and make themselves merry as assure of forgiveness of their sin and after meat all of all sort resort to some bridge to hurl their sin into the water as it be write t t mich. 7.19 he shall cast all our sin into the bottom of the sea and if they there espy any fish they leap for joy these serve to they as the scape-goat to carry away their sin at night they renew their cheer and end this feast @. v. of their lent penance and reconciliation fast. from this day to the ten u u reconciliation day be a time of penance or Lent wherein they fast and pray for the cause aforesaid and that if they have be write in the book of death yet God see their good work may repent and write they in the Life-book 10 10 Hospinian Lombardo thrice a day very early they confess three hour before day and surcease suit at law etc. and on the nine day very early y y Buxdorf c. 20 vict. Carben l. 1. c. 17. add that the man and woman that morning curse the first Christian they meet and therefore will wait two or three hour for some to who they owe some special grudge to bestow their curse upon he in these word God make thou my cock this year they resort to the synagogue and at their return every male take a cock and every female a hen if she be with child both and the householder say out of the hundred and five psalm verse 17 18 19 20 21 22. and out of job chapter 23. verse 23 24. 25. swinge the cock three time about his head every time say this cock shall make a exchange for i he shall die for i and I shall go into life with all the people of Israel amen he do it three time for himself for his child for the stranger that be with he then he kill he and cut his throat and hurl he with all his force to the ground and roast he signify that he himself deserve death the sword stone and fire the innards they hurl on the top of the house that the crow may with it carry away their sin a white cock for this purpose be principal a red cock they use not for they be full of sin themselves by esaias authority z z esa 1.18 if your sin be red as scarlet etc. a a ant. margar. Antonius Margarita say that this propitiatory creature shall be a ape as most like to man but they use a cock for the name sake a man in Hebrew be gebher which be the Talmudical or babylonish name of a cock thus those that with a ram horn beguile the devil and with a cock beguile GOD just beguile themselves who refuse that sacrifice of Christ in who stripe they may be heal they have another fable of a cock mention by b b vict. Carben l. 1. count jud. c. 11. victor Carbensis think that as often as a cock stand on one leg and his comb look pale that GOD be angry which happen they say every day and only in the day time and that but the twinkle of a eye and therefore they praise GOD which have give such understanding to a cock after the performance of this Cock-sacrifice they go to the burial place use like ceremony there as on newyear even and after noon bathe they likewise after eevensong he which have offend other ask they forgiveness which if he obtain not at first than the offender take with he three other and ask the second and three time if all this be in vain he take ten other and renew his suit if he obtain it be well if not GOD will hold he excuse and the other party shall be guilty c c shall be call a sinner li. Musar fol. 18. if the party offend be dead the offender with ten other go to the grave and there confess d d say I have sin against God and this my brother and do thus and thus if he owe he money he pay it to his heir if he know none he confess it and leave it in the Court ibid. his fault they confess one to another also and that in a secret place of their synagogue where each receive mutual at his fellow hand with a leather belt nine and thirty blow at each blow the party beat beat himself on the breast and say one word of his confession take out of the seventy and eight psalm and eight and thirty e e yet he be merciful etc. verse be in the hebrew thirteen word which he thrice repeat then the striker lie down and receive like penance at the hand of the former you may judge with what rigour this do they run home and make merry with the cock and hen before mention sup large because of the next day fast their supper must be end before sunset for than begin their fast they put on their clean raiment and over the same a great and large shirt down to the shoe to testify their purity they resort to their synagogue with wax candle in Germany they have for every man one and then light they the woman also light candle at home as on the sabbath it be ominous if the candle burn not clear they spread the floor with carpet for soil their pure clothes their five humiliation at the feast of reconciliation their humiliation at this feast be five first four and twenty or seven and twenty hour fast whereunto child be subject the male after twelve year the female after eleven second they wear no shoe three they must not anoint they four nor bathe they no not put a finger into the water five nor company with no not touch their wife before they begin prayer thirteen of the principal rabbi walk in the temple give licence to all both good and bad to pray and the precantor or reader fetch the book out of the ark and open it sing a long prayer begin all compact vow and oath etc. insinuate that all the vow promise oath and covenant which every jew have that year break be disannul and pardon and that because now all have power to pray and praise god. they continue sing till late in the night some remain all night f f manent 24. synagoga and ben. kat. 313. in the synagogue yea the devout some stand upright sing and pray without intermission all that feast the space of seven and twenty hour in the same place those that depart the synagogue return in the morning before day and there stay all that day often they prostrate themselves with their face cover at every word of their confession knock their brest when it begin to be night the priest draw his tally a large cloth make of hair before his eye and pronounce the blessing Numb. 6. hold his hand towards the people who meanwhile cover their face with their hand for they may not look on the priest hand because the spirit of GOD rest thereon then he sing a prayer seven time together sometime high sometime low with his voice because that GOD now ascend from they into the seven heaven and they with their sweet melody bring he on the way then they make a long and shrill sound with their Rams-horn-trumpet and there follow present a voice from heaven go eat thy bread with joy and gladness etc. after this they return home some carry home their light to distinguish the holy time as you have hear from the profane some leave they in the synagogue all the year at certain time light they some saint-iewe provide to have a waxelight continual burn all the year long in the synagogue in their return they wish to each other a good year for the book before mention be now close nor may they expect any alteration they sup large and betimes the next morning return to the synagogue lest Satan shall complain at so soon a cool of their zeal but the devil may be quiet for when the law be give g g Pirke c. 46. Samael the evil spirit complain that he have power over all people but the israelite GOD answer that he shall have power over they if on the reconciliation-day he find any sin in they but he find they pure say that this his people be like the angel live in unity without eat or drink the jew have a ceremony to give the devil gift on this day either not to hinder they or else h h exod. 23.8 because gift blind the wise @. 5 of their other feast the jew divide the law into two and fifty part and read every sabbath one the last fall on the next day after the feast of tabernacle about the three and twenty day of September in this i i the feast of the law finish day they leap dance and make much joy they assemble in their synagogue and take all the book of the law out of the ark leave in it meanwhile that it be not leave empty a burn light they read the first lecture and the last thereof and leap about the ark with the book and they hurl pearl nut and such fruit among the youth which in their scramble sometime fall together by the ear and mar the sport on this day they sell their synagogue-office the clerk make proclamation who will give most at the three time obtain first the office of light the light all the year then that of provide the wine which they use to begin the feast with in respect of the poor which have no wine to hallow at home three be set to sale the office Gelilah of fold up and unfold the Law four Hagbohah of lift up the law and carry it in procession five the office etzchaijm of touch those turn piece of wood whereto the law be fasten which the youngman be forward to buy in hope of holiness and long life six Acheron to be call forth last on the festival day to read somewhat of the Law seven Schetria to be depute or substitute in place of the negligent officer etc. the money hence arise be for the use of the poor and reparation of their synagogue but in these sale-office wealth have more honour than worthiness their feast of dedication we can say much more of then that which already have be say much niceness herein be observe about the light wherewith they solemnize this darkness which I willing omit these light thy use in their house all the space of these eight day burn their k k Hospinian m. Lombard feast of lot they keep with all riot two day as with some at shrovetide the man disguise themselves in woman habit the woman in man they hold that he shall be fortunate which then labour woman especial then make merry in remembrance of queen Esther and they with their infant be present in the night at the read of the book of Esther which be all write in a large sheet of parchment and read from the begin to the end in time past they have two stone in one of which be write haman name which they beat together till the name be blot out to fulfil that scripture the name of the wicked shall rot curse be Haman bless be mordecai curse be ZERES haman wife bless be Esther curse be all idolater bless be Israel when they come to the place where haman ten son be name they read it all in one breath for in a twinkle of a eye they be all slay they make great cheer for so do Esther in feast Assuerus in these two day they do nothing but eat drink dance pipe sing play etc. the rich be bind to send to the poor Jew double present which must not be spend but on this solemnity they quaff it be say rabbi Isaac Tirna a good work till they find no difference between arur Haman and Baruch mordecai curse be Haman bless be mordecai vociferation that day observe and hold it lawful to drink till they can tell their five finger on the hand they l l Hospinian observe festival the equinoctial and solstice and a certain rogation day they use the fast before mention out of Zach. 7. with other superstition some of m m syn. jud. Buxdorf they fast also as be say on monday and thursday and some on the ten of march for the death of Miriam at who departure a certain fountain dry up and the people be leave without water but in this month the rabbin will not allow fast because of their deliverance therein out of Egypt some fast for the death of Samuel April 28. and for the take of the ark April 10. and at other time for other prophet some fast on the New-moon even some when they have have a infortunate dream and all that day in which their father die through their whole life their fast be a abstinence from all eat and drink till night but of these fast and other their solemnity be say before in the abstract of their calendar take out of joseph Scaliger their fast on the 17. of the four month for the destruction of their city be rigorous keep and from thence to the nine day of the month follow be hold unlucky day in which schoolmaster may not beat their scholar nor any man will sew at the Law and for the burn of the temple in the nine day of the five month they go barefoot read heavy story and jeremiah lamentation and mourn among the grave of the dead and be sad all that move from the first to the ten day they eat no flesh nor drink wine nor bathe nor marry nor cut their hair Hos. 2.7 they sew not at the law for hosea say the month shall devour their portion and they shall be take say Jeremy in their month on the eight day they eat only lentil for they may not eat pease or beanes because they have black spot like mouth which lentil want and therefore more fit represent a heavy man which want his mouth for sorrow egg they may eat in the night for their roundness for sorrow as if it be round roll from one to another they have their fast also on special occasion as they tell of one chone Hammagal which in a great drought put himself into a pie make fit for his body and pray say lord of the world the eye of thy child be upon i as one who they think familiar with thou I swear by thy holy name that I will not come hence till thou show mercy and then it rain present for how can it choose they tell the same pye-tale of Moses likewise and of Habbacuc expound that hab. 2.1 I will stand on my watch I will stand in my pye their manner be say victor Carbensis to curse Titus and say he be of the generation of agag the amalechite and such a blasphemer as never be any and that for his blasphemy he be strike with madness chap. 19 of their cookery butchery marriage punishment funeral Buxdorf syn. jud. c. 26. and d. but why do we entertain you so long in feast and fast both almost violent to human nature howsoever the glutton be never glut with the one and the superstitious rather kill the flesh than the vice of the flesh with the other we will sober recreate your spirit with a walk into the Cook-room and thence to the butchery and then to the bride-chamber to take view of their espousal marriage divorce and thence divorce your eye from these spectacle and thence divert they to their beggar penance and to that fatal divorce end your walk where the walk of all flesh end at death and the grave @. i. of their cookery they have * * they ground these absurdity on Moses his word exo. 23.19 kitchen vessel of two sort one for flesh another for white-meat their milk vessel of wood be mark with three cut because that sentence thou shall not seethe a kid in his mother milk be three time in the law repeat every jew carry two knife with he one for flesh the other for cheese and fish and these also be mark with three cut and if these vessel shall be a a the knife may not after be use except heat red hot in the fire three hour and three day hide in the earth and three time put into water vict. carb l. 1. c. 12. intermingle our jew may not eat that which be dress therein yea the innocent vessel be break if of earth most accurate wash if of wood and purge in the fire if they be of iron they seethe not milk and flesh at one time and over one fire over against each other nor set they together on the table but separate they with somewhat set between one cloth be lay for flesh and another for white-meate he which eat flesh or broth thereof may not eat white-meat a hour after yea the most religious will b b nine hour say Carbens this they gather out of num. 31.23 abstain six hour after yet may they eat a hen together with almond-milk if any have not the gift of such abstinence very careful must he cleanse his tooth and wash his mouth and with a piece of dry bread take away the taste of the flesh if any suet fall into their white-meat they may not be eat except there be sixty time as much of the meat as of the suet a egg may not be poch in a flesh vessel they break it also and diligent observe that none of that bloody resemblance in the top of the egg remain if in cut up of a hen they find egg they may not eat they till they be wash and soften in water and salt flesh and fish may not be dress or set on the table or eat together for this they write will bring the leprosy in their diet-difficulty they consult with their rabbin glass knife and all their kitchen vessel new buy must be curious wash and if they will bear it purge with the fire @. 2 of their butchery bvtchery be with the jew exalt above the liberal science and must be learn by much bookishness and long experience they have a book of shamble-constitution and in hard case they advise with some learned rabbi neither may any practice this art without licence from the rabbi whereby he signify that he have take examination and proof of the party and find he expert therein both in word and deed and therefore have permit he to kill and other to eat the meat by he kill provide that he diligent read every week for one year and every month the next year and once a quarter during his life the constitution abovesaid they have their especial knife for this business great one for great cattle and small for the small the great have blunt and broad point if they have any rift in they they may not use they the great beast foot must be bind in remembrance of Abraham bind Isaac and then with one cut or thrust he cut the weasand a sunder which do he look on his knife if there be any rift in it for that will terrify the beast and cause the blood to recoil back to the heart whereby the beast will not be fit for use as retain some of the blood after this he hang up the beast take out the innards and cut a hole on both side of the heart thrust his hand through the same into the body of the beast to search if there be any blood and if there be any fault in the beast it be not for their diet apply that which the law say of a carcase find tear in the field b b exod. 22.31 levit. 22. they cut the throat of a bird in like manner if it be a fowl which have quill in the wing in remembrance of a office perform by the fowl sometime as a they say to Rebecca when she descend from her camel at the sight of Isaac c c and and therefore they let the fowl bleed into a heap of ash and therein cover the blood they cover the blood also of other creature in the ground because the earth open her mouth to drink in the blood of ABEL and because Satan shall not accuse man of injustice for slay the innocent beast see so much blood shed by they when they have kill a great beast they cut out all the vein and sinew of which subject they have write special treatise and likewise all the suet which do they dive they in water to mollify they and wash they thorough to rinse away all the blood and then lie they on a board that all the water may pass from they after which they salt they in a vessel full of hole that the salt may drain out all whatsoever bloodiness yet remain they eat not the hinder part in remembrance of Jacob d d gen. 32. thigh but in Italy they have invent a new anatomise trick by take away the vein and sinew to make they lawful pity they can do the like for swine and other forbid meat but you see they have some trick to cousin GOD as before to cozen the devil but the most cozenage save that in the former they cozen themselves be to christian which buy those hinder part of they in pollute those meat before they sell they with filth and with urine of their child add curse and imprecation to the eater thus you see the jew-butcher have need be no botcher but half a physician in anatomise and half a rabbin in case of conscience and who know whether so many jewish physician come not from and perhaps also carry to the shambles @. 3 of their espousal and marriage but weary of this bloody spectacle let we take a more pleasant view of their virgin and espousal these be make say e e lib. praecep 124. vid. Drus pag. 2. Moses de Kotsi either with money or with a instrument or with copulation it seem this last be understand of such as have lie with a maid and therefore must by the f f exod. 22.17 and Deut. 22.29 law marry she if the father deny he not his daughter whereas otherwise they may not have carnal company before the marriage be solemnize this be forbid no g g lib. Musar cap. 6. less than to lie with a woman in her disease their prayer-book h h fol. 364. say thus he which shall espouse a woman bring witness and before they do betrothe she with money or somewhat money-worth which he give she say be thou espouse to i according to the law of Moses and Israel if there be no witness it be nothing notwithstanding they both confess it if one shall affiance a woman to another he say be thou espouse to n. with this ring according to the law of Moses and Israel @ Buxdorfius to who I be most behold in many of these report write syn. jud. c. 28. that when promise have pass between two many jew be call together into a great chamber where every of the youth hold a pot in his hand then come one and read the letter of contract that n. son of n. and n. daughter of n. have promise marriage to each other each give so much in dowry which marriage be to be solemnize on such a day and the party which fail in the promise shall give the other fifty florin this do they wish joy to each other and the jewling present break their earthen pot whereby they signify to the party prosperity and abundance at part every one have a cup of wine give they eight day after neither party go out of the house and many youth come and make merry with the bridegroom imitate they think Samson herein some say k k Drus sup. that the man take the espouse bride home to his house to be both witness and keeper of her virginity till the marriage solemnity the day before the marriage the bride must wash she in that absolute manner l l cap. 14. before describe certain woman ring with somewhat when she go in and out of the water some of they also leap and dance the bridegroom send the bride a wedding girdle emboss with m m judaeaster gold and she he another with silver stud on the wedding day the bride adorn herself in the best jewish dress with her marriage attire and by woman sing their sweet Epithalamia be convey into a chamber and their place she on a fair seat braid her hair into goodle curl and put a veil over her eye in imitation of rebecca modesty sing meanwhile dance and express the great sign of joy think they therein please God as be teach by their rabbin that God use the like curl sing and dance when he present Eve to Adam n n Pirke cap. r. Eliezer c. 11. Brandspigel c. 34 yea refuse not to serve that new couple and with his own hand make the canopy under which they be to receive their marriage blessing the angel with pipe and trumpet make music to lead the dance that which Moses say o o gen. 2.22 God build a woman the Talmud interpret he make curl and he bring she to Adam to wit with leap and dance when the marriage benediction be to be solemnize four boy bear a p p vid. Eli. thil. vad Chapha canopy on four pole into the place appoint which be some street or garden q q in token that they shall multiply like the star in number abroad in the open air the people sound their acclamation bless be he which come the bride be lead by other go three time about the bridegroom as a cock go about a hen and that forsooth to fulfil that prophecy r r jerem. 31.22 a woman shall compass a man he also must fetch one compass about she the people also besprinkle the bride with wheat cry out increase and multiply according to that of the psalmist s s psal. 147.14 he fill thou with the fat of wheat in some place they mingle money with the wheat which the poor jew gather up the bride stand on the right hand for it be write t t psal. 45.10 thy wife stand on thy right hand with her face also to the south for than she shall be fruitful the rabbi which marry they take the end of the vestment about the bridegroom neck they call it tall and put it on the bride head after the example of u u ruth 3 9 and Ezek. 16.8 boaz and ruth and then take a glass fill with wine over which he utter the marriage blessing praise God by who instinct these person be espouse and so reach the glass to they and bid they drink this glass if she be a virgin have but a narrow mouth at worm they use a earthen pot now the rabbi receive a ring of pure gold without any 10 10 some superstitious engrave therein good fortune come or the planet jupiter which they will borrow from leah word gen. 30.11 vid. Munster ibid. the r. say victar carbens mark diligent whether she put forth her forefinger for the virgin Mary say they wear the ring on her middle finger and therefore all jewesses refuse that and use the fore finger jewel in it show it to some witness ask they if it be good and worth the money it cost and then put it on the bride finger and with a loud voice pronounce the spousal letter after this he take another glass of wine and bless God that the bridegroom and bride have accept of each other and give it they to taste this do the bridegroom break the former glass against the wall or ground in remembrance of the destruction of jerusalem in which respect in some place they put ash on the bridegroom head he wear for this cause a black-hood on his head like a mourner and the bride likewise wear a black cloth fit to terrify child with the deformity thus do they mix mirth and mourn as David warn rejoice unto he in tremble this end they sit down at table and then must the bridegroom make trial of his breast in sing a long prayer other in the mean time call to make ready the hen then be there a hen and a egg set before the bride of that the bridegroom carve she a piece and then present all the company man and woman tear the hen among they like hungry hound snatch out of each other hand and mouth all to glad the new marry couple the egg be not sod but in another scene of mirth one cast it in the face of another of some christian especial if any be present at the nuptial in the same be a mystery include for the bride that she shall have as easy travel in childbirth as the hen lay her egg after this they fall to their cheer and dance one they call the Mitzuah or commandment-dance as if GOD have enjoin it the chief guest take the bridegroom by the hand another he and so on through the company likewise the chief woman take the bride another she and so one another then do they dance in a long row with a tumultuous noise and so end the nuptial sport among all their other blessing the bridegroom be to say one to use the word of Genebrard who express it be borrow from some word of the canticle fleshly abuse by such application the marriage common last eight day and on the sabbath they dance the lusty of all do the sabbath herein a singular honour because that also be call a bride it be prohibit to bid any uncircumcised guest to this banquet for 10 10 prou. 14.10 Solomon say the stranger do not intermeddle with his joy yea the good angel see such there will depart and the evil will come and raise strife and contention for they think no y y com. sup. aboth fol. 83. ap. Drus place empty from the earth to the sky but all full of good or bad angel fly or stand in the same the marriage z z rambam m. n. lib. 3. cap. 50. be in public lest whoredom shall be cover under that pretext pretend themselves marry when they be not @. 4 of conjugal duty let it not grieve you to hear somewhat of the duty betwixt man and wife the husband owe ten thing to the wife a a vid. Drus lib. 6. in 1. cor. 7.2 vid. ap. r. ab. ben Kattan pr. 150. p. ric. in praec. coniugale Talmud Afinarius come sup. aboth 10. Drus pag. 285. three according to the law her nourishment her clothing and her time namely of due benevolence to be perform and seven thing according to the word of the scribe the first whereof be the foundation of dowry viz. two hundred if she be a virgin otherwise a hundred the other concern the condition of the dowry the woman which render not her husband his due be rebellious and refractory and he be bid to expel she without a dowry the condition of the dowry be first to cure she in sickness second to redeem she be captive three to bury she be dead four to nourish she out of his own good and that she dwell in his house in her widowhood five to keep her daughter till marriage six that her son inherit they appoint not only love but honour to the wife as Peter also enjoin to this weak vessel which honour they say be in meat and drink and goodly garment for which he shall this be a woman friend have favour with God the author of Arbaa Turim add that a man shall love his wife as his own body and honour she above his body and keep she as one of his member for the wife be the other half of man and a man without a wife be but half a man and let he take heed of strike his wife say b b Musar cap. 6. another or to be virulent in term against she for for her tear how pitiful easy be they to some his punishment be near and howsoever since the destruction of the temple the door of prayer have be shut yet the door of tear have not be shut as say David be not thou silent at my tear and shall not a man honour his wife yes say c c Vid. Drus pag. 376. R. havina for a man have no blessing but for his wife as it be write he bless Abraham for she let a man clothe himself I will not have woman hear it beneath his ability his child according to his ability and his wife above his ability let the wife honour her husband as her father and fear to displease he and let he spare she in his anger remember that she be take out of his rib but for the wife choice a man aught say d d Musar 74. one to sell all that he have and buy a wife the daughter of a wise disciple if he find not such a one let he take a daughter of the great man of his time if not such the daughter of a synagogue-ruler in that defect let he take the daughter of one which gather alm if not then of a schoolmaster and not the daughter of the people of the land of who the scripture say e e vid. sup. c. 8. curse be he that lie with a beast they say that a man ought f f Drus l. 7 not to lodge in the same chamber no not with his sister daughter or daughter in law yea there wise man forbid conference with a woman altogether @. v. of divorce and other marriage observation the bill of divorce be still practise among the jew it must be write in twelve line it be therefore call g g vid. eli. Thisrad get and Drus pag. 13. and Bux syn. c. 28. get neither more nor less and deliver to the woman before three credible witness under their hand and seal then do the husband deliver it to she say loe woman the bill of thy divorce take it of i by it be divorce from i be thou free to another husband the tenor of this bill be this the second day of the week the eight and twenty of the month n. in the year of the world 5363. as we here at Mentz upon Rhine use to reckon I Isaac surname Eckendorf son of r. abr. now dwell at Mentz of my free will without constraint thou Sara surname Turmmerle daughter of r. levi which hitherto have be my wife have determine to free forsake and divorce and now to forsake free and put thou from i that thou may be thy own and at thy own free will and pleasure may depart whither thou will and none from henceforth for ever shall prohibit thou and thou be so free that thou may marry to any other man this divorce may not be do in every place but they have some special place appoint note and know situate on some know river whereto certain chief rabbin be call by writing if there be none there dwell which consummate the business by the old h h Drus pag. 221. law a woman may be reconcile to her husband before the bill of divorce give not after the observation of the brother to marry the wife of his brother decease without issue or else to lose the inheritance Buxd. syn. ca. 30. which be testify by pull off his shoe and spit in his face be now thus rule by the rabbin that none shall marry such a widow but rather suffer the premise ignominy which be perform in this sort she come before the chief rabbi with five witness where the rabbi demand if she have be three month a widow if her husband have a brother unmarried if the party convent be he etc. and last if she be fast for otherwise she may not spit in her brother face of he also the rabbi ask like question and receive a denial of marriage there be bring a shoe of singular fashion for that purpose which he put on his right foot bare and then set himself against a wall the woman come and disclaim his affinity stoop and with her right hand for if she want a right hand it put the rabbin out of their right wit to scan whether with her tooth or how else it may be do unloose the shoe and take it off spit in his face so that the five witness may see it say thus it shall be do with he which will not build the house of his brother for this they allege Levit. 12.4 in the time of her uncleanness a woman may not enter into the synagogue nor pray nor name the name of GOD nor handle any holy book which if they observe the rabbin promise they long life as soon as she know of her uncleanness she present separate herself from her husband the space of seven day not touch he nor sit on the same seat nor eat in the same dish or on the same cloth nor may drink out of the same cup nor stand against he nor speak in his face if one will give any thing to the other one lay it on a bench or table and go away and the other come and take it they say it procure the leprosy in the child which be then get which they object to christian when she have number seven i i talmudeorum p. ric. praec. 111 day of her uncleanness she proceed to number as many of her purification after which time find herself pure she clothe herself in white and take a woman with she wash herself in cold water some in winter put in warm water to it which other in the cold season refuse and leave not a hair of her head unwashed as before be describe some k k sup. cap. 14. fast till they have do it lest the flesh in the tooth shall hinder the water from come to they for mouth and eye must be open and they must stoop that the pap keep not away the water from the breast and if they have a plaster on a sore it must off and their nail must be pare they l l phil. Ferdinandus pr. 1. write that if any shall exceed twenty year and not marry or if he shall marry a wife which be barren he sin as much as if he have slay a man and deserve the punishment of Onan who GOD slay provide if he addict himself to the study of the law and find no need of a wife but if he find concupiscence prevail he ought to marry notwithstanding and this necessity remain m m p. ricius pr. affir 49. till he have beget a son and a daughter @. 5 of the jewish beggar disease and penance the poor Jew on the Friday night and every festival Buxdorf c. 33. jewish beggar enter into the house of the rich beg provision for the feast and if any be exceed poor the rabbin make he a licence to beg therein testify of his honesty and jewish say wherewith he wander through the country visit all the jew he can find and if he come to a place where be many jew he show his licence to the chief rabbi or to the clerk which call man to the synagogue or to the elder or ruler of the synagogue which be as their consul or to the overseer of the poor and crave their favour which grant he stand with two other at the door of the synagogue and beg or else those two go from house to house and beg for he the like be do when a poor jew have a daughter marriageable to beg for her dowry when poor jew travel they may turn into another jew house where their proverb be the first day he be a guest the second a burden the three a fugitive the fall sickness be usual among the jew cap. 34. disease of the jew and they use to imprecate it to each other in their anger as they also do the plague in a general pestilence they write in their chamber strange character and wonderful name which they say be the name of the pest-angel and I once see say our author Adiridon Bediridon and so on the word Diridon ride on quite through the alphabet write with great letter in their house as a present remedy for the plague the lepry they have seldom which may be attribute to their diet now the sword and sceptre be take from they in stead of other penalty cap. 35. jewish penance they inflict sharp penance according to the nature of the crime thus the adulterer satisfy for his hot lust in cold water wherein he be enjoin to sit some winter day and if the water be freeze the ice be cut and he set therein up to his chin as long as a egg be roast in summer time he be set naked in a anthill his nose and ear stop and after wash himself in cold water if the season be neither cold not hot he be enjoin a certain kind of fast in which he may not eat any thing till night and then only a little bread and water be allow he and yet he must after endure the ant or water-penance in Medrasch be write that Adam sit up to the nose in water a hundred and thirty year till he beget Seth for eat the forbid fruit if the penance seem light they enjoin he further to run through a swarm of bee and when the swell of his body through their sting be abate he must do it again and again according to the measure of his offence if he have often that way offend he be bind to endure that penance many year yea sometime a three year fast together eat bread and water at supper otherwise nothing except he rather choose to redeem this with fast three whole day together in each year without taste any refection at all as queen Esther do when any have lie with a woman in her uncleanness he incur the penance of forty day fast and twice or thrice every of those day to receive on his bare back with a leather thong or girdle nine blow to eat no flesh or hot meat nor drink any wine but on the sabbath if a man kiss or embrace his menstruous wife the case be alike a robber be adjudge three year banishment to wander three year through the city where jew dwell cry aloud I be a robber and suffer himself to be beat in manner aforesaid he may not eat flesh nor drink wine nor cut the hair off his head or beard he must put on his change of garment and shirt unwashed he may not wash himself every month once he must cover his head he must wear his arm wherewith he commit murder fasten to his neck with a chain some be enjoin that where they sleep one night they may not sleep the next that they may wander over the world like Cain some be constrain to wear a iron breastplate next their skin and some to throw themselves down before the door of the synagogue that they which go in may tread on he that jew which accuse another before a christian magistrate be account a traitor and never make reckon of after but why do I tire the reader to who I fear I have be over-tedious but in this matter of religion of who be it fit to protract discourse then of they who the old world yield the only example of truth and the present age a principal example of falsehood and superstition let it not grieve the reader to perform the last office of humanity to our jew and as he have see his birth his synagogue-rite and home superstition so to visit he on his deathbed and help lay he in his grave and examine his hope of the resurrection and of their Messiah and we will end our pilgrimage in this holy land @. 7 of their visitation of the sick and funeral rite when n n ceremony about the sick a man lie sick the rabbin visit he and if he be rich order be take for his will and then they exhort he to persevere constant in their faith they ask he if he believe that the Messiah be yet to come he make his confession on his bed say I confess before thou my god and lord God of my parent lord of all creature that my health and death be in thy hand I pray thou grant i recovery of my former health and hear my prayer as thou do hezekiah in his sickness and if the time of my death be come then grant that death may be a remission of all my sin which of ignorance or knowledge I have commit ever since I be a man grant that I may have my part in paradise and the world to come which be reserve for the just grant that I may know the way of everlasting life fill i with the joy of thy excellent countenance by thy right hand for ever and ever bless be thou o GOD which hear my prayer thus they which refuse the merit of Christ death ascribe remission of sin to their own when he give up the ghost o o and about the dead in the house all the stander by rend their garment but in a certain place of the same where they do no great harm about a hand-breadth they lament the dead seven day they present after his death pour out all the water in the house into the street they cover his face that it may no more be see they bow his thumb in his hand frame a resemblance of the Hebrew name Schaddai his other finger be stretch out to testify a forsake of the world they wash he with hot water and have anoint his head with wine and the yolk of a egg mix together they put on he a white vestment which he use to wear on the feast of reconciliation when they carry he out of the house they hurl after he a break sherd signify that with he all heaviness shall be expel and break when they be come to the place p p at the grave they may not bury the corpse in silk or needle work juch f. 54. no not a prince for this be waste and a work of the gentile lib. heb. Mahzor vid. Genebrard of burial they say bless be GOD which have form you with judgement and justice have create feed sustain and at last have deprive you of life speak to the dead he know the number of you all and will quicken you again in his time bless be God which do to die and make alive let the dead live with my carcase let they rise again awake and rejoice you that lie in dust because thy dew be the dew of light and the earth shall cast forth her dead this the minister say alone then he go on with a long prayer of three and twenty sentence which the people say after he go about the sepulchre they call this prayer tzidduck the subject whereof be the justice of GOD call for pardon in the name of Abraham Isaac and jacob acknowledge that by three thing the foundation of the world be found the law worship and piety to the dead call for deliverance for the blood of his servant shed in the 856. year for the confession of his holy name and for the merit of the only-begotten which be seven and thirty year old in who place a ram be take conclude with mention of their captain slay in the 136. year here they take down the corpse and then the minister sing the people follow this be the way of the world let he sleep in peace etc. you father of the world which sleep in Hebron open unto he the gate of the garden of Eden and say his come be in peace you everlasting hill of the double cave open unto he the gate of the garden of Eden and bid he welcome you angel of peace go forth to meet he unlock to he the gate of paradise you keeper of the treasure of the garden of Eden open the gate and let n. enter and enjoy the fruit of paradise good thing be at his right hand pleasant thing at his left hear this o lord and let his come be in peace then lay they he into the ground and his near kinsman cast in the first earth after which they turn to the east with diverse other blessing when q q after the burial they return they blow themselves backward three time and throw grass over their head signify their hope of the resurrection according to that Es. 66.14 and your bone shall bud as the grass say also dust thou be and to dust thou shall return then do every one mutter a prayer to himself as he go out of the burial place in the porch of the synagogue God r r Esay 25.8 shall destroy death for ever say they and wipe away all tear from their eye and will take away their reproach from all the earth for the lord have speak it then enter they into the synagogue and leap up and down and change their seat seven time and there say over their Purgatory-prayer Kaddisch the mourner go barefoot seven day and eat not flesh nor drink wine except on the sabbath and festival they bathe not in three and thirty day after cut not their nail work not make a pitiful howl etc. the first night the mourner eat nothing of his own but meat send he from his friend the child mourn for his father a year the son eleven month say over his Kaddisch for mean sinner be free soon but the wicked stay the whole twelve month and therefore to persist the twelve move in his prayer shall be to acknowledge his father a wicked man and for the effect hereof rabbi Akibha meet once in the way a man with a asslike burden of stick which upon examination confess that he be a Purgatory-ghost carry to burn himself such bundle every day rabbi Akibha inquire if he have a son or wife and where and find out his son teach he this prayer which be so effectual that in a dream this ghost return to the rabbi with thanks for his deliverance and say he be now in begin Eden or paradise rabbi Akibha signify this to the jewish synagogue with injunction to teach their child this prayer but to return to our funeral when they be come back to the mourn house they wash their hand but observe not the Mosaical rite because the temple be not stand then do they pour out a long blessing over a cup of wine and another over their meat exceed much long their Purgatory-prayer or as Genebrard call it their be this it be better to go into the house of mourn then into the house of feast in which be the end of all man which let the live remember let we hear the end fear GOD and keep his commandment this be the duty of every man a sure rest in the high habitation under the wing of GOD in the degree of the saint shine as the brightness of the sky the change of bond pardon of sin grant of salvation indulgence and mercy from the sight of he which dwell in heaven and a portion in the life to come there let the portion be and the dwell of the soul of the wise master n. the spirit of the lord make he to rest in begin Eden and give he peace as it be write in Esay let peace come and let he rest in bed walk before it he and all the decease of Israel through his mercy amen they write also on the tomb let his soul be in the garden of Eden amen or let his soul be bind in the bundle of life and sometime thou be the tomb of n. which depart into Eden such a day of such a month and year thus poor purgatory with jew and romist be preach by walk ghost they have a light burn for the dead seven day they pour the water out of the door because the angel of death wash his sword late use in water and enuenome it this his sword he hold in his hand at the bed head have on the end thereof three drop of gall the sick man spy this deadly angel open his mouth with fear and then those drop fall in of which one kill he the second make he pale the three rot and putrefy Elias s s in rad. Hakebac levita add that after a man be dead the angel of death come and sit on his grave and present the soul enter into his body and he make he stand on his foot have to that purpose in his hand a chain half of iron and half of fire wherewith he strike he at the first blow his member be dissolve at the second his bone be scatter then come the angel and gather they at the three he be bring to dust and ash and return into his grave and this say r. meir be more grievous than the judgement of hell for the just and the son of the prince and abortive be judge therewith except they which die on the even of the sabbath and in the land of Israel of which you have hear their roll opinion before sup. cap. 13. neither will we roll this stone to our reader again chap. 20 the jew faith and hope touch their Messiah @. i. of the sign of the come of their Messiah the jew general believe hope and pray for a Messiah but such a one who kingdom shall be of this world and who shall to use the apostle a a act. 1.6 phrase who be also even after Christ death and resurrection partaker of this dream restore the kingdom to Israel and because the scripture speak sometime of the poor contemptible and deject state of the promise Messiah sometime of the puissance renown and glory of his kingdom they therefore frame to their conceit two messiah one poor and simple but a mighty warrior who they call Messiah Ben-Ioseph the other Messiah Ben-David after the other in time but before he in glory and the true Messiah howsoever even this also be in their opinion but a mere man and one which shall marry and leave behind he a remain and reign posterity the cabalist according to their transcendent mystery out of the name Adam which the hebrew write without point Adm gather that the soul of Adam by a metempsychosis pass into David and that of David into Messiah which yet lie hide for the sin of the jew the ancient jew look for this Messiah to be send they about that time when jesus come in the flesh as that prophecy which be father on Elias testify to wit that the world shall be two thousand year Tohu empty and without law two thousand under the law two thousand under the Messiah and according Christ jesus come into the world about the year after the creation 3963. the jew reckon 202. year few in all their computation than the christian upon this occasion and in regard of the general expectation of the Messiah about that time rise so many sect and especial that rebellion of Ben-Cochab before speak of to who r. Akibha famous for his four and twenty thousand disciple give testimony and call he Messiah the king but this Ben-Cochab the son of the star numb 23. be by Adrian as you have see besiege take and execute and be call after b b ben-cobas and Cozabh or Cuzibha ben-cozobh the son of lie they therefore when as they find no Messiah say that the time be defer because of their sin and after denounce anathema to he that shall set down the time of his come and be convince in their conscience that the c c gen 49.10 hag. 2. dan. 9.23 prophecy of this time be already past and accomplish they affirm in their writing that he be then bear but do not yet reveal himself because of their sin r. Solomon jarchi that the ancient jew think he be bear on that day in which jerusalem be last destroy but uncertain where he have lie hide some say that he abide in paradise tie by the hair of a woman head so interpret that of the canticle the d d Cantic. 7.5 hair of thy head be as purple the king be tie in the rafter by rafter mean paradise the talmudist e e Sanhed c. 11. write that he lie at the gate of Rome among the lazar and leper according to Esay 53. before he come they write that ten notable miracle shall happen to warn they thereof first GOD shall raise up three king which shall make profession of the true faith but shall indeed betray it and seduce man and cause they to deny god. the lover of the truth shall flee and hide themselves in cave and hole of the earth and these tyrant shall pursue and slay they then shall there be no king in Israel as it f f Hosh. 3.4 be write no pastor no holy man the heaven shall be shut up the people shall be make few for these tyrant which yet by divine dispensation shall reign but three month shall impose ten time as much as be before exact and they which have not to pay shall lose their head and from the end of the earth shall come man black and loathsome the dread of who countenance shall kill man for they have two head and seven eye sparkle like fire the second miracle shall be a great heat of the sun cause fever pestilence and other disease so that the gentle shall dig themselves grave and there lie and wish for death but the israelite shall have this heat to be as wholesome medicine to they so interpret the g g Malac. 4.2 prophet GOD shall make a bloody dew fall on the earth of which the people and the wicked of the israelite shall drink think it to be good water and shall die it shall not hurt h h dan. 12.3 the just who shall shine etc. four GOD shall make a wholesome dew to fall whereof the indifferent mean sinner sick of the former dew shall drink and live Hos. 14.6 five the i i joel. 2.31 sun shall be darken thirty day and then receive again his light whereby many shall embrace Judaism six GOD shall permit the edomite or roman to rule over all the world but one especial at Rome shall reign nine month over all the world waste large country lay heavy tribute upon the israelite then shall the israelite have no helper as say isaiah 49.16 but after nine month GOD shall send Messiah Ben-Ioseph of the child of joseph who name shall be Nehemias the son of Husiel he shall come with the race of Ephraim Manasse Benjamin and gad and the israelite hear of it shall flock to he as Jeremy show k k jerem. 5.14 convert you to the lord you rebellious child I will take you one of a city and two of a tribe etc. this Messiah shall overthrow the edomite and slay their king and destroy the empire shall carry to jerusalem holy vessel reserve in the house of aelian for a treasure the king of Egypt also shall make peace with the Israelite and shall kill the man about jerusalem Damascus and Ascalon the fame whereof shall affright all the inhabitant of the earth seven there be at Rome a marble image of a virgin not make by man hand to which shall resort all the wicked of the world and shall incestuous converse therewith hence shall GOD frame a infant in the same which shall with breach of the marble come forth this shall be name Armillus the wicked the same which the christian call Antichrist of ten else quantity of breadth and length a span breadth between his eye which shall be red and deep in his head his hair yellow the sole of his feet-green deform with two head he shall profess himself the roman Messiah and GOD and shall be accept of they he shall bid they bring he the law which he have give they which they shall bring with their prayer-book he shall cause they to believe in he and shall send ambassador to Nehemias the son of Husiel and to the people of Israel command they also to bring he their law and to acknowledge he for god. then shall Nehemias go unto Armillus with three hundred thousand ephraimite carry with he the book of the law and when he come at he he shall read out of the same this sentence I be the lord thy god thou shall have none other god in my sight Armillus shall reply that there be no such sentence in their law and therefore they shall acknowledge he for God as well as the gentile then shall Nehemias overthrow two hundred thousand of Armillus his army whereat Armillus shall be so wrathful that he shall assemble all his force into a deep valley and there shall destroy with many other israelite this Nehemias but the angel shall take and hide he that Armillus may not know of his death lest he shall not leave one of Israel live all nation shall then expel the israelite and such affliction shall befall they as never since the begin of the world at this time shall the angel Michael come forth and separate the wicked from Israel as write l l cap. 12. ver. 1. Daniel they which remain shall fly into the desert and for five and forty day space live with grass and leaf and herb but all the wicked israelite shall die Armillus shall after subdue Egypt and shall turn thence against jerusalem and seek again to waste it these thing after their manner they fable out of the eleven and twelve of Daniel the eight miracle be the arise of Michael who three time shall wind his great horn Es. 27.23 and Zach. 9.14 at the first sound the true Messiah Ben David and Elias the prophet shall show themselves to those devout israelite in the desert of juda who shall then gather courage and all the jew in the world shall hear this sound and shall confess God deliverance and all that have be lead captive into Assyria shall assemble together the same horn shall strike fear and disease into the christian and other people now shall the jew make great journey towards jerusalem and together with Elias and Messiah shall come thither with joy Armillus hear this in his proud fury shall re-assemble his christian against the Messiah and jerusalem but GOD not suffer his people to fall out of one trouble into another shall say to the Messiah come place thyself at my right hand and to the israelite be still and wait for the great succour of the lord this day and then shall GOD rain fire and brimstone from heaven as Ezekiel m m Ezek. 38.22 report wherewith Armillus and his army shall die and n n Obad. 18. the house of jacob shall be as fire and the house of joseph as a flame and the house of Esau the idumaean atheist which destroy God house as stubble at the second sound or blast of this horn of Michael the grave at jerusalem shall open and the dead arise and Messiah Ben David with Elias shall revoke into life that Messiah ben joseph and the israelite shall send Messiah Ben David into all country of the jew dispersion to cause they to come to jerusalem and the nation with who they be shall bring they in their chariot and on their shoulder the last miracle be the three time of Michael wind his horn when GOD shall bring forth all the jew which be by the Rivers Gosan Lachbach Chabor and in the city of juda and they without number or measure shall with their infant enter into the paradise of Moses and the ground before they and behind they shall be mere fire which shall leave no sustenance to the christian and when the ten tribe shall depart out of the nation than the pillar of the cloud of divine glory shall compass they and GOD shall go before they and shall open to they the fountain flow from the tree of life esa 49.10 I may add to these miracle that of the o o Vict carb l. 8. cap. 15. ass which Abraham ride on when he go to sacrifice his son which Moses also use when he return into Egypt and some say Balaam ass be the same this shall the Messiah ride on according to Zachary prophecy Zach. 9.5 against these ten miraculous sign foreshow Messiah his come the most be full of trouble they have ten consolation first the certainty of Messiah come second that he shall gather they from all place of the dispersion jerem. 31.8 but the lame there mention shall be so cure that p p esa 35.6 they shall leap as heart etc. three GOD will raise up the dead four GOD will erect a three temple according to the figure of that in Ezekiel 41. five that the israelite shall then reign over all the earth esa 60.12 yea all the world shall be subject to the law soph. 3.9 six GOD will destroy all their enemy Ezek. 25.14 seven GOD will take from they all disease esa 33.24 eight GOD will prolong their life that they shall live as long as a oak esa 65.22 and as in the time from Adam to No ninthly they shall see God face to face esa 40.5 and they all shall prophesy joel. 2.28 tenth GOD shall take away from they all evil concupiscence and inclination to evil Ezek. 36.26 thus far out of the book Abhkas Rochel @. 2 jewish tale of monstrous bird beast fish and men. their cheer in these day shall be the great beast bird and fish which GOD over create and no other wine then that which grow in paradise and be keep in Adam cellar till that time the great ox Behemoth mention in job q q job. 40.10 of these huge creature see the same huge report and hideous vanity 4. esdras 6.49 and psal. 50.10 all the beast of the wood be i and the beast feed on a thousand hill that be Behemoth which every day feed on a thousand hill but lest this devour beast shall consume all the hill in the world they tell you that he be a stall ox still abide in the same place and what he eat in the day grow again in the night the huge whale Leviathan or as they pronounce it Lipiasan must honour also this feast of this they write in the r r bava basia cap 5. Talmud that to prevent fill the world with these huge monster GOD geld the male Leviathan and the female be slay and preserve in pickle for the just to be eat in the time of the Messiah Esay 27. the male Behemoth be geld also and the female be store up for this feast Elias levita s s rad. juctma report of a huge huge bird also call Bariuchne to be roast at this feast of which the t t Bechoros cap. ult. Talmud say that a egg sometime fall out of her nest do overthrow and break down three hundred tall cedar with which fall the egg be break overflow and carry away sixty village we will have the whetstone before we part r. Barchannah see a frog as big as akra a village of sixty household then come a huge serpent and swallow that huge frog last the huge huge crow that ever the rabbin see fly and devour these both and fly away sit on a tree which tree sure can not be less than the three hundred cedar before mention if this crow be but as big as that egg r. Papa answer Vid. Hieron l. 2. that he will never have believe it but that he see it I hope they will pardon we if we be of the same mind but will you not fain hear of a man hold like proportion then let r. Saul tell you of his adventure in the bury of a dead corpse where he encounter with a bone of a man into which there fly a raven and the rabbi will needs follow after to see what become of she and so he go and he go three league in the hollow of the same bone and can find no end thereof and therefore return so he perceive it be one of the bone of Og the giant who Moses have slay perhaps you will marvel how Moses can achieve such a exploit forsooth you must understand that Moses be ten cubit high and have a axe ten cubit long and leap other ten cubit in the air and so give the deadly blow to Og who it seem be lay along in some deep trench or else you will think the rabbin lie tush your incredulity make you unworthy to hear their story of r. Osua who beguile the angel of death of who when he come to smite he he will in kindness need learn his future place in paradise Homer Poliphemus and guide journey of Phaeton be petty matter the jew scorn such peddle wherewith the deadly angel be content and go with he yea for his security at his request resign his deadly weapon into his hand thus at last they come at paradise where he show he his place which he desirous to take better view of require his help to lift he high and then with a quick delivery leap into paradise thus do the poor cozen angel miss his prey and be glad with much ado to recover his sword from the rabbin and that you may see their skill no less in cosmography then theology another be carry to the place where heaven and earth meet and kiss each other where while he may take the more diligent view in observe those part which the friar of Oxford never see nor Faustus with his Mephostophilos he hang his cloak on a window in heaven and sudden it be convey out of sight hereat amaze that there shall be thief in heaven a voice tell he it be the heaven motion and at such a hour the next day he may attend and again obtain his cloak which he do according but to take view of other strange creature make room I pray for another rabbi with his bird and a great deal of room you will say be requisite rabbi Kimchi on the 50. psalm aver out of rabbi jehudah that Ziz be a bird so great that with spread abroad his wing he hide the sun and darken all the world and to leap back into the Talmud a certain rabbi sail on the sea see a bird in the u u like the fish in the legend of saint Brandon middle of the sea so high that the water reach but to her knee whereupon he wish his companion there to wash because it be shallow do it not say a voice from heaven for it be seven year space since a hatchet by chance fall out of a man hand in this place and always descend be not yet come at the bottom I perceive by your incredulous smile you will scarce believe 10 10 Cholm cap. 3 that a lion in the wood Ela roar sudden that all the woman in Rome four hundred mile from thence for very horror prove abortive and when he come a hundred mile near his terrible noise shake the tooth out of all the roman head and the emperor himself that cause the rabbi to obtain of GOD by his prayer to make this trial of the lion fall down from his throne half dead and with much importunity request his help to cause he retire to his den but this roar have all most mar our feast @. 3 their Messiah his feast our wine you have hear of fetch out of Adam cellar Esay 27.2.3 and psal. 75.9 before the feast Messiah will cause these pretty creature Behemoth and Leviathan y y 40.15 psal. 104.26 to play together and make they sport but when they have weary themselves in the fight Messiah with his sword shall kill they both esa 27.1 then follow the feast and afterward his marriage z z psal. 45.10 king daughter shall be among thy honourable woman at thy right hand stand the queen in the gold of Ophir among the Messiah his excellent woman rabbi Kimchi expound shall be king daughter for every king shall repute it to his own glory to bestow a daughter on the Messiah but the true queen shall be one of the fair israelite daughter and shall continual converse with he whereas the other must come only at call he shall thus beget child which shall reign after he Esay 53.10 when he be dead now the state of the jew in his time shall be such that the christian shall free build they house and city and till their ground and bestow on they their good yea prince shall serve they and they shall walk in fair garment esa 60.10 11 12. and esa 61.5 6. the air also shall be new and wholesome esa 65.17 by the benefit whereof they shall abide sound and live long and in their age be as fresh as if they be young psal. 92.14.15 the wheat once sow shall always grow up of itself no otherwise then the vine hosea 14.8 and if any shall desire any rain for his field or garden or one herb by itself he shall have it Zach. 10.11 then shall be peace among man and beast Hos. 2.19 esa 11.7 if there arise any war among the gentile the Messiah shall accord they esa 2.4 they shall live in great felicity full of the knowledge and praise of God tract Sanhed c. Hesek and tract Idolot and sabbato the earth shall be full hereof etc. the Talmud also speak of a thousand year wherein the world shall be renew somewhat like the opinion of some ancient in the primitive church in which time the just shall have wing give they like eagle whereby they may fly over the face of the water but the body of the just which shall rise again shall never return to dust ricius in this and many other of their absurdity seek to give a allegorical interpretation but which of the heathen have not so patronise their superstition and idolatry as appear in the poet philosopher chaldaean and egyptian priest who mystical learning can free their religion from be mystery of iniquity six thousand year the world endure say r. Katina and a thousand year shall be a desolation and GOD only shall be exalt in that day for one thousand year be one day of the lord as it be write a thousand year in thy sight be as yesterday and this be a sabbath wherein shall be the feast above mention and thus do a a this be not Elias the prophet mention in the scripture but a Talmudical rab. and therefore no sure ground to Scheltco his position in his treatise of the end of the world english by t. r. with Genebrard chron. in Elias affirm as be say two thousand year the world be empty two thousand the law and two thousand Messiah but for the sin of man that be want which we see want this last clause ricius say be add by the talmudist which still expect their Messiah eighty five jubilee shall the world endure and in the last faith this Elias shall come the son of David thus have we hear the infancy of the church in the time of her nonage and of those Hebrew patriarch we have see also their present infancy in these jewish fable the just reward of b b joh. 3.13 love darkness rather then light and so with our prayer to GOD at last to take that veil of Moses from their heart that there may be one proper shepherd and one sheepfold and that meanwhile we may learn precious to esteem and reverent to make use of that light we have warn by the spectacle of divine justice in they through so many age blind in so palpable foolery we will now leave they and this holy land and seek further what adventure we shall light on the next neighbour nation hope and crave for pardon of such prolixity in this part of our discourse fit of all the other in this part of our work to be consider chap. 21 of the hope and hindrance of the jew conversion when I have now as I think bring this jewish relation to a end and even weary the reader with that which may much more weary the writer that prophecy of a a rom. 11. 25 26. Paul that all Israel shall be save etc. which by most interpreter be construe of the general conversion of that nation after the fullness of the gentile be come in as in the begin of this work be say cause my stray pen ready to wander from these so far wander from their holy progenitor to undertake this task also to declare what future hope and what present fear and let may be conceive of their conversion to Christianity the hope though it be yet toss upon surge of almost-desperate sea yet have a sure anchor to rely on and a kind of obscure ken of that wished-for haven where it will be for b b p. mart. in rom. c. 11. the destruction of the jew say Peter martyr be not so desperate but that their be some hope leave of their salvation and a little after allude to the apostle mystery for when there shall have be a full conversion of the gentile unto Christ then shall the jew also come in so chrusostom quia c c tom. 2. hom. 12. in marc. dom. because the fullness of the gentile have come in at last all Israel shall be save the same hope be general cherish by the rest of the father and d. willet in a book * * ludaeor. write of this argument bring to this purpose many authority of scripture and father gen. 9.27 and 49.10 Deut. 33.7 psal. 125.1 Ezek. 37.1 and 47.4 Zach. 2.12 and 12.10 mal. 3.5 luk. 15.31 joh. 10.16 2. cor. 3.16 Apoc. 3.9 etc. and especial that in the eleven to the roman wherein many argument be compile together confirm also by the interpretation and testimony of Origen athanasius chrusostom Jerome Augustine beda Hugo cardinalis Aquinas Gorrham Calvin Beza bullinger martyr to who we may add diverse other these indeed further our hope which yet depend more upon divine goodness then on human probability the stability of his truth which have promise as Paul also rom. 11. expound the former prophet the unchangeableness of God election the bottomless sea of his mercy the unsearchableness of his judgement minister hope beyond hope hereunto also may be add the common ground both of reason which they hold with we in nature and of the scripture the ancient part whereof and especial the law of Moses they maintain with equal acknowledgement and for the most part with more forward industry and zeal then do the commoner sort of christin but the d d impediment of the jew conversion impediment which have hitherto and do yet withhold they from christianity do exceed in number and power for that forestall prejudice of they the glory of the temple the sacrifice and legal worship past their hope then and still of such a monarch to their Messiah as you have hear of the splendour of their renown ancestor the keep of the divine oracle their peculiar title of be God people have breed in they such a swell pride that they natural envy and abhor the very thought thereof that the gentile shall in these thing either equal or succeed they soon say Martin e e luth. in mich. 4.1 2. see also a whole book of his cont. Luther than they will endure that the gentile which in their daily prayer they curse and revile shall have any part with they in their Messiah and be account coheir thereof they will crucify ten messiah yea if it be possible will do to death GOD himself with all the angel and creature else although they shall therefore undergo a thousand hell hence in a great part proceed their natural and long continue obstinacy and beside that prejudice pride and envy they be not a little scandalize from the christian themselves somewhat in regard of the mutual difference and disagrement among protestant which though in itself bad be make much worse by the unseasonable and unreasonable exaggeration of their common adversary the Papist but more in respect of those which call themselves catholic and be not but even by these man be find to be manifest idolater a f f relation of religion of the west part scandal it be to see God law neglect and man exact with rigour a great matter at some time to eat flesh than the adulterer pollution of the flesh at any time the blasphemy of some nation these be interjection to the vulgar and phrase of gallantry to the prince the forge and pack of miracle wherein the friar and jew concur with equal diligence the one in contrive the other in discover they a scandal be the alteration which they be force by the inquisitor to make in their author and monument of antiquity think that these device be our best evidence a scandal be the vow and pray to angel and saint yea more to the mother of Christ then to Christ himself or to GOD to who alone they repute this be a due sacrifice but the great scandal of all other be the worship of image indeed it seem strange to i and do to the rest of my brethren according to the flesh Nathaniel a jew bear baptize in London before the congregation at All-hallows g g apr. 1577. make this confession even unto this day in who this blindness and hardness of heart be in part continue through occasion give by they that profess the name of jesus and not only in we which be of the house of Israel but in other as the turk and Mahometan which be the race of ishmael we and our father and elder say and in our book call they by no other name but  abodazara idolatrous master a thing so detestable unto we as nothing more etc. they say unto we oftentimes that they do not worship he as god but GOD in they neither be the heathen we say that be round about we so blind that they think the stock and stone to be GOD but they be persuade that God may be worship in they and yet they go far for the christian in Spain and Portugal have it write in their book that the virgin Mary be the lord treasurer and that she bestow gift and grace upon her servant that her mercy pardon they who the justice of her son may condemn and that our salvation lie in her hand but our law teach that GOD be all-sufficient he give to who he list he will not give his glory to another etc. the reader may if he please from that jew himself in his print confession be further inform of that partition wall which separate the jew and catholic they be so much the more scandalize when they see the catechism recite the decalogue with omission of that second commandment which they think as one of their great rabbin contest with our h h rel. west author be the ordinance of Christ himself yea the priest and friar let pass in their conference with they for currant their jewish upbraid that Christ a carpenter son be a image-maker or at least a author of their worship as for those speculative plaster of (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) of intention instrumental and final in worship of image of the true and idol of the false god they be as even now you hear the unsavoure dregs to the jew in the world the poor idiot among the christian can as little distinguish as the pagan and both among the christian be like honour do to God image and to that of saint and to they both in like form of worship as among the pagan they be force to be at some sermon and there be well edify by their hear when they see the preacher direct his prayer to a crucifix call it his lord and saviour their transubstantiation be a monster as hideous as the former the mean i i ibid. use to their conversion be weak especial in some place where they have not the new testament in such language as they can understand and the inquisitor have inhibit and take from they all book write on that theme in defence of christian religion or against it allege they will have no dispute in matter of religion either way like the jesuit edict at Dola forbid all talk of GOD either in good sort or in bad but of all other this be a good furtherance that when in their baptism they deny the devil and all his work they must renounce their right and property in all their good and possession the shameful covetousness of hypocritical christian have bring these within the compass of the devil work presuppose forsooth that either the convert jew or his corrupt ancestor have scrape together such heap of wealth by usury or oppression or some unlawful mean or other therefore for the good of his soul his body shall be leave to beg or starve while with the leave of his jewish superstition he must likewise leave all that he have and his new-received religion must be a mean to strip he of his riches and to wean he from his well-beloved Mammon which that nation be natural so far in love with this alone to the world-bewitched jew be such a partition-wall to keep he from christianity that he will venture soul and all rather than thus betray himself his wife and child to extreme beggary and want and so much the worse say k k vict. de Carben. count jug. l. 1. c. 4 5. victor Carbensis one of these convert because in their jewish estate they have not learn any art which now may minister unto they sustenance thus be they drive to beg from door to door for their food expose not only to this extremity of want but to the opprobry also of unchristian christian who jewish hate the name of a jew nor can the jew be wash from it with the sacred tincture of baptism while the scum of the irreligious-religious vulgar scoff and point at they say there go a baptize jew a name best fit themselves and on the other side their own countryman hate and abhor they as apostate renegado and fugitive and if any show they kind entertainment yet as a nine-day wonder it last but a little while whereof the jew have this proverb a now convert be as a new or clean cloth which at first be pleasant but after a little wear grow foul and loathsome especial since the fair of his preferment to welcome he to our religion be to turn friar rel. west than which profession nothing can be more hateful to he who account it a course against nature and a breach of that ordinance of l l gen. 1.28 GOD of multiply the world by a holy propagation in that m m Heb. 13.4 honourable estate of marriage which that n n 1. tim. 4.1 4. doctrine of devil have make the friar uncapable of as for the example of Elias and some other holy man who our popish votary will make patroness of their disorderly order the jew herein more truly-christian than the Papist hold it a course extraordinary and ordinary prefer holy marriage far before that seeming-ho vow of virginity thus we see what outward scandal beside their general prejudice against Christianity do hinder they from it which offence in behalf of the christian together with that prejudice pride and envy and above all that veil which divine justice have leave upon their heart GOD in his good time remove and grant according to that prophecy that all Israel may be save chap. 22 the late inhabitant of Palestina and the part adjoin since the dispersion of the jew till this day @. i. of the christian time before the saracen and thus have we end our jewish relation our next journey be into Arabia a way dreadful sometime to the israelite pass this way to Canaan where yet their expect inheritance their pillar of a cloud by day and fire by night their manna and many other miraculous effect of divine presence may arm they against heat drought desert serpent enemy and all opposition not so your pilgrim now leave palaestina and the holy land to visit these arabian desert full of emptiness store with want and yet most fruitful of that which be worse than barrenness the very seminary of Mahometan impious piety the very conceit whereof make he like the river jordan which lose himself in this wilderness and therefore linger as long as he may diffuse himself in lake by the way as loath to mix his fresh-water with the dead sea to stay and stray so long in palaestina as he which know a heathenish and moorish mare will swallow he if he can sink as soon as he be pass hence let we therefore stay here a little long to refresh our eye weary with jewish spectacle and take view of those which have since succeed they in habitation in sin in judgement and where may we better stay or what part of the world can yield such variety and multiplicity of object to both the eye of the mind curiosity and devotion no where such manifold alteration and division of state so diversify a map of nature so multiply rite of religion in such differ sect of heathen hebrew mahometans christian no where antiquity show a grave countenance no where the monument of such mercy the spectacle of such judgement such consolation such desolation such ambition of potentate and foreign suitor from the east the west the north the south such miracle such oracle such confluence of pilgrim look as far opposite as sampson fox with as fiery division whether in differ heresy of one or differ name of diverse devotion both catholic and heretical jew saracen and christian concur in visit adorn adore these place with title and rite of holiness how often have this country emty our western world with arm and army to recover it and the eastern in like manner to retain it how often have it bring army of angelical spirit out of the high heaven to cover these hill with chariot and horse of fire round about the holy man of GOD how oft but what speak I of man or angel GOD himself love the gate of Zion more than all the dwelling of the world and JESUS CHRIST the angel of the covenant true GOD and perfect man here be bear here live practise die ascend and hence he send his apostle to be father of man that the son of man may be make the heir of GOD coheir with himself after the jew for reject he be reject out of both the heavenly and earthly Canaan this country be inhabit partly by roman colony there plant for security of the country by the roman emperor partly by such syrian as submit themselves peaceable to the roman empire both that ethnic before Constantine and after in far more flourish estate under the christian emperor till the day of un-christian phocas a a an. dom. 595. 604. plat. Bonifac. 3. Phoco imp. b. petri etc. this be the murderer of mauritius his lord the usurper of the empire the exalter of the roman see unto the ecclesiastical supremacy with as good right as himself have to the state a monster of mankind under who the empire be near a utter overthrow as by the hun auares and other nation in the west so especial by the persian in the east who emperor chosroes overthrow that army which have conspire against mauricius and b b p. Bizar hist Pers. l. 6. mar. sanut torsel geor. Cedreni hist compend in the four year of phocas overranne Mesopotamia and Syria in the next year after carry much prey and many captive out of all Syria Palestina and Phoenicia in the seven year of his reign possess Armenia Galatia Paphlagonia and spoil all as far as chalcedon yet say cedrenus phocas do more harm at home than the enemy in the field at the same time the jew make a commotion at Antioch and slay beside many other citizen anastasius the patriarch in despite also put his privitives in his mouth but the jew pay much blood for this butchery and phocas also himself the chief butcher be most merciless butcher present after by heraclius his successor they tell of a revelation to a certain holy man that GOD have make phocas emperor because he can not find a worse man by who to punish that people which I mention that the world may see what a good midwife Rome then in travail have to help her babe Antichrist into the world but to return to the story heraclius can not withstand the persian insolence but lose in his first year Apamea and edessa and in the next Caesarea from whence they carry many thousand into captivity in the four Damascus be take and in the five jerusalem where by reason of the jewish cruelty who buy all the christian they can to slaughter they there be slay c c g. tyren l. 1. say 36000. ninety thousand zacharias the patriarch together with the holy cross and exceed store of captive and spoil be carry into captivity the next year they overcome Egypt Africa and Ethiopia chosroes neglect all overture of peace make to he by heraclius except they will deny their crucify god and worship the sun he also cause the christian in his dominion to become nestorian the cause perhaps why almost all the far eastern christian to this day be or at least be call nestorian against he heraclius continue a six year expedition in which he overrun his country overthrow his army sack his city castle and palace and at last assist his elder son Siroes who chosroes seek to dis-herit against he who take he and have before expose he to all contumelious insultation and almost starve he in a dark prison and slay all his other child in his sight with abominable tyranny shoot his tyrannical father to death so die chosroes a successor of sennacherib in the dominion of many the same country subjection to the like blasphemous impiety and reward by like parricide heraclius in the year of his reign visit jerusalem restore the captive cross and patriarch by restitution of siroe he banish thence all the jew prohibit by edict that none shall come near it by three mile @. 2 of the saracen and turk in Palestina the saracen have do good service in war against the persian which in the time of heraclius begin a new religion and empire under Mahomet the founder of both the second after who Omar overthrow Theodorus the brother of heraclius in battle and after he another Theodorus and Boanes his general and force the emperor to abandon Syria carry the holy cross from jerusalem to Constantinople in the 26. of heraclius he enter jerusalem hypocritical and pseudoprophetical clothe in a homely garment of camel hair and seek out the place of Salomon temple there to erect another subdue soon after the whole persian state and a great part of the roman dom. 641. g. Tyren l. 1. c. 2. do Homar build his temple at jerusalem with incredible cost in matter and workmanship enrich the same with many and large possession and revenue in the mosaic work of the inner and outward part thereof express in Arabic letter the author time and charge of the building the form whereof be thus describe by William archbishop of Tyrus a a lib. 8. c. 3. the churchyard be square about a bow-shot in length and breadth compass with a high wall have on the west square two gate one on the north and another on the east on the south be the palace on every of these gate and on the corner be high steeple on which at certain hour the priest after the saracenicall manner call they to prayer in this compass none be suffer to dwell nor to enter but with bare and wash foot porter be assign to that purpose in the midst of this square be another somewhat high whereto they ascend by stair in two place on the west side as many on the south and one on the east in every of the corner be oratory or chapel erect in the middle hereof be the temple raise of eight-square form crust within and without with marble and mosaic work have a spherical roof artificial cover with lead both the inner and outward square be pave with white stone whereby the rain water descend into many cistern for that cause provide in the midst of this temple within the inner row of pillar there be a rock of pretty height with a cave under it of the same stone upon which they say David see the angel stand which smite the people with pestilence after he have number they where also he then build a altar this remain open to the view till the western christian win the place cover it with marble and erect thereon a altar and Quire baumgarten who be at jerusalem a hundred and nine year since and be thrust down the stair by the saracen say this temple be not now very large and that it be twelve-cornered with a round steeple in the midst thereon as on their steeple usual a half moon within be report to burn continual two thousand lamp the floor of the churchyard be white marble occupy a bow-shot about the temple make such a reflection of the sunbeam that a man be not able to endure it this temple the saracen have in such reverence that the sultan do then entitle himself the high priest and defender of it they call it the holy rock if any jew or Christian enter therein they compel he to deny his religion and turn Turk or else they cut he asunder in the middle tantum saraceni Christiani sepulch ies christi Sanutus Tor l. 3. p. 11. c. 12. which happen to a christian maronite about six month before who in a turkish habit have enter but be know for fear deny his faith but with reluctation of his conscience revoke this act soon after and live after such a dismember three hour near this temple be another sometime call Salomon porch by the christian dedicate to our lady large than be now that of Salomon in which eight hundred lamp be say to burn continual under both these we be tell that there be a large vault with admirable row of pillar able to receive many thousand Breidenbachius chancellor and Deane of Mentz Ber. Breid 1483. who visit those place above twenty year before he write almost the same thing save that he place but seven hundred lamp in this temple of Solomon or as the saracen call it the holy rock the sultan then live have build another near it with eighty eight lamp continual burn he with his companion have like to have be slay by the saracen for offer to enter another temple in mount Zion wherein be say to be the sepulchre of the king of juda the saracen come far in pilgrimage to the holy rock so they call it of the rock aforesaid which be grate about with iron which they dare not touch for the repute sanctity and report rarity thereof melchisedech offering Jacob dream of the ladder which yet some have ascribe to the stone now at Westminster Jeremy enclose the ark by some suppose to be still therein l. suthenens Adrichomius etc. and a world of wonder tell thereof Ludolphus Suthenensis relate of that bloody dissection of such as enter therein but it be high time for we to be go out of it lest some wish we cut asunder in the midst and this prolix history make short by the half thus Palestina continue whole subject to the saracen who after be divide into sect the egyptian call Siha prevail against the persian or eastern call Sunni and obtain all as far as Antioch and the christian of those part be in some tolerable condition till the day of Hequen the Calipha who raze to the ground the temple of the resurrection build in the time of Constantine and repair by heraclius he forbid they the keep of holy solemnity and afflict they with manifold other oppression force many to apostasy in the time of Daher son of Hequen the church be rebuild ann. dom. 1048. but the greedy governor cruel exact on the christian still threaten if their purpose be not effect to demolish their temple yet these full fly be far more gentle than those their meager and hungry successor the turk which have conquer these part tyrannize most cruel both here and in the part of the lesser Asia belph b b thus tyr. but other ascribe it to Axan and tell of very honourable usage of the captive emperor kn. t. h. the Turk have overthrow and take Diogenes the christian emperor in battle who he use at a settle ascend or descend his throne thus tyrius Raimond de agiles testify that the surian or christian of those part of who remain about Libanus sixty thousand at that time of the frank invasion so call as he suppose of sur the name of Tyrus till this day endure such misery both in this turkish and that former saracenicall slavery that many be compel to forsake their religion and be circumcise some other for fear deliver their young child to circumcision and some be violent take to this purpose out of their mother bosom the father be slay and the mother violate church be subvert altar overthrow and superstitious image by a contrary superstition be do away and if any man devotion desire they in private they be force by a monthly or yearly price to redeem they they prostitute in stew their son and daughter and yet the mother dare not weep at the sight @. 3 of the exploit of the Frank and other western christian in Palestina thirty eight year they groan under this turkish yoke from which they be free by the frank and other western nation under the conduct of Godfrey of Buillon Robert of Normandy son to the conqueror and other who by the instigation of Peter the eremite first who f f guibert abbas hist jerosol they so admire that his word and deed be account divine and the very hair pluck off his mule for relic and after of pope Urban call a council at claremont to this purpose cross themselves g g i will in occidentales etc. ot. praef Fris Frid. 1. to war in and for the holy land against the infidel GOD bless their design and give into their hand all the three palestina for so they be divide according to the three chief city jerusalem the first the second under Caesarea the three adjacent to scythopolis and subject by the christian to Nazareth from Antiochia to Egypt and as far as edessa be subdue to the christian faith and sceptre far more than David or Solomon possess they have say Vitriaco four principality that of edessa chief city after his account of Media the second of Antiochia the three of Tripoli the four of jerusalem but of their happy achievement another place be fit they which listen to be acquaint with these war beside and other of late time may out of the writing of diverse eye-witness which be in that first expedition satisfy themselves as robertus monachus Raimundus de agiles Fulcherius Carnotensis and diverse h h see gesta francos in two large tome rob. mon. hist jerosol guibert hist Ieros. Baldricus arch. hist Ieros. ita etiam gesta francos Raimund de agiles hist jer. fulch carnat gesta Peregr albert. Aq hist Ierosol other jerusalem be enter on the twelve of july 1099. being Friday and after much blood and slaughter in the city they set upon those which have betake themselves to Salomon temple so be that call which Homar build where say robertus monachus be so much blood shed that the slay body be roll by the force thereof and arm or dismember hand swim upon the blood and be join to strange body the kill soldier be scarce able to endure the hot vapour of the blood of the slay Guibertus abbas say the blood reach to the ankle Baldricus to the calf of the leg that they ride in blood up to the knee and to the bridle of the horse and Fulcherius that there be slay in this temple about ten thousand and many of they be rip up by the Frank to find gold which they have swallow and the body after burn in heap to find the mettle in the ash Albertus aquensis add that the three day after the victory for fear of the remain captive Saracen lest they may join with the enemy against they and in furious zeal they make a fresh massacre slay those which for pity or covetousness of ransom they have in hot blood spare not the honour of noble matron not the delicacy of tender maiden not the child yet in the womb of their pregnant mother not the infant now suck at the breast not the hope of innocent youngling play or cry by the mother hand not sigh tear promise prayer lamentable cry twyne embrace of the leg body hand of the bloody soldier can stay the hand even then give the fatal blow but jerusalem be now again fill with slay carcase general it be agree that they find much wealth in the city to pay they for their pain soon after they encounter a army of three hundred thousand saracen which they overthrow be but twenty thousand christian where Robert duke or earl for I find both title often give he but in ancient story of those time both he and king William his father be often call earl of Normandy take with his own hand the chief standard of the enemy be a long spear cover with silver with a golden globe or apple on the top have slay the bearer and thereby terrify the enemy and put they to rout which be long after reserve as a monument in the temple of the sepulchre many other victory be obtain the saracen be either expel Palestina or subject to the frank and the christian which be poor and few recover freedom yet as few as they be in the city Raimond tell of threescore thousand surian or christian of that country which in this long saracenicall night continue their habitation in the mountain of Libanus but of this be no marvel for even till these day notwithstanding the manifold change and chance of those region and people there have in the mountain and desert of Palestina and Syria live some nation neither acknowledge the saracenicall law nor empire @. 4 of the azopart and Assysine such be the azopart azopart which live in cave in the desert of Ascalon which king Baldwin the successor of Godfrey seek to smoke and fire out of their den and by cunning stratagem destroy as many as he can and just for these be black in hue black in condition use to rob and slay such as they can lay hold on assysine tyr. l. 20 c. 31. such be the assassin which live in the province of Tyre as tyrius report of they not far from antaradus which have ten strong hold with the country adjacent and be think to be in number sixty thousand their government go not by inheritance but by election the chief or grand master of they be call the old man who be obey in whatsoever he command be the attempt never so dangerous if he give to one or more of they a weapon and enjoin the kill of such a enemy prince or private man they glad undertake it with the death of that party or themselves in attempt both saracen and christian call they the reason of the name unknown assassin for the space of four hundred year they be zealous follower in a precise course of the mahometan Sect but about the time when our author the archbishop of Tyre write this their old man grow into distaste of his religion and by read the scripture become desirous of christianity he persuade his subject also to forsake Mahometism prohibit their fast demolish their mosque allow swine flesh he send also to almaricus king of jerusalem offer to turn christian if he may hue peaceable and be release of two thousand byzantine which he yearly pay for quietness to the knight templar who have certain castle border on he the king be content to pay this money himself but by the treachery of the templar the legate be slay and foul scandal inflict on the christian name the assysine never after return to their old mahometry mat. par. in steph. and p. Aemil lud. junior etc. or turn anew to christianity Matthew Paris relate that these assassin thus close and treacherous murder Raimund earl of Tripoli dom. 1150. Paulus aemylius affirm that these assysine come out of Persia that they be teach from their childhood diverse language and to conceive it meritorious of heavenly reward to kill the enemy of their faith that their old man be call also Arsacida two of they say he slay Raimund two of they after slay Conrade Ferratensis b b vid. g. Nubrig l. 4. 24. and seq and l. 5. 16. king Richard be take by the duke of Austria under this colour walk in the marketplace of Tyre which city he have defend against the enemy who be execute therefore seem very cheerful and saint Lewis himself hardly escape the like treachery Marcus Paulus report of one in the north-east part of Persia call the old man of the mountain by proper name Aloadin c c see l. 4. c. 8. of this hist m. Polo l. 1. c. 21 Odoricus which have build a strong castle and therein a imaginary paradise who use that assasine mystery promise to reward these murderer with the pleasure of paradise a taste of which in all fleshly delight he have before give they in the tartarian conquest say Odoricus he have so slay diverse tartar which therefore besiege his castle and after three year siege force it for want of victual so Paulus Haith c. 24. but have seven and twenty year and that then it be yield for want of clothes and not of meat he call this castle Tigado and the inhabitant by the former name of assassin this be do by Haalon the tartar 1262. about a hundred year since they d d Cartwright tell of the ike paradise of Aladeules in those part destroy by Selym the Turk but I think it be rather the memory of Aloadin than any truth of Aladeules it be most remarkable that Marcus Paulus testify of two deputy or lieutenant under he the one in e e see l. 4. c. 1. Curdistan where the like generation of irreligious and rob Curdi do yet remain the other near to Damascus of who we have speak See l. 4. c. 1. the place where this old man live be call mulchet that be a place of heretic for so the saracen deem they Benjamin Tudelensis above four and forty year ago ben. Tudelensis have write that these Hhasissin near Baalgad under Libanus follow not the doctrine of the ismaelite but of one who they esteem a prophet who word they obey whether to live or die he they call Hheich all Hhassissin he be their senator at who command all the mountain go out and in his seat be in the city call Karmos which be sometime the biginning of the country of Sehon and they have a religion among themselves according to the doctrine of their senator they be a terror to all man for they kill even king with the saw their dominion continue eight day journey they hold war with the christian call Frank and with the king of Tripoli of the region of Saam Damascus wherein happen not long since a earthquake whereby be slay in that region many both jew and gentise and in the land of Israel * * gauteras in his Antioch mention this or such another terrible earthquake about this time jac. Vitr l. 3. twenty thousand thus far out of the jew. jacobus de Vitriaco bishop of Acon in his eastern story account it no small grace of GOD that in the siege of Damiata where himself be present an. 1219. their chief man escape these assassin they be after that murder by the templary commit on their legate for the most part enemy unto they yet one he mention the son of the earl of Tripoli * * an. do. 1172. Edward the first his father then live war in these part and be by one of these Assasine almost slay l. 1. c. 14. be at his devotion in the church of our lady at Carchusa slay by they as he be kneel before the altar whereupon the templar war on they and force they to the tribute of three thousand byzantine in his first book he tell their custom at large the place of their first original whence they come into Syria he place near Baldac or Bagdet in the confine of Persia they willing and cheerful obey all the command of their abbot master or old man of the mountain in all thing absolute esteem it meritorious * * Vitriac vit. l. 1. c. 81. who also bring up child of purpose in secret and pleasant place and in diverse language where they never see any but their master till their lord send they thence for hatred of his enemy or at request of his friend or for reward and price give they a sharp knife or blade for such exploit if they die they be account martyr and reverence as saint their parent reward with gift and if they be bond with freedom hence it be that they take upon they so cheerful this deadly legacy with no less wariness and subtle in protean insinuation and fashion-imitation than vehemency of desire and resolution studious to effect the same sometime in the habit of the clergy man or monk sometime like merchant always apply themselves to other fashion that it be impossible to prevent they inferior person they disdain to deal with but mighty potentate must either purchase their security or always be strong guard Vitriacus affirm that they be imagine to be descend from the ancient Esses and that they still retain the jewish writing have letter mix of the Hebrew and Chaldee which perhaps may be the samaritan letter marinus Sanutus Torsellus about three hundred year since write a large book entitle touch the recovery of the holy land mar. sanut l. 3. 10 c. 8. haply this name Arsasidae be either take or give they of Arsaces the first founder of the parthian empire in those part whence these come in which he mention these assassin or as he call they Arsasidae of who beside other thing he relate this story an. 1194. Boamund prince of Antiochia send for Lewon lord of Armenia his vassal so great where then the christian affair to come to he which he at first refuse because he have in like manner send for his brother rupinus and make he prisoner but after upon condition he come with such a ambuscado that when Boamund will contrary to covenant have take he himself be take and carry prisoner into Armenia from whence he be deliver by meditation of Henry then governor of the Holy-land under q. Isabella at who hand the say lord of Armenia desire and receive the title and crown of a king and this be the beginning of that royal title to those king of Armenia but this Henry in his return visit according to his request the king of the Arsasidae so he call he who bring he to a castle where be a very high tower and in each corner thereof stand two man clothe in white then say the king to his guest your subject will not obey you in like manner as i will i and withal give a human * * or spit token and present two of those white one cast themselves down and with the fall die instant then do he offer the like experiment in the rest but Henry refuse as have more proof than he desire of this more than votary obedience he offer he also that if he have any enemy he will procure he to be slay by these his servant I stay the long on these curse assassin that the reader may make comparison and observe their resemblance with the latter Jesuitical brood in total and simple obedience the opinion that it be tolerable nay lawful commendable meritorious of heaven to kill and treacherous to murder the prince of the earth and the glorious martyrdom of such as be therefore execute @. v. of the Dogzijn and drusian and other pagan there Dogzijn or drusian another like both people and sect brethren in evil be the Dogzijn of who Benjamin thus write about ten mile from Sidon there be a certain people which hold war with the sidonian call in their language Dogzijn of other call pagan of no religion or sect they dwell in the mountain in cave and hole of rock obey no king or governor but live at random in the high hill and steep rock three day journey unto the hill Hermon they be infamous incestuous the father pollute their own daughter and in a solemnity which they yearly celebrate all both man and woman come to a common feast where they change wife with each other they hold that the soul when it depart out of the body of a good man pass into some infant then beget but of a bad man into a dog or other beast their knowledge be according to their life there be no jew among they but sometime artificer and diverse come unto they for merchandise and go away again and the jew be gentle entertain of they this people be very swift in run up and down those hill and not to be vanquish of other man thus far Tudelensis Martin a baumgarten relate that the venetian consul tell he of a sect not far from Tripoli which use at certain time promiscuous lust the father with the daughter the mother with the son and each with his next mate the issue thereof if male to be kill with needle as sacrifice their blood the female preserve he name they not but it be likely to be the posterity of those Dogzijn perhaps that of kill their male be add by such as make bad thing worse and yet epiphanius report of the gnostike as great or worse abomination for even the devil himself may be slander but long before his time Epiph. haer. 26. jac. de Vitr l. 1. cap. 13. jacobus de Vitriaco do write of a certain miserable people live in the mountain and not far from Tripoli which in great part observe the law of Mahomet but have another hide law which they say they may reveal to no man but to their own child when they grow to be of ripe age their wife and daughter with a implicit faith profess a belief in the same but know it not and if the son shall upon any cause reveal it to his mother the husband will slay his wife and the father his son these eat swine flesh and drink wine and of other saracen be account heretic these have their work of darkness in secret wherein they practise filthiness and such thing as be contrary to the female sex and therefore fear lest their wife will not endure their execrable rite if they be therewith acquaint howsoever the case stand a filthy sect it be and be for even still it continue and if my conjecture deceive not these be those drusian of which many author have write false surmise they to be the relic of the latin army and of those Frank which sometime possess these part of Syria I deny not but that some of these may join unto they in and for that fellowship of filthiness as here in these part many debauch beast with those beastly gypsy yea I think that the assassin and these since the tartar destroy the chief of that sect in Persia and possess the part of Syria have grow into one people receive also into their society whatsoever dregs of nation malcontent exile and unruly borderer those mountain can secure in and through all the change of state and dominion which those country have suffer which freedom they retain not only in the weak and more unsettle government of the mameluke and egyptian sultan but even still continue in some sort notwithstanding the ottoman greatness circumcision they embrace with the turk use the liberty of christian in drink wine and more than beastly licentiousness in incestuous copulation with their own daughter g. bot. ben. thus Botero Knoll in his turkish history say they follow one Isman a prophet of their own and be not circumcise but I have learn of a friend of i one master pountesse who have have acquaintance with they that they be circumcise and that they be of those Dogzijn which Benjamin mention it be apparent by their place of abode by their heretical sect and custom so like and by their name easy change from Dogzijn to Dorzijn and so to Drozijn or Druzijn a easy change than so long a time and foreign pronunciation usual admit biddulph l biddulph write that they retain still baptism and the name of christian but be call rafty that be infidel Selym the second seek to bring they under the turkish yoke and his successor likewise till these day yet both these and the arabian be never make full subject thus the ancient scythian the reisbuti in the mogul country of Cambia the Curdi * * Cartwright Barbaro and other other mountain inhabitant and borderer as also a long time the welshman in Wales under the great sovereignty have enjoy a kind of freedom secure by the mountainous situation their natural hardiness and the great cause their poverty as a bootless booty and worthless conquest to buy bareness and barrenness with the price of blood these drusian be a people warlike Knolls amur. 3 and religious observer of their own superstition yield due obedience unto their natural lord they wear long coat reach to the knee but tone before and no breech and use the harquebus and Scimatar they be increase in number which may come to pass by the long war which the western christian with often invasion make in those part after they be dispossess of the kingdom of jerusalem the same second by the tartar a long time and after it be the confine of the turkish and mameluke empire so that it be no marvel if they be of sundry nation and religion be the confluence of so many people and sink of so many sect howsoever the drusian name be predominant they inhabit from joppa to Caesarea and Damascus some dissension among their prince give opportunity to Ebrain Bassa an. dom. 1585. to spoil their country and extort what he can one of they help to cut the other throat yet never can he force manogli to come in and submit himself although herein he use the turkish force and wily stratagem than also invest Aly ebre-carfus in the sovereignty sweat he to the Turk and carry with he Ebne-Mansur and Serafadin two of the drusian prince which have submit themselves in his galley as prisoner to Constantinople they be still it be the relation of a traveller govern by a succession of prince who they call emyr the present emer of Sidon be Faccardine a man never see to pray m. g. sandys l. 3. p. 210. nor in a mosque small of stature courageous and tyrannical he never commence battle nor execute any notable design without the consent of his mother a woman skill in magic to his town he have add a kingly signiory what by his sword and what by his stratagem he pick a quarrel with joseph emer of Tripoli and dispossess he of Barut and after sack Tripoli itself and force the emer to fly to Cyprus and when with the force of Damascus for he get to be make seidar or governor of the soldiery there he seek to repair his loss in the field the damascen be foil and pursue to the gate of their city the conqueror lodging in the suburb whence they be remove by the force of fifteen hundred thousand sultany this be 1606. thus under the title of a subject to the Turk but yield obedience at large he hold gazir Barut Sidon Tyrus Acre Saffet or tyberias Diar camer Elkiffe the two head of jordan the lake Bemochonthis now call houle and sea of tyberias with the hot bath adjoin Nazareth Cana and mount tabor Saffet be his principal city in which be many jew the grand signior often threat his subversion both for his encroach and intelligence with the florentine which he divert with gift and favour but yet provide for it by fortify his hold able to hold out a long war have also forty thousand expert soldier in continual pay beside the advantage of the mountain and in great extremity the sea and the florentine he have the five part of the increase of all thing and head-money for all cattle within his dominion and two dollar yearly for the head of every jew and Christian the merchant be there so safe that they may travel with their purse in their hand yet subject to tyrannical seizure upon the death of factor or owner but more then enough of these drusian and other people mingle with they biddulph mention Useph beg or lord joseph which in the mountain hold out against the Turk he tell also of one Asan bashaw which rule like a king in a ancient city call Achilles pay duty to the Turk successive from his predecessor of the house as it be say of Sanballat and be call eben Sumboloc and his kindred call one another Amiogli for they account themselves ammonite this bashaw be old and refer matter of government to his kinsman Useph beg. it shall seem they be some relic of the cuthean or samaritan which perhaps join with the drusian in many thing there be also in these part of palaestina many arabian which it seem have pester those place ever since the invasion of Homar if not before and these still use to prey upon the pilgrim that travel to jerusalem notwithstanding the conduct of janissary of these arabian one sect be call * * jac. vit. l. 1. c. 12. volater l. 11. beduine which imagine the day of every man death fatal destine never go arm to battle use only spear and sword disdain bow and arrow as token of cowardice these be false alike to christian and saracen easy betray either always addict themselves to the strong dwell in tent go clothe with skin wander up and down in tribe still seek fresh pasture feed on milk and commit the care of all business to their wife some of the eastern people worship to the east which they say they learn of their father that be christian themselves be mahumetan yet account other saracen heretical and some esteem the sun to be the chief God thus Vitriacus @. 5 of the unchristian christian such be and have be the unholy inhabitant of the holy land since the jew expulsion neither can we say much better of their conqueror the persian arabian turk tartar mameluke and after these the turk in the ottoman dynasty no nor can we commend the christian for much christianity whether the native surian some of which have pass through all these change without any great change either to the saracenicall or western rite from their greekish or their invader and conqueror for these soon degenerate into a unchristian christianity and be call pulam successor of the place not the condition of those which pass thither with duke Godfrey Sanut l 3 they give themselves to effeminate delicacy to excess in diet and apparel full of intestine discord and civil contention cozener and false addict to witchcraft and divination contumelious abuse pilgrim who devotion have bring from far country thither or which come to help they against the saracen call they in scorn the son of Hernaud the maronite Christian be in time past sixty thousand but now be few neither be this a fit place for discourse of that and other sect of christian live in or frequent these holy place nestorian jacobite Abassens armenian georgian greek and other but the condition of the inhabitant at that time Vitriaco l. 1. c. 71.72 we mention as the cause of the loss of that country to the saracen the clergy mind more as a clergy man of their own express the church good than her good to fleece then to feed their flock the regulars enrich with possession religion bring forth wealth and the daughter eat up the mother the native laiety melt in lust and pleasure grow more fearful than woman except they be assist with the Frank english or other western people strengthen themselves in the strength of their contention against their christian brethren with saracenicall assistance their wife they mew up very close from the sight almost of brethren and near kindred scarce suffer they to visit the church once in a year some of the great one erect altar in their wife bedchamber whereon some silly priest may mumble his parrot they the more enrage use all mean with woman wile and devilish will by sorcery or any other mean to effect their filthy purpose vit. l. 1. c. 8. it be also make a refuge and receptacle of the most disorder person in these western part thief robber perjure adulterer traitor murderer parricide pirate apostate monk and nun which become common harlot and other monster in shape of man and woman pass the sea to this land entitle holy who change soil not soul they practise the like villainy with less shame be further from their friend and easy may they escape after great mischief either run as rennegadoe to the saracen or escape by ship to some near island or to such privilege sanctuary as every religious house afford to the prejudice of justice and religion some also which in Europe have be condemn for some crime by mediation of friend obtain this exchange of punishment to be send hither where they become harbourer of whore gamer murderer and for further impunity be at a yearly fee with the great one neither can the fear of human justice or divine judgement reclaim they many terrible earthquake happen among they by one of which Tyrus be almost utter together with the inhabitant destroy shake their earthy harden heart or move they to relent no marvel if the land can no long brook such inhabitant but expose they to the sword of the saracen and then again for so the father when he have chasten his child cast the rod into the fire to the tartar and from one to another till the Turk now lord it among they in sort as you have hear and even still the wickedness of the people in unnatural lust and nameless filthiness be such that I abhor further to write of it so be this paradise of the world both in bodily and spiritual pleasure and fruitfulness now become a desolate wilderness for the one and disconsolate in the other while one be loath to sow for another to reap of the arabian saracen turk and of the ancient inhabitant of Asia minor and of their religion the second book chap. i. of Arabia and of the ancient religion rite and custom thereof Arabia be a very large region a a maginus lie between two bay or gulf of the sea the persian on the east and that which hereof be call the arabian on the west on the south be the ocean on the north be Syria and Euphrates b b plin. l. 6. c. 28. orosius l. 1. Pliny set down the northern limit the hill amanus over against Cilicia and Commagena many colony of they be there plant by Tigranes the great it thence say he decline to our sea and the egyptian shore and to the heart of Syria to mount Libanus by a certain workmanship of nature it much resemble the form and site of Italy c c Solin 36. Arabia signify holy as Solinus affirm but in the scripture (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Harabi signify both a robber by the way and a arabian so jer. 3.2 in d d so our english transl and the span. Ital. Pagnine Vat. Tremel etc. the way thou have sit for they as the arabian in the wilderness in the vulgar latin be translate saint Jerome interpret (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) e e hier. in Es. 27 in Ezec. 27. Arabia and vesper and and planicy and and acknowledge the fitness of the former name in Jeremy answer the condition of the people give to rob on the border of Palestina and all traveller from jerusalem to jericho thus he comment on that place of Jeremy which he translate the Hebrew being Harabi hence Martin deal Rio infame Hebraeis arab chananaeus Chaldaeus from the practice of the people their proper name become appellative a arabian for a robber as Sarak also a Chananite for a merchant a chaldean for a mathematician the nation of this wide tract of land be many it be the next to be speak of in this our discourse according to geographical method as confine upon judaea whence we last depart f f Draudius in Solin Beros l. 4. some derive the name from Arabus the son of Apollo and Babylonia and the forge Berosus of annius tell that janus pater send one sabus into Arabia foelix Arabus into Arabia deserta and Petreius into Petraea all nephew of cham all indeed the son of annius his brain true it be that Arabia be common divide into those three part Petraea deserta and foelix of the nation in Arabia Pliny write large among the rest name the saracen who s. Jerome often epiphanius also and other of the ancient father mention of which we be anon to speak at large but long before Pliny the scripture speak of the people of this region not only those which be say to descend of cush the son of cham but of many other which descend of Abraham as ishmael the son of Abraham by Hagar and g g gen. 25.2 Zimram and jokshan and Medan and midian and ishbak and Shuah with their posterity the issue of Abraham by Keturah who after that Seba and Sabbetha and rama and Sabtheca have people some part of Arabia be send away with their portion eastward to the east country that be into Arabia where it be likely they mingle their seed and generation with those former of the posterity of cham for therefore it seem Moses wife zipporah be call a h h Numb. 12.1 cushite or as some read a aethiopian not that she be of the country Aethiopia in Africa but a Midianite of Arabia of Abraham race which country because the posterity of cush have first inhabit and happy have mingle themselves in marriage with they she be call a cushite which some wrong expound a aethiopian if they understand it proper although cush be also the father of the aethiopian but of this name Aethiopia sometime take more large otherwhiles more straighten you shall see more in our seven book the first chapter this posterity of Abraham be in scripture often call the child of the east saint Jerome i i hier. in Es. 21. reckon also to Arabia the idumaean moabite and ammonite and certain it be that the place sometime by they inhabit be now account to Arabia the many name of the arabian nation they which will may read in Pliny and other Mohamed k k Gabriel and John Marenitae translator of the Nubian geographer who have the most exact description of Arabia Ben-Iacob Sirazita author of the Arabic dictionary affirm that jaarob call jerah gen. 10.25 son of Cahhtan or jectan be author of the Arabic tongue which be bring to perfection by ishmael son of Abraham who dwell in a region call Araba of that jaarob whence the whole land of Arabia take name the name foelix or happy be give to the southerly part of Arabia for the fertility thereof l l Arias Montan Caleb the name Petraea to a second part of Petra the seat royal after call Arach of Aretas a arabian king the desert Arabia have a name answerable to the nature thereof be in great part without inhabitant for the barrenness of the soil as be also a great part of that which be call Petraea this desert Arabia be also m m Maginus Ptolom l. 5. call and of the Hebrew cedar it be bound on the east with Babylonia and part of the persian gulf on the north with Mesopotamia near to Euphrates on the west with Syria and Arabia Petraea on the south be the mountain of Arabia foelix near to they and to Euphrates it have some town and be frequent with merchant otherwhere partly unpeople partly Strabo therefore term it n n scenitae Nomades (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) i. scenitis feed with such roam arabian as have no dwell house but remove to and fro seek where to find pasture for their beast and lodge in tent David account himself o o psal. 120 5 miserable for this dwell in the tent of kedar or as tremelius read it p p tanquam sceniae Kedareni as the scenite of kedar thus do the patriarch of old thus do the scythian and thus do the tartar and the arabian in Asia Africa and Europe at this day roam rove rob and therefore the q q Elias this rad. kedar jew call the tartarian kedarim because of their like course of life they r r boter relat part. 1. l. 2. which dwell in town and city observe a more civil life be call moor the other arabian in more proper appellation or beduine the name moores be give they of the spaniard because out of Mauritania they invade Spain and now s s adri hom theat t. s. be take usual not so much for the inhabitant of the arabian city as for all of the arabian and mahometan superstition Bosra be the chief city Arabia Petraea adjoin on the west and north to Syria on the east to the desert Arabia on the south to the happy Pliny Strabo and Ptolemie call it Nabathaea some think of Nebaioth son of ishmael tyrius call it Arabia secunda now it be call by Ruscelli Baraab or after Ziglerus Barra or Bathalatha after Castaldus t t mel. l. 1. c. 10. and Caslig Pintiani and spicileg a. Schot Mela ascribe the hill casius hereto which say he be so high that from the four watch of the night or the last quarter thereof it show the sunrising but nonius pintianus correct he say there be two casij the one of Syria the other of Arabia and that this report be to be apply to the syrian casius wherein Schottus be of another mind nigh to Syria it be more plentiful u u diod. l. 3. c. 12. then in other part the scarcity of wood and water with the barrenness of the soil in other place show how it be malign of the element both in this part and the former they have need go strong and well accompany for fear of robbery and spoil which the arabian attend this part be famous unto all generation not so much for the amalakite midianite and other their border neighbour of who and their religion somewhat be speak 10 10 lib. 1. c. vlt. before as y y r. Volaterran for the miraculous passage of the israelite through the same and abode therein forty year in which time they receive the law be feed with manna their meat drink clothe judgement mercy continual yield miraculous evidence of God presence among they Bellonius visit the mount Sinai he z z Obser l. 2. c. 10. and d. say it be a mile and a half from Horeb and far high from who top which be hard stone a a Moses narbonens write that he observe in the stone of Sinai a bush or bramble figure whereof some think Sinai be name of seneb which signify a bush Drus pag. 269. of iron colour may both shore of the red sea be see this sea be not therefore call red because either the ground or the sand or the water thereof be red as bellonius have observe for none of they be b b of this see more l. 7. c. 11. so the people thereabouts take care for no other house then the bough of palmtree to keep they from the heat of the sun for rain they have but seldom the cattle be less there then in Egypt in the ascent of mount Sinai be step cut out in the rock they begin to ascend it at break of day and it be afternoon before they can get to the monastery of maronite Christian which be on the top thereof there be also a meschit there for the arabian and turk who resort thither on pilgrimage as well as the christian there be a church also on the top of mount Horeb and another monastery at the foot of the hill beside other monastery wherein live religious people call Caloieri observe the greek rite who show all and more than all the place renown in scripture and antiquity to pilgrim they eat neither flesh nor white meat they allow food unto stranger such as it be rice wheat bean and such like which they set on the floor without a cloth in a wooden dish and the people compose themselves to eat the same after the arabian manner which be to sit upon their heel touch the ground with their toe whereas the turk sit crosslegged like tailor there be extant a epistle of Eugenius bishop of m. Sinai write 1569. to Charles the archduke wherein he complain that the great Turk have cause all the revenue of the church and monastery to be sell whereby they be force to pledge there holy vessel and to borrow on usury Arabia foelix c c maginus dom. Niger com. Asiae l. 6. trend from hence southwards have on all part of the sea against which it do abutt the space of three thousand five hundred and four mile Virgil call it Panchaea now d d Adrich say it be now call Mamotra Ayaman or Giamen this seem to be the country wherein Saba stand chief city of the sabaean who queen visit Solomon for so the jew reckon howsoever the abassine challenge she to themselves Aben ezra on dan. 11. call this Saba Aliman or Alieman and Salmanticensis jeman e e capt. Dounton which trade a little while since in the red sea call it yeoman which be all f f vid. Drus p. 32. 33. Rhodoman call her (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) one for all be but the article signify the south as the scripture also call her queen of the south for so it be situate not to judaea alone but to the petraean and desert Arabia the name Seba or Saba agree also with the name of sheba gen. 10.7 as for sheba the nephew of Abraham by Ketura it be like he be founder of the other Seba or Saba in Arabia deserta the elder posterity of Chush have before seat themselves in the more fertile southern country and because both people these in Arabia and those in Africa be comprehend under one general name of Aethiopia hence may those of Africa take occasion to usurp the antiquity of the other yea it be more likely that these Abassens in Africa a thousand year after that the queen be bury be seat in Arabia and thence pass in late age into Africa subdue those country to they for so have stephanus (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) step. urb the Abassens so we now call those aethiopian in the empire of presbyter John be nation of Arabia beyond the sabaean and the nubian geographer diverse time mention Salomon wife in Arabia which I can interpret but of that queen beniam Itiner so that out of Arabia they carry this tradition with they as it be likely into Africa where want of learning and plenty of superstition have so increase their legend of this queen as we shall after hear Benjamin Tudelensis write likewise that the region of Seba be now call the land of Aliman and that it extend sixteen day journey alongst the hill in all which region there be of those arabian which have no certain dwelling but wander up and down in tent rob the neighbour nation as be also report of the saracen near Mecca which government of Mecca both Benjamin and Salmanticensis g g juchasin pag. 2. beniam pag. 61. Mecca in adjoin to that of Aliman or the kingdom of Saba for so say he the jew in those part still call the chief city of that kingdom it have store of river lake town city cattle fruit of many sort the chief city be Medina Mecca Ziden zebit aden Benjamin add Theima or Theman a city wall fifteen mile square enclose ground for tillage in the wall Tilmaas also Chibar and other there be store of silver gold and variety of gem there be also wild beast of diverse kind as for the phoenix because I and not I alone think it a fable as neither agree to reason nor likelihood and plain disagree to the history of the creation and of Noah ark in both which God make all male and female and command they to increase and multiply I think it not worthy recital one wonder of nature do in Abi a city of this region will not I think be distasteful cite by photius out of Diodorus siculus write in some part of his work which be now want phot. Bibliotheca ca. 244. one diophantus a macedonian be marry to a arabian woman in that city Abi have by she a daughter call Herais which in ripe age be marry to one Samiades who have live a year with she do after travel into far country in the mean time his wife be trouble with a uncouth and strange disease a swell arise about the bottom of her belly which on the seven day break there proceed thence those part whereby nature distinguish man from the other sex which secret she keep secret notwithstanding continue her woman habit till the return of her husband who then demand the company and duty of his wife be repel by her father for which he sue he before the judge where Herais be force to show that which before her modesty have forbid she to tell and afterward name himself diophantus serve the king in his war with the habit and heart of a man and leave her feminine weakness as it seem to her husband who in the impatience of his love slay himself our author add also that by the help of the physician such perfection be add to this work of nature that nothing remain to testify he have be a woman he annex also like example in some other ludovicus Vertomannus or barthema as ramusius name he tell g g lud. vertum. l 1. c. 7. at large his journey through all this threefold Arabia he travel from Damascus to Mecca 1503. with the caravan of pilgrim and merchant be often by the way set upon by army of those thievish and beggarly arabian this journey be of forty day travel travel two and twenty hour and rest two for their repast after many day they come to a mountain inhabit with jew h h Benjamin tell of many jew in the arabian mountain subject to no potentate as it seem of these ten or twelve mile in circuit which go naked and be of small stature about five or six span high black of colour circumcise speak with a wominish voice and if they get a Moor in their power they flay he a live they see there certain white thorn and in the same two turtle which seem to they as a miracle for in fifteen day and night they have neither see bird nor beast they give their camel by the way not above five barley loaf at a meal as big as a pomegranate and drink once in three day at the end of eight day they stay a day or two to rest they their pilot direct their journey by the compass in Diodorus time they observe the north-star no less than if it have be at sea they travel five day and night through the sandy sea which be a great plain champain full of a small white sand-like meal where if by some disaster the wind blow from the south they be all dead man and although they have the wind at north yet can they not see one another above ten pace off and such as ride on camel be enclose with wood with hole to receive the air the pilot go before with their compass for direction many die there for thirst and many with fullness drink too much when once they come at water when the north wind blow those sand be drive to a heap he suppose that i i jul. Scaliger Exerc 104. and Ios. scal. ep. ad cosub lit. Chytr Aleppo Mis. mummia be make of such as the sand have surprise and bury quick but the true mummia be make of embalm body of man as they use to do in Egypt and other place for I have read not only of woman but infant also which be not likely to take such dangerous journey who body have be thus use to mummia as for the other part of Arabia they which listen may by this our author by Pliny Niger and other be inform further the like journey to this of Barthemas be relate by diverse latter traveller mounseur de Monface 1608. go with a caravan of 10000 from Aleppo to Bagdat their travel he say be all by night aswell to avoid the vehement heat of the day as to be guide by the star their guide call themselves pilot they travel thirty day till they come to Nane where they take water upon Euphrates they see no beast but ass roe and gazel a kind of wild goat and stag innumerable so wild that they often run through the caravan no fowl but pigeon which nestle in the ruin of old town sometime inhabit where also they make use of old well otherwise have no water but what they carry in borachoe make of whole goat skin there can be no path by reason of the continual motion of the sand by the wind their king have 100000. horseman subject to he gallant horse man almost naked himself subject to the Turk to come to the disposition of the people they be small naked beggarly what they have do in Asia Africa and Europe by force of arm under the name of saracen and pretence of religion shall follow in the next chapter what they still do if they meet with purchase traveller know to their cost usual arabian be reckon either merchant or thief plin. 6. 28. sol. c. 46. Strab. l. 16. diod. l. 3. c. 12. psal. 72. vid. bern. Aldrete antig. l. 2. the one have certain habitation or else trade abroad Strabo Pliny and Solinus admire their wealth as sell much to other and buy nothing thus treasure up the wealth of the east and west the parthian and roman their merchandise be gold silver frankincense with other spice their gold by Diodorus testimony be often find in whole piece pure and shine so that it give splendour and lustre to the gem enclose therein whence happy that of the psalm to he shall be give of the gold of Arabia the ancient practice of merchandise among some of the arabian people and namely the ismaelite the k k gen. 37.28 Ezek. 27. scripture record for their ancient religion it be not like it can be good when as they have so bad a author of their stock accurse cham the son of Abraham be better instruct but as they be bear after the flesh and not according to promise so if they and some of their posterity do a while hold the truth as the history of job and his friend evince yet this last not long but soon after l l psal. 76.1 and 147.20 in jewrie be God know and he deal not so with any other nation Herodotus m m Herodot l. 3. father of the greek history affirm in his Thalia that the arabian worship Dyonisius who they name urotalt and Urania who they call Alilat these alone they esteem god they shave their maiden like to Dionysius in a round form about the temple suidas tell n n Suid. hist that they be excellent archer their arrow be as long as themselves their bow they bend not with hand but with foot curio o o coelius aug. Curio hist sar. lib. 1. in his saracenicall history testify of they that as they descend in great part of Abraham race by ishmael the son of Keturah and by Esau so they of old have and still retain many rite observe by the hebrew as number by tribe and marry only within their own tribe every tribe also have their own king which it seem the tent-wandring or Scenite-Arabian observe still that son succeed not which be elder but he which be bear first after he be proclaim king or ruler be of noble race on both side they use also circumcision for their religion in old time some be Christian of which about the time of Mahomet there be many sect some be Jew other worship the sun and moon other certain serpent other some kind of tree and some a tower call Alcaba which they suppose Ishmael have build and some other some other deity p p clem. alex. Paraen Clemens alexandrinus object to the ancient scythian the worship of a sword to the persian the like devotion to a river add that the arabian worship a stone q q arnob. l. 6. Arnobius have also the same testimony explain that stone to be rude and unformed a fit deity for rude stony senseless worshipper Eusebius r r euseb laudib Constant sardus l. 3. c. 15. tell that they use human sacrifice which not only sardus confirm say that they sacrifice every year a child who they bury under the altar but Nicephorus s s Niceph. hist. eccle. l. 18. c. 23. also report of one naaman a schenite-arabian a chieftain among they who in zeal of that superstition kill man with his own hand and sacrifice they on the altar to his god in the time of mauricius warn by a vision become a christian and with he a innumerable company of he who he offer a live unbloody sacrifice in baptism unto Christ when they enter league with any their manner be that one stand in the midst between both party do wound the hand with a sharp stone in the palm near to the thumb of they both and take flock of the garment of they both anoint with that blood seven stone set in the midst of they mean while invoke Dionysius and Urania and then this mediator be come surety for the party who thereby esteem himself bind to observe it and this do t t Herod l. 3. they make league with Cambyses to these two arabian god great Alexander will have add himself a three say u u Arrian l. 7. arrianus in his life he make great provision to invade they both because they have send he no embassage and for that they worship only these two deity heaven for that it contain the sun and star and Dionysius because he have invade the indian and therefore equal this his own expedition to that of Dionysius he will also for rob of man be reckon a god Strabo 10 10 Strabo l. 15. say that in respect of the wealthiness of this country he have think have not death prevent he to have make Arabia the imperial seat he affirm also that Sesostris the egyptian king pass through Arabia in that his renown expedition erect there in diverse place egyptian temple and superstition circumcision in Arabia that the Troglodytae which dwell in cave and border on the egyptian by some repute arabian be circumcise as the arabian and egyptian be the arabian by testimony both of old and late writer be account no warlike people Virgil sing of they Molles Sabaei in elder and late time they be govern by their phylarchi y y am. May. Cellin or head of the tribe or lineage they take tribute and custom according rather by a rob force then civil form make their will their law on the one side of Euphrates they acknowledge some obedience to the turk such as it be on the other side not so much as appear by the passage down Euphrates record by Gasparo Balbi William Parry and other in some place pay a custom in other like to be rob of all the ancient arabian which dwell in the city be say to have in each city a prince fair house and temple after the egyptian manner and then Strabo say Arabia foelix be divide into five kingdom the nabbathaeans worship the sun burn frankincense on a altar unto he they neglect the body of the dead bury even their king in a dunghill of the other arabian he report that they use incestuous copulation with sister and mother adultery with they be death but that only be adultery which be out of the same kindred otherwise all of the same blood to use the same woman be their incestuous honesty when fifteen brother king son have by their continual company tire their own and only sister she devise a mean to rid herself or at least to ease she somewhat of that trouble and therefore whereas the custom be that he which go in leave his staff at the door to prohibit other entrance she get like staff and always have one at the door be disburden of their importunity every one that come think some other have be there before they but they be once altogether one of they steal from his fellow and find this staff at the door accuse his sister to his father of adultery whereof by discovery of the truth she be clear Linschoten z z Linschoten history of the indies tell of the like practice observe by the Nairos in cochin leave their arm at the door when they enter to their nairo-kinswoman which they use likewise in common be never marry their circumcision they observe as a a Draudius in Solin some write at the thirteen year of their age imitate Ishmael herein every one abide in his father profession the possession and wealth be common to the whole kindred Alexander ab Alexandro name Dyasares a arabian deity their priest he say be attire in linen garment with mitre and sandal b b sol. polyhist Solinus affirm that they abstain from swine flesh neither will that sweet air of Arabia breathe life to that sordid and stink creature this be the happy Arabia where happiness make they unhappy their sweet c c Strab. l. 16. breed bitter effect in disease their body which they be force to cure with the scent of brimstone and goat beard burn that which other admire and almost adore for rareness and excellency be here there common fuel for their fire d d d. sic. l. 3. Vulcan devour jaw be feed with herb shrub tree gum spice for human and divine use most esteem frankincense say e e plin. l. 12. c. 14. Pliny grow only in Arabia but not in every place thereof about the midst of the country be Sabota the chief city of the sabaean in a high mountain eight mansion from thence be the region of frankincense which be call Sabba that be a mystery look towards the east every way guard and make unpassable with rock the soil be reddish incline to white the length of the frankincense-wood be twenty the breadth half as much a in this account be five mile other arabian beside these and the minaei see not this tree nor all of these but only some three hundred family unto who the right of these rite devolve by succession therefore they be call holy neither may they in the time when they cut they be pollute with knowledge of woman or with funeral what manner of tree it be Pliny say he know not nor any roman to his knowledge they gather it in the spring and autumn they cut the tree from whence it sweat there need no watch to keep they but the innocence of the inhabitant when Alexander in his youth bestow large store of frankincense in his devotion Leonides his master tell he he shall so do when he have conquer the country where it grow he after enjoin some part of Arabia send he a ship lade with frankincense and bid he serve the god plentiful the frankincense when it be gather be carry on camel to Sabota by one way out of which to go be capital there they pay the tithe to a god which they call sabis the priest take it by measure not by weight certain portion be allow to they and to the king scribe Plautus therefore f f pl. in poenult and in call it frankincense odour Arabicus Virgil call it Panchaan and sabaean frankincense the manifold rite which the heathen use in their holy thing with this drug Stuckius g g Stuckius show at large here also grow the myrrh in the same wood and among the Trogloditae but this and cinnamon and other thing which grow elsewhere as well as here need not much discourse they use yet some religion in gather of their cinnamon as h h joan. Boemus some observe sacrifice before they begin and after divide what they have gather with a sacred spear assign a portion to the sun if the division be just make the sun seal his consent by fire with his beam consume the same thus much of their spice and holy drug of their other riches I mean not to speak save of their sheep with great tail some of which weigh forty pound these kind of sheep be common through Africa even to the cape of good hope near to which at Soldania our man have buy many for little piece of old iron i i leo Africanus Leo say he see one at cairo who tail support by a cart with wheel for else she can not have carry it weigh fourscore pound and hear of such as weigh a hundred and thirty pound k k gal. 1.17 Paul present after his conversion preach the gospel in Arabia Panchaea and another island call sacra be adjoin by l l Diod. sic. l. 6. cap. 10. Diodorus to Arabia both fertile as he say of frankincense in Panchaea be the city Panara who inhabitant be call the minister of jupiter tryphilius who temple be thence distant threescore furlong admirable for antiquity magnificence and nature of the place it be two hundred foot long the breadth answerable have in it large statue and about it the house of the priest many fountain there spring make a navigable stream call the water of the sun which be medicinable to the body the country about for the space of two hundred furlong be consecrate to the god and the revenue thereof spend in sacrifice beyond be a high mountain call the seat of heaven and Olympus triphylius where Coelus be say to have institute the rite there yearly observe the priest rule all in Panchaea both in civil and religious case and live very delicious attire with linen stoale and mitre and particoloured sandal these spend their time in sing hymn and recount the act of their god they derive their generation from the cretan jupiter l l euseb eu. lib. 2. they may not go out of their sacred limit assign they if they do it be lawful to kill they the temple be enrich with gift and offering the door excel for matter and workmanship the bed of the god be six cubit long and four broad all of gold fair wrought the table stand by nothing inferior in the midst be another bed of gold very large grave with egyptian letter in which be contain the gest of jupiter Coelus Diana and Apollo write by Mercury thus far Diodorus justine m m justin hist lib. 39 mention hierotimus a arabian king which have six hundred child by concubine some n n Gramay as arab. be of opinion that the wiseman which by the ancient conduct of a star come to jerusalem the first fruit of the gentile come out of Arabia Scaliger o o Ios. scal. can. Isag. lib. 2. mention a conquest ancient make and hold by the arabian in chaldaea Philostratus p p Philost ap. l. 1. say the arabian be skilful in augury or divination because they eat of the head and heart of a dragon that they eat serpent Solinus affirm athenaeus q q athenaeus l. 6. cap. 6. say that the arabian use to maim themselves if their king happen to be maim and that in the same member and in r r ath. l. 12. c. 4. another place he cite out of heraclides Cumaeus the delicacy of this arabian king and his quiet or idle course of life commit matter of judgement to officer and if any think himself wrong by they he pull a chain fasten to a window in the high part of the palace whereupon the king take the matter into his hand and whether part he find guilty die for it his expense be fifteen babylonian talent a day the arabian kill s s Plutarch and mouse as a certain suppose enemy to the god a custom common to they with the persian and aethiopian the t t Tertul. veland virg. woman cover their face content to see with one eye rather than to prostitute the whole face they kill not viper but scar they away with clapper from their Balsam-tree say u u pausaniae Beotica pausanias when they gather that commodity because they think they consecrate to those Balsam-tree under which they live and feed of that liquor with which also they cure themselves if they be bite of they the Arabic tongue be now the common language of the east especial among such as embrace the mahometan religion this language in the first division of tongue according to 10 10 Epiph. count Sethian epiphanius be begin in Armot the first speaker and author thereof it be now the most universal in the world as Bibliander postellus Scaliger Aldrete and claude duret in his late history origine des langues de cest univers do prove at large from the herculean pillar to the Molluccas and from the tartar and many turk in Europe unto the aethiopian in Africa extend itself which be never grant to any other language since that first confusion and babble at Babel chap. 2 of the Saracene name nation and proceed in arm and the succession of their Chalifaes @. i. of the saracen before Mahomet day the arabian be distinguish by many surname the chief whereof say a a scal. E.T. l. 2. Scaliger be the hagaren so call of Hagar the handmaid of Sara who the arabian call Erabelhagiari and Elmagarin and the saracen still call by their neighbour Essarak that be thievish the hagaren be more civil who chief hold be Petra and their prince be all entitle Aretae as the egyptian ptolemaei Jerome in many place affirm that the ismaelite and hagaren be the same which now be call Saracen so in his commentary on the second of Jeremy cedar say b b in jer. 25. in Es. 42. and he be the region of the desert and of the ismaelite who now they call Saracen and on the twenty five of Ezekiel the madianites ismaelite and agaren be now call Saracen and on Esay twenty one he extend their desert from India to Mauritania and to the atlantike ocean c c Epiph. haer. lib. 1. epiphanius likewise affirm that the hagaren and ismaelite in his time be call Saracen Pliny d d lib. 6. c. 28. mention that the saracen place they near to the nabathaean Ptolemey e e geograph lib. 6. cap. 7. likewise name the scenite so call of their tent which with themselves their flock and substance they remove up and down from place to place posterity have call all these tent-wanderer say f f A.M. l. 22 Scaliger out of ammianus marcellinus Saracen and so do Ptolemey in the next word call the next adjoin people seat they in the northerly bound of Arabia foelix in the same chapter he set down Saraca the name of a arabian city g g Boterus Curio some author have write that because ishmael be son of Hagar a bondwoman his nice posterity have disclaim that descent and derive their pedegrece and name from Sara say in his annotation upon Eusebius chronicle after that he have cite the former testimony of ammianus and of Onkelos on the thirty seven of genesis add the authority of stephanus who affirm Saraka to be a region of Arabia near the nabathaean of which he think that the saracen borrow their name we know say Scaliger that the arabian Nomades be so call for SARAK in Arabic sound as much that be furace (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) thievish or robber such as the cosak-tartar border on the turk the bandolier in the pyrenaean hill and the borderer sometime betwixt England and Scotland Sara to call they saracen of Sara be ridiculous for then either they must be call SARAEI or she SARACA Mr. Brerewood say that sarra signify a desert and Shakan to inhabit in the Arabic and therefore as they be call Scenites of their tent so may they also of the desert their not habit habitation be call saracen book of lang. c. 13. and Erpenius say that this name be unknown to themselves but all the Muhammedans general call themselves Muslimos or musleman which signify believer as if all else be infidel or heretic h h am. mar. lib. 14. marcellinus thus write of they this people stretch from the assyrian to the fall of Nilus all warrior half naked in colour jack none plow or plant but they wander up and down without house or law their life be always in flight their wife they hire and covenant with for a time which breed child in one place and bring forth in another and never rest their food be venison milk herb and such fowl as they can take the most that we have see know not the use of wheat or wine like kite they snatch their prey but stay not by it whether they win or lose they be such as the roman need never wish they their friend or their enemy in the time of julian i i lib. 25. they make out-road and spoil on the roman province because they be deny their wont stipend by julian who tell they that he have better store of iron than gold saint k k hierom. trad. heb. in Genesm Jerome interpret that prophecy concern Ishmael that he shall be a wild man his hand against every one and every man hand against he of this rob rove rogue life of his posterity in his second book against jovinian he testify that their food be the milk and flesh of camel a creature easy breed in those barren desert but they think it unlawful to eat swine flesh and that swine be seldom or not at all find among they the prophet l l jerem. 49.28 vid. Hieron Es. 21. jeremy reckon their tent camel and flock as their great wealth in that his prophecy of their destruction by Nabuchodonosor this name Saracene may well befit that course of life which they embrace in the more southerly part of Arabia they be more civil and rich dwell in city and have quick trade which all be want about Medina and Mecca place so renown by the life and death of Mahomet m m or Muhammed neither do it seem probable that those which be call agaren in the continue succession of so many age as appeareth 1. chron. 5.10 and Psam. 83.6 will after grow ashamed of that or that ishmael which deride the hope conceive of Isaac the son of Sara will nourish his posterity in the same hope or leave they any honourable memory of Sara who have reject he together with his mother yea and their own superstitious legend prove the contrary as shall appear in the next chapter for their religion in old time one say n n constantin imp. cap. 15. that the saracen adore the star of Venus and in their pray cry alla o o Euthemius call it (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that be God and Venus joannes Meurfius note thereon that they worship the image of Venus set on a great stone on which they believe that Abraham lie with Hagar or else that he tie his camel thereunto while he be sacrifice Isaac p p scal. E.T. l. 5. Scaliger call her chubar and Chobar and say that neither circumcision nor the Friday sabbath be of Mahomet institution but of ancient time both those rite have be use by the arabian and leave by he as he find they q q Herod lib. 3. Herodotus testify that the arabian worship Alilat which be the moon for still they call the moon new horn Helal and the turk and saracen salute the new moon at her first appearance with a kind of veneration in Sylburgius his saracenica be report that the saracen till the time of heraclius worship the morningstar and Venus which they call chabar that be r r arab nob ap. Vincent Bellar. lib. 24. great cedrenus also affirm this to be a ancient superstition of the arabian in worship of Venus who star they say be Lucifer the morning star which for the greatness they call in their language Cuba to this day say he (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) name UENUS a god for proof whereof we will unfold a great mystery of they the work of their profane prayer be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) alla alla signify GOD GOD Oua great Cuba great or Luna and Venus that be GOD be the great GOD and Venus a great god and certain both in earth and in their paradise their chief devotion seem still to hold of Venus in the begin of the spring and in the begin of autumn the sun enter into Aries and Libra the arabian use which they have borrow from the zechiam and Albarachuma people of India to cast stone upon heap be naked and bareheaded with great cry and go about their idol kiss the corner in honour of their god this they use at Mecca in honour of Venus and therefore in that solemnity do they cast stone under their privity because those part be under her dominion only whereas nakedness be immodest some ordain that they shall bind a cloth about their reins this Mahomet find before his time and do not reject as he do some idolatrous rite but in their pilgrimage rite they still observe it proper they call the morning star Chobar or Chubar but as the phoenician astarte be with they in their confuse worship both juno Venus and the moon so they intend the like in this arabian deity for as orania and Alilat and Venus be the same as Herodotus aver so the same confusion of devotion be in Arabia as well as in their neighbour-country Phoenicia their circumcision it seem come from ishmael and the rest of Abraham son of old their friday-sabbath from this chubar-devotion both before Mahomet time as be also the abstinence from swines-flesh as we before have observe out of saint s s Hieron in amos 5. Jerome who also mention this their worship of Chobar so interpret those word of amos the star of your god that be say he Chobar or Lucifer which the saracen still worship to this day and in the life of Hilarion he tell that Hilarion pass through the desert come to a city or town call elusa on that very day whereon their annual solemnity have gather all the people into the temple of Venus for they worship she for the morningstar to the worship whereof the saracen nation be addict these hear that Hilarion pass by who have before cure many of they come flock about he with their wife and child cry in Syriac Barah that be bless we he in courteous and mild word persuade they rather to worship the live God than those stone promise if they will believe in Christ he will visit they often marvelous be the grace of God they suffer he not thence to depart before he have lay the line for build of a church and their priest crown as he be be mark with the sign of Christ thus far Jerome some t t Gabriel Sionita and joan. hesronitae Beduois or beduin activity of the arabian dwell in city some in the desert those better civilise and fit for art these which inhabit the desert be call Bedavyae or Beduois that be the people of the desert exceed in number and wander without house use tent make of Cotton wool or of goat and camel hair always move and remove as water and pasture move they carry their wife child and utensil on their camel their horse be lean little swift laborious bold and the horseman active beyond belief dart and catch with their hand the same dart in the horse swift race before it come at the ground and avoid a dart throw at they by sleighty wind under the horse side or belly also take up weapon lie on the ground while the horse be run and in like swift race hit the small mark with arrow or sling their arm be arrow javelin with iron head sword which they use not to thrust but stroke dagger sling and use the same in adverse fight or in averse flight they lie in wait for caravans prey upon traveller live at rapine and spoil and often make themselves the great Turk receiver and treasurer and raise new impost on all such as they can enforce whether traveller or city obey neither the ottoman nor any other sovereign but be divide in innumerable family obey the head of their own family or tribe their tribe or family these tribe be distinguish by the name of their first parent as abi-helal abi-risce abi-zaid and six hundred other all esteem and salute gentle and equal in right their food their food be brown bread new and sour milk cheese goat and camel flesh pulse honey oil and butter Rice be esteem a great delicacy by reason of their tradition that it come of Mahomet sweat foolish and blasphemous tradition for say they when Mahomet compass the throne of God in paradise God turn and look on he which make the modest prophet sweat and wipe it off with his finger six drop fall out of paradise one whereof produce the rose the second rice the other four his four associate they use a certain hodgepodge or frumenty of boil wheat lay after a dry in the sun then beat and boil with fat flesh till the flesh be consume this they call heresy and say that Gabriel the angel teach it Mahomet for the strengthen his reins whereby one night he fight against forty man and in another have forty time carnal deal with woman these may seem calumny devise by some mahometan adversary if the former author both learned in and zealous of the law of Mohamed have not relate the same in a chapter of the choice of meat Mohamed or Mahomet commend also the eat of gourd of the Melongene Melongene affirm that he have see this plant in paradise and measure the quantity of man wit by their eat store hereof when he be once in prison say Ben-sidi-Ali the angel Gabriel come down from heaven and carry he in jennet Elenaam or the garden of pleasure where among other he see this shrub and he ask why it grow there the angel answer because it have confess the unity of God and that thou be a true prophet their apparel their garment be base a cotton shirt with very wide sleeve a upper garment of wool weave with white and black line of goat or camel hair their foot be bare their noble sort go better clothe and use shoe a red leather girdle a white tulipan of cotton or linen of few fold their woman go almost naked in a blue smock of cotton linen head tire and face veil they use earring chain broochen and ring of glass or other base matter and die or paint with blue mark make with a needle their cheek arm and lip thus much of the beduine @. 2 of the Sararcenical beginning and proceed under MAHOMET and his successor of the Maraunian race cedren comp. this rob and rogue people live in much obscurity until that darkness bring they to light and a religion new stamp by Mahomet in a secret and just judgement of God for the contempt of the truth be by as new a kind of preach viz. force of arm obtrude on the lukewarm world for when as Mahomet of whole life follow a large discourse have observe that sick state of the empire afflict with jewish rebellion persian invasion and nestorian infection beside the security of the head itself heraclius then emperor he think good to take occasion by the forelock and to strike while the iron be hot first a a saracen hist. Curio l. 1. dreshleri chron. boter Phryg chron. car. chron. Sabel aen. 8. l. 7 Volaterran l. 12. chron. arab. polity of the turkish empire etc. under pretence of religion have inveigle a multitude of disciple he make a commotion in Arabia and be therefore drive out of Mecca many of his follower resort to he of who he appoint captain and leader of the rest ubequar Omar ozman Alifre talaus Azubeirus Zadimui Zaedinus and Abnobeid the arabian as some affirm aid heraclius in his war against cosdroes the persian and after that war end the arabian complain for want of pay the treasurer answer that there be scarce sufficient for the greek and roman soldier much less for that company of dog whereupon as long before on like occasion they have rebel in the reign of julian so now enrage they depart into Syria and adjoin themselves unto Mahumet who even then after the persian victory have obtain some say of the emperor who he serve in those war to himself and his follower a region to inhabit the emperor so reward his exploit in the late war Mahumet with this supply assail Mecca which diverse time before he have in vain attempt and take it with other piece in Arabia viz. Hunaim jetrip tambic etc. he afterward create four general who he call the four sharp sword of GOD and command they to go into the four part of the world and to kill all such as will not embrace his Law these four be Ebubezer b b the arabian name in other language be translate diverse or ubequar omer osman and ali. Ebubezer go into Palestina but be overthrow by Theodorus Begarius Caesar lieutenant about the same time die Mahumet and this c c Abu-becher Ebubezer succeed he although Mahumet have design Ali his successor at his death say cedrenus a comet appear thirty day together at noon in form of a sword from the south to the north foresignify the empire of the arabian Eubocara or Abubacher for diverse be this Ebubezer call have by his might and the assistance of Homar and osman obtain to be d d Califa that be vicar be the name of the chief place or sovereignty in case spiritual and temporal the successor of Mahomet and Amira be a lord a name apply to the Califa and the great ruler under he and also to all of Mahomet his kindred Califa overthrow the imperial and soon after die Homar the next Califa win Bosra the chief city of Arabia and all the country as far as Gabata and put Theodorus the emperor brother to flight he besiege Damascus and have break the force that come to rescue it obtain it subdue also all Phoenicia after that turn his force into Egypt Cyrus the bishop of Alexandria stay he with promise of two hundred thousand piece of gold for yearly tribute this be disannul by heraclius and Emanuel the deputy deny the payment whereupon enter the second time under conduct of Egypt be conquer after two year siege jerusalem also be win into which he enter clothe in a garment of camel hair and very homely profess great sanctity he build a superstitious temple where that of Solomon have stand jaidus one of his captain subdue edessa and all Mesopotamia afterward place muavias over all the country between Euphrates and Nilus he invade Persia where the persian lose both their king Hormisda their state religion and name of persian be convert into saracen this victorious Homar make jerusalem his royal seat and while he be pray be murder by his servant ozman e e Othman 4. a. d. 655. the succeed caliph send a great army into Africa under the lead of Hucba who overcome gregorius patritius and destroy Carthage subject all that province to their empire make tune the Mother-city but soon after translate that honour to chairoan which he build thirty six mile from the sea and a hundred from tune in the three year of his reign muavias the deputy of Egypt with a navy of seven hundred or as other say of a hundred and seventy sail assail Cyprus and take Constantia waste the whole island and have winter his army at Damascus the next year besiege arad in Cyprus and win it and dispeople all the i will thence he invade the continent of Asia and carry away many prisoner and after in a sea-fight with constans the emperor die the lycian sea with christian blood he win Rhodes and sell to a jew the brazen coloss or pillar of the sun which lade nine hundred camel sometime reckon one of the world seven wonder make in twelve year space by chares after this he afflict the Cyclides island in the Archipelago and then send his fleet against Sicilia where they make spoil with fire and sword till by olympius they be chase thence muavias himself with a army by land enter into Cappadocia jaid have overrun all the neighbour Armenia unto the hill Caucasus but mean while ozman besiege in his house by Ali his faction slay himself when he have live eighty and seven year and reign twelve the saracen can not agree about their new prince Muavi and f f hali 5. Ali with great army be corrival of that dignity and Ali be treacherous murder by muavias mean in a temple near Cufa a city of Arabia be there bury and the place be of he call Massadalle or Alli his house for if you believe the legend his corpse be lay on a camel which be suffer to go whither he will he stay at this place of this Ali or Hali Mahomet cousin the persian derive their sect and tell of he many legendary fable Bedwell call this place in his arabian Trudgman masge Aly that be the mesged mosque or temple of ali. g g Hasen Ben ali. alhacem the son of Ali and fatima Mahomet daughter be by Muavia his own hand crown h h some say he resign and he with Muavi be reckon but the six caliph of the arabian and by he soon after poison thus be Muavi sole caliph who grant peace to the emperor on condition that he shall pay he every day i i this daily tribute be both cease and invert soon after when Abdimelech make peace with the emperor with promise to pay he the like t ibute p. diacon ten pound of gold and a Gentleman-servant with a horse Damascus be now make the seat-royal of which city although we have say somewhat in our first book yet let we be a little beholden to Benjamin Tudelensis to show we the saracenicall face thereof in his time it be subject to Noraldine as he term he king of the child of Thogarma that be the turk the city say he be great and fair contain on every side fifteen mile by it slide the river Pharphar and water their garden k k Adonis and phar. Orontes 2. reg. 5.12 Amana be more familiar and enter the city yea by help of art in conduit visit their private house both strive in emulous contention whether shall add more pleasure or more profit to the city by naaman therefore in the heat of his indignation prefer before all the water of Israel but no where be so magnificent a building say Benjamin as the synagogue of the ismaelite which be therein the people call it the palace of Benhadad there be to be see a wall of glass build by Art-magic distinguish by hole as many as the year have day and so place that every day the sun find they fit in order to his present motion each hole have therein a dial with twelve degree answer to the hour of that day so that in they be design both the time of the year and of the day within the palace be bath and costly building so rich of gold and silver as seem incredible I see there hang a rib of one of the enakim or giant nine spanish palm long and two broad on the sepulchre be write the name of Abchamaz after this in the time of Tamerlan the magnificence of their temple be not quite extinct but as be report it have forty great porch in the circuit thereof and within nine thousand lamp hang from the roof all of gold and silver for the temple sake at first he spare the city but after provoke by their rebellion he destroy it and they neither be the wall of Damascus rebuild till a certain florentine for love of the governor daughter deny his faith become mahometan and after that both governor and repairer of the city in the wall engrave a lion the arm of Florence he be honour after his death with a moskee and worship after the manner of their saint the saracen visit his tomb and have touch the same stroke their beard with their hand there do our author * * baumgarten Pereg. l. 3. c. 5. A.D. 1507. the egyptian still and turk be more charitable to dog and cat then to man see a large house compass with high wall which be inhabit with cat the reason forsooth be this Mahomet sometime live in this city make much reckon of a cat which he carry in his sleeve and by lucky token from she order his affair from this dream the mahometans make so much of cat and hold it charitable alm to feed they think that he shall provoke the judgement of God which shall suffer a cat to starve and many of they be find in the shambles beg or buy the innards of beast to nourish cat a superstition more likely to descend from the egyptian who for the benefit they receive by cat in destroy their vermin of which that country yield store in a heathenish superstition deify they but let we return to Muavi he subdue the sect of Ali in Persia and after invade cil icia and send to aid sapores a band of saracen which afflict chalcedon and sack Armaria a city of Phrygia and with a fleet invade Sicill take Siracuse and carry away with they the riches of Sicilia and of Rome itself late fleece by the emperor and here hoard another army of saracen overrun the sea-coast of Africa lead away eight hundred thousand prisoner muamad and Caise on the other side subdue to Muavi Lydia and Cilicia a a about these time another false prophet call muctar obtain Persia and the arabian be trouble p. diacon in justin and after with Sews another saracen general besiege Constantinople from April to September and take Cizicum there winter their force and in the spring return to their siege which they continue seven year but by divine assistance and force of tempest they be chase thence and Constantine slay three hundred thousand saracen in a battle not long after against Susia the nephew of Muavi and compel the saracen to pay a great tribute b b 679 682 jezid reign after the death of Muavi his father a better poet than soldier he soon die neither do his successor Maruan and Abdalan live two year in the room c c Abdimelec son of Maruan scal. 9 and p. diacon in justiniano Abdimelec be choose caliph who descend from Hali when as Abdalan of the lineage of Eubocara the arabian call this the Maraunian race the other abazian have possess himself of that title by force who Ciafa the kinsman of Abdimelec overthrow ciafa after this victory enter Damascus pluck jazid one of the former caliph out of his grave burn his bone and hurl the ash into the river and cruel persecute all the Maraunian stock hereupon d d other call he Abdul Mumen Abedramon one of that house with a great number of his friend and follower flee into Mauritania Tingitana where he be welcome of the saracen there be and first entitle himself miralmumim which signify the prince of believer and then build e e Leo write otherwise as in our six book shall appear he say Morocco be build in the 424 year of their Hegira Morocco Addimelec have other iron in the fire neglect this first appease tumult in his own state then overthrow the emperor in the field after receive by treason of the deputy Armenia win that part of Persia which yet be subject to the roman and by his force spoil Thracia while the greek be divide among themselves he also chase the roman garrison out of the coast-town which they hold in Africa Abdimelec be dead f f call of Leo Qualid and of Scaliger Walid 110 and Tarik mirkond oelid scal. E.T. lib. 6. pag. 584. Turquet span. hist lib. 5. Ulitus the son of Abedramon succeed under who the saracen beside the spoil of Galatia conquer all Africa betwixt Niger and the sea a little piece except at the mouth of the strait subject to rodericus the king of Spain Mucas be make lieutenant of the saracen empire in Africa to he julianus earl of cepta full of indignation against his prince for deflower his fair daughter caba about the year 712. offer the conquest of Spain if he will furnish he with some competent force of his saracen this traitor thus strengthen with the authority of this place be governor of the isle viridis and diverse place in Africa and Spain back with his friend and aid with the saracen overthrow the goatish empire which have now rule Spain about three hundred year rodericus lose the field and his state and spend the remnant of his day with a hermit in a solitary desert of Lusitania julianus himself be after slay by the saracen as be the spanish traitor the just end of unjust treachery Scaliger out of a arabian geographer call that captain muse or Moses son of nutzir of the Marawan stock who have with he a valiant captain name tark or Tarik of who the hill and the straight be name as the vulgar pronounce it Gibraltar proper Gebal Tarik g g m. Bedwel in high arab. trudg say it be of the situation Tarifa signify the end or outmost bound of any thing that be the hill of Tarik because he have ship over his barbarian thither and fortify himself in that hill in the ninti year of the Hegira which he do lest his barbarous soldier shall forsake he and therefore also cause his ship to be burn this ulit qualid walid or oelid for thus I find his name diversify in author beside h h Tarik mirkond hiss persic these his conquest in Africa and Europe achieve by his captain great exploit in Asia among which one call Koteybah eben moselem conquer Korasan as far as Tarquestan with all the country of Maurenaher and Koarrazin on the other side Moseleima ben Abdel malek force the grecian emperor to tribute he also erect many public building the most famous of which be the mosque at Damascus Osiasge his deputy in Karason be so cruel that he put to death above a hundred thousand person in that country during his government beside a infinite number slay in the war he have thirty thousand slave of diverse nation this caliph die dom. 715. a. Heg. 95. after mircond account Persia be not yet full subdue Geryon and Tarbestan two province thereof be bring under in the time of soleyman Suleiman or as Curio call he Zulciminius the next a a anno. 717. Suleiman caliph he send Malsmas with a great power into Thrace where have spoil the country he lay siege to b b Curio lib. 2. Constantinople Zulciminius his master assault it by sea with a navy of three thousand ship in which siege he die dom. 719. Aumar c c wolfgang Droschter Chro. Omar his successor have no success in this attempt partly through the violence of frost cause famine and disease in his camp and partly by force of a artificial glass wherewith Leo the emperor cast fire among the enemy fleet and fire even the sea about the ship that by this subtlety and force of tempest of three thousand sail five ship only be say to have escape d d jezid gizid send with supply of three hundred and threescore ship dare not approach for fear of this fire and the saracen by their caliph be revoke when the plague have slay in Constantinople three hundred thousand people in his time Aly eben abas one of the descendant of abas uncle to Mahomet war for the chalifate challenge it to his stock but Aumar or Homar be poison by Ochon and yezid or gizid succeed who reign be trouble with the war of Aly aforesaid still continue his challenge after he a. 724. succeed Ochon his brother which have poison Homar Persia have some broil which he pacify he be murder succeed walid or euelit son of jezid in who time the bottom of the sea near the coast of Asia minor burn and send forth smoke first and after heap of stone with which the shore of Asia Lesbos and Macedonia be fill and a new island e e p. diac. leo. take beginning of the heap together of earth which be annex to the island call sacra the saracen in Spain erect among themselves many petty kingdom and by their division make way to Pelagius with some remainder of the spaniard to recover some of their lose country who die in the year 732. his son Fafila succeed in who time the saracen pass the pyrenaean hill into France where theodoricus the second be then king but f f Paul aemil. lib. 2. Charles Martell master of the king house rule as do his father in that office before and his son both pipin after he the saracen take Narbone and after Bordeaux kill in it man woman and child and raise the temple to the ground they pass Garunna and overturn Angolesme and Bloys and come into g g Toures Turon where eudo the Goth then king of a great part of France in war with Martell for fear of the common enemy enter league and with their joint force slay h h scal E.T. l. 6. pag. 584. say that the country people keep fresh memory thereof as if it be late do it be a. d 725. Hegire 106. sixteen year after they have invade Spain three hundred and seventy five thousand saracen and those of Navarre slay the rest that escape in their return but when eudo be dead Martell take part of his kingdom from his son Hunoldus and vaifarus who thereupon recall the saracen which under the lead of atinus take Auenion by the treason of mauricius then governor from whence and out of France they be drive i i Annis 735. and 737. and 738. by Martellus the saracen make four invasion into Thrace while Euelitus be Caliph to who succeed 744. k k jezid gizit the three who waste Cyprus and carry away the people into Syria after he and l l Hisan Mirkon call he Ebrahem ice which two rule not two year Maruan reign and after another of the same name and the saracen be divide tebid Dadac and Zulciminius challenge each to himself the sovereignty and when all these be overthrow and slay Asmulinus among the persian raise up the servant to murder their master and with they he overthrow Iblinus with one hundred thousand saracen and after Maruan himself with three hundred thousand who flee into Egypt be there also vanquish and slay in a temple this murder grow through the faction of the abasian stock who conspire against he because he have slay one of their kindred Abulabas the chief of this conspiracy succeed he in the m m Ios. scal. can. be lib. 2. and lib. 3 year 749. and remove the Chaliphate to that family from the maraunian in the year of their Hegeira 132. after the arabian computation as we follow Scaliger herein and he the chronicle which Abraham Zacuthi gather out of the monument of the ismaelite in the former relation we have principal follow Curio his saracenicall history though by the way we have borrow of other also @. 3 of the abasian Chalifaes their city Bagadet with many persian indian and other occurrence under they TARIK mirkond write that the family of abas have still from the first challenge continue their quarrel and that oelid to satisfy they have cause the son of Abdala one of the abasians to be proclaim his successor one of which Safa in this war against Marwan force he to flee to Mesera or cairo in Egypt where he be take and put to death and with he eighty person of the family of Ben Humia they do also break open their sepulcher and burn the bone spare only one of that live Hamarben Abdala Azis Safa be son of Abdala the son of Aly who father be Abdula the son of abas he have for wazir or Vesir which I mention to show the antiquity of this custom in the saracenicall regiment still observe by the turk and persian as chief counsellor and swayer of the state Abuzalemah who for conspiracy he put to death place in his room Kaleb Barmaqui he make his three uncle chief governor of the province David or daud of Medina and Mecca Abdula of Syria Egypt and Africa and Safa he send to Korosan the chief city whereof be call Mechad whereas Ishmael sophi and his successor be inter this city be fortify with three hundred tower each from other a musket shoot distant thus mirkond this Safa or as Curio call he Abulabas be dead Abugephar Elmantzar g g dom. 753. Heg. 836. succeed he imprison the twelve son of Hasin the son of Ali where they perish he begin first to build the city of bagde mirkond say that in the 145. year of the Heg. have finish a war against some rebel in Arabia part from Cufa he cross Mesopotamia and come to the bank of Tigris the bounty of the soil and commodious situation for the visit of his province cause he to build this city which by reason of many pleasant and delightful garden which be in that country the people call Bagadad of baga a persian word which signify a garden he die upon the way to Mecca a. Heg. 759. or after zacuth 758. John di Barros h h as dec. 1. lib. 1 ascribe this city to the same Bugiafar also for so he call he but Curio to one muamat long after Scaliger i i animad in euseb chron. Lydyat they think this to be seleucia a city build nigh unto Babylon by Seleucus near the meeting and mix of Euphrates and Tigris of which see our babylonian history in the first book Mahdi his son succeed a. h. 165. mirkond call he Mahadi Bila in his time Akemben ocem sometime secretary to Abusalem governor of Karason slay by Abuiafar revolt from his subjection and religion he have but one eye and be of terrible aspect he not only seek to be acknowledge for king but will be worship as a god cover his face with a veil say that man be unworthy to see his face and many province receive he for king but Mahadi send a strong power against he his partaker poison he and then give out that he be ascend into heaven but as many of his kindred and follower as be take be burn and the country subdue a. Heg. 169. to Mahadi succeed Elida Bila musa which after fifteen month die and Arachid Bila Harun his brother succeed against he rebel rafh eben Nacer of samarkand who entitle himself king in expedition against who Arachid die a. h. 193. mahamid Amin be his successor to who he give all he hold in Alep and thence westward to Mahamun another son he have give Persia and Karason to racem the three aderbaion and Diarbek this division cause another in which the chalife seek to dispossess Mahamun by force be overthrow Bagadet whither he be pursue take and himself slay a. 198. Mahamun or Mammon be the next chalife against who the governor of aderbaion and Karason rebel which he pacify as he can he spend much to have all the book of philosophy the mathematics and physic which he can get to be translate out of the greek he die a. h. 210. Abu Ezach Matacon or Mutetzam the four son of Harun succeed he build Samarrah on Tigris northwards from Bagdet which soon after be ruin sistom a province near the persian gulf rebel and long war continue in Persia this matacon win much from the grecian emperor he die after he have reign eight year leave behind he eight son and eight daughter with eight thousand slave he have take eight city the chief of eight realm and put to death the eight king thereof he leave eight million also of treasure have live to make up eight eight forty and eight year wacek succeed in who time by a three year famine Karason be almost dispeople afterward they return and war against the Mayusi heathenish people in Persia whereof say mirkond there be great number at this day which worship the fire of who they make a great massacre Methucal or almoto Wakel Bila jafar succeed a. 222. in who reign the descendant of Aly do rise for that he seek all mean to hinder their pilgrimage to his sepulchre break the bank of Euphrates with the inundation thereof into the desert stop their passage montacer son of this chalife murder he by his slave A.H. 234. but die himself within six month after Abul abas Hamed his next heir after five year rule be cast into prison by his soldier and there famish in Persia the deputy or governor have under many chalife succeed by a kind of inheritance the chalife confirm the succession to the heir but in these day arise one acem Ben zeyd alawy that be send of God he enter into Persia and take diverse city and province thereof Mostahhin the next chalife enjoy the seat but sixteen month he die A.H. 242. almatez Bila follow the thirty three in order of their chalife he send Mesa Ben Buka against acem Ben Zeyd and recover much from he which he have seize on in Persia but after thou year and a half this Chalifa be force by his soldier find he in a stove bathe himself to drink a pot full of cold water which sudden kill he Motady Bila succeed with like fortune slay of his soldier after eleven month in these combustion the Chaliphate be divide one reign in Bagdet the other in Egypt who history you may find in our egyptian relation almat Hamed Bila succeed in Bagdet the thirty five chalife Persia be now rend with many faction for beside Taher the allow governor and ahem Ben zeyd which still continue his war a new captain Yacub leys arise who overthrow Taher and slay he this Yacub be a tinker as his father also after that a captain of robber then fish in those trouble water take part with another rebel in sistom and share the country by his fellow misfortune become sole lord after this he prevail against Taher and acem and bring Persia under he follow his design against the chalife himself now much terrify with his fame and be likely to have prevail if he have not die by the way A.H. 268. his brother Hamer Ben leys succeed in Persia Karason and the rest of his conquest the chalife himself add thereto Hierak the chief city whereof say our author be Hispahon make he Chena of bagadet which be the sovereign magistrate of justice next the chalife but mataze Bila Hamed the next chalife slay he be before vanquish by Ishmael to who he give the title of king of Maurenahar Karason Scyras Siston and kermon Geryon also and Taberstan which he take from mahamed Ben zeyd alawy moktafy Bila be next chalife and after he his brother Moctader Bila who die A.H. 301. and jafar Ben mataze succeed all this while be Persia and the neighbour-country subject to war and contention each call his own whatsoever he can get and hold by force the particular I forbear to recite in these time the arabian rob Mecca carry from thence great spoil which the superstitious moor have offer among the rest carry away a stone to Cufa a holy relic bring forsooth by Adam out of paradise and afterward it befall to Ishmael the son of Abraham and I know not when be bring to Mecca it be white by nature but be touch by sinner it be a sin to deny it prove black but saint Rumwald at * * Lamberti peramb Kent boxley and many other popish stone or block have like virtue jafar our chalife die A.H. 320. about these time Abusuia zacuth call he bawia a poor persian dream that he piss fire which inflame the country and divide itself into three part continue long a ginger interpret that he shall command great province in which his son shall succeed he Elkaher or Kaher Bila Mahamet Ben mathaze be the next chalife who eye his soldier put out after eighteen month and give his place to razibila he cut off the hand of eben mokale his wazir and hang it on a gibbet for write a letter without his privity he ordain also that the wazir shall preach the law to the people which till that time the chalife themselves have perform muktafy succeed in his time be a great famine and pestilence the soldier put out his eye a. h. 330. after which he live forty two year but his son mostachfy Abdela be caliph now do the three son of Abusuia find mean to make themselves lord of Persia and the adjacent region one of which war upon the chalife take he and put out his eye a. h. 334. and place Motyah Bila fazele in that dignity in his time the stone aforesaid be recover from Cufa be redeem at the weight in gold and restore to Mecca and now the chalife begin to be but shadow of that quondam body and lord in name tayaha Abdel Carim be caliph after Motyah in who time the posterity of Abusuia have ruinate Bagadet by their war which be by Azudu Daule one of they re-edify a. h. 368. this prince show himself favourable to his divine philosopher physician and poet and give leave also to the christian his subject to build church bear part of the charge he build a goodly hospital at Bagadet A.H. 371. and endow it with great revenue and another at Scyras not inferior he die a. 372. and leave his inheritance to his three son of which scerfa Daule go into Persia and scam daule to Bagadet which soon after possess his brother state then dead and associate Bahao daule the three brother with he in government who prove sole heir by the treason of mutinous soldier which murder scam daule a. h. 380. Bahao depose the chalife in the first year of his reign although the possession of the place since the time of the Daules or abusuia race be but a ecclesiastical power plume of the temporal sovereignty he give the place to Kader Bila Hamed the forty six in order of chalife at this time Mamud Gasney reign in Karasan and Maurenahar who take the advantage of the minority of Fakoro Daules son fakoro himself and Bahao be dead much alter the face of the persian and Mahometan affair from this time forward the Daules with civil contention weaken each other great be the broil also in all the northerly adjoin country the king of Bokara Turquestan Nichabur darband samarcand with all the province in or near those part of Persia fry in civil combustion every man measure his right by his sword and spear Mamud at this time have chase away his brother Ishmael mamud exploit in India Persia etc. contract friendship with Ilechkan king of Turquestan and make a prosperous expedition into India as his father Sabutaquin have do before which Ilechkan envy treacherous enter into his country and force mamud return but Mamud be victorious Ilechkan strengthen himself with a new confederacy of Kaderkham king of Katao kotan a country in Catay who great force force Mamud to use the help of the turk and with the calanges gazney and auegany advance and fight on a elephant obtain the victory a. h. 397. now do Mamud return to his indian expedition seek to convert the indian to his religion where he fight with Bal a indian king and overthrow he in battle take forty elephant and rich spoil and the indian retire with their treasure and the riches of their pagode or idol temple Mamud enter here also where mirkond say he take seven million of dram of gold 700. ingot of gold with store of pearl and gem he overthrow also the gaore or guzarate in Karason be at this time such a famine that the people do eat up one another this be do a. h. 400. Mamud go against Bagadet and by strait siege force Kader Bila the chalife to yield himself and redeem his peace with money after this and some new exploit in Persia he return into India where he again do great act and at his return overthrow Nealataquin give the government of Korarrazin to Altuntar one of his captain in a four journey into India he overthrow gulkand a pagan king who see himself vanquish with the loss of fifty thousand man fear a beautiful wife which he have shall come into his enemy hand slay she and himself also in a five expedition he overcome gipal and jaudebal two indian king and return to Gaznehen build a stately temple or mosque as a thanksgiving for his victory and then enter into Persia take Rey and Hispahon in Hierak now the seat of Ahas the persian king from Maiudu Daule who he dispossess of his kingdom at this time be great quarrel among the Daules in Persia kermon and Diarbek and Mocheraf prevail against Sulton call himself king of king a. h. 411. Gelala another of the Daules be the year after make king of Bagadet a. h. 416. Mocharaf die at Bagadet and the year after the turk take fire and spoil Bagadet this make they call Gelala again to their succour who not long before be defeat at Bagadet and force to flee to Basora and now enter go to the chalife house to kiss his foot a. h. 419. but the turk which he bring with he fall to mutiny for their pay the chalife be force to become paymaster Mamud amidst his conquest die a. h. 421. and mahamed his son succeed and the next year follow Kader the chalife which have enjoy without great joy in it his place forty one year and Kahem his son succeed masud the other son of Mamud war upon his brother who by treachery of Issuf and Amir Aly traitor to their master he take and put out his eye he that love the treason reward the traitor the one with iron in a dungeon the other with more open and yet more close air in hang thus he rule Karason Gazneken and Hierak and send Altuntax governor of Koarrazin against Taquin who hold samarkand and bokara which war be bloody but a. h. 424. his garrison in India and the country of Gibal revolt in recompense of which he subdue Geryon and Taberstan Togotel * * this be Tangrolipix sec. c. 8. or Togozelbek and jakarbek salinquis two turkish captain subdue many of his town in Karasan and force Alaon Daule and Abusale out of their government whereupon masud return be by other of his enemy overthrow herewith enrage he put many turk to death which have fight in this last battle but faint on his part and make a expedition into India by treachery be take of his follower and soon after slay his blind brother mahamed recover the state but not his eye and therefore resign to his son Hamed who again be dispossess by Moadud the son of mafud but the turk in Karasan and Maurenahar will not acknowledge he and in the 435. of the Heg. have the victory against his army other turk also go out of Turquestan spoil the country of Garmeer and Kandachar this seem a true story of the turk beginning of greatness in Persia then that which be usual receive and be thus by mirkond a persian historian deliver Moadud have relieve Lahor which his vassal in India rebel have besiege march against the turk but die in the way a. h. 441. at Bagadet matter have continue in confusion they have revolt from gelata Daule and proclaim Abulganiar king but he refuse and the turk soon after fire the town and spoil it this continue till a. h. 428. when the cold be so extreme that the river degile or Tigris be freeze twelve day together and the snow lie three span deep there a. h 434. ebrahem nealy Saliuqui a Turk enter Persia in the province of Hierak and take Amedon Tokzelbek before mention take Rey and spoil all Persia with a victorious army he also through the dissension of the son of Abulganiar after their father death find mean to increase himself and the chalife of Damascus force Kahem the chalife of Bagadet to flee to Tokzelbek for succour whereupon he enter Bagadet and put all to fire and sword rifle the very sepulcher to search for treasure he take malek rhaym the successor of Abulganiar who before he have help to win Scyras and the best part of Persia and imprison he where he die and thus the empire of the Daules be deadly sick soon after die Abdella Rachid also the successor of Maodud be so pursue by Tokzelbek that at last in a fort he be through the corruption of his guard by money take and murder then do he marry a sister of the decease proclaim himself king but not long after be in a public place to receive the salutation which they be accustom to make in those part ten of the chief man conspire together slay he Kahem or Alkahem die a. h. 467. and Almoktady Byla be caliph the forty eight in order in his time the turk and ferrogozad the other son of masud come to composition Almostazer Byla succeed his father in the Caliphate a. h. 487. in who time Bagadet have be ruin by the overflow of Tigris the situation be change and it be new build on the other side of the river towards the east where it now stand in a more commodious seat have have twenty five chalife since the foundation by Abuiafar and yet not one of they die in it he live in peace and die a. h. 512. this story be thus tell by zacuth in his time the astrologer foretold a exceed deluge not so great as in the day of Noah because then say they be seven planet in conjunction with whereas now there be but six Saturn be exclude this make the inhabitant of bagde afraid because of the low situation and cause they to stop the passage of the water the ismaelite which of devotion perform their pilgrimage be most of they drown the Calipha for this cause array the ginger which foretold this in royal apparel almostarched Byla fazele his son succeed he war against some prince of Persia and seize upon some province of masul Saliuqui king of Karason but masud have the better and slay the chalife A.H. 529. his son and successor rach Bila seek to revenge his death but have conquer a great part of Persia be slay also by masud a. 532. he follow his victory make himself master of Bagadet and place almoktafy Bila in the califate who take advantage of masud death which happen soon after march into Persia and recover that which masud have usurp which he enjoy peaceable and die a. h. 555. and now the chalife become great potentate again his son Almostanget Byla Issuf succeed the fifty three chalife after his death which be through heat by shut the door when he be in the bath succeed a. 566. almostanzy Benur elah Acen and he * * in his time the abasian chalife be receive in Egypt which the phetimaeans of Ali have separate zacuth die a. 577. Nacer hold the place forty seven year under who Bagadet do great flourish during his government the saliuquis be vanquish by the koarrasmians Altahar Byla mahamed the next chalife enjoy it but nine month his son almostancer Byla seventeen year in who time the Mogoles or tartarian win some province but by he be diverse time defeat almostacem or Musteatzem Byla Abdula be the fifty eight other reckon but fifty four and the last of the Chalifaes of Bagadet the thirty seven of this family which have command about five hundred twenty three year in the persian chronicle of mirkond and other esteem as king thereof he die a. h. 655. I confess zacuth and mirkond do not full agree in name time and relation nor yet much disagree I have here most observe the late as the large not long before one profess himself a prophet send of GOD have of the scum of all nation gather a army wherewith he commit much excess and slaughter in Asia both of jew and christian in the time of this last chalife the tartar king Chita make his brother Halacho king of Irak and Mesopotamia who besiege and sack bagd and slay Musteatzem this Chalipha be starve by his commandment in the midst of his treasure because he will not employ the same through nigardise for his own defence from that time there have be no chaliph say this arabian history in Bagdet in he end the abasian line of which have be five and thirty caliph @. 4 of their title greatness and learning after Mahumet or Muhammed the false prophet the first captain of war be call emirelmumenim a a jacob de Vitriaco hist Ieros. l. 1. c. 9 Amir Amira Amiras amara Bedwel hence be our title admiral compound and of (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the sea that be to say the captain of the Sound-believer and after because under cloak of religion they seize on the primacy and tyranny spiritual and temporal they name themselves caliph that be vicar Bedwell interpret successor the first emirelmumenim be abubecher when by his successor governor b b such be the governor of Chorasan Irak sirrah Damascus jaman Mutzul Halep Gunia Mahaan the arabian call they king and their heir succeed they be send into Spain and Africa they for a time hold the same as deputy although to their power nothing lack but the title of a king yet they profess to do all in the name of the emirelmumenim until afterward they take that title also themselves and become absolute whence all the petty king of Spain and the african potentate be call emireelmumenim and the king of Barbary be so style at this day even as the french king be call christianissimus and the Spaniard catholicus the legate of the Chalipha be call Naibin which also signify the same that Chalipha but this be make peculiar to those saracen tyrant which use both sword to speak in the romish language supreme in matter divine and human thus observe joseph Scaliger c c can. Isag. l. 3. of these name whereby appear that Emire elmumenim be not give only to Abedramon and his successor in Africa as be before observe out of Curio Benjamin Tudelensis name the chaliph which in his time rule in bagde Amir Almumanin Alghabassi which Montanus translate the prince of the believer which live in penance or heaviness but I rather incline to Mr. selden conjecture that it be emirelmumenim of the abazian race or kindred for so Benjamin add after that the proper name of this great king be Al-ghabassi Hhaphtsi who I take to be the same which be before call moktaphi the first syllable in that name be common as you see to many of they and ktaphi or Chaphtsi not so unlike as many name prove in their transmigration from one language to another he report that he have a palace of three mile compass within the city within which be a wood or grove of tree of all sort both barren and bear beast also of all sort for game and in the midst thereof a great lake with plenty of fish neither want there fowl for variety of disport he be skilful of the Hebrew and well respect that nation he have impose this rule on himself not to use any meat or apparel which he have not d d the great Turk observe some shadow of this custom in use one or other handicraft first earn to which purpose he make fine mat which be seal with his own seal be by his courtier sell the great man buy they for their use none of the ismaelite so he call the mahometans may see his face and the pilgrim which come from Mecca in the land of Eliman and pass this way desire to see he use to enter the palace and there cry out o lord light of the ismaelite and sunbeam of our law show we the brightness of thy face but he answer they nothing as not seem to regard they then his courtier and great attendant sue for they say o our lord spread thy peace over these man which come from far country etc. then will he let out at the window a skirt of his garment which they devout kiss and when one of those great man have say go in peace return full of gladness to their home where they be receive almost with veneration for so happy a exploit every of the prince which attend on he have their several palace within the great palace and be due observe wear also iron chain because they have once conspire to set up his brother but they have the revenue of town and city belong to they bring they by their officer notwithstanding thus do he conserve his majesty with the people and security with his own I omit the edifice and pillar of gold and silver adorn with gem which he mention in that palace out of which the chaliph come but once in the year in the month Ramadan or their easter solemnity at which time they resort thither out of far country to see he as if he have be Mahomet he be then carry on a mule royal apparel and crown with a diadem of unspeakable price on which he wear a black cloth in token that the day of death will obscure all that pomp and splendour the prince of Arabia Media Persia Tuboth do attend he and thus he go to the great temple build in the gate Bosra the people man and woman all clothe in silk and purple salute he peace be on thou our lord king he resalute they with his hand or move his garment be thus convey to the porch with music also of all kind and dance he ascend a tower of wood and there make a sermon of his law the wiseman of the ismaelite applaud his learning the people answer amen after this he give they all his blessing and a camel be bring to he which he kill for the Paschall feast and cause the prince to distribute piece of the flesh of the beast which himself have slay this they esteem a great gift this do they depart the king return by another way by the bank of Tigris alone the prince pass in the river unto the palace he have build a palace on the other side of Tigris on a branch of Euphrates which flow by one side of the city in which he have raise great house hospital for the sick and for the poor and for mad man with all provision for they at his charge this I have be bold to insert out of this jew because I know none other author that can acquaint we with the state of bagded in the time of her chief flourish before it be destroy by the tartar thus have we give you a Chronographical view of the ancient caliph with their first and great conquest omit the lesser and late as in the year 807. in Sardinia and Corsica in 826. in Crete 843. in Sicil and present after in e e lud. reg. l 8. Italy overrun tuscan and burn the suburb of Rome itself with the church of Peter and Paul 845. the next year in Illyria Dalmatia beside the take of Ancona in 847. chase by pope Leo f f plat. in pont. from Ostia these with other their affair of war in lucania Calabria apulia at beneventum Genua Capua which city they take I pass over after this great body grow lubberly and unwieldy it fall under the weight of itself none so much as the saracen overthrow the saracen as their g g Cairaoan become a papacy absolute though schismatical as they call it so do Morocco the persian be always prone to such schism and other as it serve for their advantage sect and division make plain nevertheless this dis-joining and disjoint notwithstanding their religion even still cover a great part of the world for beside the triumph sword of the Turk persian Mogore barbarian and other mahometan prince such be the zeal of the superstitious mahometan that in place further distant this their religion have be preach which they trade together with their merchandise even from the atlantike ocean unto the philippinas it have sound in China it have pierce Tartary and although the name of christian extend itself into so many sect and profession in the country of Asia Africa and America beside Europe almost whole christian yet it be hard to say whether there be not as many disciple and professor of this ridiculous and impious devotion as of all those which give their name to Christ in whatsoever truth or heresy master Brerewood account the mahumetan more than the christian in proportion of six to five thus have the field and the church stoop to Mahomet we may add more Saul among the prophet learning have flourish among the mahometans at first unlearned and rude but enemy to learning in other yea they h h ber. Aldrete var. antiq. l. 3. c. 33. seek to propagate their impious mahometry and extirpate the christian truth by that policy of julian prohibit all learning to their christian subject such a decree of Abdalla a. 766. be recite by theophanes when the king of Africa possess Spain they found university both at Morocco it be i i scal. Epist. step. Uberio he say that the figure which we use in arithmetic come from the arabian or moor to the spaniard and thence to we about three hundred year since and then much differ from those chaacter which now we use scaliger report and in Spain allow yearly stipend to the professor and in those time be great ignorance of good learning in the latin church when good discipline flourish exceed among the Muhammedans yea whatsoever the latin write after the industry of the arabian have acquaint they with their ignorance be whole to be ascribe to the arabian both their philosophy physic and mathematics for they have no greek author which be not first translate into Arabic and thence into latin as Ptolomey Euclid and the rest till Constantinople be take by the turk the greek exile bring we back to the fountain John Leo testify that many ancient author and great volume be among they translate out of the latin which the latin themselves have lose but now the Muhammedans be grow artless in Africa only in Constantinople may good Arabic and persian work be get by the help of the jew lud. Viues k k trad. Discip lib. 4. and Ludovicus Viu cause corrupt art. l. 4. Alcorani and say that they translate Arabic out of the latin but he be not so well able to judge thereof although he right ascribe the corrupt of art to unskilful translation and show the difference of Abenrois or Auerrois his Aristotle as the latin have he from the greek but his invective be too bitter in condemn all the arabian as unlearned dote and savour more of the Alcoran then of art and the Spaniard may bear some grudge to that nation which so many hundred year have spoil Spain still leave the four part of the spanish language as Scaliger l l scal. Epist. ad Casaub testify thereof Arabic in monument of their conquest of their learned man be m m Lud reg. 7. 14. Avicen Auerrois auempace Algazel etc. philosopher Mesue rasis and many other physician and astrologer mention in the chronicle of Zacuthi leo and Abilfada Ishmael geographer Cairaon bagd Fez Morocco Corduba etc. be university of saracen student but now learn and school be decay and ruin even as at first also it be among some of they little countenance as appear by that Hagag in the 96. year of the Hegira who be governor or king of n n whereof Taurus be chief city m. polo lib 1. cap. 9 call it Hierach magin med a Irak in his sickness consult with a ginger whether the star have tell he of any king death that year he answer that a king shall die but his name be cani whereupon Hagag remember that at his birth his mother have impose that name on he I shall die say he but thou shall go one hour before and present cause his head to be smite off a unhappy harbengership in regard of his art a unhappy art which can better tell other destiny than their own but no marvel in Hagag who be flesh in blood that his herodian testament shall be thus bloody who in his life have in that median province slay a hundred and twenty thousand man beside fifty thousand man and fourscore thousand woman which perish in his imprisonment baghdad or Bagdat baghdad which be also call dar-assalam that be the city of peace * * the devil jerusalem the tartarian conquest be here omit receive that name of a monk call Bachdad who as Ben-Casen write serve a church build in that meadow but abu-giapar Almansur the second abassaean Chalipha who win it a. Heg. 150. name it dar-assalam it be the city royal of Mesopotamia now call Diarbecr which the say Almansur place in a large plain upon Tigris and divide by the river into two city join by a bridge of boat this city build in this place Almansur rule many year and after he other caliph till the 339. year of the Hegira in which king aadhd-eddaule and saif-eddaule take it who with their successor enjoy it till Solymus the ottoman emperor subdue and be now rule by a with many janissary but hereof Ahmad Abi Bacr of Bachdad in his annal will show you more this city be famous for school of all science both in former and the present time here Ahmad assalami a famous poet write his verse here Alpharabius the renown philosopher and physician bear at farab in Turcomannia profess these study public with great applause and leave many of his scholar in this city go to Harran of Mesopotamia Aristotle book of physics admire where find Aristotle book de auditu he read it forty time and write upon the book that he be willing again to read it hence he go to Damascus and there die a. h. * * this number seem false Bochara the city of Auicenna some say in Bocara near Samercand 339. thus ben-casem in his book Bochara be a ancient city upon Euphrates in a village belong whereto Honain Ali bensina who the latin call Auicenna be bear a. h. 370. he give himself to physic very young and be the first which become physician to king and prince who before in that country use o o this seem to arise of their opinion of fate Auicenna no physician he publish near a hundred book many of physic some of philosophy a dictionary of herb and stone verse of the soul etc. he live eight and fifty year and die in Hamadan he have run through all art at eighteen thus ben-casem but other affirm that a certain physician flourish of great note upon who no pray nor pay can fasten a disciple lest the secret of his art shall be make common the mother of Auicenna offer her son to do he service in decoction and other mean office which he can not do himself nor be there fear of danger from he who nature have make deaf and therefore dumb he make trial his dissimulation and find Auicenna deaf as he think and entertain he who watch his time and transcribe his book and note send they close to his mother which after his mother death he publish in his own name Damascus Damascus be call of the arabian sciam and Demasc of the syrian Darmsuc it be luxurious in fruit of all kind rich in olive and iron of excellent temper by nature and so better by art that no helm or shield can withstand it it be seat in a large plain at the root of Libanas there call Hermon six mile in compass double wall with a strong square tower in the midst build by a florintine beautify with spring market-place public building meskit bath cane and all sort of like weave and in all ancient time with learning and learned man here flourish saint Damascen and here almotannabbi excel in art and arm comparison of Mahomet and Almotannabbi m. Abi Abdillah emulous of Mahomet but not with like success he be call nabion that be the prophet this motannabbi that be prophesy he write the Alcoran elegant and eloquent this excel in prose and verse both have follower but this man disciple after his death be disperse which happen a. h. 354. ben-casem also relate that Mohamed Abi Abdillah profess philosophy in this city and to dispute with all comer and write a huge book he die there A.H. 638. Aleppo Aleppo be call of the inhabitant Haleb the chief mart of all the east frequent by persian indian armenian and all european the port be Scanderoone call by the inhabitant Escanderuneh the soil be very fertile and nourish abundance of silkworm A.H. 922. sultan Selim take it and find therein infinite wealth Sciarfeddin a turkish historian Sciarfeddin which write the victory of the othoman in two tome say that it have of gold and silver coin 1150000. and a mighty mass uncoin vest of cloth of gold tissued or wrought with gold silk and scarlet above 300000. beside abundance of gem and pearl and beside other wealth innumerable it have eight armoury well furnish it now flourish in the next place to Constantinople and Caito and may be call queen of the east here be store of gem amber bengeoin aloe and musk musk how make which be take from a little reddish beast beat with many blow on one place that the blood may all come thither then be the skin so swell and full of blood bind straight that the blood may not issue and put into one or more bladder be dry on a beast back till the bladder fall off of itself and that blood after a month become excellent musk at Aleppo be bear that great grammarian Othaman Abu Homar surname ben-ellhhageb which write Cafia and sciafia of grammar and die a. h. 672. chap. 3 the life of Mahumet Mahammed or Muhammed the saracen lawgiver @. i. Mahomet life after the history of christian the life of Mahomet be at large describe by diverse author but I find it no where so full as before the Koran in the italian edition the sum whereof and of the other report touch the same be this Ishmael be the first according to that italian author other ascribe it to Abraham that build the temple at Mecca and have to wife a egyptian idolatress have by she twelve son which as he say be disperse in Arabia Persia Armenia sow so many sort of religion and chedar his second son place in the temple of his father upon a high tower call Alquibla a idol name Allech and Alleze institute certain cremony and among the rest the sacrifice of a ram in remembrance of that ram which be present to his grandfather Abram at the offering of Isaac of chedar a a reckon another genealogy and the saracen chronicle continue this even from Adam not agree with themselves or any truth descend Thebic and so in order Caab Numhib Almucaien Ahlucen Acaha Amubasca Amir Celif Nisca Abhimaistae aadirem Scaad Mudhar ilge Mudicita Hudhaifa Chinene Melich Phasce Paliff Lunai Cabnai Morta Chelef Facien abdamanef Abdalmutalif Abdalla the suppose father of Mahomet his mother name be hennina or hemina a jewish as some b b i. bo. ben. volater etc. write his father be a Ethnic or pagan idolater his base condition and obscurity be such that the turk themselves doubt whether he be a arabian or persian notwithstanding that genealogical rabble c c Christ rich Richerius report that he be a cyrevean by birth and that in the time of his minority or childhood he be by some plagiary steal away from his friend and sell to the Ismaelite-merchant other say that he be abandon both of father and mother and according to the cruel custom of that barbarous people sell to stranger from so base a beginning do this cunning impostor and seducer of the world arise to be the scourge of prince and disturber of the world he be somewhat comely of person and of sharp wit and therefore be make overseer of the business of Abdalmutalif his master or as some say his grandfather and trade for he in Soria Egypt and Persia and after his death inherit his good continue his trade of merchandise with a great man of Corozan he succeed he in his bed and wealth by the marriage of his widow Gadisa who d d arab nobilis in alcor refut cedrenus call her chadicha other call Adega the daughter of Hulert and that as some suspect not unprobable by the help of sorcery and incantation with this widow after she be become his wife he live in his wont course of life thirteen year and have by she one son and three daughter and by this mean grow great he aspire high assemble to himself a company of thief unthrift and outlaw which with he become voluntary and adventurer in the war of the emperor heraclius against the persian in which he valourous behave himself and be wound in the visage and cosdroes the persian king be overcome after this Mahomet devise further how to satisfy his ambitious desire of sovereignty meet with occasion fit those his aspire design the arabian be deny their pay as be say raise a mutiny and e e this mutiny according to other happen many year after that Mahumet have under the cloak of religion further his ambition and rebellion rebellion these choose Mahomet to be their captain who use they as his instrument of robbery and violence about the country of Mecca but the noble oppose themselves against he he perceive that their power and authority will be a perilous rub in his way think it his safe course to insinuate with they and therefore seek by alliance to win their better like take some of their daughter to his wife of which he have at one time eleven and in all his life fifteen beside two slave heraclius at that time favour the heresy of the monothelite and neglect the affair of the empire Mahomet project take better effect hummar also and Mauchia cause all Soria and judaea and Egypt to rebel Sergius at that time a nestorian monk of Constantinople thence for that heresy excommunicate resort to Mahomet kindle these spark into a great fire persuade he to countenance his rebellion with the pretence of religion the rather now that heraclius have offend the christian by his exaction and heresy and the jew by new cruelty because by magic he have be warn to beware of the circumcise nation thus some male content jew and some heretical christian be call to counsel it be agree that he shall profess himself to be choose in this turbulent state of the world to bring unto the same a new law appoint hereunto by divine authority to the jew affirm himself their expect Messiah to the christian promise amidst so many heresy the rule of truth to the excommunicate heretic restitution of their person and good to servant liberty to subject immunity from tribute and thus he cause himself of Sergius to be baptize and to be f f he neither be circumcise himself say a arabian nobleman in confutation of the Alcoran nor do command any thing thereof in his law but the arabian use circumcision before his time circumcise also of Abdalla a jew have before be a paynim after he get himself into a cave two mile from the town call garb continue there two year in company of Sergius and Abdalla which acquaint he with the christian and jewish principle and in the night resort to his wife who he persuade to this vain belief by Zeidinus his servant reward he therefore with freedom and proclaim as by a edict from heaven the like liberty to all servant of all sort which will follow he this rout resort to he and by their number strengthen his faction their master not a little aggrieve give out a rumour that Mahomet be mad and possess of a devil and that a evil end will befall he and his follower and although they may have get he into their hand yet in regard of his nine uncle and some noble family link he in kindred viz. the corasi the Hassinist the benitamine they abstain from further rigour thus with the help of Sergius and g g Sansovino call he Bacira and add also Nicholas a priest of Rome Baira a jacobite and Cillenus in the cave with the favour of his two uncle Hanza and Alaben at Mecca with his elder brother that take his daughter fatima and Eubocara a chief man of that place afterward his father in-law he compose after his and their pleasure constitution and canon and publish the same at Mecca with protestation that the angel Gabriel have be send to he from God as in old time to the prophet to teach he these thing and in the first place command they to believe in God the creator of heaven and earth the causer of rain and fruit that inflict death on man and after raise they up to give they either in reward of their good work paradise or of their bad hell and such other thing never before hear of among these simple idolatrous inhabitant of Mecca he grow in great estimation for in Persia and Arabia before this time some worship a tree which they call Putulangua offer sacrifice thereto some a idol call Bliomum and some the sun and other use other idolatry spread by the so many son of Ishmael and therefore the rude multitude astonish with these prophetical and angelical title be easy bewitch and by degree he publish his intend wickedness not spare outrageous villainy as h h Mahomet a thief and murderer the steal of a camel the murder of a jew sleep under a tree yea he pretend not human infirmity but divine authority to his most mischievous designment for example be lustful affect to i i a adulterer Zamech the daughter of Gaissi the wife of Zaidi he write in his law that after vow or promise of marriage it be lawful for he to enjoy she and if he please to take she to his wife and be reprehend that Aissa his k k a wittol wife be dishonest with Zaphagam the son of Almuthathum the angel forsooth say she be chaste and be find by his wife with Mary the wife of macobe the king of the jacobite he in another chapter be absolve of his oath and free to lie with any woman not be able to contain himself notwithstanding he have swear so to do and by the same authority he enjoin they penance for blame the prophet and willing to divorce one of his wife but fear the greatness of her kindred he frame one chapter blame he for fear man more then god. meet once with a woman on the way he will have abuse she but she refuse he set upon her ass lettuce befit his lip affirm that that woman have more sin then if she have slay a hundred man and the saracen to this day say l l pet. alf. Breidenbach Petrus Alfonsi deplore that fact of this saracen woman he want not his miracle also in his legend as he journey in the heat of the day with m m Mahomet miracle his camel a cloud cover his head from the scorch heat of the sun about the seventeen year of his age and when he first enter the cave he see the angel Gabriel in his proper shape with white wing on a seat of gold betwixt heaven and earth who bring he his prophecy and go to Mecca to tell his wife the beast tree stove and herb salute he with the name of a prophet and a messenger of God and the trunk of a tree stand in the way divide itself for he to pass between and then after close again he also to satisfy his incredulous uncle Bugellinus cause the moon to descend from heaven which enter into his sleeve and after part itself in two and then ascend again to satisfy the people doubt he cause a bull teach before to come at his call to bring on his horn a chapter which he there have tie to testify the truth of Mahomet but while the fame of this prophetical function fill the mouth of the vulgar with acclamation it no less fill the heart of the noble of Mecca with disdain who seek therefore to apprehend he but he close flee to jetrib or Medina with his follower where he live with the name of a prophet thirteen year from this flight they begin the computation of their Hegira the word hegirathi signify a persecution for religion wherein Mahomet imitate the christian of those part who account their year from the persecution of Dioclesian that his flight happen on the sixteen of july an. dom. 622. on Friday therefore do they keep holy the Friday and because then the moon show her new horn that become a sacred ensign to the mahometan and on tower where they watch to observe the new moon they set up a horn moon as christian on steeple use to erect the cross for then there be no new moon day of there month Muharram n n for the understanding of this read scal. E.T. lib. 2. and 5. but be the second day after the jewish account and therefore the new moon may then be see but for the Friday it be observe before Mahomet time as shall after be show he deprive a certain carpenter poor orphan of their patrimony and consecrate their house into a temple this city be for most part inhabit with jew they ask a sign in confirmation of his Office he say that he be not send with miracle but denunciation of arm here and hell hereafter and those which will not receive his new doctrine he expel by force be absolute lord here he aspire also to the dominion of Mecca he send thirty horse with Hanzeta to rob the merchant travel thither but be then prevent he send four year after six hundred of his best soldier under Hugaida to assault Mecca but he also be discomfit yet not desist his enterprise seven year after he achieve it and after eleven battle enter and sack the town and give the spoil to his soldier and for fear the neighbouring-city submit themselves Mahomet here with encourage assault the persian and egyptian exchange with those he conquer his new religion for their old wealth and liberty bind the governor thereunto but now be old and through his intemperance weak and disease also with the fall sickness he colour his often fall with pretext of gabriel brightness and the unsufferable splendour of his presence he be of mean stature large sinew brown colour broad face with a cut lip and have one of his foretooth strike out in one expedition and in another his face wound he have great head thin hair long shank not proportionable to his head he be of few word but deceitful covetous and withal prodigal but of other man good and in deed of lust equal himself to forty other man or as some say fifty when he be threescore and three year of age he die of which he live in trade of merchandise thirty eight and in the cave two at Mecca ten in Medina thirteen he have command that they shall not bury he for that on the three day after he will ascend in body and soul into heaven meanwhile the earth be poison with the stink of his carcase they bury he not at Mecca as some affirm but at Medina his law in his life-time sustain many alteration Cellenus his scribe write what himself please and the several parcel of the same be collect by odman one of his successor this book be thereupon call Koran that be a Summarie or collection of precept thus Mahomet advantage himself with the mutinous rebel fugitive unthrift Apostata-Jew and heretical christian in that disease state of the empire the body whereof be afflict on the east by the persian on the west by the goth and other barbarian and fret within his own bowel by intestine rebellion the soul thereof be no less tear and rend by the sect and heresy of the arian donatist nestorian pelagian and other he fish in these trouble water set on foot his new religion to bring light to the gentile and to mitigate to the jew and christian the severity of the law and gospel but the mahometans themselves do report otherwise fable of this fable great matter as if he have be the promise and hope of nation and the most excellent personage of the World @. 2 the saracen story of Mahomet life they have write a book of the generation of Mahomet to this effect o o legend of Mahomet Dalmata interpret the book of the generation of Mahomet the messenger of God the prayer and salvation of God be upon he from Adam and Eve to the time when God bring he forth gracious perfect and fit for himself when as Kabachbar have learn out of the p p these prophet be Abnabdalla Abnalmutaira abuzaid Abamacumet Alabez Alfad Abulambez Ezerigi Abnamare kabalchabar scholar of Kabalmedi or Kabalachbar scripture and by astrology that this prophet shall be bear to the world he hear that there be a man bear in jeseras a city of Arabia have all such mark and token as he have foresee by the prophecy and his art viz. a spot on his forehead a print between his shoulder etc. and to satisfy his desire he go thither to see where find those token fulfil in young Mahomet he thereupon expound the dark mystery of his far-fetched light learned of his master Kabelmedi in this manner when Adam be new create as he stand up his brain shake and make a noise as the leaf do which be shake with the wind whereas Adam wonder GOD say unto he the sound which thou have hear be the sign of the prophet and messenger of my commandment take heed therefore that thou commit the seed of light only to worthy loin and to a clean womb and this q q a mahumetan chronicle say that this light cleave to the hand of God two thousand year before Adam worship he as the angel after enclose in the rib of Adam etc. light of Mahomet that shall be bear shine from the face of Adam as the sun or moon at the full and when he have beget Seth that light pass instant from the face of Adam into the face of Eve in so much that the bird of the air and beast of the earth wonder at her beauty yea the angel every day salute she and bring her odour out of paradise till she bring forth Seth alone have before at every burden bring forth a brother and a sister Seth inherit this light which remain between heaven and earth the angel thereby ascend and descend upon Seth and cry always rejoice thou earth worthy of the light of Mahomet on he be prayer and salvation of God Adam draw near to his end declare unto he by his testament the mystery of that light and the genealogy of the prophet then descend Gabriel accompany with threescore and ten thousand angel bear every one of they a white leaf and a pen which sign the writing for the continuance of the order of the prophetical generation Seth receive this writing and be clothe with a double red garment shine as the sun as saft as the violet-flower from he it pass by succession to No and sem then to Abraham at who birth two light from the east and west meet in the midst lighten the whole world and the angel be hear sing that it be the light of the prophet Mahomet who shall be bear of his seed who word shall be in the virtue of God this light pass from Abraham to the face of Hagar be with child and after to Ishmael and God tell he that the soul of Mahomet in the begin of the creation be mingle with he and that his name in heaven shall be asmet in earth Mahomet in paradise Abualtrazim at this Sara grieve until three angel comfort she with the promise of Isaac from Ishmael it remove to keidar his son who be endue with r r sound courageous fair swift just a hunter and archer seven gift marry nulia of the land of Isaac but be warn by a oracle he take to wife Algadira a arabian and after by divine warning carry the chest of this light unto jacob then be hamel bear to he and receive the same light in which succeed thebicht Hamiessa ad Aduve Adne Machar Nizar Musar Aliez Madraca Horeima Knieva anofra melic falhrem Luie galiben kab Murran Cudai abdamenef Hesim a man by divine testimony free of all uncleanness to he do all king offer their daughter in marriage and among the rest Constantine which he refuse and marry Seline the daughter of Zeit and have by her abdalmutalib who light cause rain in drought to he a elephant postrate himself and say with man voice salvation be on you and on the light that shine out of your rein dignity fame honour and victory be on you and that there shall proceed from he a king great than all the king of the earth another time as he sleep on the stone which be place by Abraham in his oratory at Mecca he dream of a chain reach east and west and to heaven and to the depth which be present convert into a flourish herb Noah and Abraham present themselves interpreter of this dream Abdalla his son the father of Mahomet have a tutor give unto he to defend he from his enemy who seem a man but be none he be preserve from the lie in wait of the jew by threescore and ten angel which seem men. he wed s s or h daughter of Abdemenes ermina and therefore two hundred woman perish for his love some hang some burn themselves when the prescribe time be come in the month Dulheia on a friday-night GOD bad Ariduvan to open the gate of paradise that the innermost of his secret may be manifest for it please i say he this night to transport the light of my prophet from the reins of Abdalla into the womb of ermina and that it come into the world this be do as Abdalla the judge and lord of the arabian go into the house of prayer he perceive a great light to lighten from his house up towards heaven and present die on the twelve day of rab on a Tuseday Mahomet be bear circumcise and all frolik and then all idol fall and become black all kingdom be destroy and not one stand upright Lucifer be cast into the bottom of the sea and in forty day can not get out and then call his fellow and tell they that Mahomet be bear with the power of the sword who will take away all their power the same also GOD cause to be proclaim in heaven and earth his mother say that she be deliver of he without pain and angelical bird come to nourish the child and a man clothe in white present he with three key like to pearl which he take the key of victory the key of the law and the key of prophecy and after come three person with shine face present he a cauldron of emerald with four handle which Mahomet accept as a sign of his rule over all the world the bird cloud wind angel contend for the nourishment of the child but the cause be determine by heavenly voice affirm that he shall not be take from the hand of man a ass almost famish worship he and receive he on her back become herald to this new prophet with man voice proclaim the worthiness of her carriage three man carry he up into a mountain of which one open he from the breast unto the navel and wash his entrails with snow the second cleave his heart in the midst and take out of it a black grain say that it be the portion of the devil the three make he whole again Seraphin nourish he three year and Gabriel nine and twenty who give unto he in the forty year of his age the law and carry he to heaven this his journey be relate by friar Richard sometime a student in the university of Baldach chapter 14. and in his t t see also 3. cap. 7. life Gabriel with threescore and ten pair of wing come to Mahomet in the chamber of Aissa his best belove wife and say that GOD will have he to visit he where he be and bring with he the beast Elmparac or Alborach of nature between a mule and a ass this beast tell Mahomet that he will not take he on his back till he have pray to God for he his step be as far as one can see so that in the twinkle of a eye he have bring Mahomet to jerusalem then Gabriel with his girdle tie the beast to a rock and u u la vita Mahometi say in a shine ladder they go up to heaven where the star hang by golden chain as big as mount Notho by Medina carry Mahomet on his shoulder into heaven where he knock and the porter open here Mahomet see 10 10 there be in the first heaven angel of the shape of all creature pray for the creature of their shape and a cock who foot touch one heaven and head the other who crow move the cock of the earth to do so in the second be noe. this heaven be of gold the three of pearl wherein be Abraham and the huge huge angel of death with his book and pen in hand write the time and man life which fatal opinion make they hardy the four be of emerald here be joseph and the angel of compassion weep for the sin of man the five of diamond and in it Moses the six of ruby and in it John Baptist the seven of fire and in it jesus Christ all these recommend themselves to his prayer troop of angel and pray twice on his knee for they and among the rest old father Adam rejoice for such a son and commend he to his prayer then he bring he to the second heaven which be a journey of five hundred year and so forth on to the seven heaven here he see the angelical people every of which be a thousand time great than the world and every of they have threescore and ten thousand head and every head threescore and ten thousand mouth and every mouth seventeen hundred tongue praise God in seven hundred thousand language and he see one angel weep and he ask the cause who answer that he be sin and Mahomet pray for he then Gabriel commend he to another angel and he to another and so forth in order till he come before GOD and his throne then GOD who face be cover with threescore and ten thousand clothes of light and from who Mahomet stand two stone cast below touch he with his hand the coldness whereof pierce to the marrow of his backbone and GOD say I have impose on thou and on thy people prayer when he be return as far as the four heaven Moses counsel he to return back to obtain case unto the people which can not bear so many prayer which he do oftentimes till there remain but few thus return to his Elmparac he rod back to his house at Mecca all this be do in the ten part of the night but when he be request to do thus much in the people sight he answer praise be GOD I be a man and a apostle the book Asear say bellonius tell further that in this journey Mahomet hear a woman voice cry Mahomet Mahomet but he hold his peace afterward another call he but he give no answer Mahomet ask the angel who they be he answer that the one be she which publish the jew law and if he have answer she all his disciple shall have be jew the other be she which deliver the gospel who if he have answer all his follower have be christian the say book tell that GOD give he a fivefold privilege first that he shall be the high creature in heaven or earth second the most execellent of the son of Adam three a universal redeemer four skilful in all language five that the spoil of war shall be give he Gabriel after say that book carry he to hell to see the secret thereof and the seven gate thereof etc. where as in the place fit for he we will leave he the book of the virtue of Mahomet say that in glory of his strength he will boast that he have know his eleven wife successive in one hour one of their chronicle tell of his martial affair this chronicle reckon from Adam to no one thousand two hundred forty and two year from thence to Abraham one thousand and fourscore hence to Moses five hundred and fifteen after he to David five hundred threescore and nine and from this time to Christ one thousand three hundred and fifty from whence to Mahomet be number six hundred and twenty in all five thousand three hundred threescore and sixteen from Adam to Mahomet all the prophet be in number a hundred and twenty thousand and the messenger of GOD three hundred and fifteen whereof Adam Seth Esdrik Noah Abraham be Hebrew Huth Schale ishmael Schaib Mahomet be arabian if this history of Mahomet life be long and tedious I think good out of a arabian chronicle to add this epitome thereof his mother die in a journey to Mecca when he be fourscore year old and his nurse restore he to his grandfather Abdalmutalif with who he live eight year the seraphim preserve he but be never see after that Gabriel be his guardian of who he receive the law which he keep close three year communicate it only to some of his own opinion by who help he become priest and prince of the arabian and saracen and about eighteen month after be carry into heaven and be return into the earth he take Eubocara Ali and zaid to be his companion in this enterprise he go to zaif or atharf and preach public and thence to Mecca ten year go from place to place and of he convert he choose some for guard of his person who swear the observance of his law to the number of forty who now with word now with the sword set forward this doctrine after ten year Mecca be people only with believer and all Arabia be convert without difficulty then he send to the neighbour king to become of his religion to the king of Persia to the roman emperor to king Cinna to the lord of the two sea to the king of Aethiopia etc. after he return to jetrib and on Tuesday the twelve of rab in the eleven year die his sepulture be appoint by GOD in the house of Aisca his wife in the chamber where he be wont to sleep where at this day be a temple of brick his body be wrap in three white clothes without any pomp his seal be a silver ring with this inscription Mahomet the messenger of God he go twice on pilgrimage and nineteen time conduct a army the place of his burial be at Medina surname of he Talnabi a a Nobi a prophet that be of the prophet not as some write at Mecca neither do his corpse hang in the air by force of loadstone draw up his iron coffin or chest but lie bury in the ground if anywhere as Ludovicus Verttomannus by his own view have observe of this place and of Mecha we shall speak more in relate the rite of the pilgrim that visit they the book of the policy of the turkish empire some relate otherwise of the death of Mahomet as that he die at forty year of age be poison by one of his disciple call albunor to make trial of his boast prophecy that he will rise again within three day after his death this albunor after come to see he find his body tear in piece and devour of dog whereupon gather together the bone that remain into a coffin he cause they to be bury which in my mind be not so probable as the former report the day of his death Scaliger account the ten year of the Hogira scal. E.T. p. 741. on Monday the twelve of rabie 1. or rather the evening before that be the sixteen of june in the year of our lord 631. and be bear the five of May an. dom. 570. on the same day and month sixty three Arabic year before unto this which have be speak I have think good to add out of Arabic author collect by Gabriel and John the maronites this which follow computation of their Hegera mahomed be bear at Mecca and in the forty year of his age and as ben-casem have in the 933. of Alexander the great begin to utter his doctrine first privy after that public whereupon he be banish the city in the fifty two of his life note for reconciliation thereof with christian account or according to Abdillatif ben-iusof the fifty three and flee to jathreb from which flight which they call Hegeraton or Hegera which happen a. b. 622. or thereabouts and although this year 1623. be to they 1032. yet because they reckon according to the year of the moon which they say consist of three hundred fifty four day the moon course have in this space exceed that of the sun some month above thirty one year whereupon their month be uncertain in this city by subtle hypocrisy mahomed become political and ecclesiastical prince and begin to procure the friendship of many and to promulgate his law by degree in the second year of his flight he enact his law of fast in the three forbid wine and swines-flesh and so proceed with the rest that within eight year he bring into subjection Mecca whence he have be expulse and Muna and go forward with his law and conquest as concern his wife ben-casem say he have four he be also report to have many harlot and concubine and in this chapter surato-lbaqra or he bid they marry one two three or four wife a man Mahomet filthiness and to take as many concubine as they be able to keep Ben-Sidi Ali say that he glory that he have the power of ten prophet in copulation give he by God yea he ascribe all his villainy to God by ministry of the angel Gabriel his first wife be name Chodaige by who he have two son his four wife and his child and four daughter Zainab Fatema who Ali marry the three and Rakia the four both which Abu-beer marry his second wife be Aifee daughter of aba-becr the first Chalifa which be but six year old Ben-Casem be our author when Mohamed take she to wife the mosleman call she the mother of the faithful mo she of the mosleman who beside the knowledge of tongue peruse diligent the Arabic history love exceed and always praise Mohamed the three be name Mary which bring forth to Mohamed Ebrahim surname Casem whence Mohamed be often call Abulcasem though ben-abdilatif will have Ebrahim to be one and Casem another but ben-casem say he have but three son of which Ebrahim Casem die at eighteen month and Taiheb and Taher his son by codaigre die both in their cradle Mohamed last wife be Zainab who also they call the mother of the faithful before the wife of zaid ben-harteh Mohamed master who divorce she whereupon Mohamed glad take she to wife he have four councillor or companion the first Abdollah or Abu-Bacr his four associate or counsellor abi-bacr Homar his sincere and most inward friend a man very rich and releever of Mohamed necessity his successor after his death he die the thirteen year of the Hegira and sixty three of his age and be bury in the same grave with Mohamed the second be Homar the son of chattab surname Faruq who succeed abi-bacr and rule ten year and six month he be the first which be call king of the faithful and write the annal of the mosleman and bring the Alcoran into a volume and cause the ramadam fast to be observe he be slay the twenty three of the Hegira and bury by abi-bacr the three be Othman Othman who in his twelve year reign subdue Cyprus Naisabur Maru Sarchas and Maritania and die a. h. 35. and be bury in the burial place of the city Aali Aali be the four who be call also Emir Elmumenin that be king of the faithful he be slay a. h. 40. in the sixty three of his age and be bury in the city Kerbelai he be uncle son or cousin-german to Mohamed and his son-in-law and dear familiar from his youth and receive the Mosleman law together with Mohamed whereupon he be wont to say I be the first Mosleman and therefore the persian detest the other three caliph as heretic burn their writing wheresoever they find they and persecute their follower because forsooth they be so impudent to prefer themselves before Aali Mohamed death and sepulchre and spoil he of the right-due by testament hence be war and hostile cruelty they and the turk and arab Mohamed the false prophet in the eleven year after his Hegira or flight and the sixty three of his age die at Medina and be bury there in the grave of Aaisee his wife here be a stately temple and huge erect with elegant and munificent structure daily increase and adorn by the cost of the othoman and gift of other prince within this building be a chapel not perfect square cover with a goodly roof under which be the urn of stone call Hagiar monauar sometime belong to aaisce aforesaid this be all cover with gold and silk and compass about with iron grate guild within this which shine with gold and gem Mohammed carcase carcase be place and not lift up by force of loadstone or other art but that stone-urn lie on the ground the Mosleman pilgrim after their return from Mecca visit this temple because Mohamed yet live be wont to say that he will for he which shall visit his tomb as well as if he have visit he live intercede with God for a life full of pleasure therefore do they throng hither with great veneration kiss and embrace the grate for none have access to the urn of stone and many for love of this place leave their country yea some mad put out their eye to see no worldly thing after and there spend the rest of their day the compass of Medina be two mile and be the circuit of the wall which aadhd Addaule king of baghdad build a. h. 364. the territory be barren scorch sand bring forth nothing but a few date and herb chap. 4 of the Alcoran or alfurcan contain the mahometan law the sum and content thereof @. i. of the composition of the Alcoran the book of Mahomet law be call by the name of Alcoran which signify a collection of a a robertus Retinensis precept and alfurcan as it be express and expound in a book b b Harman dal. interpret call the exposition or doctrine of the Alcoran because the sentence and figure thereof be sever and distinguish for all be the article and phurcan signify a distinction or as some say redemption claude duret cite a opinion that of the Hebrew word Kara which signify the law or scripture come this word koran which with the article al signify (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the scripture as with they it be esteem the like have Soranzo master Bedwel in his arabian trudgman say that the be not KARANA as before be deliver but KARA which signify to read so that Alkoran in Arabic be just as much as hammikra be in Hebrew that be the text the authentical body of their Law it be call in that language the koran without the article al and Korran so cantacuzenus (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) as if one shall say their bible scripture or book of the Law the word of GOD say Mahomet in that book come not to i all at once as the law unto Moses the psalm to David and the gospel to Christ the sentence or chapter thereof be call Azoaras which be interpret a face as we call they capita head so say one which have write note upon the Alcoran but master Bedwel who have publish a index or table of all these azoara or chapter with their Arabic title as they be name and cite by the mahometans say that they call the name of the chapter Sura and with their article Assura or Suraton assurato and he derive of the Hebrew word Zobar that Azoara but this Arabic Sura be express not by Zain he but by Sin Wau and Resh differ letter be no other than the syrian Suriya which signify for as the book of Moses in the Hebrew and the section of the civil and canon law so these chapter for the most part be denominate of some notable word in the begin of the same and be so cite by mahumetan and learned christian yet these sometime name it by the interpretation as the chap. Albacara the chap. of the cow because the word so signify the stile c c the stile of it be not in meter as some have imagine for josephus Scaliger d d in in euseb chron. Deuteronomio and etc. Syriaco Arabico and Abyssino a great critic and repute one of the great linguist in the world affirm that that language be not capable of metrical measure by quantity of syllable as neither the Hebrew Abyssine or syrian he say yet that the Alcoran be compose in rhyme but such as be not in any tuneable proportion but that word which make up the rhyme be sometime near and sometime far beyond all harmony distant from that word whereto it answer a hobble kind of rhyme say master Bedwel in his index Alcorani and rude poem without all care for it be postellus his testimony you shall have a period of two hundred syllable to rhyme and hold like cadence to as other very short Scaliger add that at the end of such rhyme be set the figure of flower or some such matter which if it be so the turkish nicety of make no likeness of any thing in their carpet or other work be strict than these Alcoran book themselves and indeed be not common with they unto other mahometans who use their liberty in this point for the word and e e the phrase phrase no man ever write any thing in Arabian more rude say a arabian christian in confutation hereof and much better might Muzeilenia Helcasi and Alabazbi the aethiopian and Calliata Ellecedi which upon emulation compose also every one a Alcoran glory of those their work contain more honesty and truth neither have it please any noble or wise man but the rude vulgar of which sore the weary labourer glad give ear to his promise of paradise the poor delight to hear of garden in Persia and bankrupt and felon easy listen to security and liberty the language be vulgar postellus also testify and without all art of grammar such as be observe of their learned writer without all bound of reason or eloquence the method f f the method be so confuse that our arabian author who live before it be so general embrace and in free time say that he have hear even good saracen affirm with grief that it be so mix and heap together that they can find no reason in it bad rhyme as you have hear and worse reason Jerome Savanorola e e hierom. savam have the like say that no man can find herein any order nor can so confuse and foolish a work proceed from any natural or supernatural light it be yet crafty f f the subtlety ric. florentinus contrive when he have set down some wicked doctrine present to lace and fringe it with precept of fast prayer or good manner always take away thing hard to be believe or practise and where it deliver any truth it be maim with defect eclipse with obscurity and serve for a stale to falsehood Erpenius have translate the chapter of joseph contain a hundred and eleven verse the second of which call it coranto and the next Alcoran the article add his annotation be and although the matter be absurd and impious yet he say other perhaps have of zeal say otherwise that this coranto be compose with such purity of speech accurate analogy and express with perfection of writing that deserve it be to they the matter and rule of grammar they call it koran of a word which signify to read as a read lecture or collection of chapter as the learn arab will have it it be not much less than the new testament in word the arab extol it above all creature and rank it next to God and think he unworthy to live which touch it unreverent as a contemner of God they use it therefore with all reverence nor will permit a christian or a jew to touch it to sit on it be a grievous crime capital to jew or christian nor may they themselves touch it unwashed and therefore write on the cover thereof let no man touch it but he which be clean in it be one hundred and fourteen chapter of unequal quantity that of joseph the twelve the second as large as the last forty the first be but of six verse and therefore not reckon a chapter by our countryman Robert of read who also divide the five follow into more by ten that the seven be his seventeen every chapter have the name of the first word or of the subject as this be call joseph the first open because it present itself at the open of the book it be compose out of diverse paper of muhamed find at his house which he profess to receive from Gabriel at diverse time by Abubecr his father in law the Numa of that saracen empire each chapter be call Souraton and with the article whence the latin call it Azoara z. for ss. and o. a for o. u as in the word Alcoran it be not to be construe but a degree or step for these step the whole be pass and each of these be a lesson also to be con of child and of his disciple after these fancy have cause he to be expel Mecca he flee ten day off to jatfrib and there divulge the rest this be call Medina and Medinatalnabi the city of the prophet and hence some chapter have title of Mecca some of Medina this flight be the fifteen of july at night a. 622. which be their or computation of their year reckon by the moon so that their 1026. begin the twenty nine of December a. d. 1616. every chapter consist of verse very unequal and lame affect rhythm yea sometime a sentence be patch in to make up a rhythm before every chapter be prefix for so they read it coin together with article as if it be all one word the signification be in that be in the name of God show mercy merciful which be as much as exceed merciful or merciful in act and nature to these word they ascribe innumerable mystery and virtue so that they think that almost no work can have good success unless they preface it with this sentence therefore in the begin of their book they use it and whatsoever business they go about if it be to mount their horse or set forth to row a boat etc. as I have be tell also there be in the begin of chapter fourteen mystical word of the signification whereof the arab profess their uncertainty and Abubecr be wont to say that in every book God keep somewhat secret to himself which in the Alcoran be those mystical beginning of chapter diverse have diverse devise to hunt out cabalistical sense and state-period with other vanity from they they hold that all the Alcoran be send in one night which they call therefore and lest it may breed a contradiction that some part be deliver at Mecca for so it must be write not Mecha they say that muhamed receive they by piece of the angel as occasion require but he from God all in one night and so they will have the name signify also a book send from heaven thus much Erpenius in his annotation on that chapter wherein also he blame the old translation of Robert read as in other thing so in that that when his mistress bring joseph before other woman they be all say the translation menstruous and cut their hand say he be rather a angel than a man he translate for they magnify he add concern that cut off the hand that it be still a use of the arab persian and people of the east to express love my friend Mr. Bedwel forty year studious of Arabic have tell i that that translation of read be general reasonable well do nor be so faulty as some will have it or much read supply that way as for other supply it need a sword like that gordian knot rather then a pen that as by the sword it have be obtrude on the world as a just punishment of ingratitude to the son of God the eternal truth and not by reason or scripture which it corrupt mingle mangle maim as the impostor oblivion sometime sometime the memory of his own design occasion so by the sword and fire it may be root out of the world again the first surat or chapter which be the or daily prayer of the Muhamedans I will transcribe out of Erpenius call by they open as before be say and the mother of the book foundation treasure and perfection in the name of God the shower of mercy merciful praise to God the lord of the creature the shower of mercy merciful the king of the day of judgement we worship thou and we call upon thou direct we into the right way the way of they who be gracious towards they without anger against they and not they which err not amen the copy of d d the agreement of copy the Koran be diverse and after Mahomet death make if it can be worse at least otherwise than he leave they for Hali have one copy leave he by Mahomet which the jew corrupt add race change at their pleasure and promise he their assistance if he will profess himself a prophet but Ozimen command all the book to be bring and deliver into the hand of Zeidi and Abdalla to bring all into one book and where they dissent to read after the copy of Corais and to burn all the rest they thus compose the Alcoran whereof they leave four copy which after be lose and yet Hali Abitalib and Ibenmuzod then refuse to deliver their book whereupon arise diverse Readins and afterward diverse schism which to compound other often endeavour by like labour after but can not thorough perfect the same neither do that which we have translate agree with those thing which friar Richard and other cite out of it in their confutation thereof the e e the truth of the matter in it truth thereof be such in his devise of new and seek and alter the old that it be not probable in Viues opinion that ever he read the old and new testament for say f f io. Ludouic. Viu he though I think of he exceed bad yet think I he not so mad to change and wrest the scripture there especial where it make nothing against he but he have partly hear of such thing partly be so persuade by his fellow Apostata-Jew and christian this rhyme harsh confuse pack work disagree each copy from other and all from truth and honesty have be g g the translator translate into latin h h 1143. move by pet. cluniacensis who epistle thereof to s. bern. be extant once by a english man robertus Retinensis and after by joannes segobiensis a Spaniard at the council of Constance and after out of arabian into italian publish by Andraea Arivabene the first and last of these that of Robert of read and the italian translation be here by we follow for the Arabic I understand not nor can warrant this when so great a man as Scaliger find great fault with it he that undertake to mend the latin stile mar the sense and the italian beguile the world in profess to have translate out of the Arabic thus Scaliger who mention another translation then in hand which we be almost out of hope to see in the mean while such as we have we give to you it contain chapter or azoara 124. every of they beginning in the name of the merciful and pitiful God Euthymius zigabenus mention but 113. Mr. Bedwel say that all the Arabic copy which ever he see whether write in the east or west among the moor in Barbary do constant with one consent reckon 114. the reason of this difference be this some interpreter do not account the first for any chapter but make it a kind of preface Robert of read of the second chapter make four of the three three of the four four of the five two of the six three the first i i in the italian be 124. chap beside this first and the eastern saracen reckon it but one Azoara to the five Bellon l. 3. divide it into four book and 201. chap. of these be the word of Mahomet and be call the mother of the book and be as it be their creed the rest be all deliver as the word of GOD he be induce as speaker the first be in this sense in the name of the merciful and pitiful God thank be unto God the lord of the world merciful pitiful judge of the day of judgement we pray unto thou we trust in thou lead we into the right way the way of they who thou have choose not of they with who thou be angry and of the infidel postellus k k Postel l. 1. c. 13. thus translate it in the name of God merciful pitiful praise be to God king of the world merciful and pitiful king of the day of judgement o let we serve he and we shall be help direct we in the right point the point of they with who thou be well please without anger against they and they shall not err this prayer be say he as common to they as the lord prayer to we and be so over and over with battology by some of they repeat that they will say over the same word or two or three word a hundred time say Alhamdu lillah lillah lillah and so on with these and the other word in like manner and thus do the priest in their public prayer which they say supply the defect of such as be negligent in pray some will say and repeat it in the field till with weariness they fall down other with wheel about their body till they be beside themselves and then in imitation of Mahomet utter some ridiculous obscure fantastical speech they divide it into seven period which they call miracle as they be here by the point that which be before they in the name etc. Mahomet use to utter always when he arise from his sickness or trance and therefore be prefix to all the chapter and by devout author also in the begin of their philosophical work by these word the point and the right point they understand the Alcoran now let we see the doctrine contain in this book which with much labour I have thus reduce into theological head reduce that which therein be confuse heap and handle in diverse place to this method name the chapter or Azoara where the reader may find each sentence @. 2 the doctrine of the Alcoran bring into common place of * * of God and Christ GOD he a a Azo 122. write that he be one necessary to all incorporeal which neither have beget nor be beget nor have any like he the creator long-suffering searcher of the heart true that he will confound enchantment that without his gift none can believe this his Alcoran that he have no son for he need nothing b b Azo 20. and he which set a second in the place of GOD shall go into hell Az. 31. and he have no partaker 32. yet in azoar 67. he induce God speak thus to Christ the son of Marie we have give the gospel that by he man may obtain the love and favour of GOD and that the believer among they Christian shall receive a great reward as also in Az. 2. he say every one whosoever live right be he jew or Christian or if he leave his own law and embrace another if he worship GOD and do good shall undoubted obtain divine favour Az. 2. the creator say I be the only creator always the same pitiful merciful beside who there be none other who miracle and great work be unto the wise the frame of heaven and earth the intercourse of night and day the ship in the sea fit for the use of man rain for the refresh of the earth the composition of all creature the wind the cloud etc. 15. invoke and worship one GOD alone 43. all the miracle of GOD can be write if all the tree in the world be pen and the sea seven time great and be ink with who it be a small thing to raise the dead of the birth of CHRIST he write thus Azo 29. of Christ we send our spirit to Marie the best of all woman and the womb untouched azoar 31. in likeness of a man profess himself a divine messenger concern a son etc. and when she in travel plain Christ come from under she and say fear not and when some chide with she about the child the child itself make answer I be the servant and prophet of God he say the jew do not slay Christ but one like he Azo 11. and upbraid they for not receive he Azo 2. and chap. 4. to Christ the son of Marie proper communicate our own soul we have give he strength and power more than other prophet yet chap. 13. he disclaim that worship which be do he and his mother Az. 4. we give our soul to Christ the son of Marie prefer he before all other that have be exalt by i to speak with GOD to power and virtue he insert the prayer of the virgin mother when she feel herself with child by joachim and make Zachary to be the virgin tutor 5. who he say for his unbelief be dumb three day the angel salute Marie say o thou the pure of all woman and man devote to god. joy unto thou of that great messenger with the word of GOD who name be JESUS CHRIST a excellent man at the command of the creator he shall come with divine power with knowledge of all learning with the book of the law and gospel shall give commandment to the israelite shall give life cure disease show what be to be eat and to be do shall confirm the old testament shall make some thing lawful which before be unlawful etc. he acknowledge that his mother know not man 11. they say the jew that they kill Christ the son of Marie the messenger of GOD but it be not true but they crucify in his stead another like he for the incomprehensible GOD cause he to go unto he JESUS be the spirit and word and messenger of GOD send from heaven 11. and GOD speak to he Az. 13. and give he a clean and bless soul whereby he make yellow form of bird and breathe on they make they fly he cure one bear blind and the leprous and raise the dead GOD teach he the book and wisdom and the gospel and testament concern e e of his law and the follower thereof his law and Alcoran he handle it in the second chapter of Azoara which begin thus in the name of the merciful and pitiful God this book without any falsehood or error show the truth to they which love fear and worship GOD and be studious of prayer and alm and the observation of the law give of GOD from heaven to thou and other thy predecessor and the hope of the world to come have manifest the true Sect for this bring the follower thereof to the high enrich they with the high good as to the unbeliever and erroneous it menace true the great evil to come this he after apply to paradise and hell which be due to the enemy of Gabriel which intimate this book to his heart by the creator and to all the enemy of GOD and Michael and the archangel this his Alcoran he call the establish of the law of the israelite and Azo 21. he arrogate to his book wisdom and eloquence and 47. he say d d Azoara 47. it be compose of the incomprehensible and wise GOD every where agree with itself and call it 63. the book of Abraham and 69. if it shall be place on a mountain that mountain for divine fear will be dissolve those which will not be convert take and slay by all mean entrap they and fight against they till they be your tributary and subject and 18. the five part of all the prey be due unto GOD and his prophet and to your kindred and orphan and the poor those that be take in war kill or make slave but pardon they if they will turn to your law and GOD also will pardon they such good warrior shall have full pardon the jew and christian contrary to that he have say before let GOD confound he have send his messenger with the right way and good law that he may manifest and extol it above all law of the twelve month four be to be consecrate to fight against the enemy those that refuse this war-fare lose their soul and they which fly in the day of battle Az. 6. do it by the devil instigation thus punish they for their former sin yea the devil themselves Az. 56. being convert thereby say to their Diobolical nation we have hear a book send after Moses which approve all his say and teach the true and right way and Az. 12. he call the Alcoran a book of truth send from above a confirmer of Christ precept he say Az. 15. that Moses deliver some thing in writing more unwritten he make his book to be the same which GOD have teach Abraham Ishmael Isaac jacob Moses and CHRIST Az. 5. he say his book contain some thing firm and without exception some thing contrary which froward man pervert to controversy but the exposition thereof belong to GOD only and to the wise which believe that all of it come from God Az. 6. he excite they to defend it when he shall be dead or slay and God will reward they neither can any die but by the will of God to wit in the time appoint they which in the expedition shall have pardon which be better than all possession and a easy judgement and they which die in the way of God be not to be esteem dead for they live with god. that life be firm this and all worldly thing mutable 7. if the Alcoran Az. 9 be not of God it will have many contrariety in it which himself yet Az. 5. confess they which be well Az. 10. and remain at home be not of like merit as they which go to war the fire of hell be hot than the danger of war and although thou prophet shall pardon the resister of God and his messenger seventy time yet God will never pardon they the sick and weak and such as have not necessary be excuse from this necessity of war but to the good warrior God give paradise in reward of their soul and good whether they kill or be kill Azo 18. 19 and in 57 kill the unbeliever who you conquer till you have make great slaughter God can take vengeance on they but he choose rather to do it by you he shall lay deafness and blindness on the fainthearted yet in 52. and 98. as contrary to himself he affirm that he be send only to teach not to compel and force man to believe and Az. 4. offer no man violence for the law then the right way and the evil be open except we expound it rather that jew christian and all unbeliever be compel to be tributary and their slave not force to their religion but instruct only which agree with their practice from this doctrine and that of destiny in the 50. Az. have rise their forwardness to the war and the greatness of their conquest agreeable to this doctrine be their manner of teach it the reader or preacher as say friar Richard student among they in the university of Baldach hold a bare sword in his hand or set it up in a eminent place to the terror of the gainsayer but disputation e e Mahomet disclaim divine miracle and human disputation prove with the sword and reason about his law he utter dislike Az. 32. to such as will dispute with thou answer that God know all thy do which in the last day shall determine all controversy and 50. nothing but evil cleave to the heart of such as unwise dispute of divine precept but commend thou thyself unto God that know all thing and chap. 4. 15. he be command to go away from such this book be give to take way discord from man miracle he disclaim as insufficient proof for though it shall make plain the mountain and make the dead to speak yet they will be incredulous but it be thy duty only to show they my precept Azo 23. and Az. 10. you which be good believe in GOD in his messenger and in the book send from heaven they which first believe and after deny and become incredulous shall have no pardon nor mercy of GOD but shall go into the fire and 11. we will bring infinite evil upon he that will not obey GOD and his messenger and will be dispute to they which f f not to dispute nor seek a sign in proof of the Law demand that the book may rain upon they from heaven thou shall say that some ask a great thing of Moses that he will show GOD unto their eye and be therefore smite with lightning from heaven 12. to jew and christian GOD have give disagreement till GOD shall determine the same at the day of judgement make not yourselves companion of they which deride our Law no man receive the perfection of the law but he which believe the testament the gospel and this book send of god. 14. they which err will say let GOD show we miracle these hurt none but their own soul for if they shall see all g g the fox will eat no grape because they be sour and hang too high miracle do they will dispute with thou say that they can not be do but by enchantment thou shall not come to they with manifest miracle for they will refuse they as odious thing 15. dispute not with they which will not hear and if they demand miracle say GOD only do they I know not the secret of GOD and follow nothing but that which GOD and the angel have command and if angel shall speak to such they will not believe 16. GOD himself and his bless spirit have compound this most true book 26. 44. they which say his law be new or feign go to the devil 47. he induce some gainsayer say we will not leave worship our image for this jester and rhymer yet be he alone come with the truth confirm all the other messenger 55. he say I GOD write this book with my own hand 56. the unbeliever say I be a magician and have feign it but then I pray GOD I may have no part in he when he shall be our judge say not there be three God but one GOD alone without a son to he all thing be subject Christ can deny but that he be subject to GOD as well as the angel 12. we send Christ to who we give the gospel which be the light and confirmation of the testament and the right way to he which fear GOD the compliment of the jewish law therefore let every servant of the gospel follow his precept otherwise he shall be a bad man no religion or law attain to perfection but such as obey the precept of the testament and the gospel and this book the Alcoran send from god. to believe Jew and christian he promise pardon but Az. 13. prefer the christian to the jew all that say that Christ be GOD be unbeliever and liar Christ himself have say you child of Israel believe in your GOD and my lord of who he which will be partaker shall be cast into the fire eternal Christ be but the messenger of GOD before who be many messenger and his mother be true and they do eat good people exalt not yourselves in your law further than the truth 3. the soul of Christ be clean and bless he cure the leprous raise the dead teach wisdom the testament and the gospel the unbelieve israelite believe that he be a magician and 34. we have give a good place and abound with water to the son of Marie and to she for have do such miracle in the world of the h h creation creation he affirm Az. 2. that when GOD have make the world he dispose the seven heaven he tell the angel he will make one like unto himself in the earth they answer we in all thing be subject to your majesty and give praise unto you but he will be wicked and a shedder of blood then GOD testify that he know a thing not know to the angel teach Adam the name of thing by himself not know to the angel i i of the angel and therefore command the angel to do reverence before Adam which wicked k k Belzebub say he be make of fire and therefore better than he which be make of earth azoar 17. Belzebub refuse they obey and Az. 25. we make man of clay and I breathe into he a portion of my own soul after that I have create the devil of pestiferous fire and because Belzebub refuse to humble himself to this man make of black mire he be damn and when he desire respite till the resurrection it be deny and therefore he say he will teach all evil thing that they shall not give thou thanks etc. of the angel he affirm 45. that some of they have two wing some three some four and 52. the heaven will fall upon man be it not for the angel that call upon god. of l l paradise the turk paradise a beastly carnal one paradise he dream in this sort Az. 5. and 65. he which fear GOD shall receive the two paradise full of all good pleasant with stream fountain there they shall possess ring of gold chain jewel clothe with cloth of gold their bed shall be of gold and this for ever there they shall lie on silken and purple carpet and shall be accompany with many maiden beautiful as the hyacinth and pearl never deflower of man or devil never menstruous sit in pleasant shade with their eye fix on their husband their eye large with the white of they exceed white and the black very black lie on the shine green fair young man shall serve they with vial and other vessel full of the most excellent liquor which shall neither cause headache nor drunkenness and shall bring they the choice fruit and flesh of fowl they shall there hear no filthy or displease word and Az. 86. in paradise shall be administer to they in well-wrought vessel of glass and silver drink as the savoury ginger out of the fountain Zelzebil they shall have garment of silk and gold chain of silver bless wine maiden likewise with pretty breast there shall be tall tree of colour between yellow and green they shall have in paradise all pleasure and shall enjoy woman with eye fair and as great as egg sweet smell river of milk and honey and fruit of all sort Az. 6. he say paradise be of as great capacity as heaven and earth of hell l l of Hell he fable that it have seven gate that it shall make the wicked like to flea that they shall be feed with the tree ezecum which shall burn in their belly like fire that they shall drink fire and be hold in chain of seventy cubit shall be keep sure the fire shall cast forth embers like tower or camel they which contradict shall be punish with the fire of hell they which fear shall go into paradise and as it be in a m m of purgatory middle space betwixt the one and the other there shall stand some other with hope and expectation of paradise we have set angel over hell and have appoint their member 84. 98. there shall be fountain of scald water and they shall eat upon a reed but shall not satisfy their hunger they shall be bind in chain 121. he n n of the prophet Mahomet sometime excuse his own baseness as Azo 17. where he say he can nor write nor read add that his name and mention be in the testament and gospel and 36. the unbeliever say he murmur that he be follow only of weaver and the rascal-rour and 53. that the Alcoran be not commit to a man of great possession and they say that it be art-magic and that I have feign it and in 64. the moon be divide and they say it be sorcery the tale be tell by friar Richard thus Mahomet point to the moon with his thumb and middle finger and it be divide the two piece fall on the hill of Mecha which enter into Mahomet coat be make whole again he o o Mahomet guilty of his witchcraft often speak of it that he may not be think such a one sometime extol himself blasphemous induce Christ thus say to the israelite o you israelite I be send a messenger unto you from GOD affirm by the testament which I have in my hand that a messenger shall come after i who name be Mahomet of who they shall say he be a magician 71. his beastly prerogative he boast 43. say he be the seal and last of the prophet to thou o prophet we make it lawful to lie with all woman which be give thou or which thou buy and thy aunt thy kindred and all good woman which free desire thy company if thou be willing and this be permit to thou alone divorce these couple thyself to those at thy pleasure and be by some other of his wife find in bed with Marie the wife of a jacobite Christian he swear that he will never after use her company but after be impotent in his lust he ordain a law to himself Az. 76. why do thou o prophet make that lawful for the love of thy woman which GOD have make unlawful GOD full of pity and giver of pardon have command thou to blot out or cancel thy oath of his journey to heaven to receive the law he speak Az. 63. and 82. mingle injunction of devotion 83. thou o prophet rise in the night spend half the night or a little more or less in watch and continual and devout read over the Alcoran be thou just patient and refuse not to wash thy garment o thou man clothe in woollen 43. let none enter into the house of the prophet before he call but let he stand without the gate let none do dishonesty within his house let none hurt the prophet in any thing or have his wife after he some p p of the prophet in scripture prophet he mention not name in scripture and of those there name he tell many fable Ishmael be a true prophet and find a good man before god. joseph nine year imprison for the queen Abraham overthrow his father idol and shall have be burn for the same but the fire lose his force the mountain and bird that praise GOD be subject to David q q such tale as these of Abraham Solomon etc. you shall find both in the jewish and popish legend as if the jew Papist and mahometan have contend for the whetstone which any one that read shall find Solomon learned magic of Arot and marot devil so call he know the language of bird and when he be in the midst of his army consist of devil man and bird the lapwing bring he news of the queen of saba come to who by this lapwing he send a letter etc. of this army the ant of pismire be afraid one ant persuade her fellow to get they into their hole lest they shall be tread on Moses marry pharaoh daughter 37. one ascemel make the golden calf in the desert against Aaron will Pharaoh request Homen to build a tower whereon to climb to heaven to the GOD of Moses 50. in the time of No they worship idol who he name Huden Schuan jaguta jannea nacem the prophet Huth be send to the nation Haath to teach they the worship of one GOD and Schale to Themuth and Schaibe to Madian and Abraham and lot to the sodomite on who because they be incredulous it rain yellow and sharp stone Az. 21. Moses be send to Pharaoh etc. his scope of these narration be that he be send likewise a prophet and therefore judgement will pursue they which refuse he as it do those incredulous nation these favour of a jewish help he tell also of Alexander r r Alexander Mahomet fit saint to follow mag. that he have all knowledge he find the sun where it lay rest in a yellow fountain and the mountain in which it rise and find man without use of speech he divide they from other man etc. Az. 28. he prove s s of the resurrection and last judgement substantial that there shall be a resurrection by the history of the seven sleeper which sleep in a cave 360. year 28. Az. and 49. he say that at the time of death GOD take away the soul at a hour know restore it to some to some never at the first sound of the trumpet all shall die except those which shall be protect by the will of GOD at the second sound all thing shall revive and be judge and 66. the earth shall tremble the mountain shall be bring to dust and the whole company shall be divide into three part some before other on the right hand both which sort shall be bless but those on the left hand in their left hand shall receive the scroll or sentence of their condemnation and 79. in the last judgement the earth shall be overthrow the heaven shall be pour forth 8. angel shall bear up the throne of God and 80. the heaven shall vanish as smoke and the earth shall be pluck as wool and 111. there shall be set up the balance of judgement they to who shall befall a light weight shall live but they which have a heavy weight shall be cast into fire the book of bad work shall be keep in the bottom of the earth the book of good work in a high place in diverse place of the Alcoran the better to colour his filthiness moral and judicial he have disperse good sentence like rose scatter on a dunghill and flower in a puddle concern alm prayer tithe justice etc. other he have of another sort establish his own tyranny and religion Az. 26. swines-flesh blood that which die alone and that which have the neck cut off not in God name be unlawful t t azoar 33.34 be chaste every where but with your own wife or such as be subject to you and do serve you every adulterer shall have a hundred stripe in the presence of many he which accuse a woman of adultery not prove it by four witness shall have eighty the jealous husband accuse his wife must swear four time that he charge she true and a five time curse himself if it be otherwise the woman must do the like to clear herself 43. after u u see more in the title of woman follow a woman be divorce from one any other may marry she 19 trust not a son or a brother except he be of your own Law 72. on Friday when they be call to prayer they must lay all business apart when prayer be end they may return to their commodity redeem captive and thy sin by good work about circumcision I find no injunction in the Alcoran in the 3. 8 and 9 Az. he permit all licentiousness with all woman which they have of their own but prescribe wash after venery and after natural easement love not your enemy the woman of another faith prove first and if they favour the unbeliever divorce they 52. the woman must cover their face 43. wilful murder be prohibit Az. 10. but casual kill be to be satisfy with redemption of some good man and the kindred recompense except they forgive it the go on 10 10 pilgrimage to Mecca pilgrimage and the perpetual abode at the temple of Haran that be unlawful because nothing but there holy be there y y contrary to which be the word common in scripture for that which be lawful in common use Mecha say scal. always in the Alcoran be call Haram and the pilgrim Hurmun that be votary lawful we repute of equal merit they which love it not or do it injury shall sustain grievous evil Abraham found this temple Az. 6. and bless it and cleanse it for they which abode there and for the pilgrim he z z Abraham author of pilgrimage rite preach one GOD without partaker and the pilgrimage to this temple that on the day appoint they may in name GOD sacrifice beast wherewith to feast themselves and the poor and may fulfil their vow and go in procession round about the old temple a work which GOD will great reward Az. 32. and 19 in the time of fast and pilgrimage hunt by land be unlawful except that so get be bestow on the poor at Mecca take fish by sea as they go or return be lawful Az. 13. the unbeliever be not worthy to visit the temple Haran and these good pilgrim be not equal to the good warrior 38. he enter into the temple Haran with his head shave Az. 2. we enjoin unto you as to your predecessor fast in the time thereto appoint and in a certain number of day that be in the month Romadan in which this book which discern between good and evil be send you from heaven every one must observe it but the sick and traveller and let they do the same in the remainder of the time the rich use to satisfy their fast with alm let they do both the one and the other he permit you the use of your wife in the night because it be hard and impossible to abstain but let none use their company in the temple fast all the day and when night be come eat and drink as much as you please till the morning by the moon be know the time of pilgrimage and of fast whereby be know that you love and fear god. spend your money in the love of GOD in pilgrimage not despair he that be impotent and that be not accompany with his wife in the pilgrimage must fast three day in the voyage and seven after his return to the sick fast with alm be sufficient they which purpose this pilgrimage let they not give their mind to any evil let they not be ashamed to ask necessary 2. hold it for just and good to enter the house at the door not at the side or backside thereof 35. salute those which you meet when you enter into the house his oath ridiculous be the confirmation of this holy law by such variety of oath as I be almost afraid to mention in regard of our gull-gallant of these time who will sometime be at a set in their brave and brave phrase if they shall not have variety of oath and curse to daub up with such interjection all imperfection of speech and make smooth way for their current of their gallantry but yet even for their sake let we mention a few that they may see Mahomet have as brave a humour this way as they he induce GOD swear by less than himself as by the order of angel by the Alcoran by the blow wind by the watery cloud by the sail ship by the mount Sinai the heaven the sea the evening sarre the west his pen and line the guilty soul the devil by the morning ten night the passover by the fig and olive by the dawn and twilight and a world more of the like only he say Azoara 100 that he may not swear by the earth nor by the son like to the father yet he allow not other to swear or forswear as after you shall see inheritance and just deal Az. 8. they which eat the inheritance of orphan everlasting fire shall eat they be faithful in keep and deliver their good for GOD take knowledge of all account let one son have as much as two daughter in bargain use no lie slay your own soul the covetous shall have endless punishment he that kill unwilling shall give to the kindred of the party slay another man or if he can do that let he fast two month together he which kill wilful shall be cast into the fire Az. 70. it be no sin to revenge injury courtesy mortal sentence salute he which salute thou for salutation be much please to god. Az. 27. worship one GOD alone honour thy father and mother and do they good give they no bad word when they be old be subject with all humility and pray GOD to pardon they give to the poor and to your kindred but not superfluous for they that do superfluous be of kin to the devil slay not your child for no cause be you not fornicator for that be wickedness and a bad way be revenge on murderer say nothing till you know it for you must give account of your say 26. in dispute or reason use only good word answer in honest sort to he which ask thou 27. be just in weight and measure 37. the devil stand over the maker of song and lie that be the poet if they amend not do good 68 if you can give be daily in prayer pay your tithe follow GOD and the prophet they which do not good but for vain glory and ostentation shall be damn 118. the history which be in the old testament be so cite by he as if he never have read they so many dream and lie be insert wash and prayer Az. 12. before prayer wash the face the hand the arm up to the elbow the foot up to the ankle and after carnal company wash in the bath and if water can be have with dust of clean earth GOD desire cleanness 9 in prayer let they be sober that they may know what they say 2. GOD will not ask why man pray not towards the east for the east and west be he but will demand of the work which they have do of their alm pilgrimage and prayer he command that they be humble in prayer and that in prayer they turn towards Mecca every one which shall pray ask that which be good which way soever he shall turn he shall be hear of GOD although the true manner of pray be towards the centre of the temple of Mecca they which be good make their prayer to help they by their patience and abstinence GOD dwell in such man pray according to the usual custom in all place the footman on foot the horseman on his horse Az. 3 he that give his own for God sake be like a grain that have seven ear every of which contain a hundred grain good man lose not your alm alm by vain glory 4. give alm of the good gain of your money and of that which the earth produce but GOD respect not gift of that which be unjust get Satan persuade you to give nothing for fear of poverty to give alm public be good but to give private be better and this blot our sin give especial to those which stay in one place and be ashamed to ask 6. GOD will give paradise to they which in time of famine and scarcety give liberal and which receive injury and repent of their sin Az. 2. every one which draw nigh to death let he leave of his money to his family and kindred to distribute in alm and they which shall change that use shall be judge of the creator etc. Az. 2. they which be entreat to believe the divine precept say tradition they will follow their ancestor in their Sect what will you follow your father if they be blind or deaf will you be like they in be mute blind and foolish Az. 2. o good man eat that good which he have give you and give he thanks meat unclean above all other thing call upon he abstain from that which die of itself from swine flesh from blood and from every other creature that be kill and not in the name of the creator but in case of necessity it be not sin for GOD be merciful and will forgive you this 12. eat not of that which be drown burn in the fire and touch of the wolf 16. eat nothing which have not before be bless to the jew we make many thing unlawful because of their wickedness 2. he which shall contradict this book shall continual be consume in  fire and none of his work shall help he Az. 3 to they that doubt of wine of chess scaile and of table drink and game thou shall say that such sport and such drink be a great sin and although they be pleasant or profitable yet be they hurtful sin if they say what shall we then do thou shall say the good thing of god. persuade they to seek the orphan and succour they as their brethren or else GOD will make they so poor that they shall not be able to help either themselves or other 13. wine chess and table be not lawful but the devil invention to make debate among man and to keep they from do good let none goeon hunt in the pilgrimage month Az. 3 take not a wife of another law woman marriage divorce nor give your daughter to man of another law except they before convert to your Law let no man touch a woman in her disease before she be well cleanse use your wife and the woman which be subject to you where and how you please woman which be divorce may not marry till after four month have have three time their menstruous purgation let they not deny their husband their company at their pleasure they be the head of the woman after a three divorce from one man they may not marry the same man again except they have in the mean time be marry to another and be of he divorce let the woman nurse their child two year receive necessary of the father after burial of a husband let they stay unmarried four month and ten day and not go out of the house in a year after take you two three four wife and final as many as in your mind you be content to maintain and keep in peace it be unlawful to marry with the mother daughter sister aunt niece nurse or the mother or daughter of the nurse and take not a whore to wife 9 let the wife keep their husband secret or else let they be chastise and keep in house and bed till they be better 10. let the husband seek to live peaceable with his wife 31. cast not thy eye on other man wife though they be fair a woman convict of adultery by testimony of four woman must be keep in her house till she die and let none come at she Az. 8. if you love not your wife you may change they but take away nothing of that which be give they Az. 3 swear not in all your affair by GOD and his name they which forswear themselves shall have no good thing in the world to come and 35. swear not rash swear for GOD see every thing they which swear from their heart be bind thereto before GOD and not else to redeem such a oath they must feed or clothe ten poor man or fast three day Az. 13. Az. 4. offer violence to no man in respect of the law force to baleeve for the way of do good and evil be open 4. GOD give first the testament than the gospel and last the true book the alfurcan of the law in confirmation of those former Az. 4. they which live of USURIE shall not rise again otherwise then the devil usury they embrace that which GOD have say be unlawful but they say usury be as merchandise you which be good fear GOD and forsake usury lest the anger of GOD and of the prophet assail you take only the principal and if he can pay you stay still he can and give he alm for this shall be better for you and Az. 6. every one which fear GOD must very much beware of this vice fear the fire prepare for unbeliever and Az. 11. ascribe the misery of the jew to their wickedness and usury Az. 4. and 15. he which repent he and leave his sin obtain pardon and the cancel of that which be past but return again thereto he shall suffer eternal fire repentance in the 5. unto bad man be deny human and divine mercy except they repent GOD care little for the conversion of they which after that of infidel they be make believer become worse such shall suffer without any remission intolerable punishment 10. GOD pardon less fault but not criminal friendship Az. 5. let no man reckon he a good friend which be a unbeliever except it be for fear if betwixt you there grow discord lay aside all stomach do the will of GOD and become brethren together imitate GOD who have deliver you from the fire and from danger 6. GOD will not that any shall do evil to those of his own nation and those which consent to your law but rather their profit and commodity infidel Az. 6. think not that ever paradise shall be open unto you if you be not first valiant and courageous in battle and before you enter into battle prepare yourselves for death and after the death of the prophet Mahomet defend the order by he give with arm no man can die but when GOD will that be when his time be come those which flee out of the war be provoke of the devil but GOD pardon they which repent they which die in the way of GOD be not true call dead they live with god. let none fear they which be govern of the devil 7. be patient and you shall have eternal life 10. accompany not with unbeliever neither in friendship nor other business they which go on warfare for GOD and the prophet shall receive abundance in the earth and after death the mercy of god. they which refuse except they be sick or child shall be cast into Hell neglect not prayer in your expedition some may pray while other stand in arm pray not for they which hurt their own soul 18. look to yourselves that there be no discord among you his last Azoara be this in the name of the merciful and pitiful GOD sanctify thyself and pray continual and humble unto he which be lord of all nation lord of all GOD of all that he will defend and deliver thou from the devil which enter into the heart of man and from devilish and perverse man from Mahomet himself and from his devilish and perverse Law amen @. 3 the saracen opinion of their Alcoran thus have I endeavour to bring some order out of confusion and have frame these head out of that alcorau-chaos a a Magdeburgenses 7. have so gather some head of this headless monster the same be do by cantacuze and in Sarac. etc. but not thus full where be scarce either head or tail this tale they have and believe for what will not what shall not they believe which refuse to believe the truth that he which read b b Anonymi in Alcoran this book a thousand time in his life shall have a woman in paradise who eyebrow shall be as large as the rainbow but among the more studious and judicious the manifold contradiction therein have breed no scruple as in their ordinary discourse in speech and writing may appear for as many merchant and such as have live with they report it be a common thing c c m. bedwel Mahammedis imposturae in the preface to hear from themselves objection and doubt touch their law in their book also and tractate be contain many moral sentence and exhortation to virtue and holiness of life and those thing call in question which the Alcoran have seem to determine of these their book master Bedwel have late translate and publish one a dialogue write some six hundred year since in which many scruple be propound and leave undecided many thing find contradictory yea and the book of the old and new testament commend and approve and the doctrine of the trinity explain the exception also make by the other mahometans to the gospel answer in that book it be affirm that there be write by Mahomet a hundred and twenty thousand say of which only three thousand be good the residue false that the descent of the moon into Mahomet sleeve be impossible that shed of blood be too slippery a argument for proof of doctrine that the sun his beam and heat do represent the trinity and unity that the state of paradise be like to that of angel without meat drink woman and therefore that voluptuous paradise be one of Mahomet fiction for himself say he do write some thing in jest that it seem absurd and against reason and faith to follow a law which it self say none can understand but GOD that the Alcoran in the Assora jonas send man to the jew and christian for the right understanding thereof that whereas it say Christ be the word of GOD it follow he be the son of GOD as reason and speech the sun and his lay be one essence and the understanding Will memory in one man that the christian can not as the mahometans object blot the name of their prophet out of their scripture see the jew and christian and heretic and christian have always be watchful adversary to each other and they be more ancient six hundred year than Mahomet that the story of the speak ant and other thing be trivial and impertinent that Moses law be give with open miracle and the gospel approve with diverse language and martyrdom that these nor any law of GOD have therein any contrarity that virginity be a chief and bodily good and their prophet write of himself polygamy adultery and the like with many libidinous precept and practice that these thing seem contrary that the devil shall be save the jew also and christian which yet he counsel to slay with other the like contradiction that their prophet only understand the Arabic and by a interpreter hear that which be contain in the book of jew and christian which easy appear in his falsify the history of the bible that he have no testimony but his own that there be many absurd thing in their law not confirm by miracle and other excuse they by metaphor etc. these thing be there religious discourse with show of reverence to their law but exceed magnify of Christ and his gospel which be so general with the more learned sort that some also have hazard their life in this c c Relat. master Harb quarrel and Avicen that learned physician say against their paradise that wise divine more respect the mind the conjunction whereof with truth be a felicity beyond those sensual pleasure of the body and be it not for sensuality ignorance and the sword these alcoran-fable will soon vanish chap. v. other Mahumetical speculation and explanation of their law collect out of their own commentary of that argument of such writing as have come to our hand touch Mahomet doctrine and religion that seem most full to lay they open which be call by a a f. Sansov and Bellar. lib. 3. some scala a book contain the exposition of the Alcoran in form of a dialogue translate into latin by Hermannus Dalmata and make the twelve chapter of the first book of the Alcoran in italian I have therefore presume on the reader patience to those former collection out of the Alcoran itself to add these ensue as a further explanation of their opinion the messenger of GOD so begin that book be sit among his fellow the prayer and salutation of GOD be upon he in his city jesrab and the angel Gabriel descend on he say GOD salute thou o Mahomet etc. there come four wiseman master in Israel to prove thou the chief of who be abdia-ben-salon Mahomet therefore send his cousin Hali to salute they and they be come to Mahomet after mutual salutation Abdia tell he that he and his fellow be send by the people of the jew to learn the understanding of some obscure place of their Law Mahomet ask if he come to inquire or to tempt Abdia say to inquire then Mahomet give he full leave he begin have before gather out of the whole body of their law a hundred most exquisite question the principal dregs you shall here have Abdia tell we o Mahomet whether thou be a prophet or a messenger Mahomet GOD have appoint i both a prophet and a messenger ab. do thou preach the law of GOD or thy own law mah. the law of GOD this law be faith and this faith be that there be not god but one GOD without partaker ab. how many law of GOD be there mah. one the law and faith of the prophet which go before we be one the rite be different ab. shall we enter paradise for faith or work mah. both be necessary but if a gentile jew or christian become a saracen and prevent his good work faith only shall suffice but if gentile jew or christian do good work not in the love of GOD the fire shall consume both he and his work ab. how do the mercy of GOD prevent his anger mah. when before other creature Adam rise up he sucese and say GOD be thank and the angel hear it say the pity of GOD be upon thou adam who answer amen then say the lord I have receive your prayer ab. what be the four thing which GOD wrought with his own hand mah. he make paradise plant the tree of the trumpet form Adam and do write the table of Moses ab. who tell thou this mah. Gabriel from the lord of the world ab. in what form mah. of a man stand upright never sleep nor eat nor drink but the praise of god. ab. tell i in order what be one what be two what three four five six etc. to a hundred mah. one be GOD without son partaker or fellow almighty lord of life and death two adam and Eve three michael Gabriel Saraphiel archangel secretary of god. four the law of Moses the psalm of David the gospel and alfurcan so call of the distinction of the sentence five the prayer which GOD give i and my people and to none of the other prophet six the day of the creation seven heaven eight angel which sustain the throne of god. nine be the miracle of Moses ten be the fasting-day of the pilgrim three when they go seven in their return eleven be the star whereof joseph dream twelve month in the year thirteen be the sun and moon with the eleven star fourteen candle hang about the throne of GOD of the length of five hundred year fifteen the fifteen day of ramadam in which the Alcoran come slide from heaven sixteen be the legion of the cherubim seventeen be the name of GOD between the bottom of the earth and hell which stay those flame which else will consume of the world eighteen interposition there be between the throne of GOD and the air for else the brightness of GOD will blind the World nineteen be the arm or branch of Zachia a river in hell which shall make a great noise in the day of judgement twenty the day of the month Ramadam when the psalm descend on David the one and twenty of ramadam Solomon be bear the two and twenty David be pardon the sin against Uriah the three and twenty of ramadam Christ the son of Marie be bear the prayer of GOD be upon he the four and twenty GOD speak to Moses the five and twenty the sea be divide the six and twenty he receive the table the seven and twenty jonas be swallow of the whale the eight and twenty jacob recover his sight when judas bring Joseph coat the nine and twenty be Enoch translate the thirty Moses go into mount Sinai ab. make short work for thou have do all this exact mah. forty be the day of Moses his fast fifty thousand year shall the day of judgement continue sixty be the vein which every of the heaven have in the earth without which variety there will be no knowledge among man seventie man Moses take to himself eighty stripe be due to a drunken man ninety the angel say to David this my fellow have ninety sheep and I but one which he have steal from i a hundred stripe be due to the adulterer ab. well show we how the earth be make and when mah. GOD make man of mire the mire of froth this be make of the tempest these of the sea the sea of darkness the darkness of light this of the word the word of the thought the thought of jacinth the jacinth of the commandment let it be and it be ab. how many angel be set over man mah. two one on the right hand which write his good deed another on the left which register his bad these sit on man shoulder their pen be their tongue their ink be their spital their heart be the book ab. what do GOD make after mah. the book wherein be write all thing past present and to come in heaven and earth and the pen make of the bright light five hundred year long and eighty broad have eighty tooth wherein be write all thing in the world till the day of judgement the book be make of the great emerald the word of pearl the cover of pity GOD over-looketh the same a hundred and sixty time in a day and night the heaven be make of smoke of the vapour of the sea the greenness of the sea proceed from the mount kaf which be make of the emerald of paradise and compass the world bear up the heaven the gate of heaven be of gold the lock of light the key of piety above the heaven be the sea of life above that the cloudy sea then the ary sea the stony sea the dark sea the sea of solace the moon the sun the name of GOD supplication Gabriel the parchment raze the parchment full write all these in order one over another then above all these the threescore and ten space of light then threescore and ten thousand hill with threescore and ten thousand space between and threescore and ten thousand troop of angel on they in every troop five thousand angel always praise the lord of the world above these the limit or bound of angelical dignity and above the same the banner of glory and then space of pearl and in their order one above another the space of grace of power of divinity of dispensation the footstool the throne the house of the universe ab. be the sun and moon faithful or not mah. they be faithful and obey every command of god. ab. why then be they not of equal light mah. GOD create they equal but by this it come to pass that the vicissitude or intercourse of day and night be uncertain till Gabriel fly by the moon darken she with the touch of his wing ab. how many order be there of the star mah. three the first of those which hang by chain from the throne of GOD give light to the seven throne the second chase away the devil when they will enter into heaven the three in the sight of the angel there be seven sea between we and heaven there be three wind the first barren the second tempestuous which shall blow the fire in the day of judgement the three minister to the earth and sea ab. where be the sun mah. in a hot fountain this in a serpent which be a great space in the mount kaf and this kaf be in the hand of the angel which hold the world till the day of judgement abd. what be the manner of they which bear up the seat of GOD mah. their head be under the seat of GOD their foot under the seven throne their neck be so large that a bird in a thousand year continual flight shall not reach from the one ear to another they have horn and their meat and drink be the praise and glory of god. abd. how far be it to heaven mahom. five hundred year journey to the low and so from each to other abd. what bird be between we and heaven mahom. some which touch neither heaven nor earth have mane like horse hair like woman wing like bird and lay their egg and hatch they on their tail till the day of judgement ab. what be the forbid tree mah. of wheat which have seven ear whereof Adam pluck one wherein be five grain of which two he eat two he give to Eve and one he carry away this grain be big than a egg and be bruise bring forth all kind of seed ab. where be Adam receive after his expulsion from paradise mah. Adam in India Eve in Nubia Adam be recover with three leaf of paradise Eve with her hair they meet together in Arafe further as concern Eve she be make of a rib of the left side for otherwise she have be as strong as the man ab. who dwell in the earth before mah. first the devil seven thousand year after they the angel last Adam a thousand year after the angel ab. who begin the pilgrimage mah. Adam Gabriel shave his head and he circumcise himself and after he Abraham ab. to what land speak GOD at any time mah. to mount Sinai that it shall lift up Moses to heaven Abitabil and Moses be the two man who sepulchre be know Moses by chance find a sepulchre which while he measure with his body the angel of death draw from he his soul out of his nostril by the smell of a apple of paradise ab. where be the middle of the earth mah. in jerusalem ab. who make the first ship mah. Noah he receive the key thereof of Gabriel and go forth of Arabia compass Mecca seven time and likewise jerusalem in the mean while Mecca be receive up into heaven and the mount Abikobez preserve jerusalem in her belly ab. what shall become of the child of the infidel mah. they shall come in at the day of judgement and GOD shall say unto they will you do that thing which shall be command you and he shall command to flow forth one of the river of hell and bid they leap into the same they which obey shall go into paradise this shall be the trial of the child of the faithful also which be bear deaf blind etc. abd. what rest under these seven earth mah. a ox who foot be on a white stone his head in the east his tail in the west he have forty horn and as many tooth it be a thousand year journey from one horn to another under that stone be zohot a mountain of hell of a thousand year journey all the infidel shall ascend upon the same and from the top shall fall into Hell under that mount be the land Werelea under that the sea Alkasem the land Aliolen the sea Zere the land Neama the sea Zegir the land theris the land Agiba white as milk sweet as musk soft as saffron bright as the moon the sea alknitar the fish Albehbut with his head in the east his tail in the west all these in order one after another and beneath all these in like infernal order the wind the mountain the thunder the lightning the bloody sea hell close the fiery sea the dark sea the sea Po the cloudy sea praise glorification the throne the book the pen the great name of god. ab. what have come out of paradise into the world mah. Mecca jesrab b b jerusalem be raze of they an. 1219. yet dare they not destroy the holy sepulchre because of that testimony of jesus in their Alcoran yea they kiss the gospel in reverence especial luc. 1. which they will often reiterate Vitr. l. 3. they call it not jerusalem but BEITAALMIKDAS that be the house of the sanctuary and Cudsi Mubarrak that be the bless sanctuary Bed Trud. jerusalem as on the contrary out of hell in Egypt Antiochia in Syria Ebheran in Armenia and Elmeden of chaldaea ab. what say you of paradise mah. the ground of paradise be of gold enamel with emerald and hyacinth plant with every fruitful tree water with stream of milk honey and wine the day be of a thousand year continuance and the year of forty thousand year the people shall have whatsoever can be desire they shall be clothe in all colour except c c the turk reckon green the prophet colour black which be the proper colour of Mahomet they all shall be of the stature of Adam in resemblance like Christ never increase or diminish as soon as they be enter shall be set before they the liver of the fish Albehbut and whatsoever dainty they can desire they shall not need go to stool any more than the child in the womb but they shall sweat out all superfluity of send like musk they shall eat but for delight not for hunger unlawful meat as swine flesh they shall refrain and if you listen to know why this beast be unclean understand that jesus on a time call forth japhet to tell his disciple the history of the ark who tell they that by the weight of the ordure the ark lean on the one side whereupon No consult with GOD be bid bring the elephant thither out of who dung mix with man come forth a hog which wroot in that mire with his snout and by the stink thereof be produce out of his nose a mouse which gnaw the board of the ark no fear this danger be bid to strike the lion on the forehead and by the lion breath be a cat engender mortal enemy to the mouse but to return from this stink tale to refresh ourselves with the like sweet of this paradise he add that there they have the wife that here they have and other concubine who how when wheresoever they will abd. but why be wine lawful there and here unlawful mah. the angel Arot and marot be sometime send to instruct and govern the world forbid man wine injustice and murder but a woman have whereof to accuse her husband invite they to dinner and make they drink they inflame with a double heat of wine and lust can not obtain that their desire of their fair hostess except one will teach she the word of ascend to heaven and the other of descend thus she mount up to heaven and upon enquiry of the matter she be make the Morning-star and they put to their choice whether they will be punish in this world or in the world to come they accept their punishment in this be hang by chain with their head in a pit of Babel till the day of judgement hell say Mahomet there have the floor of brimstone smoky pitchy with stink flame with deep pit of scald pitch and sulphurous flame wherein the damn be punish daily the tree bear most loasome fruit which they eat the day of judgement shall be in this sort in that day GOD will command the angel of death to kill every creature which be do he shall ask he if nothing be alive Adreiel the angel of death shall answer nothing but myself then go thy way betwixt paradise and hell and last of all kill thyself thus he fold in his wing prostrate on the earth shall strangle himself with such a bellow noise as will terrify the very angel if they be alive thus the world shall be empty forty year then shall GOD hold the heaven and earth in his fist and say where be now the mighty man the king and prince of the world tell i if you be true who be the kingdom and empire and power repeat these word three time he shall rise up Seraphiel and say take this trumpet and go to jerusalem and sound this trumpet be of five hundred year journey at that sound all soul shall come forth and disperse themselves unto their own body and their bone shall be gather together forty year after he shall sound again and then the bone shall resume flesh and sinew after forty year the three sound shall warn the soul to repossess their body and a fire from the west shall drive every creature to jerusalem when they have here swim forty year in their own sweat they shall with much vexation come to Adam and say father Adam father Adam why have thou beget we to these misery and torment why suffer thou we to hang between hope and fear pray to GOD that he will finish his determination of we between paradise and hell Adam shall excuse his unworthiness for his disobedience and send they to No Noah will post they to Abraham Abraham to Moses he shall send they to jesus Christ to he they shall come and say the spirit word and power of GOD let thy pity move thou to make intercession for we he shall answer they that which you ask you have lose I be indeed send unto you in the power of GOD and word of truth but you have err and have make i GOD more than ever I preach to you and have therefore lose my benefit but go to the last of the prophet mean he with who thou now talk Abdia then shall they turn to he and say o faithful messenger and friend of GOD we have sin hear we holy prophet our only hope etc. then shall Gabriel present himself to help his friend and they shall go to the throne of god. and GOD shall say I know why you be come far be it that I shall not hear the prayer of my faithful one then shall a bridge be make over hell and on the top of the bridge shall be set a balance wherein every man work shall be weigh and those which be save shall pass over the bridge the other shall fall into Hell abd. how many band of man shall there be in that day mahom. a hundred and twenty of which three only shall be find faithful and every band or troop of man shall be in length the journey of a thousand year in breadth five hundred abd. what shall become of death mah. he shall be transform into a ram and they shall bring he between paradise and Hell then shall arise much dissension between these two people through fear of the one and hope of the other but the people of paradise shall prevail and shall slay death between paradise and Hell abd. thou o Mahomet have overcome and I believe that there be but one GOD almighty and thou be his messenger and prophet in this long and tedious Summarie of that long and more tedious dialogue compare with the former jewish opinion touch their Behemoth Leviathan Ziz jerusalem swine flesh the angel of death and other their superstitious opinion it may appear that the jew be forward mint-master in this new-coined religion of Mahomet in the begin of this dialogue be mention their five prayer and their ramadam or Ramazan of which that arabian nobleman in confutation of the Alcoran write thus h h arab. nob. in Consut. alcor he which have fulfil these five prayer shall be praise in this world and in the next they be as follow two kneel in the morning afternoon four at vesper or a little before sunset four after sunset four at their beginning of supper two and after supper when it be dark two in all eighteen kneel in a day their Lent i i of Mahomet Lent or fast of the month Ramazan be thus in the day time they must fast from meat drink and venery till the sun be down then be riot permit they till a white thread may be discern from a black but if any be sick or in journey he may pay at another time the same number of day Sampsates Isphacanes a persian in a letter write to one meletius which have convert to Christianity and flee to Constantinople to reduce he to his former vomit allege this say of GOD to Mahomet I have make all thing for thou and thou for i object to christian the worship of three person the father mother and son the worship of many god and how say he can GOD have a son without a woman and how can they agree together how can GOD be make man and why can he not have save man by a word but as if he have be hinder through weakness do therefore become man and if he be GOD how can he suffer yea the name of Mahomet say he be express both in the old testament and the gospel Christ himself commend it which the christian have race out yea from everlasting it be write on the right side of the throne of god. and the musulman derive their faith from Abraham this I have insert to show the vain conceit they have of our religion and their blind confidence in their own with their carnal dream of divine mystery and devilish slander of our scripture which they know not their scandal also from the worship of image and saint friar Richard k k richardus Confut. alcor recite among Mahomet opinion that of threescore and thirteen part of the saracen one only shall be save and that the devil shall once be save by the Ascoran and that the devil call themselves saracen fit companion with they in their holy thing some l l Pietro Messia tradotto f. Sanso lib. 4. cap. 1. make it a canon of Mahomet that they shall look towards the south when they pray that when they pray they shall say GOD be one GOD without equal and Mahomet his prophet which lod. barthema say be the character of the profession of a mahometan and that by the pronounce of those word he be try whether he be a infidel or no. these word say the abovesaid arabian as they affirm before the begin of the world be write in the throne of god. bellonius m m bell. Obseru lib. 3 cap. 9 in his observation tell out of their book that there be a tree in paradise which shadow it all over and spread her bough over the wall who leaf be of pure gold and silver each of they after the name of GOD have therein write the name of Mahomet and that if a christian at unaware shall pronounce the say prayer Laillah etc. GOD be one GOD and Mahomet his prophet he must either die or turn Turk such reputation have they of this form which they call a prayer with as good reason as the Marie among the romist wherein yet they pray not for any thing bellonius also say that they hold the heaven to be make of smoke and the firmament establish on the horn of a Buffal by who stir earthquake be cause that there be seven paradise with house garden fountain and whatsoever sense account delectable where they shall enjoy all delight without any sorrow have carpet bed boy horse saddle garment for cost and workmanship most curious and ready for attendance those boy rich adorn when they have satisfy their hunger and thirst shall present every saracen a huge pomecitron in a golden charger and as soon as they shall smell thereof there shall thence proceed a comely virgin in gallant attire which shall embrace he and he she and so shall they continue fifty year after which space end God shall show they his face whereat they shall fall down not able to endure the brightness but he shall say arise my servant and enjoy my glory for hereafter you shall never die nor be grieve then shall they see God and each lead his virgin into his chamber where all pleasure shall attend they if one of those virgin shall come forth at midnight she will lighten the world no less than the sun and if she shall spit into the sea all the water thereof will become sweet Gabriel keep the key of paradise which be in number threescore and ten thousand each seven thousand mile long but he be not able to open paradise without invocation of the name of GOD and Mahomet his friend there be a table of adamant seven hundred thousand day journey long and broad with seat of gold and silver about it where they shall be feast methodij Constitut in Bib. pat. and Abucara disput. count sar. there be extant a constitution of methodius patriarch of Constantinople touch the diversity of penance according to the diversity of the offence to be perform by such as have revolt from the faith to Mahometism likewise there be a fragment of nicetas wherein be express the abiuration and renunciation of Mahomet and his law by new convert both before baptism when they be admit into the number of the and at baptism as be then use in the church some of which I here mention as fit to our purpose after the anathema pronounce against Mahomet Ali his son-in-law Apompicertus baeicer Amar Talcan Apupachren Sadicen and the rest of his consort and successor also against gadise aise and other his wife with Phatuma his daughter he anathematise the core that be Mahomet scripture and all his learning law apocryphal narration tradition and blasphemy the five article be against Mahomet paradise there thus express that in it be four river one of clear water a second of sweet milk a three of pleasant wine a four of honey and that the saracen at the day of judgement which shall be five hundred thousand year after his time shall live carnal with their wife under the shadow of certain tree call Sidra and Telech and shall eat what fruit and bird they will and shall drink of the fountain Caphura and Zinciber and wine out of the spring theon their age shall be the same with the heaven their member four cubit they shall have their fill of lust in the presence of God who be not ashamed six he anathematise Mahomet angel Aroth maron Tzapha and Marona with his prophet chud Zalech soaip edres Duaciphel and Lechina seven his doctrine of the sun and moon and his challenge to be the keybearer of paradise also his house of Mecca in the midst whereof they say be a stone represent Venus on which Abraham lie with Hagar and tie thereto his camel when he shall have sacrifice Isaac where the pilgrim hold their ear with one hand point to the stone with the other and so turn round till they fall down with giddiness see of this in the next chapter and in the second chapter Cateches. mist mahom. he renounce likewise their cast seven stone against the christian and the tale of Mahomet camel and they which worship the morningstar or Lucifer and Venus which the arabian call Chobar that be great and thus he proceed in two and twenty article abandon his former sect after which he desire baptism of like subject be the or instruction of Peter guerra de lorca concern convert and keep from Mahometisme in which be rehearse and refute a great part of their superstition dedicate to king Philip the second but king Philip the three have otherwise convert the moor of Spain for who he write his book by a utter subversion and turn they quite out of his dominion he therein tell of the devil appear to Mahomet in form of a vulture with a beak and feather of gold profess himself to be Gabriel send of GOD to teach he his law that Mahomet will not permit Jew to turn to his law without baptise they first unto Christianity that the saracen worship the new-moon that the woman spend all their time and care to adorn themselves for their husband lust and because they respect fatness in their wife these therefore with idleness sleep and diet according do fat themselves like swine that a mahometan may attain to that perfection that he may satisfy for sin past and after live without sin especial by fast and pilgrimage that the bless virgin shall as they dream in the other life be marry to that curse monster Mahomet that woman shall rise again in the male sex and shall also have woman for their lust which shall be produce out of certain tree Thesaur in salute they gent. with diverse other thing scarce object to they by other Thomas jesus another Spaniard have write prolix of this argument but I may not here now follow he let i yet be bold out of certain arabike of the best note to add the creed the commandment mescuite with other mahometan rite and custom collect by Gabriel and John two maronites and first touch the eastern language and author eastern language there be in the east eight principal language the Arabic persian turkish Hebrew Chaldee Syriac which little differ from chaldee greeke and armenian the Arabic be most noble and usual and be extend as far as Mohamed name as their sacred language know to all mosleman of better fashion in this be their Alcoran and their public prayer and most of their law yea say Zaheri the bless in paradise use it in this also be write their book of physic astrology rhetoric the persian have little but poet and historian the turkish almost nothing the Chaldee and Syriac be nigh lose as the greek Arabic author but Auerroes algazele abu-bece Alfarabius call of the mosleman the second philosopher Mohamed Ben-Isaac and Mohamed ben-abdillab adorn the Arabic beside very many astrologer mathematician physician and historian Ben-Sidi Aali reckon one hundred and fifty which have write on their law ben-casem innumerable grammarian and rhetorician now for the mosleman religion Ben-Sidi Aali express it to consist herein mosleman creed that they believe all the speech make by Gabriel the angel to our prophet when he question he of the thing to be believe and do which be these to believe in one God to who none be equal this against Christian and that the angel be the servant of God to believe in the scripture send to the apostle divide in their opinion into one hundred and four book of which ten be send to Adam fifty to Seth thirty to Enoc call Edris ten to Abraham the law to Moses the psalm to David the gospel to isa or jesus Christ last the Alcoran to Mohamed that they hold these send for man good and believe in the resurrection after death and that some be predestinate to fire some to paradise according to the will of God for it be say in the Alcoran there be none of you which have not his place in paradise and a place determine in hell that they believe also the reward of the good and punishment of the bad and the intercession of the saint also this be of the thing to be hold that they firm believe in the divine pen which be create by the finger of God this pen be make of pearl of that length and space that a swift horse can scarce pass in five hundred year it perform that office that it write all thing past present and to come the ink with which it write be of light the tongue by which it write none understand but the archangel Seraphael that they believe also the punishment of the sepulcher for the dead be use often to be punish in their grave as happen in a certain sepulchre betwixt Mecca and Medina the precept of the mosleman be first circumcision not on the eight day as to the jew Mosleman precept be circumcision five hour prayer but at the eight nine ten eleven twelve year that they may know what they do and may profess their faith with understanding and although most hold woman free therefrom yet in Egypt they circumcise woman at thirteen fourteen or fifteen year old many of they till then go stark naked and Sidi-Ben Aali say that it be command to man but be use to woman for honour the second commandment be prayer hourly which in the church at home or abroad they be bind to perform five time in the day and night first at break of day the second about noon the three in the afternoon the four after sunset when the star begin to appear the last in the first watch or before midnight for after it be unlawful say Ben-Sidi Aali neither may any transgress these hour without sin yea say he if one be cast into the sea and know the hour of prayer if he be able he ought to do it as also woman in travel must hide the infant head as they can and do it traveller when they perceive that hour be come go out of the way and wash or if they have no water light dig the earth and make show of wash and go not thence till they have finish their devotion three alm be also command alm fast and they which be so poor that they can give to orphan and the poor must help in hospital and highway by such service to satisfy God four Ramahdan fast of thirty day be command from morning to sunset and the star appear pilgrimage fight for then after evening prayer they eat any food except wine with bacchanal cheer and tumult five pilgrimage once in their life to Mecca and Medina be also commend and six to fight against the enemy of their faith be no less command not to preach by the word and meekness as Christ but by the sword and war to invade and revenge and if by their person and blood they can they must say our author by their purse and good help the prince herein and if they die in wat the sensual pleasure of paradise Rivers of milk and honey beautiful woman and the like be their present purchase therefore do they give to apostate which become mosleman note a arrow bear up by their forefinger the arrow signify war and that one finger the unity of the deity their last commandment be wash with water which be threefold wash one before prayer handle in three chapter by Ben-Sidi Aali thus perform the arm strip naked to the elbow they wash the right hand and arm than the left after the nose ear face neck crown foot to the joint if they be bare or else their shoe-top last their privity meanwhile mumble their devotion these wash they think to wash away their venial and light sin for their great they use bath and say all the body must be wash to wash away crime the three wash be of their secret by themselves or their servant after the office of nature deliver by he in two chapter too foolish and filthy to be relate add the prohibition of image paint or carve theft homicide robbery adultery swines-flesh wine strangle blood and thing die of themselves and all unclean creature he also instruct at large of their testament and funeral the mosleman be sick order of visit the sick of will restitution and burial present send for a abed religious man or Santone to strengthen they in the faith and propound heavenly thing to he recite somewhat out of the Alcoran and if the disease be very dangerous they wash and make their testament and be bind to restore all ill-gotten good give the creditor a bill of their hand and if they know not to who to restore they must bequeath a sum of money to public use hospital mescuit bath the poor and religious person yea for that respect they set captive at liberty as be read that Auicenna do some give book to public use some other thing Ben-Sidi Aali say it be Mohamed precept that the three part of man good be bestow on public use and if a man die intestate they say other dead man will chide he when they be dead the body be wash the nose eye mouth and ear stop with cotton better apparel be put on white shirt and tulipant then be the body carry to the burial place without the city with a great troop the santones or religious go before than the man promiscuous after the corpse follow by woman howl lament shrick till they come to the grave there be those garment take away and the corpse shroud in a white sheet and put into the grave with the face to the south after the cover with earth many prayer be make and much alm be give to the poor to do the same mescuite or mosque and their ceremony in they touch the eastern custom Ben-Sidi Aali have write of the structure of mescuite before they be a large floor pave with marble in the midst be a square laver where they which come to pray use to wash themselves after this be a great hall without image or picture the wall bare not shine with gold or gem the pavement mat on which the vulgar sit the rich use carpet spread for they by their slave from the roof hang many lamp which be light in prayer time and that be end be put out these church be for the most part round and cover with lead and have adjoin high tower which serve for steeple with four window open to the four wind whereon the priest at set-time ascend and with a strong voice call man to prayer which be end and their legal wash be do all of they leave their shoe on a rue at the threshold of the gate or porch they enter with great silence the priest begin the prayer and all follow and while he kneel they do so and rise when he stand up and imitate he in the elevation or depression of the voice none yaun cough walk or talk but in great silence after prayer they resume their shoe and depart no woman may come to the mescuite at these set hour if there be any man nor may have any society of man except the priest which direct and go before they with his voice in their manner of pray as say the say author Mosleman woman disrespect hence some ascribe to the turite false that woman have no soul eastern attire they be permit not to enter the mescuite but to stand at the door and must be go quick before the man have do their prayer he add that the woman church be the inner part of their own house such be their disrespect of woman notwithstanding Mohamed promise in his Alcoran that many say they enter not paradise but may stand at the door with christian and see the glory of the man the garment of the east be common long some flit on the right and left hand some whole the upper garment have wide sleeve their head-tire be a tulipant but differ of prince white and fine artificial wreathe rather long then round of their cady and Mufeis very large of fifty or sixty else of calico round and wreathe of citizen less of serif or Mohamed posterity green of soldier and servant long and white christian use not white nor round one the maronite patriarch and his suffragan bishop we be a huge Tulipant round and blue with a black hood under it other priest less and no hood the woman be pompous but come abroad we be a cover make of Horse-hair before their face that they may see and not be know not if their own husband meet they neither if they do know will they salute it be a shame for a woman to be see speak with a man their chain brooch and other ornament and paint of their eye brow and finger end I omit both man and woman be so addict to neatness that they be very careful lest any drop of urine spot their clothes in make water or go to stool a note for traveller in these part not to provoke they without liberty in urine etc. a cause of quarrel often to christian and will then think themselves unclean they therefore then sit down like woman and wash or if no water may be have wipe with three stone or a three corner stone as Ben-Sidi Aali in his chapter of wash warn they think it unlawful to spit or piss on a brute creature in food they abstain from strangle and blood and mosleman from swines-flesh they love junket they break bread and cut it not their table be a round piece of leather to which they come with wash and prayer promise they use not fork but spoon of wood of diverse colour and where they need not they three finger as Ben-Sidi Aali warn pewter and porcelain be in much use but other vessel of plate or gold say he Mohamed forbid say the devil use such the common drink be water the better sort add sugar sometime amber and musk etc. chap. 5 of the pilgrimage to Mecca we have hear of the antiquity of this pilgrimage in the former chapter derive from Adam who be shave and circumcise for that purpose and the Alcoran name Abraham the founder of the temple etc. pity it be that the last of the prophet shall not honour that which be first institute by the first of man if we will rather believe that arabian before mention we shall find another original namely that whereas two nation of the indian call Zechian and Albarachuma have use to go about their idol naked and shave with great howl kiss the corner and cast stone upon a heap which be heap up in honour of their god and that twice every year in the spring and in autumn the arabian have learn the same of the indian and practise the same at Mecca in honour of Venus cast stone back between their leg the part of Venus in the time of Mahomet neither do Mahomet abrogate this as he do other idolatrous rite only for modesty sake they be enjoin to gird a piece of linen about their reins Petrus Alphonsi a a ap. Breidenbach a ancient author who of a jew have become a Christian thus relate this history the ammonite and moabite erect two idol one of white stone call Mercury in honour of Mars the other of black call Chamos in honour of Saturn twice a year these man ascend to worship they when the sun enter into Aries in honour of Mars and then at their departure they cast stone as before be say when the sun enter into Libra in honour of Saturn at which time they sacrifice naked with their head shave the arabian also worship they Mahomet do not abolish they but place the image of Saturn in a corner with his backpart forward and bury the image of Mars in the ground and lay a stone over it these stone he permit they to kiss and with shave crown and naked back to cast stone backward between their leg which they say be do to scar away the devil this be suffer to be do at Mecca in honour of Venus sup. cap. 5. but we have already hear that Venus be the ancient arabian and Saracenical deity to who they perform such rite of old Mecca or as they call it Macca signify a habitation contain in it about six thousand house fair build like those of Italy other wall it have not than such as nature have environ it with namely with high and barren mountain round about some b b pilgrimage to Mecca m. Hak. tom. 2. report that between the mountain and the city be pleasant garden abundance of fig grape apple melon and that there be store also of flesh and water but it seem that this be of late industry not of nature indulgence if it be true for lud. barthema c c vertoman lib. 1. cap. 14. or vertoman be there in the year 1503. say that the place be accurse of GOD as not bring forth herb tree fruit or any thing and beside have great scarcity of water and be serve with these thing from other place it be govern by a king tributary then to the sultan now to the Turk call the Seriffo lineal descend from their great seducer by his daughter fatima the only issue of this libidinous polygamous prophet marry to hali. all of this kindred be call Emyri that be lord clothe with or at least wear turban of green which colour the mahometans will not suffer other man to wear the number of pilgrim which resort hither be incredible from cairo come a carovan of devotion some to Mammon some to Mahomet either for trade of merchandise or for superstition and another yearly from Damascus beside those which come from the indies Aethiopia Arabia Persia etc. lud. barthema say that at his be at Mecca of the carovan of Damascus wherein he go be five and thirty thousand camel and about forty thousand person of that of cairo be threescore and four thousand camel and now in these time about forty thousand camel mule and dromedary and fifty thousand person beside the arabian carovan and of other nation this mart of Mecca be much impair since the portugal have intercept the indian commodity which by a carovan from thence be wont to be bring hither let i desire the reader to have patience and go along on this pilgrimage with one of these Carovans through these arabian desert to Mecca and Medina and because that of cairo be the chief we will bestow ourselves in it and observe what rite they observe before they set forth what by the way and at the intend place of their devotion d d Alcorr Italy touch the necessity whereof they think that they which go not once in their life shall after death go to the devil yea some for devotion pluck out their eye after so holy a sight the month Ramazan or Ramadham the nine month in their calendar contain thirty day as you have hear be their lent fall sometime high sometime low be that whole month during which time the pilgrim and merchant resort to cairo from Asia Greece Barbary etc. after their m m pilgrimage to Mecca Hak. lent end they observe their easter or feast call bairam three day twenty day after this feast the carovan be ready to depart against this time they assemble themselves at a place two league from cairo call Birca attend the come of the captain this captain of the coravan who they call Amarilla Haggi be renew every three year and to he the grand signior every voyage give eighteen purse each contain six hundred twenty five ducat of gold for the behoof of the carovan and also to do alm unto needful pilgrim he have four Chausi to serve he and four hundred soldier two hundred Spachi mount on dromedary and as many janissary ride on camel the Chausi and Spachi the captain maintain at his own charge the janissary have their provision from cairo he have eight pilot for guide which office be hereditary they carry six piece of ordnance to terrify the arabian and to triumph at Mecca the merchandise that go by land pay no custom that which go by sea pay ten in the hundred at the feast before the carovan set forth the captain with his retinue and officer resort unto the castle of cairo before the bassa which give unto every man a garment and that of the captain be wrought with gold the other according to their degree moreover he deliver unto he the Chisua Tunabi or garment of the prophet a vesture of silk wrought with these letter of gold Mahumet Resullala that be there be no god but God and Mahomet be the messenger of God after this he deliver to he a gate wrought curious with gold and a cover of green velvet make in manner of a pyramid about nine palm high wrought with fine gold to cover the tomb of the prophet Mahomet and many other cover beside of gold and silk to adorn it the two former be for the house of Abraham in Mecca then the captain have take his leave depart accompany with all the people of cairo in manner of a procession with sing shout and a thousand ceremony beside and pass the gate bab. nassara lay up in a the say vesture very safe this ceremony be perform with such public resort that it be not lawful for any man to forbid his wife the go to this feast for she may upon such a cause separate herself from her husband and lie with another man the camel which carry the vesture be adorn with cloth of gold and many little bell the multitude strew flower and sweet water on they other with fine cloth and towel touch the same reserve these for relic twenty day after this feast the captain take the vesture out of that mosquita repair to Birca where his tent abide some ten day in this time they which mean to follow the carovan resort thither and among they many woman attire with trifle tassel and knot accompany with their friend mount on camel the night before their departure they make great feast and triumph with discharge their ordnance firework etc. shout till at the break of day upon the sound of a trumpet they march forward on their way from cairo to Mecca be forty day journey travel from two a clock in the morning till the sunrising and then have rest till noon they set forward so continue till night observe this order till the end of their voyage without change except n n l. bar. with the of Damascus travel two and twenty hour of four and twenty at some place where in respect of water they rest sometime a day and a half to refresh themselves the carovan be divide into three part the forward the main battle and the rearward the forward contain about the three part of the people and among these the eight pilot a Chausi and four knave with bull sinew which punish offender on the sole of their foot in the night time they have four or five man go before with piece of dry wood which give light they follow the star as the mariner within a quarter of a mile follow the main battle with their ordnance gunner and fifteen archer Spachi the chief physician with his ointment and medicine for the sick and camel for they to ride on next go the fair camel that may be find in the turk dominion deck with cloth of gold and silk and carry a little chest make of pure legmame in form of the israelitish ark contain in it the Alcoran all write with great letter of gold bind between two table of massy gold this chest be cover with silk during the voyage but at their enter into Mecca and Medina it be cover with cloth of gold adorn with jewel this camel be compass about with arabian singer and musician sing always and play upon instrument after this follow fifteen other most fair camel every one carry one of the abovesaid vesture be cover from top to toe with silk behind these go the twenty camel which carry the captain money and provision after follow the standard of the great signior accompany with musician and soldier and behind these less than a mile follow the rearward the great part pilgrim the merchant for security go before for in this voyage it be needful and usual that the captain bestow present garment and turban upon the chief arabian to give he free passage receive sometime by pilfer some damage notwithstanding they pass by certain weak castle in the way agerut Nachel Acba biritem between which two last be the river of jethro and the pond of midian where Moses sit down at jebhir the first town subject to the Seriffo of Mecca they be receive with much joy and well refresh with the plenty which that place yield they find other filthy commodity also more than plenty which fact they hold purge they from a multitude of sin and increase their devotion to prosecute the voyage the next day they go towards in which place grow shrub whereout issue balm hereby they lodge one night in memory of a victory here obtain against the christian at the earnest prayer of their prophet dream of drum here still found by angel as they pass the next morning by sunrising they arrive at bedrihonem where every one wash himself from top to toe cover their privity with a cloth and their shoulder with another white one and they which can go in this habit to Mecca merit more they which can make a vow to offer a ram at the mountain of pardon after this wash it be not lawful for any man or woman to kill a flea or louse with their hand or nail till they have accomplish their vow at that mountain this night they come within two mile of Mecca the next morning they march on and the Seriffo meet they resign his government to the captain during his abode there and the captain give h m a garment of cloth of gold with other jewel after this have eat together upon carpet and hide they take with they the gate and garment abovesaid and go attend but with few to the mosquita and there cause the old to be pull down and put the new coverture on the house of Abraham and the old vesture be the eunuch which serve in the say mosquita which sell it dear to the pilgrim every little piece be account a most holy relic and well may it be so for can you doubt of it put the same under the head of a man at his death all his sin must by virtue hereof be pardon they take away the old door which be the seriffoe fee and set in place the new thus after some orison the captain return to his pavilion the Seriffo remain in the city that you may be the better acquaint with this mosquita and house of Abraham you be to know o o description of the mosquita at Mecca that in the midst of the city be the great mosquita build they say in the time when their prophet live it be foursquare every square half a mile be in all the circuit two mile in manner of a cloister the gallery round about be in manner of four street these street be separate from each other with pillar of marble some and some of lime and stone in the midst of all separate from the rest be the house of Abraham this mosquita have fourscore and nineteen gate and five steeple from whence the talismani call the people to their devotion and the pilgrim which be not provide of tent resort hither man and woman lie together their house of prayer become a den of thief barthema say that this temple be round like the Coliseo at Rome that at every entrance be a descent of ten or twelve step on both side whereof stand jeweller which sell gem only within it be vault gild and odoriferous beyond what can be speak for there be four or five hundred man which sell powder to preserve dead corpse and other sweet it seem that since his time the temple and house of Abraham be alter this p p the house of Abraham describe house be foursquare make of speckle stone twenty pace high and forty in circuit and upon one side of this house within the wall there be a stone of a span long and half a span broad which stone they say fall down from heaven a voice from heaven at the same fall be hear that wheresoever this stone fall there shall be build the house of GOD wherein he will hear the prayer of sinner then be the stone q q of this stone see sup. c. 2. as white as snow but now through the kiss of sinner it be become so black as it be the entrance into this house be small and high there be without this house one and thirty pillar of brass upon square stone sustain a thread of copper reach from one to another on which be fasten many burn lamp the founder of these be Solyman be enter into this house through that difficult passage there stand two pillar of marble at the entrance in the midst be three of aloes-wood cover with tile of India of a thousand colour which serve to underprop the Terratza or roof it be so dark that they can hardly see within for want of light nor be it without a evil smell without the gate five pace be the pond zunzun that bless pond which the angel show to Agar for her son Ishmael of their feast Baraim be say already about six day after they be come hither to Mecca they celebrate another feast call be Baraim that be the great feast which be also call the feast of the ram. in those day space they prepare themselves hereunto with due ceremony first depart from the carovan guide with such as be skilful in the way they go twenty or thirty in a company walk through a street which ascend by little and little till they come unto a certain gate whereon be write in marble Babel Salema that be the gate of health and from this place be descry the great mosquita and twice salute say peace to thou messenger of God then proceed on their way they find a arch on their right hand whereon they ascend five step upon which be a great void place make of stone after descend five other step and proceed the space of a flight-shoot they find another arch like unto the first and this way from the one arch to the other they go and come seven time say always some of their prayer which they say the afflict Hagar say while she seek and find not water for her son after this ceremony thy enter into the mosquita and draw near unto the house of Abraham they go round about it other seven time always say this be the house of GOD and of his servant Abraham this do they go and kiss that black stone abovesaid and then go they to the pond zunzun and in their apparel as they be wash themselves from head to foot say Tobah allah Tobah allah pardon lord pardon lord drink also of that muddy unsavoury water and thus return they cleanse from all their sin every pilgrim perform these ceremony once at the least the devout sort often a hundred year since these ceremony be somewhat different after Barthemaes r r vertoman lib. 1. cap. 15. a. d. 1503. relation on the three and twenty of May the people before day compass that house of Abraham seven time always touch and kiss every corner ten or twelve pace from this house be another in manner of a chapel with three or four gate and in the midst thereof a pit of brackish water threescore and ten yard deep thereat stand six or eight man appoint to draw water for the people who after their sevenfold ceremony come to the brink and say all this be for the honour of God and the pitiful God pardon i my sin then do those other power upon they three bucket full of water from the top of their head to their foot be their garment never so costly the carovan s s the pilgrim go to the mountain of pardon have abode at Mecca five day the night before the evening of their feast the captain with all his company set forward towards the mountain of pardon call jabel Arafata distant from Mecca fifteen mile this mountain or small hill rather be in compass two mile environ round about with the goodly plain that a man eye have see and that plain compass with high mountain upon the side towards Mecca there be many pipe of clear fresh water wherewith the people refresh themselves and their cattle Adam and Eve when they be banish paradise after they have be separate forty year one in Nubia and the other in India as you hear before meet at this pleasant place and here inhabit and build a little house which they call at this day Beyt-Adam the house of Adam hither come also the same day the other Carovans of Arabia and Damascus and all the inhabitant for ten day journey round about so that at one time here be to be see above two hundred thousand person and three hundred thousand cattle now all this company meet together the night before the feast the three host cast themselves into a triangle set the mountain in the midst and fill heaven and earth with shout sing hallow gunshot and firework all that night the next day be their feast in silence they attend their sacrifice and prayer only and in the evening they which have horse mount thereon and approach as nigh unto the mountain as they can other make the best shift they can on foot give ever unto the captain of cairo the chief place the second to the captain of Damascus and the three to the captain of Arabia and be all approach there come one of the santones mount on a camel well furnish who at the other side of the mountain ascend five step into a pulpit make for that purpose and there make a sermon to the people the content whereof be the benefit which GOD have bestow on they deliverance from idolatry give they the house of Abraham and the mountain of pardon add that the merciful GOD command his secretary Abraham to build he a house in Mecca wherein his successor may be hear at which time all the mountain in the world come together thither with sufficiency of stone for the building thereof except that little low hill which for poverty can not go to discharge this debt for the which it become sorrowful and weep thirty year at the end whereof God in compassion say unto it weep no more my daughter comfort thyself I will cause all those that go to the house of my servant Abraham that they shall not be absolve from their sin unless they first come to do thou reverence to keep in this place their holy feast and this I have command to my people by the mouth of my friend and prophet Mahomet this say he exhort they to the love of God to prayer and alm the sermon end at the sunsetting they make three prayer first for the Seriffo second for the grand signior the three for the people to which prayer all with one voice cry Amin Alla Amin ja Alla be it so lord barthema add to the sermon the cadi or santones exhortation to weep for their sin and knock their breast with invocation of Abraham and Isaac to pray for the people of the prophet and report further that there be kill on the first day more than thirty thousand ram or sheep towards the west and give to the poor of which there be thirty or forty thousand thus have have the santones blessing and salute the mountain of pardon they return the way they come in the midst of which way be a place call mina and a little from thence four great pillar two on each side of the way if any pass not through the midst of these he lose all the merit of his pilgrimage and from the mount of pardon till they be pass these pillar none dare look backward for fear lest his sin which he have leave in the mountain return to he again be past these pillar every one light down seek in this sandy field fifty or threescore little stone which they bind in a handkerchief and carry to that place of mina where they stay five day because at that time there be a fair free and frank of all custom and in this place be other three pillar not together but set in diverse place monument of those three apparition which the devil make to Abraham a to t t barthema say Isaac Ishmael his son for they now a day make no mention of Isaac as if he have never be bear they say that when as Abraham at God command go to offer his son Ishmael the devil dehort he from the same but see his labour lose he go to Ishmael and bid he pity himself but Ishmael take up stone and throw at he say I defend i with God from the devil the offender these word the pilgrim repeat in their visitation of these pillar hurl away the stone they have gather from hence half a mile be a mountain whither Abraham go to sacrifice his son in the same be a great den whither the pilgrim resort to make their prayer and there be a great stone separate in the midst by the knife of Ishmael they say at the time of this sacrifice barthema report that here at Mecca he see two unicorn which I mention because since that time I have not find any author which have testify the like sight they be send to the Seriffo for a present by a aethiopian king the carovan depart for Medina as soon as they come in sight thereof they call the place the mountain of health they alight and go up the hill shout with loud voice and say prayer and health be unto thou o prophet of God prayer and health be upon thou o belove of god. they proceed on their journey and lodge that night within three mile of Medina and the next morning be receive with solemnity of the governor Medina u u description of Medina the word signify the people be a city two mile in circuit with fair house of lime and stone and a square mosquita in the midst less but more sumptuous than that of Mecca this be call Medina Tal Nabi that be the city of the prophet in Barthemaes time it contain about three hundred house and be very barren one garden of date except but now they have store of fruit this temple be square a hundred pace in length fourscore in breadth it have in it a i will make arch-wise support with four hundred pillar and support as he say three thousand lamp in one part of this mosquita be a library of forty five Mahumetical book also within the same in a corner thereof be a 10 10 in barthema it be say that it be a grave under the earth and there be also Hali Othman Bubecher and Homor with the book of their ordinane and sect tomb build upon four pillar with a vault exceed in height the mosquita be cover with lead and the top all enamel with gold and a half moon upon the top wrought within very artificial with gold below there be round about great iron stair ascend up to the midst of the pillar and in the midst lie bury the body of Mahumet not in a iron chest attract by adamant at Mecca as some affirm or to say the truth neither here nor at Mecca can they show this seducer body for the captain of that carovan of Damascus in which barthema go on this pilgrimage offer to the chief priest of that mosquita three thousand saraffi of gold to show he the body of the Nabi or prophet that say he be the only cause of my come the priest answer proud how can those eye wherewith thou have commit so much evil in the world see he by who GOD have create heaven and earth the captain reply true sir but do i that favour to let i see his body and I will present pluck out my y y which some be report to do indeed after their so holy pilgrimage-sight not further pollute their eye eye the priest answer o sir I will tell you the truth it be true that our prophet will die here to give we good example for he may have die at Mecca but such be his humility for our instruction and present after he be dead he be carry by the angel into heaven and where say the captain be jesus Christ the son of Marie the priest answer at the foot of Mahomet in the night time by some firework in the steeple they will have gull the credulous people with opinion of miracle use outcry in the night say Mahomet will rise again and when the mameluke can see no such light shine forth of Mahomet tomb as they rumour they say it be because they be slave and weak in the faith and can not see heavenly sight to return to the discovery of this suppose sepulchre over the body they have build a tomb of speckle stone a brace and half high and over the same another of legmame foursquare in manner of a pyramid round about the sepulchre there hang a curtain of silk which hide the sepulture from their sight that stand without beyond this in the same mosquita be other two sepulcher of Fatma and Hali who yet as some say be bury at Massadalli near cusa other say he never die but his come be still expect the attendant on these sepulcher be fifty eunuch white and tawny of which three only of the elder and best esteem white eunuch may enter within the tomb which they do twice a day to light the lamp and for other service the other attend on the mosquita and those two other sepulcher where every one may go and touch at his pleasure and take of the earth for devotion as many do the captain with great pomp present that pyramid-like vestment whereof you have hear for the tomb the eunuch take away the old and lay on the new and after this other vesture for the ornament of the mosquita and the people without deliver unto the eunuch each man somewhat to touch the tomb therewith which they keep as a relic with great devotion here be a stately hospital build by Cassachi or Rosa the wife of great Soliman rich tent and nourish many poor people a mile from the city be certain house in one of which they say Mahomet dwell have on every side many date-tree among which there be two grow out of one stock exceed high which their prophet forsooth graft with his own hand the fruit thereof be always send to Constantinople for a present to the grand-signior and be say to be the bless fruit of the prophet also there be a little mosquita wherein three place be count holy the first they affirm their prophet make his first prayer in after he know God the second be that whither he go when he will see the house of Abraham where when he sit down to that intent the mountain open from the top to the bottom to show he the house and after close again as before the three be the midst of the mosquita where be a tomb make of lime and stone foursquare and full of sand wherein they say be bury that bless camel which Mahomet be alway wont to ride upon even still as one Mr. simons a merchant and beholder thereof report to i they have a superstitious custom at cairo of carry the leg of Mahomet camel as they affirm in a coach the woman in zeal of their blind devotion hurl their sash to receive thence some holy and bless touch for their Mahumetical edification as the papist ascribe no small holiness to the touch of our lady image at Loretto with their bead or other implement of their superstition as my friend Mr. Barkley a eyewitness have tell i marvel much we may that the soldier which crucify Christ and part his garment by lot and judas which kiss he and the devil also which carry his body out of the wilderness and set it on a pinnacle of the temple do not from such holy touch acquire much holiness but here a good intent be want which though the mahometans have yet a camel leg be not so holy as our lady image grant it but they pretend tradition and devotion no less than these and otherwise there be as little warrant m m they pretend vision and miracle etc. but have not Antichrist and all idolater their miracle faith have ever relation to the word of God for that house and image of our lady that they be true as of the other bless virgin who all generation call bless and just admire for that holiness which with thankfulness to God and charity to man we be to imitate then these stone and block shall thus usurp thy name and in a worse sacrilege divine worship yea more than those holy of divine institution which be so far from convey n n agg. 2.12 13 holiness by touch that be themselves touch by any unclean thing they receive thence infection of uncleanness and if Christ himself shall thus be honour where in all the christian world be such vow pilgrimage and devotion in his name as here to the suppose lady of Loretto as if they will rather be Mariani then Christiani in their religion but who bring we now to Loretto nay who can but in read the one think of the other both be frequent so general in pilgrimage offering and I know not what superstition only in this be Loretto worse that it abuse more holy name of God and his saint to like unholy holy but of this subject that reverend and learned Deane Dr. sutcliffe have large and learned write both in confutation of that impious pamphlet of o o caluino-turcismus Giff. Turec papismus d. sut. gifford caluino-turcismus and plain paralel the mahometans and turk in very many point of their religion to he I refer the industrious reader yea the very narration of the saracenicall and turkish rite by we in this book shall be sufficient to they which know the popish in many thing to discern and acknowledge the kindred and like hellish descent both like sampson fox have their tail knit together with firebrand which both fill and empty the world with their flame howsoever their head look contrary one towards Christ the other towards Mahomet that which I speak of popish I understand of that which our adversary maintain by authority not from scripture or the ancient counsel and father but from the pope pretend supremacy and visible monarchy as head and Vice-God in the church the Alcoran whereof be his decretal extravagant consistory constitution and such canon as p p because at Trent nothing may be decree but what be first send and order from Rome hence grow this Prouerbe their holy ghost send from Rome in a box late thunder at Trent beside and against the canonical scripture which holy man of God write as they be move by the holy ghost but let we back to Medina on the other side of the city be tomb of the holy mahometans Abubachar Ottoman Omar which Bartema say be bury in the same temple with Mahumet and all under the earth a day journey from Medina be a steep mountain have no passage but one narrow path which be make by Hali who flee from the pursue christian and have no way of escape draw out his sword and divide this mountain and so save his life the captain at his return to q q when the sultan reign in Egypt they have a ceremony after the pilgrimage to cut in piece a Camel which have carry their Alcoran in great solemnity to the sultan Palace every particle of the beast and of his furniture be esteem and reserve as a holy relic the same be now perform say Dousa at Constantinople the like be in benjamin day at bagedat and I know not what camel superstition be often mean one in the Alcoran Mecca and the temple Rabe like to the house at Loretto in Angel legend the black stone Zam Zam ismael Well cairo be with a sumptuous feast receive of the bassa and present with a garment of cloth of gold he again present the Alcoran out of the chest to the bassa to kiss and then it be lay up again by this time your pilgrimage have more than weary you I have make bold to trouble you a little long with this argument of Mahomet Meccan pilgrimage out of the maronites collection from Arabic author Mecca chief city of Arabia deserta be call also in the Alcoran Becca the holy city of the mosleman both for mahomed revelation there have and for the temple especial call by they kabe or the square house which they fable be first build by angel and often visit by Adam himself and lest it shall be destroy by the flood be lift up to the six heaven call dar-assalem the habitation of peace after the flood Abraham build another house like to the former by the shadow thereof send from heaven to he thus write jacub Ben-Sidi Aali this be a chapel not very large of square figure open with four gate by one of which the minister have access the other be open but once in the year it glitter all with gold and be cover with vest of gold a encompass with elegant Iron-work to keep off near comer no man may enter it but certain elder which have long beard to their breast and remain there night and day near to this chapel be a large marble floor adorn about with eight huge light and six and thirty lamp of gold perpetual burn three path lead thereto whereon man and woman go barefoot to the chapel which they compass seven time with great reverence mumble their devotion kiss the corner sigh and implore the aid of Abraham and Mohamed round about all this space be a stately building of very elegant structure as it be a wall in which be number sixteen principal gate to go in and out where hang innumerable lamp and light of incredible greatness within this space betwixt the rue of pillar be shop of seller of gem spice silk in incredible store from India Arabia Aethiopia that it seem rather the mart of the world than a temple here do man kiss and embrace with great zeal a certain stone which they call Hagiar Alasuad or the black stone which they say be a Margarite of paradise the light whereof give lustre to all the territory of Mecca before this say jacub Ben-Sidi Aali Mohamed command to weep to ask God pardon for sin and to cry with sigh and tear for aid against their enemy after they have visit that chapel and the stone they go to another large chapel within the temple where be the well call Zam Zam which be say the say Author the well which flow from the foot of Ishmael when he be thirsty and weep which Hagar first see cry out Zam Zam in the coptite or old egyptian tongue that be stay stay there be many which draw water thence and give to the pilgrim who be command to wash therewith their body and head three time to drink thereof and if they can to carry some of it with they and to pray God for health and pardon of sin to this building be add a noble school or university a. h. 949. by Solyman who adorn it by his cost by marvelous structure and endow it with revenue after these visitation all the pilgrim go to a certain temple on a hill ten mile from the city and flock in great number buy according to their ability one or more ram for sacrifice and because some be of opinion that the Mohamedan have no sacrifice we will relate what jacub Ben-Sidi Aali have write of their ceremony mahometan sacrifice Dhahhla so the arab call a sacrifice be a kill of beast in the worship and for the offering of God and they be lamb of six or seven month at least camel of five year bullock of two year the male be to be choose before female and those clean white infect by no natural or violent defect fat corpulent horn every man must kill his own sacrifice and rip they with his own hand except in urgent necessity and then he may substitute other to do it for he for every one before they eat any thing be bind to eat some peace of the sacrifice the rest if they can to give cheerful to the poor they which be admit to these oblation let they offer one ram for themselves another for the soul of the dead another for mahomed that in the day of judgement he deliver they from calamity these sacrifice be offer to God in imitation of Abraham lie Tradition which will have offer his son Ishmael to God who go out of the city with he to a certain hill call mena where he will have offer he to God but when the sword can not cut his neck a white ram appear betwixt his hand fat and horn which he sacrifice to God in stead of his son Territorie of Mecca while the pilgrim be here busy in their sacrifice Beduin arab assault the caravans and rob they flee to the hill and inaccessible refuge so swift as if they do fly and although all arm be forbid in the territory of Mecca which contain on the east six mile on the north twelve on the west eighteen on the south four and twenty in which respect Mecca and Medina be call Atharamain yet they cease not to infest and pilgrim be here force to arm this territory be barren for want of water and rain have very few herb and plant or other pleasure of grove garden vine or green object but be roast with the sun both land and people and this haply be the cause that no man may break a bough if they find any tree balsam bring from gilead to cairo thence to Mecca only the shrub of balsam bring hither from cairo thrive well and be now so propagate that all the sweet liquor of balsam be carry only from this city through all region in great plenty here be store of pigeon which because they be of the stock of that which come to mahomed ear as the mosleman fable no man may take or scare they a certain scerif enjoy the dominion of this city and all the land of Medina by inheritance call alamam-alhascemi that be the captain or chief Hascemee scerif of Mecca descend of hascem great grandfather of Mohamed who be never deprive of their dominion by the ottoman or sultan yea the ottoman call not himself the lord of Mecca and Medina but the humble servant yet this scerif notwithstanding his revenue and gift by pilgrim and prince through the beduine spoil and his kindred quarrel seek the sovereignty be always poor therefore do the ottoman bestow the three part of the revenue of Egypt and to protect the pilgrim from the invasion of the arab Medina Medina be call the city by antonomasia and Medina Alnabi that be the city of the prophet Mohamed birth and life because Mohamed when he be force to forsake his country Mecca betake himself to this city then call jathreb and be make lord thereof it be a error that he be bear here for he be bear and bring up at Mecca chap. 7 of the successor of MAHOMET of their different sect and of the disperse of that religion through the World MAHOMET have with word and sword publish his Alcoran as you have hear his follower after his death succeed in his place succeed he in tyranny Eubocar surname Abdalla undertake the defence of that faithless faith and kingdom and that as his predecessor have do partly by subtlety partly by force for when as Mahomet disciple have bury their new religion with their old master except a few of his kindred he apply his wit to recall they and whereas a a arab. nob. ref Hali Mahomet near kinsman and son-in-law disagree from he and be persuade by the jew to profess himself a prophet with promise of their best aid and assistance Eubocar or Ebuber reconcile he and as the arabian chronicle witness convert many infidel and slay the gainsayer he reign one year and three month and thirteen day the next successor Aomar say the same author Leo b b leo. l. 1. term he Homar ordain their prayer in the month Ramazan and that the Alcoran shall be read through which he cause to be write out and unite in one book he conquer Egypt by Hanir his captain after that Damascus jerusalem Gaza and a great part of Syria be subdue he reign ten year and six month c c odman 12. hali. 4. you Alhacen five m neth and twenty day moavi 17. year jezid three year eight month who say that the prophet command not to blame but to pray for and to obey ruler though wicked for you shall have mercy and they punishment odman or oziman succeed and reign twelve year and after he Hali and next to he his son alhacem and than Moavi the great conqueror etc. these four eubocar Aomar Ozimen and Hali be the four great doctor of the mahometan law and Mahomet before his death prophesy that they shall succeed he and of their worthiness but as Mahomet have pretend the name of Gabriel to the dream of Sergius and other apostata of the christian and jew disagree both with the truth and themselves so it be not long that this untempered mortar will hold together these building for the d d Ref. ara. nob. Alcoran be according to diverse copy thereof read diverse be cause of different sect among they oziman to prevent the danger hereof command that all the copy of their law shall be bring and deliver into the hand of Zeidi and Abdalla who confer their copy shall make one book and where they dissent shall read according to the copy of Corais thus these two according to the king edict to establish a uniformity in the read of the Alcoran have out of all those copy frame one to be Athentical burn all other yet be they deceive of their hope partly because Hali Abitalib and Ibenmuzod will not bring in their book of which that of Hali be the same which Mahumet have leave and be after by the jew alter put out and in at their pleasure and partly because that book which they have thus cull out of the rest to remain canonical be lose and of the four copy which they have write thereof by fire and negligence all perish eletragig will have use the like policy after but this many-headed serpent which can not in the shell be kill much less in his ripe growth can be reform those four doctor aforesaid emulous of each other intend their own private end sow the seed then which fructify in their venomous multiplication till this day e e g. bot. Ben Curio call these sect Melici follow in Africa asafij profess in Arabia and Syria Arambeli in Armenia and Persia Buanisi in Alexandria and Assyria and all four be follow in Cairo lib. 5. 1. Hali or halli be author of the sect Imemia which be embrace of the persian indian and of many arabian and the gelbine of Africa oziman or odman begin the sect Baanesia or Xefaia and have in diverse country his follower Homar found the Anesia follow of the turk syrian and in Zahara in Africa Ebocar otherwise call Ebuber or abubequer teach the sect Melchia general possess Arabia and Africa these be hold as saint in the Saracene calendar as f f Scal. e. t. l. 4. Scaliger testify who have one in semiarabike and persian wherein over against the 27. of December be write the death of Phetima she be the daughter of muhamed God have mercy on she against the 10. of january the death of Abu-Boker God have mercy on he and so of the rest against the 16. of November the beginning of the fast Caphar so they call the christian and on the 25. of December the birth of jesus on the 17. of january the birth of Moses which I mention to show what honour they ascribe to they or rather that dishonour which in this confusion of light with darkness the prince of darkness in the form of a angel of light do unto they from these 4. in process of time arise other g g 68 Sect Sarrac 68 sect of name beside other peddle faction of small reckon among the rest the morabite have be famous live for the most part as hermit and profess a moral philosophy with principle different from the Alcoran one of these not many year since show the name of Mahomet in his breast there imprint with or some such like matter raise by a great number of arabian in Africa and lay siege to Tripoli where be betray by one of his captain his skin be send for a present to the grand signior these morobite affirm that when Hali fight he kill a 100000. christian with one stroke of his sword which be a 100 cubit in length the Cobtini be a sect ridiculous one of they show himself ride in the country of Algiers on a reed rain and bridle as a horse much honour for that on this horse this ass have as he say ride a 100 league in one night r. Moses Aegyptius h h Moreb neb. l. 1. c. 70. and l. 3. c. 18. and 24. write of two sect of moor the one call separatist the other intelligent or understander both follow in their opinion by many jew these late be of opinion that nothing in the world come to pass by chance or accident neither in general nor particular but all be dispose by the will and intent of God as well the fall of a leaf as the death of a man the separatist in a contrary extreme allow to man and beast a freedom and that God reward all creature according to their merit or demerit his providence extend itself to the fall of the leaf to the way of the ant and if one be bear defective it be better for he then if he have be perfect and so if any adversity befall he for his reward shall be the great in the world to come yea the beast which be slaughter and the ant flea or louse shall not lose his reward from the creator the mouse also which have not sin and be kill of the cat shall there be recompense now beast pray for their soul and flea and louse prey upon their body which hatch this beastly lousy divinity the intelligent believe that it be convenient that man be punish in this life and for ever in hell because the creator will the separatist think that unjust and that whatsoever be punish in this life shall be reward in the next because such be the creator wisdom neither may we believe the rabbin who recite 5. differ opinion concern the providence of God first of the epicure which exclude it whole second of Aristotle that it descend not beneath the moon three of the intelligent four of the separatist five his own which he attribute to the law of Moses that every man have freewill and all good befall he in reward all evil for punishment and what measure any man meet shall be measure to he again but for other creature beast plant and their operation as of a spider catch a fly and the like i i God be a co-worker in every work of who and in who all thing be and move and not a sparrow nor a hair from our head fall to the ground without divine providence vid. zanch. nat. d. 5. c. 1. he attribute with Aristotle unto chance and not to divine providence which he appropriate in thing below unto man these opinion he ascribe that of Aristotle to job that of the separatist to Bildad that of Sophar to the intelligent that of Eliphaz be the same with his own and then let he with Eliphaz sacrifice to exipiate it i. leo. l. 3. write that one Elefacin have write at large of the mahometan sect of which he reckon 72. principal which agree with our former number every one account his own to be good and true in which a man may attain salvation and yet Leo there add that in this age there be not find above two c c but two principal faction mahometan at this day one be that of Leshari which in all turkey Arabia and Africa be embrace the other Imamia currant in Persia and Corosan of which in his proper place more so that by Leo judgement all which follow the rule Leshari or hashari be catholic mahumetan although of these the same author affirm that in cairo and all Egypt be four religion different from each other in spiritual or ecclesiastical ceremony and also concern their civil and canon law all found on the mahometan scripture in time past by four learned man diverse construe the general rule to such particular as seem to they fit for their follower who disagree in opinion agree in affection and converse together without hatred or upbraid each other as for those other sect it seem that they be for the most part long since vanish and those difference which remain consist rather in diversity of rule and order of profession then in differ sect and heresy of religion except in some few which yet remain of which d d i. leo. l 3 Leo thus report fourscore year after Mahumet one Elhesenibu Ahilhasen give certain rule to his disciple contrary to the Alcoran principle but write nothing about a hundred year after Elharit Ibnu ese of bagaded write a book unto his disciple condemn by the Calipha and canonist but about fourscore year after that another great clerk revive the same doctrine and have many follower yet he and they be therefore condemn to death but obtain to have trial of his opinion by disputation he overthrow his adversary the mahometan lawyer and the Califa favour the say sect and erect monastery for they their sect continue till Malicsah of the nation of the turk persecute the same but twenty year after it be again renew and one Elgazzuli a learned man write seven book reconcile these Sectary and the lawyer together which reconciliation continue till the come of the tartar and Asia and Africa be full of these reformer of their Law in old time none but learned man may be admit professor hereof but within these last hundred year every ignorant idiot profess it say that learning be not necessary but e e what difference herein between the Mahometan and our separatist the holy spirit do reveal to they which have clean heart the knowledge of the truth these contrary to the Alcoran sing lovesong and dance with some fantastical ecstasy affirm themselves to be ravish of divine love these be great glutton they may not marry but be repute sodomite the same our author write of some which teach that by good work fast and abstinence a man may attain a nature angelical have his mind so purify that he can sin although he will but he must first pass through fifty degree of discipline and although he sin before he be pass these fifty degree yet GOD do not impute it to he these observe strange and inestimable fast at the first after they live in all pleasure of the world their rule be write in four volume by a learned and eloquent man Esschravar and by ibnul-farid another author in exact and most learn verse that the sphere element planet and star be one God and that no faith nor law can be erroneous because that all man in their mind intend to worship that which be to be worship and they believe that the knowledge of GOD be contain in one man who be call Elcorb elect and partaker of GOD and in knowledge as god. there be other forty man among they call elaut that be f f tronchi dunce because of their less knowledge when the Elcorb or Elcoth die his successor be choose out of these and into that vacant place of the forty they choose one out of another number of seventy they have a three inferior number of a hundred threescore and five their title I remember not out of which they choose when any of the threescore and ten die their law or rule enjoin they to wander through the world in manner of fool or of great sinner or of the vile among man and under this cloak many be most wicked man go naked without hide their shame and have to deal with woman in the open and common street like beast of this base sort be many in Tunis and far more in Egypt and most of all in cairo I myself say our author in cairo in the street call bain Elcasraim see one of they with my eye take a beautiful dame come out of the bath and lay she down in the midst of the street and carnal know she and present when he have leave the woman all the people run to touch her clothes because a holy man have touch they and they say that this saint seem to do a sin but that he do it not her husband know of it reckon it a rare favour and blessing of GOD and make solemn feast and give alm for that cause but the judge which will have punish he for the same be like to be slay of the rude multitude who have they in great reputation of sanctity and every day give they gift and present there be another sort that may be term cabalist which fast strange not do they eat the flesh of any creature but have certain meat ordain and appoint for every hour of the day and night and certain particular prayer according to the day and month number their say prayer and use to carry upon they some square thing paint with character and number they affirm that the good spirit appear and acquaint they with the affair of the world a excellent doctor name boni frame their rule and prayer and how to make their square and it seem to i who have see the work to be more magical than Cabalastical one book show their prayer and fast the second their square the three the virtue of the fourscore and nineteen name of GOD which I see in the hand of a venetian jew at Rome there be another rule in these sect call Swach of certain hermit which live in wood and solitary place feed on nothing but herb and wild fruit and none can particular know their life because of this solitariness thus far leo. Benjamin Tudelensis g g in Itinerario assassins of these see l. 2. c. 22. tell of a nation near to mount Libanus which he call Hhassissin which vary from the ordinary sort of ismalite and follow a peculiar prophet of their own who word they obey whether for life or for death they call he Hheich all Hhassissin his abode be at Karmos they be a terror to all about they saw asunder even the king if they take any they war with the Frank the christian which then hold jerusalem and the king of Tripoli their dominion extend eight day journey Zachuth mention one h h a. Zach. Chro. Serac Baba which about the 630. year of the Hegira feign himself a prophet send of God under which colour he gather together a great army wherewith he fill all Asia with slaughter and spoil slay christian and ismaelit without difference till Giatheddin king of Gunia overthrow and destroy he and his host beside the former they have other hermit of another sort one be mention by Leo i i leo lib. 4. who have five hundred horse a hundred thousand sheep two hundred beef and of offering and alm betwixt four and five thousand ducat his fame great in Asia and Africa his disciple many and five hundred people dwell with he at his charge to who he enjoin not penance nor any thing but give they certain name of God and bid they with the same to pray unto he so many time a day when they have learn this they return home he have a hundred tent for stranger his cattle and family he have four wife beside slave and by they many child sumptuous apparel his fame be such that the king of Telensin be afraid of he and he pay nothing to any such veneration have they towards he repute he a saint Leo say he speak with he and that this eremite show he magic-book and he think that this his great estimation do come by false work of the true science so the eremite term magic but these hermit we can so well reckon a sect as a religious order of which sort there be diverse in these Mahometan nation as in our ensue discourse shall appear to return therefore to the consideration of the mean use to prevent the variety of sect among they the caliph seek to remedy these inconvenience by their best policy k k io. bot. ben. moavi about the year of our lord 770. assemble a general council of their learned man to consult about a uniformity but they disagree among themselves he choose six man of the most learned and shut they up in a house together with their scripture command they that out of those copy disagree as you have hear they shall choose that shall seem best these reduce the doctrine of Mahomet into six book forbid any on pain of death to speak or write otherwise of their Law but because the arabian of subtle and pierce wit which study philosophy in the university of Bagdet Morocco Cordova and other place can not but spy and discern the mad folly of the law so palpable to any reasonable judgement it l l fr. Richard cap. 13. be therefore ordain that the philosophy lecture shall be take away and in place thereof they shall read the Alcoran provide for all these student of their law their expense out of the public charge and inhibit all further study in philosophy insomuch that they now say our author who himself be a student in that university repute he not a good saracen who be addict to that study this friar Richard mention another prophet name Solem have in estimation with these babylonian which be after slay by the tartar he and cardinal cusanus affirm that the saracen of the east differ in their Alcoran from those of the west m m this difference be in the latin translation not in the Arabic as Erpenius have observe make the first five chapter but one and that they differ in the exposition thereof and in the same school or university one sect condemn another but in these time the Mahometan professor be chief distinguish by the several nation of which be four principal the arabian persian turk and tartar to which we may add the Mogore as a five who the jesuit in their epistle report to halt from his former Mahometism and to incline to gentilism of all these the arabian be most zealous in their superstition the persian must agree to reason and nature the tartar be more heathenish and simple the turk be the free and most martial the arabian account it their peculiar glory that Mahumet be of that nation and that Mecca and Medina be there seat and therefore have labour in the day of their former puissance by the sword since by their traffic and preach to spread their Mahometism through the World their first seducer have possess Syria and Palestina Homar have add Egypt and in a short time their successor have prevail in Asia Africa and Europe as we t t sup. c. 2. have before show all mahometans be call by we Saracen which Erpenius in his annotation on his joseph say be a name to they unknown so be China to the Chinois Peru to the peruan etc. but give they by other they call themselves Muslimos or musleman of a word which signify believer as one will say in their sense catholic and orthodox believer they have be such in arm and in diligence of preach they have be as forward and so continue seven hundred year since Perimal reign in malabar they there sow their tare io. bot. ben. and the more easy to take those Ethnic in their net they take their daughter in marriage a matter of much consequence in regard of their wealth and practise of they to this day they be author of great gain unto they by their trade and traffic for Spicery and be suffer to inhabit and plant colony among they by their mean Calicut of a small thing become a great and rich city and Perimal himself be pervert by they to their faith who zealous incline to their persuasion resolve to end his day at Mecca and put himself on the voyage with some ship of pepper and other thing of price but perish by tempest in the way from malabar they pass to the maldivae and Zeilan Somatra java Molucca the philippinas and in the continent to Cambaia Bengala siam Malucca jor Pam and the huge kingdom of China preach and plant their superstition as in the particular history of these nation shall further appear they be in this respect so zealous that even the arabian mariner will stay behind in the country of the ethnic there to divulge this their sect and in the year 1555. one of they pierce as far as japon there to have lay their leaven but the portugal in these eastern part tread in the same step by their traffic and preach have much hinder their proceed the tartar persian and turk require long and several discourse in their due place and first we will speak of they which be first in this rank the great of all Mahometan state the turk chap. 8 of the turkish nation their original and proceed @. i. of the turkish name and first original although some may think that I have be so tedious in the relation of the mahometan opinion and superstition that to speak any thing more will seem but as pour water into a full sea yet because there be in this world nothing certain but uncertainty it be divine prerogative to be yesterday to day the same for ever and that this saracenicall religion have sustain her chance and change according to the diversity of time and place where it be and have be profess so do I hold it fit as we have see the foundation to behold also the frame and fabric thereon build and from that fountain or sinkehole rather of superstitition to lead you along the gutter and stream thence derive and because the turk be preeminent in all those thing which this profession account eminent it be meet to give they the first place here which elsewhere take it and after we have set down a brief history of that nation and the proceed of their state to ascribe their theory and opinion and then their practice and rite of religion but before we come to the discovery of their religion it be not amiss to search the beginning and increase of this nation the name of turk signify say chitraeus shepherd or herdsman and such it seem be their ancient profession as of the rest of the scythian unto this day Nicephorus a a lib. 18. c. 30. and before he Simocatta from who Nicephorus borrow it speak of the turk and place they about Bactria their chief city he call taugast which be suppose to be the work of Alexander their religion he say at that time be to worship the fire Aire water and earth which they adore and sing hymn to they acknowledge God the maker of heaven and earth to who they sacrifice horse kine and sheep they have priest which divine thing to come the prince of Taugast they call the son of God they worship image the prince spend the night with seven hundred woman the tartar have now possess the same country but long before the same rite as you may read in our history of they to derive they as some do from trojan and jew be somewhat far b b Turci teucri rich reb. Turc and mart. Barletius expug lib. 1. mention this opinion and andr. fetch nor be there much likelihood that they shall receive their name of Turca c c lonicer chr. Turc to 1. l. 1. a persian city the name be ancient and apply by d d pom. mela. l. 1. c. ult. plin. l. 6. c. 7. Mela and Pliny to a nation of the scythian and their original be account scythian by the e e Laon. Chalcondyl lib. 1. io. bapt. egnatius nic. euboic sagun ep. Knolls etc. most and best author Benjamin Tudelensis call they always by the name Togarma there be which bring a long genealogy from Noah ark unto the ottoman family herein disagree while some will have Magog other tubal the author of their nation Leunclavius f f i. Leunel hist Musulm recite and refute the same he write the name jurki allege Herodotus for his author and cite many author to prove that they descend of the Unui or Ungri which be call turk of which there be two sort one westerly in Pannonia another easterly near Persia call by the persian Magores he conclude that the Unni or jurchi come from juchra or juchria whence the name jurchi may easy be deflect to jurchi beyond Tanais and first after they have forsake their own country settle themselves near Moeotis from whence they pass to Chazaria and some go westward to Pannonia some eastward to Armenia and thence into Persia many probable argument may be bring to prove that they descend of the scythian who wander shepheardly-life both the name and their practice in old time and in some place still express the first expedition and military employment which I have read of the turk except what the fear of they compel the persian unto as in their history we shall after see be g g p. Bizar hist Pers. lib. 5. under Varamus a rebellious persian above a thousand year since when Cosroes be king of Persia and mauritius the roman emperor at what time many of they be slay and many take which confess that famine have force they to those war for which cause they mark themselves with a black cross a ceremony which they say they have learn of the christian think thereby to expel hunger this hungry nation have since be a greedy and insatiate devourer of nation another expedition of they which some reckon the first h h knoll Turc hist be in the year 755. or after another account 844. at which time pass through the georgian country then call Iberia they first seize on a part of the great Armenia which their posterity hold at this day call of they Turcomania in this wide and spacious country they rome up and down without certain habitation a long time with their family and herd of cattle like the ancient scythian nomad and the tartar and the same Turcoman nation at this day their language also as Megiserus in his turkish grammar show Hieron Megisarus ling. Turc. Institut. 31. have great affinity with the tartarian as also with the persian near who and sometime as now will appear among they they live but from the Arabic it differ altogether yet in their holy they must use the Arabic by reason of the Alcoran write in that language likewise they use the Arabic letter and prick the beginning of their greatness be thus by christian historian relate @. 2 of the turkish kingdom in Persia and their other conquest when as the saracen empire grow now unwieldy through her own greatness and the sultan which be wont to conquer for the chaliph begin now to share with he in his large dominion Mahomet than sultan or sultan of Persia be for this cause hardly beset with the chaliph of Babylon assail also on the other side by the indian he seek to strengthen himself against these enemy with the new friendship of these turk of who he obtain for his aid three thousand hardy soldier a a hist Musulman lib. 1. Theodor Gaza de Orig. Turcar. Epist. io. bapt. egnat Orig. Turc but see also sup. c. 2. which be more likely for I read not of Pisasiris in all the catalogue of their chalif mirkond write of many turkish incursion into Persia before this under the conduct of the son of Mikeil a valiant captain and chief of the selzuccian tribe or family who the greek common call Tangrolipix and some Selduc or Sadoc by the help of this Tangrolipix Mahomet the persian sultan overcome Pisasiris the caliph the turk after this war desire leave to pass over the river Araxis to their countryman be both deny and threaten if they again shall seek to depart whereupon they withdraw themselves into the desert of Caravonitis live there and thence make road into the country adjoin Mahumet send against they twenty thousand man which by a sudden surprise in the night Tangrolipix defeat and furnish himself with their spoil and now dare Tangrolipix show his face in the field where his army be increase by the resort of lawless person seek after spoil Mahomet on the other side impatient of his loss put out the eye of the captain which have the lead of the army and threaten to attire the soldier that have flee in woman apparel and raise another great army set forward against Tangrolipix who be now fifty thousand strong and be present make strong by those threaten soldier who flee from their lord unto he they meet at ispahan a city of Persia and there Mahomet fall with his horse break his neck upon which mischance both army come to agreement by common consent proclaim Tangrolipix b b Tangrolipix first sultan among the turk an. do. 1030. some call he Tangrolipix and some Tancroipix sultan in his stead and so make he king of Persia and the dominion thereunto pertain which be do 1030. Tangrolipix open the passage of Araxis to the rest of his countryman who he exalt to the high place of command so bridle the persian and he and his receive in their new conquest the yoke of the mahometan religion ambition incite he to further exploit he war also upon Pisasiris the chaliph and after diverse overthrow slay he and seize on his state he send cutlu-muse his kinsman against the arabian by who he be discomfit whereat aggrieve he go against they himself but with like success he send Asan his brother son to invade Media who in that enterprise be slay he send again habraime Alim his brother with a army of a hundred thousand man who take prisoner liparite governor of Iberia who come to aid the emperor lieutenant in Media who Tangrolipix frank set free and send his ambassador to the emperor proud demand he to become his subject such hap and such hope have Tangrolipix the first Turk that ever be honour with a diadem his son c c Knolles turkish history g. tyr. see sup. l. 2. c. ult. and successor Axan take Diogenes the emperor of Constantinople prisoner in the field but cutlu-muse with his cousin Melech who in his father day have flee into Arabia rebel and take arm against he as Axan be ready to join battle with they the caliph who retain the high place still in their superstition although despoil of his temporality set aside all his pontifical formality whereby he be bind not to go out of his own house thrust himself between these army and with the reverence of his place and person together with his persuasion move they to desist and to stand to his arbitrement which be that Axan the sultan shall still enjoy his dominion entire and that cutlu-muse and his son aid by he shall invade the constantinopolitan empire and shall be absolute and only lord of whatsoever they can gain thereof there be never any thing to that impiety more commodious nor to our religion more dangerous for by this mean cutlu-muse with his son in a short time conquer all Media with a great part of Armenia Cappadocia Pontus and Bythinia which their design be much further by treason and dissension in the greek empire Axan the sultan also give to his kinsman ducat and Melech the government of Aleppo and Damascus with the adjoin part of Syria by that mean to encroach upon the egyptian caliph which according they in short time do but these their haughty attempt be stay and be now in the flower be cut shorter by that fortunate expedition d d the memorable expedition of the christian prince into the holy land and many other write at large of these War francos see also sup. l. 2. ult. of the christian prince of the west agree upon at the council of claremont and perform by Gualther Sensavier Peter the hermit first and principal mover hereof Godfrey duke of Lorraine with his two brethren Eustace and Baldwin of the honourable house of Buillon Hugh surname the great brother to philip the french king Raymond and Robert earl of Flanders Robert of Normandy son to William the conqueror Stephen de Valois earl of chartiers Ademar the pope legate Bohemund prince of Tarentum and other conduct as the most receive opinion be three hundred thousand soldier in defence of the christian faith against the turk and saracen which both overthrow the turk in the lesser Asia and recover also the holy land the principality or as some stile it the kingdom of Antioch be give he by common consent to Bohemund prince of Tarentum the kingdom of jerusalem to Robert who hear of his father death refuse it in hope of England and Godfrey of Buillon be salute king the turk and saracen seek to recover that which they have lose lose also themselves a hundred thousand of they be slay in one battle the like success have the turk after against Conrade the emperor at Meander leave for trophy and triumphal arch to the christian huge heap or hill rather of their bone hereunto help the dissension among the turk and division of their state among diverse brethren the egyptian also pay tribute to the christian which dargan the sultan detain he be by Almericus the king of jerusalem overthrow in battle Noradine the Turk king of Damascus send thither also Saracon to aid Sanar the sultan before expulse to recover his state from this dargan but he have win certain town keep they to himself so that Sanar betake he to the patronage of Almericus who overthrow Saracon in battle and after besiege and take Alexandria and Pelusium seek also to conquer Egypt to himself but indeed as the event prove so subvert his own state for Sanar seek help of Saracon and for fear of both their force Almericus leave Egypt Saracon move with ambition treacherous slay the sultan and by the caliph be appoint sultan the first of the turk that ever enjoy the same to who Saladine his nephew succeed he not respect the majesty of the caliph as the sultan before have do strike out his brain with his horseman mace and root out all his posterity the better to assure himself and his turkish successor in the possession of that kingdom under who it continue to the time of the mameluke Noradine also the Turk be dead the nobility disdain the government of Melechsala his son yet but a youth betray e e Damascus betray to Saladine that state unto Saladine and thus do he hem in the kingdom of jerusalem on both side and not long after Aleppo be betray unchristianly into his hand by a traitor which govern the same for the christian neither be it long before he have through discord and treason among the christian obtain f f jerusalem lose again 1187. jerusalem itself 1187. and after Ascalon and Antioch also neither can the christian of the west ever recover the possession of that kingdom the cause continue the same which before have lose it viz. dissension and treachery as the example of Richard and Edward first of those name king of this land do show about 1202. year after Christ the tartar of who in their due place have conquer east west north and south among other overthrow that Togrian kingdom of the turk in Persia one hundred and seventy year before found by Tangrolipix the turk which remain drive to seek shelter from this violent storm flee out of Persia into Asia the less where cutlu-muse his successor their countryman enjoy some part of the country and there many of they arrive under the conduct of Aladin the son of cei Husreu descend also of the selzuccian Family in Persia take the opportunity offer by the discord of the latin with the greek and the greek among themselves seize upon Cilicia with the country thereabouts and there first at Sebastia and afterward at Iconium erect their new kingdom bear the name of the Aladin g g hist Musul. man l. lib. 1. king or sultan the tartar under the conduct of Haalon send by Mango the great cham have conquer and starve the chaliph of Babylon as be before overthrow the turkish kingdom of Damascus and race h h an d. 1200. Aleppo the other arm of this fair and far spread tree be surprise by the Mamaluke slave who after Haalon departure recover Syria and palaestina and be again with great slaughter dispossess of the same by Cassanes i i Haiton Armen a tartarian prince who repair jerusalem and give it to the christian of Armenia and other the eastern country but Cassanes retire into Persia to pacify new broil the sultan recover the same the christian of the west neglect the just defence thereof special through the pride and contention of Boniface the pope contrary to his name fill a great part of Europe with faction and quarrel @. 3 of the ottoman turk their original and proceed the turk in Asia pay tribute to the tartar cham till succession in the blood of Aladin fail this kingdom be diverse rend every one catch so much as his might can bestow on his ambition the great of these sharer be a a Knolles turkish history one Caraman alusirius who take unto himself the city Iconium with all the country of Cilicia and some part of the frontier of Lycaonia pamphylia Caria and the great Phrygia as far as philadelphia all which be after he call Caramania next neighbour and sharer to he be Saruchan of who jonia maritima be call Saruchanili the great part of Lydia with some part of the great Mysia Troas and Phrygia fall to Carasius call of he carasi-ili some part of Pontus and the country of Paphlagonia fall to the son of omer which country be call Bolli these all be of the selzuccian family but the foundation of far high fortune be then lay much low by divine providence exalt Ottoman of the oguzian tribe or family who then hold one only poor lordship call Suguta in Bythinia not far from Olympus give before to his father erthogrul in meed of good service which he increase by win somewhat from the weak christian his neighbour afterward erect into a kingdom which have devour so great a part of the world as be at this day subject to the turkish greatness when the tartar chase as be say the turk out of their persian kingdom which Tangrolipix have there establish one Solyman a Turk of the ogusian tribe reign in machan b b Leunol histor Musul. l. 2. jac. Boissardi vitae and Icones sultan Turc his pedigree be thus reckon Oguzan Oguzez Giokolpes versaiobe tectomur Clases ago Bakis Aga bosunger oicoluce bainder Cusulbuga Cabielpes soleiman some make ottoman to be of base parentage but not so probable over a small realm which for fear of those tartar he also forsake and with a thousand of his people flee and seat himself in a part of Armenia about erzerum and after upon some better hope resolve to return again into Persia but in seek to pass the river Euphrates be drown and his follower disperse follow their ancient trade of wander herdsman he leave behind he four son tencur-teken jundogdis ertogrul the father of ottoman and dunder the two elder return into Persia the two young stay and with they four hundred family with their tent and cart their movable house and insinuate into the sultan aladin good like by suit and desert this ertogrul be reward as you have hear be make lord of Suguta and warden of those march and live there in security till he be of great year and have see much alteration in that state he die 1289. have live ninety three year and he succeed by common consent as lord over the oguzian turk his son Ottoman salute therefore by the name of Osman beg or lord Osman he first d d Laon. Chalcondyles lib. 1. Abraham Zacuthi have write a chronicle of these turk together with the saracen translate by Ios. scal. can. Isag. lib. 2. see p. jovius Knolls etc. get into his subjection a great part of the castle and fort of the great Phrygia equal protect his subject both christian and turk he conquer nice the name whereof be reverend for the first general council of Christendom and Aladin the second sultan of Iconium send unto he a fair ensign a sword and robe with ample charter that whatsoever he take from the christian shall be his own and that public prayer shall be say in their temple for his health which be of he humble accept and such prayer make by one who he have appoint bishop and judge of carachiser 1300. neapolis be make his seat royal he fish so well in the trouble stream of the greek empire that he subdue the most part of Phrygia Mysia and Bythinia and Prusa after a long siege be yield unto his son Orcanes and make the royal seat of the ottoman-king where Ottoman himself be bury 1328. his son Orcanes succeed Aladin his brother content himself with a private life orchary who after build two mahometan church and another at Prusa Orcanes also erect in nice a sumptuous temple appoint a preacher to preach to the people every Friday and two fair abbey in the one of which he with his own hand serve the stranger and poor the first-dinner he be the first that build abbey among the turk follow herein by most of his successor he get Nicomedia and the town adjoin he also win all Charasia and at his return build a church and abbey at Prusa place therein religious man seek out with all diligence his son Solyman first of the turk that have possess any foot in Europe cross the Hellespont and win the castle Zemeenic and after that Maditus receptacle for the turk which come over in multitude he transport christian into Asia to dwell in their room and after e e 1358. he win gallipoli spoil the country and win from the greek who be negligent in prevent or remedy this danger but Solyman die with a fall his old father Orcanes live not two month after a prince very zealous in his superstition who beside build diverse church abbey college and cell allow pension to all such as can in the church say the book of Mahomet law by heart and competent maintenance to the judge that they shall not sell justice Amurath f f AMURATH which succeed exceed he in his blind zeal he keep in awe the turkish prince in Asia and win many town and castle in Thracia and among other adrianople the seat royal of the turkish kingdom until Constantinople be after subdue this be do 1362. he ordain that every five captive of the christian above fifteen year old shall be take up for the turkish king which be distribute among the turkish hus-bandmen in Asia to learn the turkish language religion and manner and after two or three year choice be make of the better sort to attend upon the prince person and for his war call janisar that be new soldier which order after grow to great account and be yet a principal pillar of the turkish greatness he overthrow Aladin the caramanian king which make the other prince of the selzuccian family to submit themselves unto he and busy himself in his new conquest in Europe after a great victory obtain against Lazarus despot of Servia as he view the slay carcase be slay of a wound and half-dead soldier who come stagger as it be to beg his life stab this great conqueror with a dagger hide under his g g an. do. 1390. garment Bajazet h h Bajazet his son and successor oppress most of the mahometan prince in Asia invade Valachia besiege Constantinople eight year overthrow the king of Hungary in battle subdue the caramanian kingdom and amidst his aspire fortune be by i i laz. Soranzo Ottom part 2. say it shall be write Tamurchan which signify king tamur as Leuncla interpret who yet affirm that tamur lanc or leng signify lame tamur for his leg be break there be a history of Tamburlaine translate out of Arabic into french and thence into english contain a full and happy more true discourse of his life differ much from our common report which pet. Perand jovius in their treatise thereof io. and Phil camerarius c. Maiolus and almost all the turkish historian have write tamberlane deprive of his kingdom and liberty shut up and carry about in a iron cage against the bar whereof he beat out his brain 1399. k k MAHOMET Mahomet his son after much war with his brethren whole possess the ottoman kingdom both in Europe and Asia almost quite overthrow before by Tamerlane he take the caramanian king and his son Mustapha prisoner who become his vassal as do also the U^lachian prince he die 1422. l l AMURATH 2 Amurath his successor win thessalonica the great part of Aetolia enforce the prince of Athens Phocis and Boeotia to become his tributary oppress the mahometan prince of Asia subdue Servia spoil Hungary he after retire himself to a monastical life in a monastery which yet the affair of state force he to leave again m m a history of Scanderberg MAHOMET 2 he invade Epirus at the siege of Croia die 1450. Mahomet n n leon. chien Archiep. Mytyl cap. Constant. be there salute sultan in the field a man equal unequal and troublesome to the christian and mahometan prince he win Constantinople the twenty of May 1453. the take whereof be by Leonardus chiensis o o be Ruthen ep io. ram. rep Turc lib. 3. declare in a treatise compose of that unhappy argument and likewise by cardinal p p bern de breidenbach cap. Isidorus ruthenus he win Trabezond the imperial seat of another christian empire q q Bajazet 2 1460. hence he be call emperor a name not give to the turkish king he burn Athens 1452. he obtain Epirus and Mysia 1436. and do much harm against the sultan and mameluke he conquer Euboea and illyricum in the year 1474. overthrow the persian and in the last act of his bloody life he take by Achmetes his captain Otranto or hydruntum in Italy with no small terror to all Italy he be surname great and be say to have conquer two hundred city twelve kingdom and two empire which he lest to Bajazet his son 1481. his other son Zemes be force to flee into Italy where a great sum of money r r Forty thousand ducat yearly be yearly allow the pope to keep he for his own security and for love of his brother who Alexander the bishop be report s s Guicciard. hist jac. boissurdi to poison as some think by composition with the grand signior he have some war against the mameluke some against the christian more unnatural against his brother but most most unnatural and monstrous against his son selym. his conquest be in Cilicia Caramania and Peloponnesus Selym SELYM not content to have thrust his father out of the throne aspire to a further effect of aspire ambition deprive he of life from who himself have receive it to this end he corrupt a jew Baiazet physician who Knolles call Hamon but t t Menavino l. 3. c. 22. relate all this at large Menavino a eyewitness name he Ustarabi who with the powder of beat diamond poison he and for reward when he claim selym promise have his head strike off in the tyrant presence so much do he hate the traitor who treason he so much love the body of Bajazet be embalm and inter at Constantinople in a beautiful sepulchre near to the meschit which himself have build and priest be appoint which shall every day pray for his soul two of his page do Selym put to death for wear black and mourn apparel for their master death and three other whereof Menavino be one hardly by entreaty of selym daughter and some bassa escape this viper that spare not his father proceed with bloody hand to make a end of the rest of his ottoman-kindred begin with five son of his brethren and add the remnant as he can bring they into his power and have thus found his throne in bloody cruelty of his own at home no marvel if abroad his proceed be no less cruel and bloody towards his enemy of who the first which offer himself after his domestical war appease be Ishmael the u u henricus Ponia sophi count Turc sophy who with thirty thousand persian horseman give battle to Selym notwithstanding his three hundred thousand turk where be fight in Armenia near coy a terrible and mortal battle betwixt they the turk at last very hardly prevail by help of their great ordnance but so little cause have they to rejoice of their victory that this be reckon among the dismal and disastrous day term by the turk the only day of doom the next 10 10 dom. 1515. year he enter again into the persian confine and there take ciamassum overthrow Aladeules the mountain king who reign in Taurus and antitaurus and slay he but his most fortunate attempt be against Campson gaurus the egyptian sultan and his force of mameluke who by his multitude notwithstanding their fame and valour not inferior to any soldier of the world he overcome the sultan himself be leave dead in the place August 7. 1516. neither have Tomumbeius his successor any better success but succeed as well in his fortune as to his sceptre who by treason of his own and power of his enemy lose both his life and kingdom all Egypt and Syria thereby accrue to the ottoman Selym from thenceforth purpose to turn his force from the sunrising against the christian in the west come to his own sunset the period of his reign and life a miserable disease as a angry pursuivant exact and redemand his bloody cruel spirit a implacable officer of that implacable tyrant to tyrant and prince of prince death who at last conquer this conqueror or rather if his y y animus phi. Lonicer tom. 1. lib. 1. epitaph write on his tomb say true convey he hence to seek new conquest his disease be a canker in the back eat out a passage for his viperous soul which make he rot while he live and become a stink burden to himself and other he die in September 1520. have before bequeath bloodshed and desolation to the christian and ordain Solyman his son and heir executor of that his hellish testament and further to excite he thereunto have leave he the lively counterfeit of himself with sundry bloody precept annex his title therein write be sultan Selym ottoman king of king lord of all lord prince of all prince son and nephew of God we may add heir apparent to the devil that breathe his last in blood resemble he that be z z joh. 8.44 a murderer from the beginning chap. 9 a continuation of the turkish war and affair together with the succession of the great turk till this present year 1616. @. i. of SOLYMAN the magnificent SOLYMAN SOLIMAN surname the magnificent succeed his father Selym in place and surmount he exceed in exploit Belgrade which ominous name do presage happiness unto he in his war and proceed be the beginning of his conquest win by the turk August 29. 1521. a a see the history at large in Hakl to 2. and jacob fontanus Brugensis Rhodes receive he on Christmas day 1522. but withal exile both cheer Christmas and christian he invade b b mart. fume hist of hun. lib 1. Melchior Sciterus de bello Pannonico Hungary and in the field discomfit and kill jew and slay or captive two hundred thousand hungarian in that expedition 1526. he enter Hungary the second time 1529. and after some butchery therein march to Vienna in Austria where he lose fourscore thousand of his turk and then with shame and anger return in the year 1532. he return with a army of five hundred thousand man to who Charles the five oppose himself and the christian force in great number then have in many age be see muster in his army at Vienna two hundred and threescore thousand man whereof fourscore and ten thousand footman and thirty thousand horseman be old soldier to who Solyman do not nor dare not bid battle poor Hungary rue in mean while whether he get or lose in Austria be make his thoroughfare as he go and come after this he try his success against the persian where he take Tauris and Babylon with the country of Assyria and Media 1534. each of which have sometime be lady of the World at incredible cost he prepare a fleet in the red sea 1537. and take aden and Zibyth two petty kingdom in Arabia by his force c c dam. a go besiege Dium a castle of the portugal in the east-indies but without his wish success for the portugal still retain their indian-sea and traffic and not only free that their castle from turkish bondage but have mean to fortify it better by the ordnance which the turk in their hasty flight have leave behind turkish history kn. a more dangerous plot do Solyman mean while contrive against Christendom prepare his force to invade Italy and to that end be come to Aulona a haven in Macedonia with two hundred thousand soldier where Barbarussa and Lutzis Bassa his great admiral meet he with his fleet to transport his army but Solyman first employ these sea-force on the coast of Italy and take castrum his horseman which he have send over in great palendar carry away the people cattle and substance betwixt Brundisium and Tarentum forty mile space all the country of Otranto terrify with fear of a great tempest but the venetian turn it from the rest of Italy upon themselves notwithstanding their league by unseasonable exact of that Sea-courtesy the vail of the bonnet or top sail of some turkish galley unto they as lord of that sea for which neglect some of they be sink d d Andrew d'oree a famous sea-captain Auria also the emperor admiral have surprise some of the turk straggle fleet and after hold cruel fight with twelve great galley full of janissary and choice man who he overthrow and take but the janissary that be leave cast their scimater overboard lest such choice weapon shall come to the christian hand Solyman convert his force against the venetian for the indignity mention have almost fall into the hand of the Mountain-thief which live in the acroceranian hill who in a strange resolution have conspire to kill he in his tent and have almost to the wonder of the world in a night by unknown way sudden effect it have not the crack of a bough discover their captain who in a tree be take view of the camp how to bring to pass his desperate design this their captain by name Damianus be after confession hereof tear in piece and those wild mountainer live on robbery without law or religion be like wild beast hunt to destruction the turk invade corfu whence they carry sixteen thousand of the islander captive they likewise in their return commit great spoil in zante and Cythera sack aegina paros and other island in the Archipelago bring Naxos under tribute Barbarussa sack botrotus a venetian city the like do Ustrif to Obroatium and the castle of Nadin Nauplium also and Epidaurus be besiege but Ferdinand who have entitle himself king of Hungary after Lewis his death receive a great disgrace in Hungary by the turkish force than befall the venetian in all their loss cazzianer the general of the christian shameful fly and betray his associate to the turkish cruelty the next year 1538. Barbarussa chase the christian fleet in which the emperor venetian and the pope force be join in the year 1541. Solyman again invade Hungary profess himself protector of the young king which John late king of Hungary who have hold long war with Ferdinand about that title have leave behind he his heir and successor but under colour of protection he make himself lord of Buda the chief city turn the cathedral church into a meschit and make Hungary a turkish province bestow Transylvania and what he please on the orphan two year after he reenter Hungary and take Strigonium turn the christian temple into mahometan sacrifice there for his victory as he have do at Buda he enter also into e e joan. martini ep Alba regalis where the hungarian king lie entomb another chief city of that kingdom and slay the magistrate I speak not all this while of the spacious country in Africa which from the river Muluia he add to his dominion the kingdom of Algiers Tremisen tunes Tripoli etc. be annex to his turkish sovereignty howbeit tune by aid of Charles the emperor somewhat recover herself but breathe out again her last gasp of liberty in the day of Selym his son and thus be f f Solyman as unnatural to his child as Selym be to his father Bajazet Solyman victorious and happy otherwhere victorious and unhappy when he be force to darreine battle against his own bowel and have murder Mustapha his elder son the hopeful branch in turkish estimation that ever grow out of the ottoman stock he war against Bajazet another of his son who with four of his child he procure to be do to death in Persia and after much domestical trouble in his seven expedition into Hungary his fleet in the siege of Malta be before with great disgrace repulse he die at the siege of zige the four of September 1566. @. 2 of Selim the second and AMURATH the three SELYM the only son which the bloody father have leave alive succeed in the throne not in the prowess and valour of his father neither have any turkish sultan since his day lead their force in person but commit it to their deputy and general except once when Mahomet the three have almost lose his army and himself yet do this Selym by his bassa make he lord of g g of the war of Cyprus see the relation of Nestor Martiningo in Hakl tom. 2. part. 1. Cyprus and also of the kingdom of Tunis but this sweet meat be sour sauce by his exceed loss in the sea-fight betwixt Hali Bassa admiral of the turk h h our gracious sovereign king james have write a poem of this battle and don John of Austria general of the fleet set forth by the pope Spaniard and venetian 1571. wherein a hundred threescore and one galley be take forty sink or burn and of Galliots and other small vessel be take about threescore the turkish admiral be then slay witty do a Turk descant upon this loss of the turk and their gain of Cyprus compare this to the shave of a man beard which will grow again that to the loss of a arm which once cut off can be renew last tune come in and Selym go out of this turkish sovereignty both in manner together 1574. Amurath his heir begin his empire with the slaughter of his five brethren the mother of Solyman one of that number slay herself with a dagger for anguish of that loss he in view a new galley by the breach of a piece hardly escape death thirty of his company be slay and because the plague be exceed hot he by devotion seek to appease divine anger and therefore prohibit all use of sodomy blasphemy Michael ab Isselt com. 1575. and polygamy and himself put out five hundred woman out of his seraile in a private habit he visit the market and hang up the hoorder of corn he by the tartar invade Polonia and Henry of France secret leave that kingdom of Polonia he write unto he to choose Stephen Battor for their king in which letter he call himself God of the earth governor of the whole world messenger of God and faithful servant of the great prophet which wrought so much with the nobility that either they will not or dare not do otherwise howsoever Maximilian have be before by many of they choose Tamas i i Minadois history of the war betwixt the turk and persian translate by Abraham Hartwell in nine book relate these thing at large the persian at the same time die bequeath his crown to Ishmael his son who Aidere his brother seek to deprive but be therefore himself deprive of that ambitious head which he seek to adorn with the crown and Ishmael add the slaughter of eight his young brethren ascend the throne which together with his life he lose by unnatural treachery of Periaconcona his sister the four and twenty of November 1577. Mahomet his brother succeed in this troublesome state which Amurath the Turk in these trouble water think fit time for himself to fish for hereunto also help the hatred and civil broil in Persia for the head of Periaconcona present to Mahomet with the hair dishevel on a lance and for other uncouth and bloody spectacle Sahamal and levent Ogli two georgian lord seek also innovation Amurath therefore in the year 1578. send Mustapha Bassa which have late conquer Cyprus with a army of a hundred and ten thousand into Persia who in the first battle he have with they slay five thousand and take three thousand persian and to strike that nation with terror command a bulwark to be frame of those head but by a exceed tempest which last four day together whereby the heaven seem to melt themselves in tear for the persian loss and with lightning to show that indignation against the turk which in their thunder dialect they aloud utter there grow such horror to their mind from above and such sickness to their body from those putrify carcase beneath that Mustapha be force to remove miss forty thousand of his first muster after he have fortify the armenian castle of Teflis his army be drive to shift for lack of victual ten thousand of his forager be slay by the persian who be recompense with like slaughter by Mustapha that come upon they while they be busy about the spoil and spoil the spoiler in pass over the river canac he lose fourscore thousand turk which the river seem to take for custom as it have many of the persian in the late conflict whereof his violent current be a greedy and cruel exactor Mustapha erect a fortress in Eres and take Sumachia chief city of Siruan derbent offering herself to the Turk and then return into Anatolia but Emir hamse mirise the persian prince recover after his departure both Eres and sumachia slay and captive the tartar thirty thousand of who be new come to the turk aid he raze Sumachia even with the ground the next year Mustapha fortify char in three and twenty day wherein they be hinder with snowes on the five and twenty of August although it stand in forty four degree 1580. Sinan Bassa be choose general for the persian war who as he depart from Teflis lose seven thousand of his people beside such as the georgian and persian together with the spoil carry away this be earnest the rest be but sportful show of war in train his soldier after which he return in 1583. ferat Bassa be send general but little be do till Osman Bassa a new general 1585. take Tauris the ancient Ecbatana as minadoi be of opinion but the persian prince carry with indignation revenge this loss on the turk with his own hand slay Caraemit bassa general in the place of Osman then sick and give his head as to one of his follower and afterward at Sancazan slay twenty thousand turk Osman die of sickness and the persian prince the morningstar of that eastern state be soon after murder in that dismal year 1588. ferat take Genge fifteen thousand house seven temple and five and twenty great inn be burn in Constantinople the tumultuous janissary not suffer the fire to be quench a impost be levy of the subject to satisfy the pay due to the soldier for the persian war which raise these stir yea the priest dissuade the people from those new payment and persuade they to maintain their ancient liberty shut up their Meschits intermit their orison and the great Turk be force to call in his mandate and deliver the author of that counsel whereof the Beglerbeg of Grecia be one to the janissary fury who make tennis-ball of their head in the 1592. Wihitz chief city of Croatia be yield to the Turk the next year Siseg be besiege but relieve by the christian who slay eighteen thousand turk and take their tent yet be it soon after take by the renew force of the turk Sinan take Vesprinium in Hungary and Palotta but their loss be far great than their gain which continue and a broil of the janissary add thereto bring k k to this Amurath be m. Hareborn her majesty ambassador and after m. barton of which see Hak. to. 2. part 1. there also pag. 293. you may read of the turk officer revenue payment force etc. also the letter of the great Turk to the queen and of the Sultanness and of Sinan Bassa and many other thing worthy ob eruation that trade into Turkey then begin still continue renew by the king majesty that now be Amurath into melancholy and sickness whereof he die the eighteen of January 1595. Transylvania Valachia and Moldavia have before revolt from he to Sigismond who be entitle their prince this Amurath in a letter to queen Elizabeth entitle himself by the mercy of God free from all sin with all height of grace make possessor of great blessedness above the 72. law of the world @. 3 of MAHOMET the three MAHOMET his son succeed who invite his nineteen brethren to a feast send they to learn his father death in the other world accompany thither with ten of Amurath woman from who issue be fear which with drown they he prevent much ado he have with his janissary at home much loss in his dominion abroad for which cause he send for ferat Bassa out of Hungary and strangle he and send Sinan his emulous corrival in his room who the transyluanian prince overthrow in battle and after chase he over a bridge which he make a mile in length for his army to pass over Danubius with great loss of his people his bridge the fire and water divide betwixt they and the conceit of this ill success as be think procure his death soon after in the year 1597. Mahomet in his own person enterprise these war and not far from Agria on the sixteen of October fight a cruel battle with the christian wherein have not covetousness right call the root of all evil hinder have be achieve the most glorious victory against those barbarian that ever Christendom be bless with Mahomet a a Mahomet army be report to be six hundred thousand say m. Wrag Hakl tom. 2 himself for fear see his ordnance a hundred fourscore and ten great piece take and his man slay in multitude flee with Ibrahim bassa towards Agria shed tear by the way which he wipe off his bloody face with a piece of green silk suppose to be a piece of Mahomet garment carry with he as a holy relic but while the christian be now half conqueror by greedy turn to the spoil their victory be whole lose and twenty thousand of they slay who have slay threescore thousand turk Mr. barton the english ambassador be present in the fight and Mr. Thomas glover also who in a large journal of this expedition testify that the great Turk be in great fear but be animate by some about he he take his bow and arrow and slay three christian therewith those former report he mention not not long after the bassa of Buda be take and the bassa of Bosna with some thousand of turk slay 1599 yet do not all his loss in the west by the christian vex the great sultan so much as a rebellion b b the long and dangerous rebellion in Turkey by cusabin the Scrivano etc. see Knol turkish history raise in the east which many year continue cusabin bassa of Caramania rise in arm against his master and have now do great matter his soldier before false to their prince become now also false to he he fly be after take and torture to death his rebellion outlive he and be maintain by one call the Scrivano who overthrow mehemet bassa in the field and the second time in the year 1601. overthrow he with his army of fifty thousand and forage all the country almost as far as Aleppo proclaim himself the defender of the mahometan faith and soon after give the bassa a three overthrow the turk ambassador send into Persia to demand the sophy son in hostage for the assurance of the peace between c c this embassage be otherwise and perhaps more true relate by sir a. Shirley then present those two monarch be for his proud message put to the bastinado and grievous threaten send back to the grand signior the scriuano proceed be much further by the dissension between the janissary of Aleppo and Damascus but death stay he not his rebellion which a young brother of his prosecute against who hassan bassa be send but lose himself and his army the rebel besiege Angole and force they to give two hundred thousand ducat to buy their peace mean while the janissary after their insolent manner in a mutiny force Mahomet to commit the Capi-Aga one of his great officer and some other to who the success of these rebel be impute to their cruel execution the rebel sack burze one of the chief city the turk storehouse for his war and and treasury for his revenue and the great shaugh of Persia have take corbery also from the turk the governor of Babylon incline now also to the rebel Mahomet not able with force to prevail by fair mean seek to win they and give they their demand make Zellalie one of their chieftain bassa of Bosna whereupon his man of war enter into a resolution to deprive he of the state and to invest therewith Mahomet his elder son about which a astrologian be consult promise all happy success unhappy fool that know not his own approach ruin which Mahomet execute on he together with young Mahomet the prince and fifty other conspirator he send forth a fleet of galley against the king of Fez which have encounter with a tempest be force with a great loss to retire to their former port. the chief rebel make show he will come into Europe as Zellaly have do Mahomet send certain galley to receive he but he receive they and possess himself of the galley slay the man and mock the sultan hassan a great bassa join himself also unto they about such time as Tauris d d Tauris recover by the persian be again recover by the persian all these disaster drive Mahomet to his devotion for refuge account these cross to be inflict for his sin and therefore appoint public prayer in all the mosque of his dominion and send two priest bareheaded and barefooted to Mecca on pilgrimage to pray for he but not Mahomet either have no ear to hear this or else be so far entreat as to be better acquaint with this great sultan in the place of his eternal residence whither about the year 1603. Mahomet the Turk a a of the disposition of this Mahomet his cruelty force power government etc. see Soranzo his Ottomanus be by death soon after send his son Achmat succeed for his elder be strangle in his sight he be bury in a fair chapel by himself for that purpose build about fifty foot square with four turret or steeple in the midst be his sepulchre in a great coffin of white marble his turban at his head two exceed great candle of white wax stand but never burn the one at his head the other at his foot the floor be cover with mat and fair carpet on they round about be like tomb for his wife and child but not so great and fair diverse such chapel there be near to the temple of Sophia as of his father Amurath with his five and forty child entomb about he and of the other great sultan two selym Solyman Bajazet Mahomet each have a fair hospital for the relief of the poor adjoin some of the great bassa imitate the same no other Turk be bury in the city but in the field with stone lay over or set upright fashion with some resemblance of the head which bear ensign of his dignity and whether it be a man or woman with letter engrave further to testify the same @. 4 of achmet ACHMAT b b achmat. set a sure guard about his brother and to prevent the insolency of the janissary and soldier distribute among they two million and a half and be fifteen year old be crown emperor he be say in behaviour and resemblance much to resemble Mahomet the great first conqueror of Constantinople at the same time the war in Transylvania have procure such famine that root herb leaf of tree be their food yea a mother be say to have bring back into her womb by unnatural mean satisfy nature her six child two man to eat their mother other to cut down malefactor from the gallows and eat they horse dog cat and such like be rarity to the poor and dainty beyond their reach and if the state can be make worse thief by robbery and soldier by continual spoil in take away their good add to their misery Cicala Bassa be send against the asian rebel and receive a overthrow the second time he renew his force with renew his fortune namely the loss of thirty thousand of his man the persian recover the country of Sirvan and the city of arusta with the country thereabouts and all that from the day of Solyman have be take from they except two or three place hassan Bassa be send against the christian in Hungary assist with the tartar always ready to help the turk both because they be link in marriage like in condition and that huge empire for want of heir male of the ottoman be entail to the tartar cham pay and spoil be no small motive also to fetch they into these expedition Cicala Bassa be send against the persian but defeat with all his power by the persian in Hungary they do more with their money to maintain rebellion then with open force in the year 1605. a tumult arise among the janissary in Constantinople and five hundred shop and warehouse with two hundred jew and other person to who they belong be burn the janissary enrich themselves with the spoil the jew have make they vault make fire-free to prevent the like danger from the janissary who be think purposely to fire they sometime and always have the office to quench it or pull down house in near danger which they willing protract or perform in place fit for pillage the remedy no less than the disease Hungary be at once vex with foreign and civil war the mutinous christian do more harm than the turk and the people flee into Polonia or the mountain for refuge the rebel take great town yea they spoil stiria and Austria the german name grow odious to the hungarian Botscay chief of the rebel be assist by the turk and call prince of Transylvania all Hungary in manner follow his ensign but the rebel in Asia and the persian exploit detain the turk from make use of these occasion else likely to have swallow Hungary and Austria both yet Pesth be before take by they and now Strigonium Cicala Bassa be again overthrow by the persian and with three hundred fly to Adena the bassa of Trebezond be send to succour he but be discomfit and almost all his army slay Achmat enrage cause Cicala Bassanes house at Constantinople full of wealth and treasure to be rifle Adena be yield to the persian the bassa of Damascus and Aleppo have before fall out and take arm Damascus have overthrow c c civil war between the bassa of Aleppo and Damascus Aleppo in the field besiege he and force he to composition now again Aleppo overthrow he and the bassa of Tripoli and Gazara his companion with their army of threescore thousand man take Tripoli the bassa whereof again he overthrow and add to his garland Damascus the treasury of the turk revenue and chief city of Syria the Beglerbeg of Anatolia send his lieutenant with a great army against he but to their own ruin he intercept a ship lade with the tribute of Egypt the persian send he in token of love a present worth fifty thousand crown Achmat be hereby force to peace with the christian and to recall his force out of Hungary for this employment 1606. the emperor yield satisfaction to the discontent in Hungary with free use of religion to all and Transylvania to remain to Botscay and his heir male for ever a fire at Constantinople kindle in a jew house by the tartar burn many house and jew and four million of good Achmat in great magnificence go to his Moschee to render thanks to Mahomet for a peace conclude with the emperor he now look eastward with his power and as master Henry Lello in his letter from Constantinople date April 2. 1606. testify of he he will needs at first be a soldier but the last winter have feel the cold wind from the top of the hill in Bursia which be all the year long cover with snow and receive some hurt in his stomach by drink those cold water he prove stomach-sick to this expedition also and give over his enterprise against the rebel be become one of Venus knight therein surmount his grandfather murad or Amurath 1607. he send the Visier Bassa with a hundred and thirty thousand against the rebel who prevail more by discreet appease of they then by force the bassa of Aleppo three time withstand his whole force the four time flee towards Persia with his treasure Aleppo be leave to be take and the garrison put to the sword but the bassa himself obtain pardon with restitution of his good take from he in Syria another fire arise at Constantinople and consume two million of good and 3000. house to the ground the duke of Florence do much harm to the turk by the sea 1608. the rebel make new commotion in Asia Mathias the archduke stand outwith his force against the emperor and come with his army towards Prague obtain the crown and royalty of Hungary by composition come king to Vienna but the protestant refuse to swear allegiance till free use of religion in Austria by king Mathias be grant he be crown at presburg and in the year 1612. the emperor rodolph be dead he be choose in his place 1610. the persian d d a. jansonij m. Gallobelg overthrow the turk in diverse battle wherein many thousand of they be slay in the year 1613. the Turk e e m. Gallobelg g. Arthus have provide a great army at adrianople to pass into Transylvania and his garrison begin some stir in Hungary and a new war be there fear but new occurrent in Asia alter that course for the people in Anatolia rise again in rebellion commit spoil and rapine and in Arabia a certain rebel usurp the title of a king and gather together above fifty thousand follower have possess himself of aden a commodious city for the indian merchandise and fit seat for the command of the Red-sea the persian king put his ambassador to death because he have capitulate with the Turk that his master under colour of gift shall pay he a yearly tribute and send the turkish legate which be send with the persian legate back to Constantinople have first cut off his hand and put out his eye hereby the Turk be force to employ his force this way which he have intend for Transylvania and by the bassa of Buda have promise to keep peace have send also his ambassador into Poland with a great present to the king swear by his god his horse and sword to conserve the peace this year also about April be a great fire at Constantinople which burn two thousand house the merchant mean while labour to convey and save their good f f the citizen dare not quench the fire a office belong to the janissary which be think purposely to set they sometime on fire merc. gall. janson the bassa Nassuffensis pretend that a certain merchant of Aleppo who upon that occasion he find there weapon intend violence against he and confiscate his good the chief cause of the quarrel which amount to a hundred thousand Chekin which I mention to show the misery of turkish subjection in September the duke of Arragon have intelligence that the turkish admiral have depart from Constantinople with seventy galley with intent to send aid against the rebel in Syria with his navy of ten sicilian galley fall upon ten of the turkish and take seven of they with three bassa and the beg of Cyprus free out of servitude a thousand christian slave these at Palermo go in procession with olive in their hand the turk also follow chain and the beg of Cyprus when a huge sum be not accept for his ransom kill himself of the Emir of say or Sidon g g l. 2. c. ult. we have speak elsewhere he about the same time come with three galley to Livorno bring with he his four wife ten child and much treasure he present the great duke at Florence a turkish sword rich set with stone and the duchess with two pearl esteem at 60000. crown news also come from Cyprus that the bassa of Damascus make a expedition against the emir son which he have leave in say be by he overthrow and force to flee leave 20000. slay in the field the emir request be assistance of ship these broil in Syria continue force the Turk to seek peace with the emperor the son of Emir have slay the bassa of Damascus janson and Arthus in mm. GG and receive succour from the persian the heiduck also in Hungary in the year 1614 have do the turk much scathe beside the uproar in Transylvania where the prince Gabriel bathore be by a wile of the imperial bring into a ambush and slay and Gabriel Bethlin Gabor obtain to succeed be by the Turk assist molest by the imperial the persian also dispossess the georgian of most of their country for take part with the Turk and the son of the bassa Nussuffensis before mention who be late strangle after the manner of the turkish execution of their great one arise in rebellion and commit much spoil by fire and sword in Asia the cossak be as troublesome in the european frontier all these thing force he to seek conclusion of a peace to which purpose the twelve of May 1615. achmet Chiaia his ambassador enter Vienna with rich present to the emperor and obtain a confirmation of the same for twenty year ensue g. sandys the turk strength at sea be so small that the florentine with six ship only have these three year keep the bottom of the straits in despite of they the whole Armado not dare the onset the admiral employ the pirate of Tunis and algiers who by our fugitive pirate be instruct to the spoil of christian merchant one cause of this weakness be their want of slave for their galley through their peace with Christendom HONDIUS his map of the turkish empire turcicum @. v. of sultan achmet person family government and greatness of State svltan achmet be now ann. 1616. eight or twenty nine year old of a just stature incline to be fat ready sometime to choke as he feed some purposely attend to free he from that danger he be full face and which they esteem a great beauty great eye a little hair he have on his lip less on his chin he be a unrelenting punisher of vice for sodomy he cause some of his page to be drown he be now build a magnificent Moschee for the health of his soul all of white marble himself first break the earth and work three hour in person he have not so few as four thousand which feed and live in the seraglio beside five hundred capagy who wait by fifty at every gate he have three thousand concubine and virgin for his lust as Mr. Knolles Mr. sandys say seldom so few as five hundred virgin in a seraglio by themselves attend by woman and eunuch take in war or from their christian parent they have their purgation and diet much like the persian custom in the time of Esther when it be his pleasure to have one they stand rank in a gallery and she prepare for his bed to who he give his handkerchief then deliver to the aga of the woman she that bear the first son be honour with the title of sultana he have but two son and three daughter a. 1610. and yet be that way unsatiable addict he can make a free woman his concubine and therefore Roxolana procure under colour of devotion her freedom of Solyman force he to marry she dote still on she this also have marry the mother of his young son the mother of the elder be dead call Casek Cadoun that be the lady without hair nature both grace and shame she his elder son be about twelve year old he be much delight with pleasure of the field for which in Graecia and Anatolia he have forty thousand falconer his huntsman be not much few and whereas their religion bind they once every day to practice some mutual trade as his father do make of arrow this sultan every morning after his devotion make horn-rings which they wear on their thumb for the better draw of their bow his officer a a the chief officer of the Turk and his other instrument of private and public service see Knolls and Turcicae etc. be thus deliver the capi Aga by who he speak to such as have suit to he treasurer of the household cupbearer steward overseer of his woman and principal Gardner these six be in great place he have mute person bear deaf and dumb which attend he he have fifteen hundred geld man from who their privity be whole cut and they make water through short quill of silver which to that end they wear on their turban His Visier Bassa's or Privy-counseller whereof there be nine at Constantinople and be wont to be much few be now thirty the rest of they be in their charge or beglerbeg place abroad they sit every Saturday Sunday Monday and Tuesday in the Divano or counsel-hall the aga be captain of the janissary the chiause be his pursuivant the Spahi his guard of horseman the janissary be his best footman who in their childhood be take from their parent and bring up in all hardness and in the rule of their religion then be they put to school where under most severe master they be teach the use of diverse weapon and such as prove fit be enrol for janissary of who in all be forty thousand and about sixteen thousand with their Aga attend the grand signior his person at Constantinople where they be employ as constable clerk of the market warder of the gate sergeant for arrest to guard ambassador and other office the aga be the three place in repute through the empire m. g. Sandy to who jealousy make too much love of the janissary fatal the janissary call the great Turk father he repose great trust in they they acknowledge no dependence but on he in their march they carry certain day provision of victual with they which be no great cumber be a small portion of rice with a little sugar and honey the most of they that attend the court have their be in three large seraglio where the junior reverence their senior and all obey their commander with much silence some be marry a breach of their first institution and live in private house many of they undertake to guard such christian as will be at the charge both about the city and in their travel from violence and incivility wherein they be most faithful this appear in one of they of late strike by a swagger Englishman as they travel through Morea who yet with much patience and fidelity he bring safe to zante they be all of some trade receive but five asper a day to which pension his elder son be admit from his birth two growne yearly one of violet the other of stammel they bear in their hand a great tough reed tip with silver wherewith they strike such as displease they no justice may be public administer on they but private be by their aga correct and sometime throw into the sea in the night they be most tumultuous when the emperor be die or dead for which cause it be by all industry conceal from they till the next be establish who must bestow a largesse present and increase their pension a Asper a day they have late admit beside renegado natural Turk of which one be now bassa of the port which be never before know he have also in pay other call Topegi six thousand which be gunner and twelve thousand gebegi which have charge of the powder and shot in the army he have seminary for the train up of those youngling the one sort of which be call jeheoglani whereof be five thousand which never go out of the seraglio in sixteen or twenty year never see any but their officer where they be train up to future service the Gemoglani who be also tithe child of the christian be bring up with some more liberty and to base office of husbandry and such like and may also prove janissary of these be twenty thousand the Ianizary and tithe child with his Timariot be the main pillar of his empire his b b some say there be in all a million every one find as many horse as his farm do double the yearly value of 60. sultan ^s ready to be by their Saniacks these by their bassa some sanziack command 5000. Timariot Timariot which hold land in fee to maintain so many horseman in his service be in Europe two hundred fifty seven thousand in Asia and Africa four hundred sixty two thousand he have thirty or forty thousand Achingi hindes of the country which serve on horse back without other pay then what they get by forage but of small reckon as be also the Azapi which serve on foot yet proper belong to the galley who best service be with their dead body to fill up ditch to make way for the janissary and to weary the enemy with multitude many voluntary also attend the camp in hope to succeed the slay Spahi or janizaries when they march the tartar scour the country two day journey before then follow the Achingi and after they the Timariot next the Iemoglan after they the janissary than the chause on horseback the sultan follow with the officer of his court and archer of his guard footman the stipendiary Spahi march on either side of he his coach which carry the page and eunuch come after and then the carriage and voluntary the royal standard be a horse tail tie to the end of a staff the janissary have wooden model of elephant boot sword and the like bear before they Beglerbeg signify lord of lord of which be wont to be two one in Europe another in Asia but by Solyman increase that though Romania and Anatolia have still the chief title yet in Europe be four other in Asia before these persian war nine and twenty in Africa four in all nine and thirty which be as viceroy and have their beg or sanzack under they his admiral place be as great by sea if these great one do injustice the oppress will sometime in troop attend the come forth of the emperor and by burn straw on their head or hold up torch provoke his attention who be bring by his mute deliver their petition which often turn to the ruin of the other bribery be but late know yet now the best advocate every bassa keep a Divan or court of justice in his province the chief be at Constantinople four day of the week in the seraglio whence be no appeal but to the musti the great Visier Bassa be precedent of the rest in three day all cause be determine all they have for assurance of purchase be a little schedule manifest the possession of the seller which under-written by the cadi frustrate all after-claims and as for law-querk they be unknown rebellion rare happen both because the great commander submit his neck to the executioner bowstring send with commission by the tyrant enclose in a box neither may any hope for partaker in resist where one man fall be another rise their kindred and alliance not so much as know to themselves to have have eminent parent be argument of neglect of ruin to be belove and for wealth they be but sponge all which a greedy life have suck be strain at their death except what the grand signior please to bestow on their posterity neither may any slave promise much to himself where damnable policy strangle the imperial blood if male and the issue of the female by their slave for so be the great bassa give by the sultan when make husband to his sister or daughter rare attain above the degree of a private captain this great empire may be conjecture to grow near a period in respect it have late decrease eastward and in the sea-force their discipline be neglect and not exact to ancient rigour their late emperor effeminate the bowel of the state much infest with rebellion and it have already be a long-lived tyranny out-living the wont period it may seem the great empire now in be yet be that of China far exceed in revenue in natural situation for defence in province better unite and better people not inferior in that kind of policy which prevent alienation and rebellion but in soldiery not to be compare except we say herein he have full recompense that he be strong enough in that kind which care not to conquer nor need fear to be conquer the persian have not so vast country subject but better subjection and himself a better commander and his soldier better discipline and experiment the mogul be great wealthy and mighty the persian and Mogol have no power by sea but Asia be not comparable to european valour but compare the turkish greatness to that of some of the first Califas which stretch from India to Spain France and Barbary or to the tartarian which awe more in Asia then ever Turk possess in the universe perhaps twice tell for proof read our tartarian relation and yet they pierce as far as Austria in Europe overrun Russia Polonia Hungaria and make Italy to quake with the rumour of their arm or to the roman which hold almost all the Turk have when it be better worth the hold beside this western world which the Turk know not herein I think the Turk overmatch beyond comparison nor any whit exceed the power and possession of Alexander no nor the persian greatness before he except in martial discipline wherein they now also degenerate thus much of turkish affair of state if we add also this for a conclusion that the Turk command on the sea-coast after some man b b state of the world pag. 939. arithmetic 11280. mile in Asia Africa and Europe and the superficies of all his dominion come to a million two hundred three thousand two hundred and nineteen mile every way square let the author answer it if the sum be transcendent the turk revenue beside his Timariot be esteem but fifteen million of sultany c c the turk have but two sort of coin the Sult i equal to the veni Zeccene and the Asper or silver of which 120. make a Sultanie about eight shilling six penny which may seem strange in so huge a empire but tyranny in waste and desolate nation and lording over every man estate none willing to toil for that whereof he have no certainty nay which may procure he the great danger have cause thin habitation I except the city and poor inhabitant to this his revenue may be add his tax custom spoil and extortion as the great fish prey on the small and pray to the great so here the great one spoil other and themselves spoil of all with their life or else necessary leave he their heir at their death @. 5 a appendix touch the succession of MUSTAPHA twice and of Osman murder and other civil uncivil late combustion achmet before he a a this be take out of a book write of that argument achmet reign about fifteen year die to make all sure resolve to strangle his brother Mustapha and according to custom will leave no competitor in such a empire for which purpose a guard of capagy attend at the iron gate of the Seralio and the mute be place in a room according thus be Mustapha to be dispatch but see how the strong arm put out the strong man the same night achmet have a dream or fearful vision which some of the deruice will needs presume to rumour abroad in this manner that he think as he be enter into the seven tower the princely prison of his predecessor his brother kneel down before he and cry out oh when shall we leave this horrible custom of shed innocent blood look among all the heathen and see how quick they loathe and cast away that cry sin of sacrifice of human flesh but in stead of reply he draw his scimitar to strike off his head have not one as he conceit hold it fast that he can not strike whereupon he demand angry what be thou I be the good genius of Mustapha and will not suffer he to perish therefore leave and very short shall strange thing happen in the empire achmet contrary to all expectation the next morning after his dream send for he into the room of state where he lie on a stately pallet with all his Vice-Roys and bashaw grovel on the ground and the principal musty kneel before he read on a book it shall seem that glad tiding come first to the city for he be take out of the prison with great respect and observation he be admit to his galley with high ceremony and yet solemn countenance he be accompany on the sea with thousand of boat and ten thousand of weep eye he land at the emperor own Caska with great respect and modest stillness he walk through the garden of cypress tree and at last come to a iron gate where his own company leave he except two bashaw who lead he by the arm the gate open and he must through a guard of cupogy they bend to the ground and yet look cheerful they bring he into the room where the mute stand who presence do more appall he then the rest but that he see the cruelty confirm and their very sight be worse than a unreversable judgement but when he perceive no violent hand lay upon he and that he must yet go further he be the more astonish and the more vex to endure such a procrastination at last he come where the emperor lie sick on his pallet before who his prostitution be as the ordinary slave but contrary to all expectation he bid he rise and command certain persian carpet to be spread and rich cushion to be lay on which according to their manner he sit cross legged by he and when the mufti have raise the emperor up a little with a faint voice he discover a unlooke for love heart and bequeath to he the succession he have no soon do but he begin to faint and so read they all a lesson of mortality by open a book wherein they see death write in capital letter and himself sink past recovery which make they recover new spirit and present bring his brother out into the Sophia where the principal mufti proclaim Mustapha emperor intimate to the janissary the charge of Achmat to the discharge their duty and the pleasure of Mustapha to give they a largesse which equal the bounty of other prince oversway nice exception and so with great acclamation they ratify the election and cry out live and reign great Mustapha thus be Mustapha emperor and they have two year trial of his disposition whereby they find he harmless if innocent in both sense enconium of no great and stir spirit Scander and mehemet bashaw take the young Osman after this out of the Seralio and present he to the janissary a comely sweet young youth of nine or ten year old demand withal if such a heir of the ottoman family be to be reject without cause or why they shall bring a harmless prince as they repute Mustapha into the danger of usurpation and differ no further from a traitor but that it be not impute to he as for achmat will empire be not so translate and what can they tell but private man for their own end have wrought upon his weakness make a disease tongue speak that which a healthful heart and perfect sense will not consent to for it be probable that a father will disinherit his child for any brother in the world beside there be no trial or cause either of insufficiency or disability and therefore they can not believe it last of all for any thing they see Mustapha himself be not stir or strong enough to play the steersman in such a high build ship consider the sea be tempestuous and many dangerous shore and rock be to be pass by these speech to the turbulent janissary be like fuel to fire and the presence of the lovely youth make they amaze at their inconstancy so that by way of penitency and satisfaction they quick alter the acclamation of live Mustapha into the cry of God save young Osman and so without further dispute he be advance into the throne and bring into the Seralio when Mustapha lest think of the alteration but now there be no remedy he must needs be depose and send prisoner once again into the seven tower now do Osman begin his Phaeton flourish and run the course of pleasure with his youth spend four or five year in wantonness and jollity while his bashaw spend the time in covetousness and ambitious overrule other yet not without careful overlook the janissary and provident prevent their discontent and turbulent disposition but all do help for they overwhelm to active employment and live upon the spoil of foreign nation as much as the emperor entertainment cry out to the war and when answer be make that the persian have contract a new league and the emperor of Germany old covenant be not yet determine or end they present reply the indignity which the russian have offer unto their neighbour the tartarian be not to be endure for they need go no further than the piracy of the black sea and the injury of the cossack and polonian nay why shall they not march to the expugnation of Loepolis and the forage of the country of Moldavia and Bogdonia and so forward to teach Poland a better lesson then to displease the ottoman family and mightiness the bashaw know there be no reply nor now the fire be kindle no other quench it then let it consume to cinder whereupon they present answer they be glad that the soldier be so memorable of the glory of the empire and so ready to employ themselves for the dignity of the nation and therefore they will not by any mean hinder they or the cause but they shall find the emperor as careful to satisfy their demand as they be willing to augment his greatness so that if they will give way unto time for the prepare of all thing fit for the army and the send for the tartarian to accompany they in the journey the emperor shall go in person into the field and Poland soon find what it be to exasperate such a majesty the king of Poland send to the emperor to the french king to the pope for assistance as also to his e e the polish emb. oration be print majesty of England with intimation of the terror and his well deliver discourse make such impression on his majesty princely heart that he have a present supply in a word his army be soon ready and his cossack prepare by the end of july he be encamp in the field of Bogdonia and within eight day entrench with twenty piece of ordnance mount but the cossack quarter by themselves and after their accustom manner lie between two river be the more embolden to make their daily excursion upon the tartar for have a bridge in the rear of their camp with which the turk be unacquainted they quick transport their man and as quick endamnify their enemy when the grand signior be make acquaint with the forwardness of these polonian and understand they be already encamp and expect his come he be too young to apprehend any fear and not old enough to lay the blame of his retardance where it be therefore they make the more haste when he understand the occasion and so according to former preparation the establishment of diverse government the order the province the settle the great city the muster his galley the guard of his castle and the watch of the black sea the tartar unite themselves to his army and both together make a body of 200000. which with all magnificent preparation he present in the same field and within sight of the polonian where he pitch his imperial tent. the tartar think to have make but one battle and day of trial of the business but when they come to pass over river and assail trench they know not what to say and less to do though the janissary come as a second unto they whereupon they retreat and be altogether appall to be so disappoint both they and the janissary be glad to retire with loss and the young emperor unacquainted with the war be yet acquaint with oath and curse to chide both himself and fortune at the last the bashaw see no remedy and find so great obstacle of their attempt project the preservation of the emperor person but it may be to secure their life and so entrench themselves be as they say the first time that ever so great a army of turk be enclose within wall the polonian also endure both hunger and cold slackness of payment and their entertainment come many time short the noble general die in the camp the prince lie sick of a fever their horse miscarry and other lamentable effect teach they extraordinary patience which make they attend good condition of peace and secret work of more nimble spirit a priest of Moldavia be set on work to go among the polonian and by way of general complaint against the outrageous effect of war to enlarge the happiness of peace and infer what a blessing it be to procure the same whereupon he be bring to the young prince of Poland and commander of the army with who he at last prevail so well and so far that they send a solemn embassy to the great Turk as he lay entrench in the field to entreat a peace and desire the renovation of the which have be ever between the two nation the Turk have learn his lesson so well that he seem to make the matter strange and of great humiliation of these and other occurrent in the polish war be tractat and letter print if he shall consent thereunto and rather a courtesy grant than a necessity impose and so defer they awhile till at last as if he have be overwrought by the intercession and mediation of his bashaw he be content to capitulate the matter and after many meeting and a great deal of conference article be draw and confirm with a kind of solemnity and proclaim by sound of trumpet in both the camp and so break up the camp with a kind of murmur and repine the great Turk take easy journey towards Adrinopolis where he discharge the tartar and send most of his janissary before hand to Constantinople Sigismond king of Poland raise his army and reward the cossack dismiss they home again into their country he go in person to Leopolis from whence by this time Osman be come to the great city he send a solemn ambassador to be there a leaguer as it have be in former time by Christmas Osman come home and have the accustom acclamation of the people with all the ceremony of his return whereupon he go in great pomp to the Sophia and have the useful guard of his court janissary to attend he but within short space many fearful accident appall they all first they be astonish at a blaze comet second they be affright at a great fire happen among the jew which they presage ominous to the government three a sore earth quake make their heart quake for fear another earth quake have happen in their polish expedition s. t. r. but this be usual in those part by reason of the ascend up the hill and many cavern under ground the sea also swell extraordinary and a great dearth happen these may be concur symptom the disease be Osman great spirit emulous of his ancestor glory and ambitious to add the rest of Europe to their conquest but hereto his own avarice and the decrepit or at least that undisciplined age of that empire be agree correspondent and this first disastrous polonian attempt fill he with repine indignation he be say to undertake that war against the will of his soldier and without the advice of his vizier and his gain to be the loss of 100000. horse for want of fodder and 80000. man for want of fight to which he can never incite his janissary though he hazard thereto somewhat far his own person hereupon he complain he be no king subject thus to his own slave which will neither fight in war nor obey in peace without exact new bounty and privilege Delavir Bassa Delavir Bassa a man of great courage late call from the eastern part be sudden make vizier and wrought upon the king discontent give he counsel to provide a new soldiery about Damascus and from the Kurd in stead of these degenerate janissary and of they to entertain 40000. a new militia for his guard and that the begh-lerbegh of every province shall train up some of the inhabitant in martial discipline with which man of new spirit and hope he may be able to do something Osman extreme please with this device consent and leave all to his discretion hereupon it be conclude that the king shall pretend to go in person against the emirde Zaida and after intercede against that a pilgrimage to Mecca be pretend may seven 1622. he begin to pass his tent to Asia side with great store of treasure to the deface of his palace and of church the janissary have secret intelligence and upon a word give meet at the hippodrome and thence run to the seraglio in tumult take order to stop the passage by water there they cry out for the king who appear they first demand his continuance in the city second the chief officer to be deliver to they Delavir the great vizier the Hoia or confessor the Treasurer the governor of the woman the cadileskar or chief justice and other as enemy to the state and author of that journey he grant the first but stick at the second and they return discontent Mustapha restore the next day they renew the mutiny slay the vizier and the governor of the woman and not find the king they call for Mustapha before depose a man esteem holy or frantic and fit for a cell then a sceptre he they find almost starve in a vault where in the begin of these tumult he have be put who first fear death and the next thing be he beg water who they present proclaim emperor Osman consult with huzein Bassa late vizier in the polish war and the aga of the janissary both faithful to he send to have strangle Mustapha in the seraglio but a new uproar happen and he be remove and guard the next day the king with the mufti go to they where after much entreaty their heart somewhat relent yet with new fury possess they slay huzein bassa and the aga the mufti be convey away secret and Osman lead to Mustapha plead for his life and at last be cast into the seven tower prisoner Osman brethren and death Daout Bassa the new vizier inquire and find that Osman have two brother live one about twelve the other seven year old and thereupon go to the prison with a pack of executioner which find he new fall asleep and by their intrusion awake and discontent at first they be amaze and he make show to defend himself till a strong knave strike he on the head with a battle axe and the rest leap on he strangle he with much ado and soon after they mourn for their dead king as fresh as they have rage unreasonable this be the first emperor they have betray and have set up one which in all likelihood they must change for disability new broil the first of june follow the Capiaga have receive secret order to strangle Osman brethren which go to do they cry out and he by the page be slay the janissary mutiny afresh and will have account of this treason whereof the king deny knowledge so do Daout who be suspect but to please they be degrade and huzein Bassa late governor of cairo put in his place const Lett. Febr. Daout strangle there be late report of the say Daout to be strangle in the same place where he have cause Osman to die neither can we expect otherwise then monstrous and portentous birth after such viperean conception chap. x. of the opinion hold by the turk in their religion and of their manner and custom how the turk from so small beginning have aspire to this their present greatness you have see buy indeed at a dear price with their temporal dominion accept of a spiritual bondage become the lord of many country and withal make subject to those many mahometan superstition the occasion and chief cause of sect in the saracenicall devotion you have hear in the four and seven chapter to which we may add here out of a a Obser l. 3. c. 4. bellonius he say that beside the Alcoran they have another book call Zuna that be the way or law or council of Mahomet write after his death by his disciple but the read thereof be diverse and corrupt the caliph assemble a general council of their Alphachi or learned man at Damascus wherein six commissioner be appoint namely Muszlin Bochari Buborayra Annecey Atermindi and dent to view and examine these book each of which compose a book and those six book be call Zuna the other copy be two hundred camels-lading be drown in the river those six only make authentical esteem of equal authority among the turk with the Alcoran and after by one of their divine contract into a epitome which book be call the book of flower but this Zuna be not one as the truth be but full of contrariety hence have rise sect among they the turk differ from other mahometan nation and divide also among themselves @. i. of their eight commandment ANTHONY a a mendu lib. 1. MENAVINUS who live a long time in the turkish court say that the book of their law be call Musaph or Curaam which Georgiovitz reckon another book not the Alcoran it be in Arabic and they hold unlawful to translate it into the vulgar if any like not of Georgiovitz his opinion but think it to be the Alcoran for all be but the article and the name little differ as before be show I can think it likely that this contain some extract and gloss thereof or be to their Koran as our service book to our bible have some son and proper methode but ground on the other some thing I find cite out of the Curaam that be not in the Alcoran as that of the angel mortality which perhaps may be the mistake of the interpreter the ignorance of the Arabic have cause much miscall of word and name they have it in such reverence that they will not touch it except they be wash from top to toe and it be read in their church by one with a loud voice the people give devout attendance without any noise nor may the reader hold it beneath his girdlested and after he have read it he kiss it and touch his eye with it and with great solemnity it be carry into the due place out of this book be derive eight principal commandment of their Law the first be GOD be a great God and one only God and MAHOMET be the prophet of God this article of the unity they think make against we who believe a trinity of person in detestation whereof they often reiterate these word b b the turk use to repeat one word of their prayer so often and with such continue fervour that sometime they fall down with weariness or seem ravish in a trance and devout ecstasy hu hu hu that be he he he be only GOD who be worthy to be praise for their limb health etc. and for that he have provide sustenance for every one forty year before his birth the second commandment be obey thy parent and do nothing to displease they in word or deed they much fear the curse of their parent 3. do unto other as thou will be do unto 4. that they repair to the meschit or church at the time appoint of which after 5. to fast one month of the year call romezan or Ramadan 6. that they give alm to the poor liberal and free 7. to marry at convenient age that they may multiply the sect of Mahomet 8. not to kill of these commandment be handle at large in Menavino and in the book c c policy of the turkish empire biddulph of the policy of the turkish empire and in other their time of prayer according to the four precept be d d some say that the turk now use to resort to their oratory but three time a day and busbequius say four omit that in the night Busbeq Epist. 1. they measure the time of prayer by hourglass of water some say six and the devout sort seven in the morning call Salanamazzi before sunrising the second at noon call Ulenamazzi the three about three hour before sunset call Inchindinamazzi the four at sunset Ascannamazzi the five two hour within night before they go to sleep master sandys name seven time of prayer enjoin daily the first Tingilnamas two hour before day not mention by Septemcastrensis and another Giumanamas at ten in the morning due observe on the friday by all at other time by the more religious when the priest call to prayer they will spread their garment on the earth though they be in the field and fall to their devotion moreover I have see they conjoint pray in the corner of the street before the open of their shop in the morning they spend but a part of Friday their sabbath in devotion and the rest in recreation but that so rigorous that a Turk have his ear nail to his shopboard for open it too soon their service be mix with song and respond they never look back till they come to the salutation of Mahomet who they expect to come again and think it will be behind they they harken to the priest read the Alcoran or legend or intermix instruction and exposition with such attention and such steady posture of body as if they be entrance they number their often repetition of the name of GOD with short ciaculation of prayer and praise upon bead if they find a paper in the street they will thrust it in some crevice of the adjoin wall lest the name of GOD may be therein and profane of their public prayer you shall see more after they which mean to go to prayer go first to the house of office and there purge their body they wash their privy part and then go thence wash their hand their mouth their nose their countenance and their wrist each of they three time and after their ear and neck say a certain psalm and then wash their foot to the midleg say another psalm and after all this with a grave pace walk to church without these wash they hold their prayer unprofitable Septemcastrensis say that for this cause of wash they cut their nail and all their hair except on their head and beard which yet they comb and bestow curious pain about that the water may have free passage to all part yea for this cause he think they observe circumcision that nothing be leave cover and unwashed they have three kind of wash the first of all the body no part be leave free call zcoagirgmeg which be necessary after any pollution the second be call Tachrias of the privity and hinder part after stool urine or break of wind the three Aptan or Abdas in the instrument of the five sense begin at the hand from thence the wrist to the elbow than the mouth and nostril then all the face with the eye then the ear and from thence to the foot which he wash as high as the ankle this be not necessary before every prayer except some uncleanness happen but may serve for all day their alm enjoin in the six commandment be public or private their public alm be a sacrifice if we may so call it or offer of some beast once every year for whereas of old they shall have give a certain pension of money to the poor namely two in the hundred Mahomet upon their complaint ease this heavy burden and convert it into this sacrifice this beast must be cut in piece and give to the poor neither must they themselves eat of it yet may each man eat of his neighbour offer and this sacrifice ought to be of the fair and best horse veal or mutton the place for this sacrifice be call Canaara where be many butcher which cut the throat thereof say in the name of he which have make heaven and earth and all thing else this sacrifice be to his honour and worship and let his infinite bounty accept the same they use the like upon occasion of vow if any of their house be sick as for their private alm they hold it necessary have a vain conceit that it free they from all imminent misery which they say together with the alm turn from they to the poor man whence it come that the poor be so full of disease but for all this charitable precept many poor people die among they for want of relief and c c biddulph if the poor pay not their head-money to the king yearly they be beat and their woman and child sell to pay it and yet I have see say Mr. sandys but a few beggar among they sometime you shall meet with couple chain together beg to satisfy their creditor marriage ought to be seek they say for procreation not for lust they which live unmarried after fit time Menavino which be about five and twenty year of age be not just nor please god. their law enjoin they to perform their marriage-ceremony with prayer and praise and modest shamefastness and they ought to learn each other to read if either party be ignorant but their marriage be now far degenerate from that ancient simplicity d d the turk can marry and unmarry themselves at their pleasure m. g. sandys l. 1. for if a man like a young woman he buy she of her father and then enrol she in the cadi book the marriage follow with all Bacchanal solemnity many woman be invite by the bride mother the night before when after the feast they bathe she and the next morning trick she in her rich ornament tie on her silken buskin with knot easy not unknit which the bridegroom must untie though with his tooth after that with much solemnity his companion on horseback ride two in a rank and conduct by the Sacdich who be near of his kindred have fetch she home the bride be deliver with her face close cover set astride on horseback with a canopy over she and receive of he at his door thence lead if she be of quality by a eunuch to the bride-chamber the guest honour he with present yet come not in the father also give only some piece of household carry open by particular through the street now he be to entertain the wife with a equal respect alike be their diet apparel yea and benevolence unless they consent to change or give turn or else they may complain to the cadi and procure a divorce but the husband may put away his wife at pleasure who may marry unto another within four month after except she prove with child and then she must stay so long after her delivery but if he will have she again he must buy she and if after the three divorce another be first to lie with she as a punishment for his levity they will sell some of they or give they to their slave the wife give he the reverence of a master they be at no time to deny he their embracement who he touch not again until they have be at the bath they hold their chastisement which they receive from he as a argument of affection they intermeddle not with household affair only it be require of they to content their husband to nurse their own child and to live peaceable together which also they do without jealousy or envy they be exceed beautiful for the most part ruddy clear and smooth as the polish ivory tender and soft as frequent the bath daily and never open to the weather but wither quick great and black eye be the great fair to the eye of a Turk they sit not at table with their husband but wait and serve they and then they dine by themselves admit no mankind with they above twelve year old and they never go abroad without leave except to the bath and on Thursday to weep at the grave of the dead they rise to their husband and stand while they be in presence septemcastrens Busbequ epist. and beside they come in no company of man nor do they speak with a man or in any part of their body be see of any man because they think sight especial where beauty or comeliness be can be without sin only the brother may be permit to see the sister but not the husband brother yea their son when they come to growth be separate from they for this cause that sex be not suffer to buy and sell but be close mew save that their law allow they to frequent the public bath the wife and concubine differ in the right to a dowry which the late want but the wife must cause the other to be her husband bedfellow when he command without gainsay except on their sabbath or Friday night which be the wife peculiar yet be the turk give in both sex to unnatural lust in these time even the woman in public bath sometime be so inflame in that filthiness as be intolerable busbequius tell of one woman which fall in love with a young maid and no way else prevail clothe herself in man apparel and hire a house near procure the father good will to have that his daughter in marriage which be solemnize between they and the truth discover which the black mantle of night can not cover from Hymaeneus complaint be make and the governor quench the hot flame of this new bridegroom cause she to be drown for that offence if the man abuse the wife to unnatural lust she may have her remedy by divorce if she accuse her husband which modesty forbid to be do in word and therefore she put off her shoe and by invert the same accuse she to her husband perverseness one master simons which live among they tell i that there be some which keep boy gallant array to serve for the worse than beastly lust of such as will hire they he affirm also that they have this loathsome punishment for that loathsome sin of whoredom to take the paunch of a beast new kill and cut a hole through to thrust the adulterer head in this dung-wallet and so carry he in pomp through the street it be death either to the body by judicial sentence st. gerlach ep. or the soul by turn Turk for a Christian to have carnal deal with any of their woman a jew which have deal with a turk wife with her husband consent can not escape hang therefore this indeed be a favour for he shall have be burn notwithstanding his rich countryman offer 2000 ducat to save he georg. Dousa in itin. Constantinop her husband be hang for his wittoldly permission and she herself drown George Dousa report the like danger which a armenian hardly escape but for talk with a turkish woman both of they be therefore imprison and thence deliver at a dear rate he tell of their pederasty that they buy boy at a hundred or two hundred ducat and mew they up for their filthy lust till they prove beard they will also steal boy for that villainy as he instance of one which come with the polonian ambassador so steal and never can after be hear of murder prohibit in their eight commandment they hold unpardonable if it be do wilful often will the turk brawl but never in private quarrel strike one another for fear of this law and the severity of the magistrate and if one be find dead in street or house the master of the house or the parish must find out the murderer otherwise he himself shall be accuse of it and the whole contado shall be fine and likewise in case of robbery during the time that I remain among they you hear Mr. sandys it be above three quarter of a year I never see mahometan offer violence to a mahometan nor break into ill language if any give a blow he have many gash make in his flesh and be lead about for a terror but the manslayer be deliver to the friend of the slay to be by they torture to death for public punishment to mention that here they have impal on stake thrust in at their fundament ganch on hook on which they be cast from some high place there to hang till famine if some more gentle cruelty have not make a sudden dispatch consume they they also have another invention to twitch the offender about the waste with a towel enforce he by often prick to draw up his breath till they have draw he within the compass of a span then tie it hard they cut he off in the middle and set the body on a hot plate of copper which sear the vein up-propping he during their cruel pleasure who not only retain sense but discourse also till he be take down and then depart in a instant little fault be chastise by blow on the sole of their foot by hundred at a time parent correct their child by stripe on their belly @. 2 of other their opinion and practice in religion MEnaninus reckon seven mortal sin pride avarice lechery wrath envy Sloth and gluttony the first they say cast Lucifer out of heaven the second be the root of many other sin the three be most rise among they and that in the most filthy and unnatural kind of sodomy their law to the contrary notwithstanding their four make a man a beast the five shut man out of paradise and so forth of the rest wine a a drink of greek wine be too sweet a sin for the turk to forbear be also forbid they but yet they will be drink with it if they can get their fill of it and Mahomet the three 1601. impute diverse insolence of the janissary to their excessive drink of wine by the mustie persuasion command on pain of death all such in Constantinople and pera as have wine to bring it out and stave it except ambassador only so that the street run therewith one drink wine b b a. Jesus Busb Epist. 1. with busbequius make great clamour be ask the cause he say he do it to warn his soul to flee into some corner of the body or else be quite go lest it shall be pollute with that sin yet in their fast or Lent they abstain very religious c c Villamont if it be prove against a priest that he have drink wine but once he shall never be believe as a witness after it swine flesh be prohibit too in abstain from which they be more obedient it be utter abhor the turk d d the turk be no fashion-monger general hate say Septemcastrensis that lightness in apparel speech gesture etc. use of the christian who for this cause they call ape and goat likewise they be not sumptuous in their private building they go to the war as it be to a wedding esteem they bless which be therein slay the wife and women-servant agree in one house without jealousy and grudge they be in their habit and behaviour modest and where himself dwell the father-in-law have not see the face of his daughter-in-law live in the same house with he in twenty year space so religious do they veil themselves on Friday they pray more devout but as the Alcoran also permit they abstain not from all labour he see the grand signior himself go to their church and likewise to the bath attend only with two youth none use any acclamation to he and in the church he pray on the pavement cover with a carpet like to the rest without any throne or ensign of royalty and he observe the like modesty in his other behaviour but this as other thing from their ancient simplicity be now alter thus Mr. sandys of achmet every other Friday light beside at other time on occasion he go abroad to the mosque and when in state there be not in the world to be see a great spectacle of human glory or if so I may speak of a sublimate manhood for although the temple of St. Sophia which he most usual frequent be not above a stone cast from the utmost gate of the seraglio yet have he not so few as a thousand horse beside the archer of his guard footman in that short procession the way on each side enclose with cappagy and janissary in Scarlet the aga captain bassa beglerbeg and the rest attend in exceed pomp and yet which be the great marvel in exceed silence the ear discern no more than in midnight sleep except when they salute he with a soft and short murmur so likewise in entertainment of ambassador he sit in a rich room upon a low throne the bassa stand by like statue without speech or motion the stranger be lead between two and go backward from he never put off his hat for to show the head they hold it a opprobry the turk be so zealous in their superstition that they will rather lose their life then religion as among other example in scanderbeg time at Dibra many turk choose rather to die turk then to live christian yea some as it be report rather to kill themselves then to leave their superstition and in the year 1568. the persian ambassador be shoot at and one of his follower hurt by a Turk who be apprehend confess that he do it because he be a heretic and send from a heretic for which fact he be draw at a horsetayle through the city and then have his right hand cut off and after his head they hate the persian as Rustan Bassa tell busbequiu more than they do the christian Busbeq Epist. 3. like as the traditionary jew do the textuary and the Papist the Protestant image they have in such detestation that beside the scratch out the eye of those in the Musaique work of saint sophy temple when Solyman overthrow king Lewis of Hungary he carry away three image of cunning work in brass represent Hercules with his club Apollo with his harp Diana with her bow and quiver and place they in the tiltyard at Constantinople but by the persuasion of the mufti they be melt into great ordnance they have no scutcheon or blaze of arm nay they use no seal in their letter or other writing which seem to they to savour of superstition or superfluity when they conquer any city they turn the temple into mosque and sacrifice there thus do Solyman e e Knolls at Buda and Amurath sacrifice six hundred captive to his father ghost they be moderate in their private building and detest f f septemcast m. simons tell i that now they be herein more sumptuous the christian for their excess and superfluous expense that way what say they do those pagan think they shall live ever they often lodge say g g voyag du Villamont l. 3. c. 6. Villamont at the sign of the moon and the like moderation they use in diet and apparel they have a brass pot and their other mean household implement with they in the war which they use in peace ready money be their sure riches because the grand signior be their sure heir they have the rise of the sun in great reverence and especial the appear of the new moon as h h Knol p. 421. when Mahomet the great besiege scodra the new moon beginning to show herself the Mahometan priest go about the army give the soldier warning thereof as the manner be by sing of a song in manner of a procession whereunto the whole army answer with a short respond and at the same time bow themselves to the ground salute the moon with great superstition they may i i septemcast have twelve lawful wife and as many concubine as they will some say but four wife the child of the one be equal legitimate as well as the other and inherit alike yet few of they keep two wife together in one house but in several place where they have deal they have several wife which they divorce at pleasure some say but four wife be allow they no great matter where all their own be allow to their use with other they may not meddle the offend man they the woman they drown they tell many thing of Antichrist who they call k k Leunclau say degnal Tethschel and of the resurrection and of the last judgement of hell and purgatory and that Mahomet after judgement shall deliver all of all religion from thence they have no knowledge of liberal art of case of conscience of original sin or of actual further than the outward act their respect to relic appear by Mahomet l l knoll the three 1597. who in the discomfiture of his army flee towards shed some tear as he go and wipe his eye with a piece of Mahomet garment which he carry about he as a relic the turk may neither eat drink nor make water stand in their adversity they seek with earnest prayer to their prophet and public supplication be sometime decree at m m kn. p. 1136. the take of Alba regalis 1601. the bassa of Buda than prisoner at Vienna hear of it abstain from meat with his two servant a whole day prostrate upon his face pray unto his prophet Mahomet who he say have be angry all that year with the turk they n n Busbeq endure punishment inflict by the magistrate with great patience think they shall escape all torment in those part in the world to come they therefore reward the whipper and esteem the whip which I envy not to they sacred they be but contrary to the Alcoran addict to sorcery and dream their priest write they letter or spell to keep they from danger and harm of shot etc. call f f septemcast haymay they will write any thing for money as letter of freedom for servant to run away from their master and such like they make a show of holiness but be close wicked ignorant of their own law to cover which they answer in dark sentence and the people much more nothing be sin to count of but that which endamage civil society they esteem for good work g g their good work the building and endowing of hospital make bridge and highway dig of pit and well and convey water to highway and city build bath and sound of church and such like public work Rostan h h m. Harborn Bassa leave his wife the daughter of Solyman at his death fifteen million of gold and she have of yearly revenue half a million she among other her work attempt one most famous which be a conduit to convey water for the use of the pilgrim betwixt cairo and Mecca forty day journey and for the same intent procure the sultan Selym her brother to write to the venetian for a licence to extract out of Italy a hundred thousand pound of steel only to make Chizzells hammer and mattock for the cut of certain rock by which this water must pass their i i their oath and vow oath especial of their emperor be of many cut and variety of fashion and for vow in necessity and danger they will promise unto God the sacrifice of beast in some holy place not upon altar but k k andr. Arinabene have flay off the skin they give it with the head foot and forth part of the flesh to the priest another part to the poor the three to the neighbour the four be for the guest they be so addict to the opinion of fate that GOD be esteem to bless whatsoever have success as namely Selym murder his father and to detest what want good event whatsoever ground it have they fear not the plague account every man time limit by fate and therefore will wipe their face with the clothes of such as have die thereof they hold l l Munster Cos. lib. 4. Busb ep 3. and 4. it alike acceptable to God to offer alm to beast and to bestow it on man when it be offer for the love of God some there be which will redeem bird imprison in their cage or coop and have pay their price let they fly other for the love of God cast bread into the water to feed the fish esteem it a work great meritorious but dog be account unclean in stead whereof they delight in cat follow they say their prophet Mahomet who fall asleep at table and awake to go to his devotion rather cut off his sleeve whereon he find his cat fast asleep than he will disturb she master simons tell i that he have see they at cairo feed dog with basket of bread one stand by with a club to keep they from fight and one give alm for a bitch which have whelp under a stall herein perhaps as in other thing the egyptian be more superstitious than the turk especial in this of dog which savour of their old Anubis and dog-worshipping yea and in Constantinople m m m g. sandys though they suffer they not as unclean creature to come into their house yet they think it a deed of piety to feed they and buy bread therefore provide they kennel also most of they have no particular owner they repair to the seaside nightly where they keep a grievous howl hear if the wind be southward to Pera. they say Moses be the first great prophet to who be give the book of Tefrit that be the law and they which observe it in those time be save but when man grow corrupt God give David the book Czabur or the psalter and when this prevail not jesus be send with the book Ingil or the gospel whereby in that time man be save they hold that Christ be bear of the virgin Marie at her breast have conceive by the smell of a rose which the angel Gabrel present she and prefer Christ before Moses they admit not a jew to turn Turk but he must first be a Christian and eat swinesslesh and after two or three day abjure Christ he be make Musulman for so Mahomet come last in order of the prophet with his Alcoran this law and lawgiver be so sacred to they that in all their prayer even from their mother breast they observe this form la illah illelah Mehemmet irresullellah tanre rirpeghamber hace that be there be no god but one and Mahomet his prophet one creator and more prophet this they suck in with their milk and in their first learning to speak lisp out this devotion the infant go with the rest to their mosque or Meschits but be not tie to other ceremony save wash till they be circumcise every man n n ant. Meneu have in their opinion from his birth to his death two angel attend he the one at his right hand the other at his left at four or five year old they send he to the school to learn the Curaam and the first word which their master teach they be to this sense God be one and be not contain in any place but be through all and have neither father nor mother nor child eat not nor dink nor sleep and nothing be like to he the two angel before say be call chiramim and Chira tibin which write the good or evil that man do against the day of judgement the turk o o magni geogr. abhor blasphemy not only against God and Mahumet but also against Christ and the virgin Marie and other saint and they punish blasphemer of whatsoever sect they account it a sin for a man to build a house which shall last long than a man life and therefore howsoever they be sumptuous and magnificent in there public building yet be their private dwelling very homely and ill contrive they eat much opium think it make they courageous in the war they p p voyages du Villamont l. 3. cap. 6. have a remedy for pain in the head or elsewhere to burn the part affect with the touch-box which they always carry with they or with some linen cloth whereby they have many mark on their forehead and temple witness of their needless and heedless respect to physician as the scripture contain some prophecy q q th. brightman and in Apoc. comment of the arise and proceed of the turkish nation the rod of God whereby he scourge his christian people so have they also prophecy among themselves of their end and ruin when God in his mercy to christian shall execute justice upon the turk and cast the rod into the fire wherewith he have chastise his child such a one be that which Georgiovitz r r bart. georg. italice and Latine to 1. l. 3. and ap. fox act. and mon. to 1. in fine translate and expound and such be that which s s hist Musulm l. 15. Leunclavius have transcribe out of their book call messabili wherein be write that Constantinople shall be twice take before degnal lie that be the curse Antichrist shall come once by the sword another time by the force of the prayer of the son of Isahac lain t t phil. camerarius medit. hist Cent. 3. c. 10. be a epithet which they give to degnal signify wicked or mischievous of this degnal the turk fable that before his come shall Mechdi enjoy the empire this Mechdi they say u u hist Musul. l. 16. be descend of their prophet Mahumet and walk invisible one day he shall come into light and reign for a time and after he shall degnal their antiprophet or Antichrist come a certain deruise offer to assault and murder Baiazet the great Turk profess himself to be that Mechdi and be slay by one of the bassa @. 3 of the turkish manner their civil and moral behaviour as for the bloody practice which each emperor use in murder his brethren to secure he in his throne in root out of the nobility of the country which they conquer in rase the wall and fortress of the city lest they shall be receptacle for conspiracy in translate people from one country to another with other their practice and policy of state I purpose not to add any more but refer the reader to other treatise but to present unto you a Turk set forth in the ordinary turkish disposition manner and fashion will not I think seem tedious thus therefore have we view he with other a a m. George sandys eye they be general well complexioned of good stature and full body proportionable compact they nourish no hair about they but a lock on their crown and on their face only esteem it more clean and to be better prepare for their superstitious wash but their beard they wear at full length the mark of their affect gravity and token of freedom for slave have they shave scoff at christian which cut or want they all of they wear on their head white sash and turban the badge of their religion as be the fold of the one and size of the other of their vocation and quality sash be long towel of calico wound about their head turban be make like great globe of calico too and thwart with roll of the same have little cop cap on the top of green or red velvet be only wear by person of rank and he the great that wear the great except the mufti which over-sizeth the sultan some christian turkise in fashion be permit as a great favour to wear white head in the city the next that they wear be a smock of calico with ample sleeve much long than their arm under this a pair of calsoun of the same which reach to their ankle the rest naked their slip-shoe yellow or red pick at the toe and plate on the sole over all a half-sleeved coat gird unto they with a towel their neck all bare and this within door be their summer accoutrement over all when they go abroad they wear gown button before ungathered in the shoulder in the winter they add to the former calsoun of cloth which about the small of the leg be sew to short smooth buskin of leather without sole line their gown with fur as they do their coat they wear no glove nor alter their fashion which except in richness be alike in all they retain the old world custom in give change of garment one vest fit all the clergy go much in green as Mahomet colour who kinsman wear green sash and be call emer or lord as do their woman also somewhat of green on their head a ill-favoured race seem brand of God for their hereditary presumption of holiness from so unholy a stock if a christian wear green they will tear off his clothes if not beat he they carry no weapon about they in the city only they thrust under their girdle great crooked knife of a dagger-like size in sheath of mettle the haft and sheath sometime rich set with stone they bear their body upright of a stately gate and elate countenance in their familiar salutation they lay their hand on their bosom and a little decline their body almost to the ground if to a great man with kiss the hem of his garment the ornament of their head they never put off upon any occasion they affect cleanliness even religious never make water but they wash their hand and privity this they do secret and couch revile the Christian or strike he for piss against a wall this they do also lest they shall pollute their garment which may frustrate their prayer they never walk up and down for recreation nor use any other exercise but shoot and then also sit on carpet in the shadow and send their slave for their arrow these pierce deep through target of steel and piece of brass two inch thick the bow for form and length like the lath of a crossbow of Buffolos Horn intermix with sinew of admirable workmanship wrestle and rope-walking be profession not recreation of card and die they be happy ignorant at chess they will play all day long avoid yet the hazard of money the better sort delight in horse which be quick jade if hold to a good round trot for amble they do not in a indifferent journey but they ride not so fast to put they to it they feed they in their stable with barley which there be very cheap as only serve for that purpose they great reverence their parent and superior and the young the age the left hand as they go have the priority of the right in that they be make master of the other sword and the chief place the further from the wall they live brotherly together but come not except on special occasion in each other house and then but into the more public part thereof their house and furniture be mean have nothing on the inside but white wall except some special room the roof of many curious seel the great part of the floor and that a little advance cover with carpet the cause they at enter put off their slip-shoe they lie on matress of silk or stain linen with bolster of the same and quilt suitable but much in their clothes as for lousiness which follow it be no great shame they have neither table nor stool but sit crosslegged on the floor all in a ring they have a skin spread before they in stead of a cloth the better sort sit about a round board stand on a foot half a foot high and brim like a charger Rice sod in the fat of mutton be their ordinary food pottage also fry egg pasty tansy flesh little in gobbet London spend as much flesh in one day as Constantinople in twenty fish they have in indifferent quantity the commons common feed on herb root onion garlic hodge-podge etc. vile fare and at as vile rate in so great plenty they be attend by their slave of which to have many be to be rich when one have feed sufficient he rise and another take his room and so continue till all be satisfy they eat three time a day but when they feast they sit all day long except they rise and exonerate nature forthwith return they abstain from hogs-flesh blood and that which die alone except in necessity their usual drink be water the rich infuse diverse confection wine be prohibit but so greedy swallow where they can get it that but few go away unle from the ambassadpr table our beer they prefer before all other drink which will in all likelihood prove exceed profitable to such as will bring it in among they where wine be forbid and barley be at nine penny a bushel they have Coffa house more common than alehouse with we b b biddulph in or near to which on bench in the street they will sit chat most of the day drink their Coffa so call of a berry it be make of as hot as they can endure it it be black as soot and taste not much unlike it good they say for digestion and mirth of the boy which some coffa-man keep as stale we have speak before they much use it seem for the giddiness and turbulent dream it cause which they as all kind of stupefy astonishment and madness religious c c in imitation it seem of their prophet Mahumet which have the fall evil and ascribe it to ecstasy etc. affect this perhaps the cause why tobacco be so like a thing bring they by the english the worst here pass currant and excellent there but Morat Bassa not long since cause a pipe to be thrust through the nose of a Turk and so be lead in derision through the city they take it through reed with great head of wood annex the under garment of the woman differ little from those of the man these wear on their head a cap sugar-loaf-fashion the better sort use bracelet and jewel when they go abroad they wear over all long gown of violet or scarlet cloth tie close before the large sleeve hang over their hand they have the sweet child that be light see which they carry astride on their shoulder they anoint their body with the earth of Chios which make the skin soft white and shine free the face from wrinkle for the reader further pleasure I have here present a turkish woman in picture they use their bond woman with little less respect than their wife turkish woman though they be courteous to each other and will ask how himself child slave horse cat etc. do yet never of the wine yea if you ask a child how his mother do he will throw stone and revile you biddulph their market yield man woman virgin child to as ample trial and full purchase as horse with we save that the men-slave may compel their master before the cadi to limit the time of their bondage or set a price of their redemption or else to sell they to another but galley slave be seldom release or those that belong to great man beyond the cadi authority they buy little child and geld many of they as you have hear which some say be begin by Selym the second after he have see a gelding cover a mare and by menavinus his relation of himself seem not practise in his father Baiazet time these be in great repute with their master yea the second vizier of the port be now a eunuch for art some have some little knowledge in philosophy necessity have teach they the practice of physic not the ground of art in astronomy they have some insight and undertake to tell fortune they have a good gift in poetry their music be very vile the grand signior be once persuade to hear some italian music but while they spend much time in tune he perhaps esteem that their music command they to depart logic and rhetoric they reject some write history but few read they think none dare write the truth of the present or can of the time past print they reject the most of their priest live by writing every one have some trade such light as serve their own turn a lazy people more esteem ease then profit yet very covetous seldom hold compact with the christian that hold not with their commodity chap. 11 of the religious place among the turk their Meschits hospital and monastery with their liturgy and circumcision @. i. of their temple a description of s. sophy the place a a the policy of the turkish empire of most religion to the turk abroad be those which Mahumet himself pollute with his irreligion as Mecca Medina etc. the place of most religion among themselves be their Mosches or Meschits b b i gie signify a church temple or synagogue of the Mohametan as Masged-aly near cusa i. Ali false write Massadalle where Aly be bury Bedwell that be their temple and house of prayer whereof they have many in all turkey and next thereunto their hospital for the relief of the poor impotent and pilgrim neither be the turk spare in these or the like seem charitable expense for when a Turk fall sick and think he shall thereof die he send for his friend and kinsfolk and in their presence make his testament the great legacy whereof be bequeath to public use which they think will be meritorious to their soul such be the make and repair of bridge cawseye conduit to convey water to their hospital or temple some also give to the redemption of captive many of their woman the devout sex whether in religion or superstition bequeath money to be distribute among such soldier as have slay any certain number of christian a deed in their conceit very religious these be the will and deed of the inferior sort but the emperor and great bassa appoint legacy to express a great magnificence with their devotion as the building of temple and hospital their temple or meschite be for the most part four square not much unlike to our church but large in length then breadth the temple of St. sophy in Constantinople be of all other in the turk dominion the most admirable build long since by justinian and by Mahumet the conqueror pervert to this mahometan use above nine hundred year after of this temple they write c c pet. gyllius topographia Constantinop l. 2. c. 3. that it be first build by Constantius son of Constantius the great with a roof of timber and burn by the arrian in the time of great Theodosius who again repair it sozomenus d d Sozem. l. 8. c. 22. say that in the broil which happen not long after in the reign of Arcadius and honorius about chrusostom the church be fire his enemy ascribe it to his partaker and they again to his adversary it be report that Theodosius junior rebuild it but in the time of justinian Procopius e e Procop. de aedificijs lustiniani l. 1. testify that base and wicked man burn it again which justinian build anew in such sumptuous and manificent sort that in regard of this change it may have be wish that it have perish long before his chief workman be anthemius and Isidorus who raise it into a most goodly frame which may amaze the beholder and seem incredible to the hearer both he and Euagrius f f Euag. hist ecclesiast l 4. c. 30. recite the particular the length be two hundred and threescore foot the breadth one hundred and fifteen the height a hundred and fourscore Zonara agathias and georgius cedrenus tell of the harm it receive by earthquake while justinian live which yet he repair as do Basilius and Andronicus after he Nicephorus g g Niceph. eccl. hist. l. 9 c. 9 say that Constantine raise the temple of peace which before be but small to that large and stately greatness which in his day it retain and his son Constantius finish the temple of Sophia so near it that they seem to have but one wall it be h h Niceph. l. 17. cap. 10. found by Constantine his she and be burn in a sedition of the people in the reign of justinian in which rebellion thirty thousand of the people be slay and partly to pacify the wrath of GOD say he for so great a slaughter he build this temple from the side of the temple he take i i suidas in verbo (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) four hundred twenty and seven pillar or image of heathen god and of the twelve sign of the zodiac and fourscore statue of christian emperor which he didistribute in the city but more then enough of the ancient structure thereof as it be at this day diverse have describe it but of they all most diligent Petrus k k p. Gyll topog. constant l. 2. 4. Menavino p (@) of the t. e. bellonius and other Gellius the wall and roof thereof be of brick the inner part line with marble most excellent and of diverse sort the roof be set with stone and piece of glass gild nature and art conspire to breed the beholder both pleasure and wonder it be so compose and the pillar and arch so place that the middle i will within consider by itself seem like the form of a egg long and round but the whole fabric both within and without yield to the curious observer a square form all the inner part have arch in the top open to receive light which be sustain with marble pillar of diverse colour and there be say bellonius if one may say it as many door in that temple as be day in the year it be far more admirable than the roman Pantheon the work of that be gross solid and easy for a workman to conceive but this sophian temple be more subtle to the view of the eye and mind it have two rue of pillar each over other those upper one support the hemisphere lover or steeple which be wrought all with mosaic work garnish with gold and azure the door or gate be cover with fine Latin of Corinth one of which they imagine be make of the wood of noah ark and therefore there be in it three place leave uncover for the devout people to kiss for the pardon of their sin it have sometime above three hundred thousand ducat of yearly revenue the turk when they turkeise it throw down the altar turn the bell into great ordnance and either take away the image or put out their eye for say they God and not wall and picture be to be adore Nicolas l l n. n peregrination l. 2. c. 20. Nicolai say that it have in compass more than a mile within which be comprehend the house of canon and priest of the most part of the cloister because it be near the serail they m m Bellon make a stable for horse as Constantine palace for elephant and a temple near the tiltyard or Hippodromus for wild beast which be tie to the several pillar thereof lion bear wolf wild ass ounce etc. no christian may enter into this meschit but he may put his body in at the door and view it but master simons say they be not now so scrupulous for he have be suffer to go in as g. Dousa also report of himself there have be at once in the time of Bajazet number n n Menavino thirty and six thousand turk assemble for devotion at a Easter-solemnity perhaps it be master sandys his observation the ancient fabric then stand entire whereof this remain be little more than the channel better to be believe then bellonius his report of so many door whereas if it have five it have more by one then by i be discern it be almost every other Friday frequent by the sultan the christian emperor ascend the stately gallery on horseback before the entrance there be a goodly portico where the christian that visit it on curiosity as well as the turk do leave their shoe before they do enter it have in justinian time porch or gallery on both side one of which it seem fall by some earthquake the innumerable window and unspeakable ornament of the temple will easy detain our pen as a willing prisoner in the relation thereof but beside the ancient p. gyllius menavinus bellonius Nicolai Dousa and many other have do it already neither will my pilgrimage suffer i to stay long in one place which be to visit so many both here and elsewhere in the World let we proceed therefore to their other temple especial see this be such that none be able to express the excellency nor can ever worthy express the least part thereof beside what other have report Dousa tell of a marble pillar therein which continual sweat forth a certain liquor which the turk wipe off with their handkerchief as in their opinion profitable against diverse disease Mahomet the conqueror o o n. Nicolai build one in like fashion without any figure which have about a hundred house cover with lead for their doctor and priest and for all stranger and pilgrim of any nation or religion where they may refresh themselves their servant and horse for three day with meat and lodging at free cost there be also without the precinct of the Mosche a hundred and fifty other tenement for the poor of the city which have there a Asper a day and as much bread as they need but they account that kind of life so unhappy that oftentimes those tenement stand empty but the money which shall this way be bestow be send to the hospital of the disease there be also five other Meschits in form resemble the former but not so great nor so rich the rest of p p Pol of the t. e. the Meschits be of diverse sort some high some low of several fashion the turret upon which their priest call the people to prayer be of a great height make in manner of watchtower their great church have two the lesser one of they upon the top be set a half moon or crescent which be the turk ensign as the cross be usual to the christian within their temple they have no kind of ornament but bare wall with Arabic letter some in gold write thereon save only their book and lamp burn with oil in great abundance and clothes of tapestry on the which be spread over mat upon the pavement they prostrate themselves in prayer time @. 2 of their hospital and monastery their hospital they call imaret of these there be great use because they want inn in the turk dominion they find they for the relief of the poor and of traveller where they have food allow they differ according to the use of the place and lodge place without bed they be open for the most part to all man of all religion the chief hospital in Turkis be in Constantinople two of which Mahomet and Bajazet his son found both these have about five and twenty round turret cover with lead one of which be in the midst of the other be large and great than the rest and under be lodging for the priest on one side be bed for pilgrim and traveller on the other for leper thrice a day may any man resort thither into a certain place for meat there be maintain fourteen doctor of their Law some say that the revenue of Mahomet hospital amount to a hundred and fifty thousand ducat and the other to as much or more each of which have a little chapel adjoin in which the founder be bury who be at this great charge that the priest and such as be there refresh shall pray for their soul and say allae Rahsmetileson that be God have mercy on they Selym finish that which Bajazet his father have begin to build but his son Solyman erect one far surpass the former Orcanes be the first of these ottoman prince which found monastery Mahomet the first finish a a knoll turkish Hist. the great temple at Hadrianople the seat royal of the turk in Europe before Constantinople be win he build also beside a palace another temple with a most sumptuous abbey and a public school adjoin endow the same with great revenue he also give great sum of money to be distribute yearly at Mecca and Medina for the relief of poor pilgrim b b whosoever will read of the temple hospital college etc. found by their king let he read Leunclau at the end of the life of every sultan in the end of his several book where he relate they at large hist Musulman lib. 18. Solyman erect in memorial of Mahumet his elder son a stately tomb a sumptuous church a monastery and college with other thing for the health of his soul he be bury himself in a chapel which he have in his life time build most stately with a college and hospital his wife Roxolana and some of his murder child lie entomb by he his scimatar also hang by he in token that he die in war which honour they grant not otherwise to their prince the revenue of the country about sige in Hungary late win from the christian be give to the maintenance of those house which his devotion have found neither be it lawful for they to convert any land to such sacred use except they have first with their own sword win they from the enemy of their religion the most acceptable service to their prophet and therefore Selym the second son and successor of Solyman intend to build a magnificent temple and munificent college monastery and almshouse at Hadrianople where he intend his sepulchre break his league with the venetian and wan Cyprus from they that thence he may endow the same with maintenance but it be tedious to insist further in declare their expense which devotion in all Turkey have procure their emperor and bassa esteem nothing of more honour in the world or merit for heaven let we come to their church-rite and ceremony @. 3 of their public prayer and church-rite the temple in Turkey be as have be say innumerable both public and private of mean bavilding on which be a tower as with we a steeple whereupon on the c c and. Arivah muetden or Thalisman ascend and it be open with pillar or four window first he go to that on the east-side and call the people to prayer with a loud voice joannes thesaurarius reg. fran. stop his ear with his hand cry there be no god but one and Mahumet his messenger come to make prayer for remission of your sin and know that there be no strong than the god of Mahumet his messenger this he say in order on every side of the steeple if there be in the city any mosque the cathedral begin and then all other parishional follow this they do five time a day and on Friday their sabbath six time first at sunrising with four bend to the earth and twice pray the second about noon with ten bow and five pray the three at afternoon before sunset with eight inclination and four pray the four with five bend and three pray about sunset the five long than the rest with fifteen bow and eight pray this bend or bow they call Erket which be a double bow with prostrate himself their prayer they call Czalamet which they make sit after every Erket with a salutation on the right hand and on the left and the impression or sign of peace which be do with bring both hand over the face every Busurman be bind to resort to these their liturgy at his parishional meschit except he have some lawful impediment and if not at all of they yet at least at one to be well wash for which purpose they have innumerable bath in Turkey fair build nor may any enter into the temple especial in the morning but first well wash in the bath as be say before and if he keep he not clean the rest of the day that wash will serve but a a Semtemcastr if he have commit any carnal sin or be any way soil or have eat any unclean thing then in some secret place he wash his hand and arm to the elbow his hinder part b b Menavino say that after the secret wash of their secret etc. they come forth and wash their hand face and the rest each three time observe equal that unequal number and say the Psalm Elenche motte and after another Li Circison and privity and this suffice without go to bath except he be otherwise pollute for defect herein they have inquisition and appoint penalty respect or pardon be give to none that fail especial on Friday and in their lent such a one be carry about the town with a board fasten to his neck all behang with Fox-tail beside a penalty according to his state in money and he that will not thus order himself shall not be allow their burial rite after they be thus wash they put off their shoe in imitation of Moses and then enter into the Meschitta where the floor be cover with mat or carpet nor be any other thing see but white wall and great store of burn lamp and in golden Arabic letter those c c illah illelah Mahomet irresul alah tanre she paganber hach word before mention there be a pulpit on which the Choza or Focqui ascend and the first thing he do be to stretch out his hand at large and then join they together he kneel and kiss the ground then he lift up his head and stop his ear with his hand stand a good space as it be d d quasi in astratto in distract or ravish in his prayer after lift up his hand he again kiss the ground so many time as the hour of prayer according to that former rule require and then lift up himself again he stretch out his hand again so stand about a quarter of a hour and again kneel with his mouth to the ground so continue move it every way about a while and then lift up his head and set his hand to his ear fall to his pray another quarter of a hour and then license the people to depart there be no noise hear e e their devotion silence honesty and order be such say septemca that I can but admire compare it with the contrary in the church of christian as if there have be nothing within not so religious be their course and yet that religion admit it which Martin Braidenbach report to be practise by they in a Moschee on mount Sinai where Moses receive the law for the saracen use to get therein prophet think the issue there get be holy and full of the prophetical spirit Menavino thus describe their rite after their mystical wash as before they go with a sober pace to the meschit not like one which run away and if he happen to break wind by the way his former wash be unsufficient and he must return to renew it be assemble in the meschit they all turn their face f f they pray towards Mecca as the jew towards jerusalem southwards and the meizin or muetden Clerke Sexton priest bell-ringer or bell rather stand up and read that psalm which before he have cry to they in the steeple and every one stand up hold his hand fasten to his waste and bow their head to their foot with great reverence and without stir then arise another priest of another order call Imam and read a psalm aloud the meizin as his clerk answer which be end they fall on the ground and say Saban alla Saban alla Saban alla that be God have mercy on we most wretched sinner abide prostrate till the priest Imam sing again his psalm and then they rise and this they do four or five time according to the order of their service after this they all kneel and prostrate themselves on the ground the meizin observe a long ceremony in which with a loud voice he pray GOD to inspire the christian jew greek and general all infidel to turn to their Law This be say every man lift his hand to heaven cry aloud Amin Amin and then they touch their eye to wipe they with their hand which be as cross among the papist a blessing of themselves bring their hand over their face and so they depart in the english treatise of the turkish policy these thing be relate with some other ceremony as that they say together with the priest the first Azoara or chapter of the Alcoran etc. bartholomaeus g g bar. Georgiovitz Georgiovitz say that only the chief sort be bind to assemble to the daily devotion which they observe five time a day other which can spare the time be not tie on their sabbath it be otherwise @. 4 of their sabbath and of their lent and Easter the woman enter not their but on friday at nine a clock or at easter and then they be in a gallery or terasse apart where they may see and not be see and this be not common to all but the wife and mother of the chief of the place and as we have say of the priest so it be to be understand that all the man and woman there do the same without fail in any point they suffer not c c some say they be now less curious in this point a Christian to enter therein and yet will they enter into the church of the christian to hear the Church-music the woman abide in their church from nine of the clock to midnight continual pray with certain motion and strange cry continue so long in this act that they fall upon the ground as in a swoon through weariness and if any feel herself at that time to be with child the turk hold that they be conceive by the holy ghost and present vow that child to God and call such Nefecs Ogli that be son of the holy ghost and on Friday at nine or ten of the clock the priest use to preach to the people and these their discourse last above two hour that which be say be not very manifest yet they say that he preach the miracle of Mahomet sometime exalt their faith sometime commend obedience and sometime rehearse fabulous tale to terrify the bad as that such man soul be carry of certain camel there be some six thousand fly about in the air for this purpose into the sepulcher of wicked christian and that the good christian be put in their empty sepulcher inveigh against the blasphemer of Mahomet Christ and the saint exhort to alm rehearse their commandment of the law and if they preach scandalous doctrine the mufti and the Cadlilescher deprive they and correct they as heretic yea some of they for prefer Christ before Mahomet be put to death of which one Ibraim Schec a priest of Constantinople report to have wrought miracle among the turk in the day of Soliman be stone to death his head cut off and his body burn and of his disciple some be behead other thrust into the galley for prefer Christ and deny Mahomet and be it not for the terror of the sword there will be more innovation of religion and some have persuade the grand signior not to suffer the Alcoran to be so common to be read and interpret of every one guilty of the absurdity therein contain but to return after this preach end two young clerk go up to he and sing certain prayer which end the priest again begin to sing with the people in a base voice with wriggle every way for the space of half a hour say nothing but Lailla illellah that be there be but one God and these ceremony be do only on their lenten friday their Lent be one moon or month in the year which if this year it be july the next it shall be August and so in order that in twelve year they have fast all time of the year make no other difference of meat then at other time but eat only in the night they prepare d d Knol tur. hist p. 777. themselves by diminish their fare not as the christian at Shrovetide that they may the better endure it for on the day in which they fast they will not so much as taste a cup of water or wash their mouth therewith till the star appear and eight or ten day after it begin some officer ride about the town cry such a day begin the fast prepare you prepare you and when it be begin the cadi and Subassi if they find any shop open or any body eat in the day set he on a ass backward with the tail in his hand as adulterer be punish and to drink wine at this time be death neither will they suffer jew or christian to scandalize their Turk this way and when their Lent be near the end they go all to the bath and pluck off all their hair but of the head and beard with a ointment for that purpose they colour their nail red with a endure colour call Chua with which they die also the tail and foot of their horse and the woman their hand foot and privy part this they do in honour of their solemnity which last three day with great feast in which nothing else but meat and drink may be sell they go to the sepulcher of the dead there to eat full of gladness and salute each other say Baaram glutiotzong that be God give you a good feast and if they meet with a jew or a christian woe unto they on the first day of their bairam the sultan ride to s. Sophia with all pomp and then do we see say master sandys a sight full of horror many mourn with age yet dead before death and revolt from their christianity therefore throw away their bonnet and lift up their fore finger to which the tyrant bow himself as glory in such conversion the turk keep e e this second easter be call Chuccibairam another easter especial in Mecca more solemn to the tartar moor and arabian then to the turk except the pilgrim which resort thither @. v. of the turkish circumcision the turk say they be d d circumcision circumcise because they be the son of Ishmael and because they may be clean when they go to their temple no filth lie hide under the skin at seven or eight year of age or late this ceremony be perform the first thing they do be to invite many thither both turk jew and christian beside the friend and kindred to make the great gain every one give somewhat according to his ability when the day be come they which be invite mount on horseback for else it be e e no solemnity without horse no solemnity and go to the house of the child who be mount on a fair horse rich clothe with a great Tulipant on his head be carry to church with a long spear bear before he have a torch on the top worth a crown more or less according to the state of the party adorn with rose and garland which with the spear be leave a gift to the church the fee of the priest all the way they sound on instrument after the son follow the father the kindred and the rest of the friend that sometime there be a hundred horse at church they alight and accompany the child to the priest which wait for they here one of the friend sit down and on his lap the child be set present another pull off his shoe another hold his hand and other his foot and many hold he in talk with word and these be the gossip the priest see all thing ready take the end of the skin of his yard and draw it out and nip it with silver pincers so to mortify it and cut it off with less pain then make he believe he will defer it till the next day he arise the other hold he fast and after as if he have forget somewhat to be do about it with sizzer which he hold close in his hand sudden cut it off and another lay thereon a certain powder to ease the pain and in five and twenty day they look to the cure of it lay on it salt and marmalade of quince and thence forward he be call a Musulman but his name be not then give he but at his birth and that according to their quality bellonius write that they must answer the circumciser to certain question somewhat like it seem to that which in the baptism of elder person be perform by themselves of young by their godfather and therefore they be so old before they be circumcise he also affirm that it be never do in the meschit wherein none uncircumcised may enter but in the house the name Mussulman Mussliman or Muslim signify a orthodox mahometan as christian or catholic with we say or after cantacuzenus after the child be loose who to show himself of courage smile and lift up his great finger say those former word of their profession and be again mount all the company after a little prayer and offering at the church with like pomp convey he home where be great feast provision some feast it three day together Amurath circumcise his son Mahomet at sixteen year old unto which solemnity many christian prince be solemn invite who send thither their ambassador with present who have there their scaffol prepare for they and furnish according to their state the solemnity last forty day and forty night in the great marketplace of Constantinople and to end these f f Knol p. 957. solemnity Mahomet the prince be circumcise not public but in his father chamber by Mechmet one of the inferior bassa sometime the emperor Soliman barber and it be do of other turk also most common in the father house not in the church the woman-child about the same age among other woman without other solemnity say over those word illah etc. and likewise the renegado-Jew but the christian renegado be carry about the street of the city with much solemnity and many gift give they beside freedom from tribute georgiovit many blind by covetousness offer themselves to this circumcision but if any for blasphemy against Mahomet or injury to a Turk be by force circumcise they have no such gift which punishment the Cadilescher by the testimony of two accuse turk inflict and therefore to prevent the same the christian obtain the grand signor safe conduct that in case of conscience they may not be judge of any except they be accuse at the court before the four bassa and the Cadilescher of Constantinople and that by the witness of priest only which have not in twelve year drink wine chap. 12 of the sepulcher Funeral-rite and opinion touch the dead among the turk now if you be weary of view their temple and their prayer and other ceremony seem tedious I have think fit to present you with another sight and to conclude with that which be the conclusion of all flesh a discourse of their funeral when a a Menavino l. 2. 19 policy of the turkish empire a Turk be sick and like to die his friend visit he and put he in mind of his sin advise he with a penitent heart to bewail they then do certain of their priest or one of his kinsman read some psalm and prayer and if the pang of death do still continue they bring he the Alcoran or Curaam wherein be one legend call Thebara Echelezi which they read seven time and if he shall die of that sickness they think he will die before they have thrice read it and if they see breath still remain they read another psalm call jasinnel Curanil Hecin to the end that the devil cause no impediment to his soul when he be dead they lay he forth in the midst of the house upon carpet and place he on his right side with his face towards the south then do assemble certain priest to buy he b b if it be a woman which be dead the woman take this care and pain about it to lay she forth etc. who bring with they a string of bead such as the papist use in mumble and number their devotion be a thousand of they of aloe and there with compass the body and then say to every one Sababan alla that be God have mercy on he and turn it about four or five time after this their priest which be twenty or more carry the corpse into the garden and lay it on a table two hand breadth from the ground take away his shirt and cover his shame with a new cloth make of fine bombast with warm water and soap wash he from top to toe then do they take two sheet of bombast in which they wrap the corpse wet the same with rose-water perfume and odoriferous thing and lay he on the beer cover he quite over with his best garment place his turban at the head thereof all bedeck with flower this do the priest begin their devotion and some of the company take up the beer carry the same with the head forward to the meschit the kinsman follow and the woman remain at home weep and make ready to eat for the priest when they come to the church they set he down without door and go and make a end of their service after that they carry he forth of the city to the burial place for it be not lawful to bury in their city some provide their sepulcher in their life time some have they make after by their friend either in their garden or some solitary place they have also common burial place as be our churchyard wherein be many tomb of marble Brick or other matter according to the quality of the person if the decease be a man of high condition his horse be lead with his corpse and his tomb be adorn with many epitaph and if he be a great commander those horse be saddle the contrary way and rich furnish have certain thing hang at their nose which cause they to neigh as it be lament the loss of their master they carry also the truncheon of their lance with their standard and ensign trail along the ground there be plant also about their sepulcher violet and other pleasant flower the common sort have their tomb of marble engrave with letter when they be come to the place with those sheet they let the corpse into the grave cover he on every side with board only on the face they lay a little earth and there leave he and return home where they find store of cheer and there make a prayer for his soul Georgiovitz c c lib. 2. say that they make over the grave the form of a altar lest the beast shall go over it and defile it they also often repair thither with tear and set on the monument flesh bread wheat egg milk etc. which be do for the dead man soul in alm to the poor or to the bird or ant which they also account a act of mercy no less meritorious than the other the priest have five asper a piece give they for their pain and if the party be poor they gather money to pay the priest and to discharge the funeral they wear d d m. sandys say the better sort mourn in white and for black he never see it wear by Turk black eight day in token of mourn and those that be of great account three day at which time the friend of the dead assemble and use some word of mutual consolation from thenceforth resume their wont habit howbeit their kindred special of the female sex often repair to the grave to lament there bellonius in his obseruat e e Bellon lib. 3. cap. 5. observe that they sew not the sheet at the head nor at the foot the reason be their dream of certain angel send in commission present after the burial to examine the decease party into who they say GOD have then put a new spirit these angel Menavino call Nechir and Remonchir who come with dreadful countenance and burn firebrand and examine he of his life which if they find wicked they scourge he with fiery whip if good they become goodly angel and comfort he bellonius a little otherwise tell that those angel which he call Guanequir and Mongir come the one with a iron hammer the other with a hook which set the corpse upon his knee and put a new soul into it and then ask if he have believe Mahomet and observe his precept if he have do good work keep their lent pay his tithe give alm of which if he can give good account they depart from he and two other angel come in their place white as snow and one of they put his arm in stead of a pillow under his head the other sit at his foot and defend he until the day of judgement but if he satisfy not the demand of those black angel he with the iron mallet strike he at one blow there with nine fathom under the ground and neither of they cease the one with his hammer the other with his hook to torment the decease party until the day of judgement for this cause the turk write upon the dead carcase the name Croco and make their sepulcher hollow that they may have room to kneel and some lay board over that no earth fall in the fear hereof make they in their morning prayer to say lord God from the question of the two angel the torment of the grave and evil journey deliver i amin. yea hence be the prayer which the turk man and woman say at the grave of the dead for delivery from these angel concern the day of judgement they a a Menavino l. 2. 20 21 22 23. hold that there be a angel stand in heaven name Israphil hold always a trumpet in his hand prepare against God command to sound the consummation of the World for at the sound thereof all man and angel shall die for so they find it write in their Curaam which book be of high authority with they the turkish doctor will dissent from that opinion of the angel mortality if this book will give they leave for to contradict the authority thereof be punish with fire or else their tongue be pull out of their head they hold that after this dismal sound shall be a great earthquake which shall tumble the mountain and rock from their place and grind they to meal after this God will return to make anew the light and the angel as before and will cause to fall a pleasant rain call Rehemet that be the rain of mercy and so shall the earth remain forty day although those day shall be of a large size than these many also hold that from thenceforth there shall be no darkness of the night as now but that it shall be most clear neither shall there need any more sleep for the sustentation of our body after forty day god will command Israphil to sound his trumpet the second time at which find all the dead b b the resurrection shall be raise again by the will of God the dead even from Abel to the end of the world throughout all the earth hear the sound thereof and rise in manner as they be bury among they shall be see diverse face and countenance some shine as the sun many like the moon many as the star other shall be obscure and dark and other with hog face with swell tongue then shall every one cry nessi nessi that be woe be i wretch who have suffer myself to be overcome with my filthy lust the angel shall with their finger point at the face which shine which be they that have wrought good work and shall show they to one another the wicked shall have envy thereat they say that those with face like hog be such as have be usurer and those with the swell tongue liar and blasphemer there shall be other tread under foot to wit the proud person of this world God say they will then demand account of the king prince emperor and tyrant which use oppression and violence c c the judgement then shall God divide this raise company into seventy part all which shall be examine present their sin before their eye and all that they have in this world do well or ill whereto he shall need no testimony every member bear witness against itself of the deed yea and very thought there shall be also Michael the angel hold in his hand the balance of divine justice and shall weigh soul and distinguish the good from the bad there shall be Moses with his standard under which shall all the observer of his law be assemble near to he shall be jesus Christ the son of the virgin Mary with another great standard and all his christian the observer of his Faith on the other side shall be Mahomet with his standard and faithful mahometans they which have do good shall be all gather under the say standard where they shall have a pleasant shadow the rest shall be extreme scorch by the heat of the sun according to the measure of their sin thus shall both part abide till God shall pronounce his eternal sentence when that doom be pronounce the angel shall stand divide into squadron all like adorn the seraphin on one side the cherubin on the other of the which one part shall sound instrument of diverse sort and other shall sing hymn and many shall stand at the gate of paradise sing and gratulate the bless soul which have observe the divine precept christian jew turk paradise and moor be all of equal beauty and beatitude if they have do well but sinner shall be know asunder they affirm also that God will give those soul of paradise a large space in heaven for their everlasting habitation goodly and shine they shall also have Barachi sunbeam on which they may ride and take their view round about paradise of the precious delight therein there shall they have pleasant fruit and if they eat one apple two shall grow in the room and to quench their thirst they shall have river clear as crystal sweet as sugar by drink of which their sight and understanding shall increase in such sort that they shall see from one pole to the other the meat which they eat shall consume by a subtle kind of sweat further they say they shall have their woman call Uri that be shine which shall every day be virgin with which they shall continue for ever neither shall there be any danger of old age the man always be as of thirty year old the woman of fifteen or twenty those three standard-bearer shall be the principal each of they have a peculiar part of paradise assign he for his dominion those which for their bad deed shall be condemn to hell Hell shall be all know by proper name master Sandis say he be tell by a sicilian devout renegado that the burn globe of the sun be the continent of the damn which they shall bear in their forehead and they shall bear the number and greatness of their sin on their shoulder thus shall they be lead between two mountain where hell be situate at the mouth whereof be a most venomous serpent and from one mountain to another be a bridge thirty mile long which be so make that they ascend on the first part the other part be plain the last descend this bridge say they be make of thin iron and sharp they call it serat Cuplissi that be the bridge of justice upon this shall pass the sinner with the heavy weight of their sin upon their shoulder and they which have not be altogether evil shall not fall into hell but into purgatory but the other shall sudden be plunge into the bottom of hell where they shall burn more or less according to the quantity of the fire of their sin which they have carry out of this world and after the burn they turn to be refresh and present again to the fire in the midst of hell they say be a tree full of fruit every apple be like to the head of a devil which grow green in the midst of all those flame call or the tree of bitterness and the soul that shall eat thereof think to refresh themselves shall so find they and by they and their pain in hell they shall grow mad and the devil shall bind they with chain of fire and shall drag they up and down through Hell those soul which sometime shall name God in their aid they say after many year shall go into paradise and none shall remain in hell but such as despair of their salvation and god mercy Bellon obseru. l b. 3. cap. 6. resurrection of ram thus far Menavino to this agree bellonius and add that in the day of judgement they believe a resurrection of the bird and beast and that the ram which they kill at their easter shall go into paradise and therefore though one will serve they kill many for the book of Zuna say that those ram shall pray for their sacrificer in the day of judgement it tell that the star be hang in the air by golden chain to watch lest the devil shall learn the secret of paradise and reveal they to soothsayer also that the ram which Abraham offer in stead of his son be a black one which have be nourish forty year in paradise that Mahomet shall be turn at the end of the world into a ram and the turk into flea who he shall carry stick to he out of hell into paradise and there shake they off where they shall again receive the form of turk that he shall wash they with the water of that fountain in paradise to purge the blackness which they get by the scorch of hell from whence he will deliver all good turk chap. 13 of the religious votary among the turk and of their saint sect miracle and hypocritical holiness to proceed unto the difference of opinion among the turk Septemcastrensis who live very many year among they say that although they consent against Christ yet do they much dissent among themselves wrest the Alcoran to their purpose and scarce one of a hundred agree with his fellow about Mahomet and their Law and beside their difference in ceremony there be say he four sect differ in main ground of religion which will not be appease without blood if they fear not the high power and be not thereby keep in awe one of these sect be that of the priest hold that none can be save but by the law of Mahomet the second of their religious Dermschler repute the successor of the saint the friend of GOD and Mahomet who be of opinion that the law profit nothing but the grace of GOD and these ground their opinion on miraculous illusion of which he report one in the time of Amurath the second who examine this contention betwixt these secular and regulars and be purpose to give sentence in the behalf of the priest and against the religious one of these Dermschler a a vision and apparition among the turk as well as among the papist appear to he in a vision other also ground faith on vision and deliver he out of a great danger alter his mind for go to stool in the night the board give way and he fall in stay on a cross timber where this religious man in their wont habit appear to he and bid he now use the help of his priest for his deliverance this after so affect the king that himself become a religious man till the necessity of state-affair compel he to resume his government he that list may compare with this Dunstan device for his regulars the three he call Czofilar speculative man which sect be found on tradition hold that they be save by merit without law or grace these be very earnest in prayer never cease and meet in the night and sit in a circle they begin to say Layla illalach with shake their head till they fall down senseless these three sort be manifest to the people and as it be of equal esteem with they the four be call horife that be heretic hold that every man be save in his own law and all law to be a like good to the observer these be burn if they be take strange it be that he report of the miraculous work of some of they miracle as well with the turk as papist that they may seem as he say incarnate devil some go naked with their privity only hide and some of these be impassable beside the violence of winter and summer endure like stone the brand with fire or wound with sword some seldom eat or drink and some not at all other but from hand to mouth some be perpetual silent have no conversation with man of which he say he see one and some have their supernatural trance or ravishment some dwell among man some by themselves apart and some in wilderness some keep hospitality in city at least to harbour man if they have not food for they some carry about water in leather bag give it to all and demand nothing for the same except any voluntary gratify they some inhabit at the sepulcher of the saint keep the same and live on the vow and offering of the people not observe the wash and ceremony of the Law as concern those water-carrier Nicholas Nicholai say that he have see in a morning at Constantinople fifty of those so he call they in a company all furnish with their scrip of leather full of cistern or fountain-water hang on their side with cup of fine corinthian Latin gild and damaskined bear in the same hand a looking-glass which they hold before their eye of they who they give to drink admonish they to think on death and if any give they any thing they out of a viol cast on their face sweet smell water he tell of some that will seem to live a solitary life among beast but indeed live in shop in most popular city the wall whereof be cover with skin of diverse beast and upon the horn thereof they hang tallow candle Mock-eremites in the midst of this their sacred shop stand a stool cover with a green cloth and upon the same a great Latin candlestick without any candle moreover they have paint a Cimitterre hang in the midst in memory of Haly who forsooth with his sword cut the rock in sunder and they breed up with they beast as bull bear heart raven eagle so that in stead of their live with beast beast live with they and if sufficient be not bring to their shop they with one of these beast in their hand go about the street beg in the army of the turk that assault Malta in the year 1565. be b b Knol p. 794. thirteen thousand of a certain kind of man among the turk which live of the revenue of the church who have at Constantinople c c turkish decci vow their life for their superstition Antonio Pigafetta d d Knol p. 834. report that as the emperor ambassador be convey from the presence of the great Turk to their lodging by the janissary and their aga there be among they certain religious man call Haagi which use to follow the janissary who continual turn about and in their go sing or rather howl certain psalm or prayer for their great sultan welfare make they wonder that they fall not down for giddiness and this my friend master simons have see they do take one another by the hand in a ring and so continue their whirl-gig-devotion with continual turn fit agree to so giddy and brainsick a religion till with the great applause of turk and admiration of other sweat and a long protract weariness make a end of this dance their round but among all their order of religion Nicholas Nicholai e e N.N. l. 3. c. 15 and Christoph Richerius and before he Menavino reckon four which be most common among they the giamailer the calendar the and the Torlachi the giamailer be for the most part fair young man of rich house which give themselves to travel through diverse region at other man charge under colour of religion carry with they none other apparel then a little cassock of purple colour gird with a girdle of silk and gold upon the end whereof hang certain cymbal of silver mix with some other clear-sounding metal and they do ordinary wear six or seven of these about their girdle and under their knee in stead of a cloak they be cover with the skin of a lion or leopard be whole and in his natural hair which they make fast upon their breast by the two former leg all the rest of their body be bare save that they wear great ring on their ear and a kind of sandal on their foot their hair grow long like woman dishevel over their shoulder they bear in one of their hand a book write in the persian language full of amorous sonnet and thus with their voice and cymbal they make pleasant music especial if they meet some fair stripling who they set in the midst of they and encompass with their Morris-music these be the pilgrim of love and under pretext of religion do draw unto they the heart of woman and youngling and be call the man of the religion of love unto which order of religion youth be prone more then enough the partaker of their music ordinary impart to they of their coin the calendar f f nic. nic. be of a contrary profession to the former glory of abstinence and chastity they have for their dwell certain little church which they call Techie over the gate whereof they do write these or the like word Coeda dil ersin cusciunge all that be they which will enter into their religion must do work like they and remain in their virginity these calendar be clothe with a little short coat without sleeve after the fashion of haircloth make of wool and Horse-hair and do not let their hair grow long but cut the same and cover their head with feel hat like the priest of Graecia about which hang certain string about the breadth of a hand make of horse hair in their ear and about their neck and arm they wear great ring of iron they pierce their skin under their privy member thrust through the same a ring of a indifferent bigness and weight to bar they from venery if they be thereunto otherwise willing they also go read of certain song make by one of their order call Nerzim the first saint and martyr after their reckon of their religion who for certain word speak against the law of Mahomet be in Azamia flay quick Menavino g g lib. 2. c. 10. say he have read some of his writing agree with the christian faith in many point some h h policy of the turkish empire say he be martyr for confess Christ the deruis go bareheaded and cause their head and beard to be cut with a razor and all the hairy part of their body and burn also their temple with a hot iron or a old piece of cloth burn have their ear pierce wherein they do wear certain great ring of jasper all their clothes be two sheep or goat skin the hair thereof be dry in the sun one before and the other behind embrace the body in form of a girdle otherwise naked winter and summer they dwell without the city in suburb and village thus under the colour of religion they roam up and down and make no conscience to rob kill and murder if they find themselves the strong with a small hatchet which they bear under their girdle all man of whatsoever law or nation they be fornicator and most detestable in that most detestable sin of sodomy for show of holiness they eat of a certain herb i i this seem to be the same herb which Menavino call asseral call Matslach the violent operation whereof make they to become mad so as through a certain fury they with a certain knife or razor do cut their neck stomach and thigh until they be full of most horrible wound which to heal they lay upon they a certain herb let it lie upon their hurt until it be altogether consume into ash suffer in the mean time extreme pain with marvelous patience thus do they imitate their prophet Mahomet who through abstinence in his den fall into such a fury say they that he will have throw himself from the top of it and therefore fool and mad man be in great reverence yea they account such for saint and if such mad man strike or rob they they take it in good part and say they shall have good luck after it they erect stately monument over such mad man grave as at Aleppo one k k biddulph ep. fool be esteem belove of God if such be christian they circumcise they by force and esteem they saint say God have make he a fool thus to be save by their mean sheh Boubac who be mad go always naked be dead they build a house over his grave where to this day say our author there be lamp burn day and night and many of these daruise there remain to look to his sepulchre and to receive the offering of such as come as many do every week out of Aleppo if any be sick or in danger they vow to offer money or other thing to sheh Boubac if they recover the same account they make of one sheh mahammet a mad man yet live in Aleppo go naked with a spit on his shoulder man and woman will come and kiss his hand or some other part of his body and ask he counsel for they hold that mad man soul be in heaven talk with GOD and that he reveal secret to they and even the bassa themselves will kiss and consult with this oracle hard I deem it to say whether be the mad man in a late victory against the christian they affirm that this sheh mahammet be see in the field many thousand mile distant fight against their enemy who by his help they overcome but to return to our daruise this our author say that oftentimes great bassa in displeasure with the emperor will retire themselves into this order as the hospital and sanctuary of their disease and dangerous state their witness be of better account than any other man although he be a Emir or of the kindred of Mahomet they live of alm as the other religious do which they beg in the name of haly. they have l l nic. nichol. in Anatolia a sepulchre of a saint call by they Scidibattal who say they conquer the most part of Turkey and about the place of the sepulchre be a habitation and covent where above five hundred of these deruise dwell and there once in the year they keep a general assembly in which their superior who they call m m that be the father of father Assambaba be present and precedent their counsel or chapter consist say menavinus of above eight thousand of their order one of these deruislar n n Kn p. 463. draw near unto Bajazet the second as if he will have receive a alm of he desperate assail he with a short Scimatar which he close hide under his hypocritical habit but Bajazet by the start of his horse afraid of this hobgoblin avoid the deadly blow but not unwounded neither have he so escape have not Ishender bassa with his horseman mace present strike down the desperate villain as he be redouble his blow who be forthwith rend in piece by the soldier Bajazet thereupon proscribe all they of that superstitious order and banish they out of his empire the like as Steptemcastrensis say they have attempt against Mahomet his father in his youth while Amurath be yet live and in our day mehemet or Muhemet the great Visier Bassa who sway almost whole and only their mighty empire as appear in the history of that state in the day of Soliman Selym and Amurath and as master harborne relate be esteem to possess two and twenty million of gold be not assault only but murder by one of these deruisler for whereas it be a custom of the great man that at ordinary hour all their chaplain or priest assemble themselves in the Divano there together mumble their superstition and this deruisler f f Knol Turk hist p. 950. ordinary thither admit upon a old grudge for that Mahomet have before deprive he of a soldier place and pension when the Visier sit there to give public audience sit right against he after his Mumpsimus finish the Visier reach unto he his wont alm he with a dagger close before provide stab he into the breast and be therefore of mehemet slave with exquisite torment do to death in their great counsel before mention there be young man clothe in white which tell the most memorable observation in their travel which they present to the Assambaba in writing subscribe with their name on the Friday they use after prayer and eat the herb o o asseral be a herb that make man merry as if they be drunken asseral to read the same with dance and after their dance which be about a huge fire make of as much wood as a hundred beast can carry they cut the skin of their arm leg or breast engrave some figure thereon whereto they after apply ash and urine in the do hereof they utter this speech this I cut for the love of such a woman upon the last day of their feast they take leave of their governor and depart in troop like soldier with banner and drum and so return unto their own monastery the Torlaquis by other call durmislur clothe themselves with sheep and goat skin like unto the above the same they wrap about they in manner of a cloak the skin of a great bear with the hair make fast upon their stomach with the leg upon their head they wear a white bonnet of felt fold with small plait have the rest of their body altogether naked they also burn their temple as the former a beastly generation for they know not nor will not learn to read write or do any civil profitable act but live idle upon alm roague through the country alone and in troop through the desert rob such as they meet handsome apparel cause they to go as they do naked they profess palmistry and fortune-telling the people see and feed they for such vanity and sometime they carry with they a old man who they worship as a god lodging themselves near the best house of the town where they come and there this new and old impostor feign himself ravish in spirit pronounce grave word and spiritual commandment at sundry time lift up his eye to heaven and after turn to those his disciple will they to carry he from thence for some imminent judgement there to be execute as be reveal to he they then pray he to avert that danger by his prayer which he according do which the people delude by their hypocrisy reward with a large benevolence at which they after among themselves do merry scoff they eat also of the herb Matslatz and sleep upon the ground naked of clothes and shame and commit also abominable sodomitry and thus much of their misorderly order of a irreligious religion he that will read more at large of they let he read the book of the policy of the turkish empire which out of Menavino discourse more large of these thing and other the turkish rite Septemcastrensis p p cap. 15. tell of certain saint of exceed estimation for holiness who sepulcher be much frequent of devout votary as that of Sedichasi which signify a holy conqueror in the confine oof Caramania another be call Hatsehipettesch that be the pilgrim help another q q Assich be the goddess of love with the Georgiovitz Ascik passa who help in love-matter and for child in barrenness another van for concord and Scheych in trouble and affliction and goi or Muschin or Bartschin invoke for their cattle and chidirelle for traveller to who he sometime appear as a traveller and any one that have extraordinary live be repute a saint after his death they have many who name I remember not say he in like reverence with they as be the apostle with we when they will seek for thing lose they go to one saint when they be rob they go to another and for the knowledge of thing secret they repair to a three they have their martyr and miracle and relic thus they tell of certain religious man condemn wrongful for suspicion of treason to the fire which they enter without harm as r r dan. 3.27 those three companion of Daniel and their shoe be hang up for a monument their Nephes that be soul or person beget of the holy spirit such be their fancy without seed of man they hold in such reputation that they account themselves happy which can do they any good yea that can touch they and if their hair be lay upon any they say that their sickness be cure in this reputation of sanctity they have a certain old woman which have a dog with she in her pilgrimage to Mecca ready to die for thirst make water in her hand and give it to the dog which charitable act be so high accept that a voice be present hear from heaven say this day thou shall be in paradise and at the same time she be catch up body and soul into heaven and hereupon be they liberal to their dog if this cross a opinion which some saracen hold that woman come not to paradise no marvel see falsehood be common contrary both to the truth and itself he that will read the miraculous tale which they tell of their saint may have recourse to that nameless author which of his country be call and here often cite by name Septemcastrensis who tell s s septemcast cap. 18. of his master and his mistress their devotion and vow to goi and Mirtschin for preservation of their cattle sometime miraculous so ready be the devil with his save destruction and destroy preservation yea he say that the devil do turn himself among they into a angel of light with such effectual illusion that there be see or at least believe among they the dead raise to life disease of all sort cure secret of the heart disclose treasure long before hide in the ground reveal and beside such ostentation and show of dissemble holiness that they may seem not to come short of the father and apostle in that behalf if bodily exercise be the trial of sanctity busbequius t t busbequius epist. 1. tell that they have like conceit of one chederles among they as some superstitious person have of St. George and the turk affirm to be the same the have a great temple dedicate in his honour at theke Thioi not far from Amasia the chief city of Cappadocia the country and both legend agree for the kill of the dragon deliver the virgin etc. they say that he travel many country and at last come to a river the water whereof yield immortality to the drinker and now can be see chederles hereby free from death ride about every everywhere on his horse which thence also drink in immortality and delight in battle take part with the best cause and to make up the tale they say he be one of the companion of Alexander u u Alexander mag. be also one of their saint the great they affirm that Alexander be Salomon chief captain and job his high steward in that Moschee or temple at theke Thioi be a fountain of water which they say spring up of the stall of chederles horse like story have they of his horsekeeper and nephew who sepulcher they show where devout pilgrim obtain many blessing they show for relic the piece of the shoe which chederles his horse break in that dragon-fight and use the same in drink against ague and headache these place be full of dragon and viper sultan murat Chan 10 10 Leuncla hist Musul. lib. 14. or Amurath the second in a battle against the christian use this prayer o righteous God give we strength and victory o Muhamet o Mustapha the top of glory by abundance of miracle by the abundance of gaiberenler which be friend to the musulman and walk invisible by the abundance of the cheder grant we victory in the time y y Leuncla hist Musul. lib. 4. of Urchan or Orcanes the son of ottoman they say these gaib-erenlers appear on white horse in a battle against the christian and slay they these they say be friend to the islam that be catholic or right believe musulman and be divine protector of the Imania or mahometan Law such tale you may read in the spanish relation of the west indies as at the battle of Tavesco z z history of the west indies lop. de gom. where a strange horseman discomfit the indian etc. and our invocation of God and saint George be rather turkish then true Christian for God alone g g psal. 142.2 be our strength which teach our hand to fight and our finger to battle and who h h psal. 73.25 have I in heaven but thou and I have desire none in earth with thou as for George and chederles I know they both alike in matter of invocation save that it be worse to abuse to impiety a christian name then a turkish and king Edward the three seem to invoke Edward as much as George ha saint Edward ha saint George say Thomas Walsingham but that of George be rather a emblem of every christian as not only the heroic muse of our Spencer i i Spencer red cross knight in the fa. q. in poetical fiction but the divine of great divine k k reinold de rom. Eccles. Idololat. lib. 1 cap. 5. in their judicial censure have manifest it seem that the chederles and gaib-erenlers be diverse and perhaps that martial nation in conquest of the christian of those part will soon reconcile themselves to that martial saint and drink in those further devotion which his horse piss such emblem be those of Christopher Catherine George which the papist invocate as saint a error proceed from those picture as it seem in church according to that of the prophet l l jerem. 10.8 the stock be a doctrine of vanity and m m Habac. 2.18 the image be a teacher of lie the rude posterity in that mist of Antichrist and smoke from the bottomless pit not be able to discern a emblem and history asunder have make saint George the Mars n n bap. mant. fast lib. 4. of the christian o o bel. Eccles. tri. lib. 1. 20. struggle much rather than he will lose his saint and yet confess the history apocryphal Baronius p p Baron. in martyrolog rom. apr. 23. his fellow cardinal but beyond in truth acknowledge it a image of a symbol rather than of a history which without good authority in his golden legend make historical he say the virgin represent some province which implore the martyr help against the devil but Hyperius q q hyp. rat stud Theolog. lib. 3. cap. 7. and Villavicentius interpret it more fit to signify the church assault by the devil protect by the christian magistrate in which respect our defender of the faith may just be term the patron of that renown order which have now learn their George to be symbolical not a Cappadocian and as prince of r r (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 1. cor. 3. God husbandry which give name to saint George to fight against the dragon and the beast with horn like the lamb but speak like the dragon as for the popish George Baronius also have another original from the arrian worship of they for a martyr but if any will be further acquaint with this knightly saint let he resort to doctor Rainolds s s rain idol r. e. his large discourse touch these romish idolatry which howsoever Serarius seek to confute muster a huge t t serar litaneuticus l. 2. c. 20. army of eight and twenty argument to fight for this fight saint yet do none of these georgian soldier strike one stroke to prove that their legendary martyr nor so much as conclude his horse tail or dragon tooth or his own sword or spear no nor show whether this George thus relate point worship be the child of history or mystery heir of the painter poet or historian symbolical or historical as for George Christopher Catherine Hippolytus that some saint have be call by these name we much deny not care not if these thus deliver in their story be but monster or mystery chap. 14 of their priest and hierarchy with a digression touch the hierarchy and misery of christian subject to the Turk after the discourse of their regulars which in estimation of devotion have with the turk and therefore in this history the first place their secular priest follow to be consider these be of differ degree which Menavino a a lib. 2. cap. 3. thus reckon first the Cadilescher under which the mofti or mufti the three the cadi and after these in subordinate order the Modecis Antippi Imam Meizini and beside these the sophi a certain Ragusian b b Edit. Alcorani Latin in a oration before Maximilian the emperor do not much disagree but for Cadilescher he call the first Pescherchadi whereof he say there be two one in Romania the other in Anatolia chief judge of the army have power to reverse the sentence of the emperor if it be against the law of Mahomet a second magistrate say he be call Muchti the chief interpreter of the law from who sentence be no appeal nic. Nicolai c c peregrination lib. 3. c. 14. say the same of their two cadilescher and that they be choose out of their most learned doctor of their law and always follow the court and with the consent of the bassa constitute and depose the cadi have for their annual stipend seven thousand or eight thousand ducat beside their ordinary gain they have ten secretary keep at the grand signor charge and two Moolorbassis which be busy about the horse they have also two hundred or three hundred slave they use few word but such as be of their law and religion altogether with very much show of gravity Arivabene d d Alcoran Ital. in his preamble to the italian Alcoran make Cadilescher e e etc. l. soranz. Otto to be a general name to all their order of priest other do place the mufti in the high place and the Cadilescher in the second rank and perhaps other give the Cadilescher the first place because their life be more in action and government as attend on the court and on the war but the mufti be high interpreter of their law though without government must indeed have pre-eminence and so Menavino f f lib. 2. cap. 4. seem to affirm who though he place the Cadilescher first yet say that g g sue all mophti when happy appeal be make from his sentence they have recourse to the mophti and this opinion be now general and most current which ascribe to the mufti the chief place master Harborn sometime ambassador into Turkey for England queen the world wonder our western Hesperus that shine so far over and beyond all Christendom into the east but my word be too base to usher in that renown name elizabeth thus h h lib. manuscript report the turk do hold for head and chief of their religion the mufti the choice of who be make by the great Turk himself such a one as be know to be wise and learned and chief of a good life his authority be so esteem that the emperor will never alter a determination make by he he intermeddle in all matter as best he like whether they be civil or criminal yea or of State and yet he have no power to command but be in each man free liberty when there happen any doubt of importance to make in some few word by write a declaration of his matter in form of a question to who the say mufti in write likewise call Zetfa give a brief answer contain his judgement thereon this Zetfa bring to the judge be the rule of his sentence provide that the declaration make before to the mufti contain no untruth also the grand signior to show that he be religious and just do serve himself of the authority of this mufti in affair of war and peace demand his judgement in manner aforesaid by this course the subject be incline to more forward obedience but yet the mufti will common flatter he and lean to that part to which he see he incline as in the time of Selym the second the mufti have discover the emperor intent to war upon Cyprus approve the same in his Zetpha but after upon great offer make to mehemet the Visier to break that resolution the mufti by he win to favour the matter affirm still that the war against Cyprus be good and just but that his majesty have a great obligation in conscience which he be bind to take in hand namely to procure the revolt of the moor in Spain there oppress by the christian wherein he be so bold with the emperor as to tell he to his face that if he do neglect the cause of those mahometans he may be thereunto by his subject compel concern the mufti and other step of their hierarchy master i i Knol p. 1302. Knolles write that the turk have certain college call medressae at Constantinople Adrinople Bursia and other place in which they live and study their profane divinity and law and have among they nine several step or degree unto the high dignity the first be call softi which be young student the second be Calfi who be reader unto the first the three Hogi writer of book for they will suffer no print the four be Naipi or young doctor which may supply the place of judge in their absence the five Caddi judge of their law and justice to punish offender of which there be one at least in every city through the turkish dominion and be know from other man by their huge turban two yard in compass the six be Muderisi which oversee the caddy do and be as to their bishop who be the seven sort and be call Mulli which place and displace churchman at their pleasure the eight Cadelescari who be but two great and principal judge or cardinal the one of Graecia the other of Anatolia and these two sit every day in the Divano among the bassa and be in great reputation the nine be the mufti who be among the turk as the pope among the roman catholic when the bassa punish any offence against their law they send to he he may not abase himself to sit in the Divano neither when he come into the presence of the grand signior will he vouchsafe to kiss his hand or to give any more reverence than he receive the great sultan arise to honour he when he come unto he and then they both sit down face to face and so talk and confer together no man can ascend to this place but by the dignity aforesaid Mahomet k k Knol 1161. the three force by a tumult of the janissary to present himself unto they come accompany with the mufti and some few other of the reverend doctor of their law who be by the sultan command to sit down while the great bassa abide stand such respect it have to these man thus much Knolles in the book l l cap. 24. of the policy of the turkish empire it be say that the mufti authority be like to that of the jewish high priest or roman pope I rather esteem it like to that of the patriarch of Alexandria Antioch etc. as bind not all mahometans but the turk only whereas the one have the other challenge a subjection of all which profess their religion that author also affirm that whensoever the mufti go abroad forth of his own house which he use to do very seldom his use and custom be first to go and visit the emperor who as soon as he see he come to salute he and do he reverence present arise out of his seat and embrace he with great kindness entertain he very friendly and love cause he to sit down by he and give he the honour of the place his authority say m m l. Soranzo part. 2. cap. 61. Soranzo be so great that none will open contradict the mufti sentence but yet if the emperor be settle in a resolution the mufti with fear or flattery incline unto he next to the mufti be the Cadilescher Cadilescher who be also choose by the emperor may be compare to those who the christian call patriarch or else to the primate and metropolitan of a kingdom of these there be now in this increase greatness of the turkish empire three whereas it seem that they have in the time of Bajazet but one and long after as before be say but two to one of these be assign Europe namely so much thereof as be subject to the Turk for his province to the second Anatolia or Turkey to the three Syria and Egypt with the part adjoin there be but two cadilescher till Selym win Syria and Egypt and erect a three but n n magin Soranzo say that this three of cairo be not right call Cadilescher but shall rather be call the great cadi out of all which province whatsoever cause come to be determine by appeal or otherwise they be bring to be decide before the Cadilescher of the same province whence they arise notwithstanding that the abode of each of they be continual or for the most part at Constantinople or elsewhere wheresoever the emperor hold his Court the honour do to they be little less than to the mufti for that their authority be over priest and people temporal and spiritual they be also learned in their law age and experience of the Muderisi and Mulli I can say no more than I have do next to these be the cadi cadi which be send abroad and disperse into every city and town of the turkish empire which beside their o o andr. Ariu ecclesiastical jurisdiction as I may term it in force man to their religious observation be as it be justicer and governor of the place so near glue be the office and officer the religion and polity of the turk there be other which be not send forth which be call Choza that be elder these with the talisman have the order of their parishional church the Thalisman call the people to prayer and the Choza execute the service and preach and in absence each supply other Office Menavino more distinct and in other name number those church-officer the Modecis be a governor of a hospital receive and dispose the rent with the other custom thereof their school degree be before speak of out of Knolles some p p policy of the turkish empire add to these former these other priest of base condition the Antippi Antippi be certain priest which upon Friday call of they Glumaagun and be observe as their sabbath because Mahomet as some hold be bear on that day and on other their fast and feasting-day after they have use diverse ceremony in a certain place in the midst of the temple about thirty step high from thence read unto the people something concern the life of Mahomet after which two little boy stand up and sing certain prayer which be end the priest and all the people sing a psalm with a low voice and then for half a hour together they cry Illah illelah that be there be but one God after all this one of these Antippi out of that high place show forth unto the people a lance and scimitar with exhortation to use their sword and lance in defence of their religion of the Imam Imam and meizin meizin be elsewhere show that the one call the people to the Mosche or Meschit the other there celebrate public orison the sophi also be certain clerk or priest employ in the sing of psalm and hymn after their manner sophi perhaps the same with the softi before mention in their church at the time of public prayer all these inferior order of priest be choose by the people and have a certain stipend allow they by the emperor which yet be so small that many of they be drive to use either write of book or handicraft and trade for their live and be clothe like layman they have q q bar. Georgiovitz no great learning it be sufficient if they can read the Alcoran which be write in Arabic they be as loath to have translate into the vulgar as the papist be to have the scripture he which can interpret and make some exposition of the text be of profund learning yet be they reverence and if a Turk do strike or offer outrage to they he lose his hand and if he be a Christian his life be sure to be burn some say that now of late some of they be more studious of astronomy and other art as for those superior rank no doubt may be make of their high account the Chadilescher be clothe in Chamlet satin silk damask or velvet of seemly colour as russet or tawny and in purple-coloured cloth with long sleeve their Tulipan on their head be of marvelous greatness sharp in the midst of purple russet colour deep and thick than other their beard great they ride on gelding with purple foot-cloth fringe and when they go on foot they go slow represent a stately and sacred gravity there be another order of sacred person which yet be neither regular nor secular by any vow or ordination but have in that account for their birth be suppose to descend of the line of Mahumet the turk and tartarian call they Seiti or Sithi the moor seriffi these we be green tulipan which colour none else may wear and that only on their head some christian ignorant hereof have have their apparel cut from their back for wear somewhat green about they these they call Hemir they enjoy many privilege especial in give testimony wherein one of these be as much as two other which they abuse to injury and wrong the most of they be moor which go ten or fifteen in a company with a banner on a staff have a moon on the top and that which be give for God sake they sit and eat in the street where also they make their prayer and be poor clad like to these in privilege and praviledge be the chagi or which live on alm like friar they attend on the public prayer on the holy relic on the corpse and funeral of the dead and to prey on the live by false oath a digression touch the hierarchy and misery of christian under the Turk etc. and thus we have take a leisurely view of the turkish hierarchy from the poor softi to the courtly Cadilescher and pontifical mufti flourish and triumph together with that monarchy which be exalt and have exalt they with the power not of the word of GOD but of the sword of man but with what word mean while shall we deplore the lamentable and miserable estate of that christian hierarchy and ecclesiastical polity which sometime flourish there with no few nor less title of dignity and eminence where be now those reverend name of bishop archbishop metropolitan patriarch and the swell stile of ecumenical nay where be the thing the life and live for the stile name title still continue continue indeed but as epitaph and inscription on the monument of their decease and bury power as the ghost and wander shadow of those sometime quick and quicken body of rule and government Constantinople decipher with due epithet and title great city of great Constantine seat in the throne of the world the fit situation to command both sea and land through Europe Asia and Africa at thy first nativity honour with a double diadem of christianity and sovereignty to which the sea prostrate itself with innumerable multitude of fish the land pay continual tribute of rare fertility for which old Rome disrobe herself to deck this her New-Rome daughter and imperial heir with her choice jewel and monument a compendium of the world eye of city heart of the habitable earth academy of learning senate of government mother of church nurse of religion and to speak in the language of thy own a a Niceph. callist in praef. a new Eden a earthly heaven model of paradise shine with the variety of thy sacred and magnificent building as the firmament with the sun moon and star this be thy ancient greatness great now only in misery and mischief which as chief seat of turkish greatness be hence inflict on the christian name and thou the soul of this body the goodly jewel in this ring of perfection which so many wonder of nature conspire to make the miracle of art temple of saint Sophia the temple of that wisdom of GOD which be GOD call by he which see thou both Christian and mahometan b b georg. phranza chron. lib. 3. cap. 17. a terrestrial heaven a Cherubical chariot another firmament beyond all name of elegance which I think say another c c const Manas ap. Pontan the very seraphin do admire with veneration and which have here move thy mention high seat and throne of that Patriarchial and ecumenical highness which hence sway all the east and contend with western Rome for sovereignty now exclude rule rite yea person Christian whole hallow to the damnable holy of ridiculous and blasphemous Mahometisme the multitude of other church as silly captive damsel attend and follow thou into this Mechitical slavery o city which have be woe worth that word that hasty hast-been which have be but who can say what thou have be let one word the sum of all earthly excellence express what flood of word and sea of rhetoric can express which have be Constantinople which be that one name may declare thy bottomless hellish downfall indeed though not in name mahometople the seat of Mahomet power the settle of mahometan dregs what word can serve to preach thy funeral sermon and ring thy knell to succeed age sometime the theatre of worldly pomp but then on that dismal day of thy captivity the stage of earthly and hellish fury the sink of blood and slaughter-house of death what sense will not become senseless to see the breach of the wall fill up with the slay the gate by death shut out death close d d hist pont. up to the arch with confuse body of turk and christian the shout of man fight the cry groan gasp of man die the manifold spectacle and e e virg. variety of death and yet the worse estate and more multiply death of the live woman ravish maiden force person vow to sanctity devote to lust slaughter slavery reverend age no whit reverence green youth perish in the bloom and rot before it have time to ripen the father see the hope of his year dear pledge of nature slay or sell before his face the child behold the parent pass into another captivity all take a everlasting fare well of all welfare as well as of each other well may we in compassion weep for those misery the bitter passion whereof like a violent whirlwind do to they dry up the fountain of tear even he which write the history of these thing counsellor he after turn monk and scarce have bare bread to sustain he jac. Pontan he be say to have slay his own wife etc. to prevent slavery and himself die in the fight th. Zygomal and great chancellor to the emperor may much move we with his own particular himself sell to one his wife to another his daughter rich espouse now marry to the serail-slavery his son slay with the sultan own hand for not be obsequious to his beastly lust if particular and private case can find any proper place in public calamity and if the emperor own history be not as some have tell it more tragical o sun how can thy brightness endure to see such hideous spectacle but cloud of shot dust and smoke hide they from thou o earth which otherwhiles at that time f f const be take may 29. 1453. of the year deck thyself with thy fair robe embroider with variety of flower how be thou then cover with dead carcase and furrow with rill of blood o GOD that the sin of man shall thus provoke thy justice by unjust and sinful instrument to punish injustice and sin and to chastise thy christian servant by antichristian and devilish enemy just be thou o lord and just be thy judgement which in judgement remember mercy which save the soul of thou in and by the affliction of their body but will cast this rod of thy wrath into a fire that never shall be quench but i think I hear some except at this long digression and quarrel at this tragedy in stead of the proceed history shall I crave pardon or shall I rather desire the reader a little to consider with i in this narration of Constantinople as the map and epitome of eastern Christendom the miserable and perplex estate of all eastern christian by like mean bring and trample under the foot of the ottoman horse the large story of their rite and opinion be reserve to another task this I have propound as the glass of their misery that be now to take leave of the turk we may not so much honour they with this peal of rhetorical ordnance as by this mirror of misery be touch with fear in ourselves for like punishment if in time we meet not God with repentance and remember the affliction of joseph to pray for those our brethren that God will have mercy on they and give they patience and in his time deliverance they which will take more view of the misery of christian under the Turk may in Viues Georgiovitz Septemcastrensis and other read they for i the parallel of the Turkish and christian hirarchy be some occasion of this digression touch which let i borrow a few word with our reader Mahomet the conqueror for the repeople of the city pretend great favour to the christian give they licence to elect a new patriarch who he honour with the wont rite and solemnity and vouchsafe to confer with he about the christian mystery for his mother be a christian and he himself addict to study of learning be a a phranza l. 1. cap. 33. skilful in the greek Chaldee persian latin Arabic beside his turkish language profess knowledge also in astrology and receive at the hand of this patriarch his name be gennadius a large treatise thereof b b confess Christ fld Gennadijum Turcogr l. 2. and in Biblioth. yet extant in greek and turkish and give he diverse privilege but thing feign can continue and partly through his own covetousness partly through the ambition and disagree of the clergy heavy fine be impose on they and the seat receive in his time nine succession and eight in the reign of Bajazet his son and so groan under that burden to this day and howsoever the patriarch enjoy c c steph. Gerla cbij ep. octob. 7 1574 etc. spiritual and ecclesiastical respect among the christian yet be he contemn of the turk some of they upbraid both he and other christian with the name of dog ethnic unbeliever and the like zealous rhetoric nor be he admit a room among the bassa except when he bring his tribute of 4000 ducat with almost as much beside to the bassa and other officer in his monastery and Patriarchial church and palace be no bishop or great prelate nourish but a few monk and some lay-officer and counsellor he sometime but seldom preach on some chief feast at the consecration of some bishop or archbishop and very little preach they have among they and that which be in the old pure greek which very few of they understand think it sufficient if two or three of their audience conceive they and very few can preach wence Budovitz ep. 1580. they have not the scripture in the vulgar greek the revenue of the patriarch be about 20000. dollar they gather much in their church and he send his collector to gather abroad and the other prelate pay a annuity to he to prevent abuse from turk he have a janissary or two at the church-door in the time of the liturgy they read in their church great legend of the lie of saint as well as the papist their religion be almost altogether in rite like the other the difference between new and old Rome be one principal occasion of the loss of Constantinople as appear p p polit. Turcog vid. ep. g. Trapez by the emperor John his go to Rome to solicit aid which have be give he but for refuse a papal ceremony and the proceed of the council of Florence the patriarch of Alexandria Antiochia and jerusalem acknowledge this of Constantinople ecumenical and his jurisdiction extend through Asia Minor the Archipelago Greece Mysia Walachia Moldavia Dalmatia Russia and Muscovia the Calogeri or monk have their garden and vineyard which they till and dress with their own hand to sustain themselves the other patriarch also pay a yearly tribute to the Turk the priest be poor and live of alm and the price of their holy which be most gainful in exequies the laity be no less miserable for the most part of spare diet but give to drink both jew and christian pay for themselves and every of their child above twelve year old a ducat by the poll and much more for the maintenance of the navy beside their tribute-child for janissary the greek be ignorant and unlearned and have exile in a blind zeal poetical and philosophical author for fear of pollution to their study and as Simeon cabasilas write to Crusias they have about seventy dialect of the modern greek tongue the pure of which be at Constantinople the most barbarous of all o time at Athens o Athens Athens decipher before call q q hen. steph. dicaearch bi. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) athenae satin (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) fran. portus so Constantinople call Antonomasticae (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and when they go thither their phrase be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) of which word contradict and corrupt the turk call it stambol at this day g. Postel compend cosmog asser men. in Alfredi (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the Greece of Greece and that which the sight be in the eye that which the mind be in the soul such be Athens in Greece seat of the muse grace empire art o Athens but I be force silence let Zygomal a eyewitness speak there now say he remain no more but the skin thereof herself be long since dead the true Athens and Helicon be come into our Westene part and how can any of they labour in learning which must labour to live necessity have no law no learning even we here now behold a british Athens or rather a attic Britain where whilom our ancestor even after learning and religion have here now flourish find through the danish pestilence a brutish barbarism alfred the son of a king and after king himself can not find a master in all his dominion to teach he the latin tongue and procure with care and cost foreigner to teach he first learn that language at six and thirty year of his age have begin to read the vulgar at twelve year which his elder and less studious brethren can not then do and himself in the preface of Gregory pastoral to use his own word in our late english say that learning be so fall in the english nation that very few be on this side Humber which their service can understand in english or a epistle from latin into english declare and I ween that not many beyond Humber be not so few of they be that I also one only may not remember by south thamise when as I to reign undertake I can show the like in Italy also by testimony of pope Agatho in the six synod at Constantinople upon like cause but I forget my Greek as they have do their greeke I fear rather I seem to remember they too much and that severe censor will judge this a abortive issue bear before the time I will therefore stay my willing pen till fit time refer the more studious to those which have write of this subject especial to Martin Crusius his Turcograecia where out of the letter of gerlach and other as also of the greek themselves John and Theodosius zygomale and of the patriarch Sex syn. const a. 4. metrophanes joasaphus jeremias between this last patriarch and d. Andrea and Crusius there pass some writing of religion they may have further satisfaction their stile be Jeremy by the mercy of God archb. of const. new Rome ecumenical patriarch Michael by the mercy of God Patriarch of great theopolis Crisis Turcogr hist ecclesiast etc. censura Orient. jerem. Patriarch Antiochia q q Moses Mardenus 1552. make a profession of his faith at Rome in his and the patriarch of Antiochia name the like be do by Sulaka elect patriarch of the nestorian 1553. both translate by and. Mosius which may be juggle as well as that of Gabriel Patriarch of Alexandria as George Dousa testify against Baronius and of all the east sophronius by the mercy of God Patriarch of the holy city jerusalem and of all Palestina in a testimonial to d. Albert Lewenstein the patriarch of Alexandria style himself I joachim pope and patriarch of the great city Alexandria judge of the world etc. other callistus Gabriel archb. of philadelphia and if to the patriarch archb. of p. servant to your holiness Gabriel a bishop (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) or n. gerasimus they make public mention of the four patriarch in their church liturgy the venetian allow the greek free use of their religion through all their dominion and Crete be a chief place for their learned man the great misery which accompany the turkish thraldom be their b b septemcast c. 5. zeal of make proselyte with manifold and strong inducement to such as have be more nuzzle in superstition then train up in knowledge and see such contempt of christian and honour which befall to many renegado and very many be pervert and bewitch therewith yea many voluntary offer themselves to apostasy and other by c c septemcast handle this at large hope fear grief despair importunity distract by that vizor of virtue in the turkish gravity sobriety bodily purity and spiritual zeal after their sect with whole rabble of satanical miracle delude want all intercourse of sacrament preach read and all christian holy and full of want in necessary for this life forget a better and turn Turk thus do they sell to the devil their soul buy by the blood of Christ jesus we may well despair of word to utter this misery and to describe this mart of hell see it exceed all word to see the market make of christian body the remainder of cruel and bloody war chain together in more than beastly bondage so bring to the market if any be sick by the way drive on as long as they can go and when their foot fail lay over a horse like as butcher deal with small cattle and if thy die leave for a prey to the fowl and beast the place of their abode by the way fill with cry of youngling of both sex abuse to unnatural lust in the market they be strip view and modesty forbid to speak o image of God thus abase open in the secret part handle be they male or female force to go run leap and if shame or disdain make they unwilling by whip and stripe compel the infant pluck from the mother breast and sell from ever again see she or liberty the wife thus open delude and deal with before the husband face and for a base price give by some base Turk everlasting divorce from his face his daughter virginity open secret my word be swallow up with horror of the fact himself at home reverend for his year now in that respect contemn and hang long on hand as unprofitable ware before he find a buyer priest soldier merchant artificer husbandman all equal subject to this iniquity save that gentleman and those of most liberal education be least esteem and most abuse because they can bring least profit to their master where beside filthy lust they suffer hunger thirst cold and stripe and which redouble those blow even there be the passion of Christ in this passion of their own upbraid to they some in impatience revolt some run away and be bring back to a worse estate if possible some kill themselves and some but I can say no more let we pray for they and let we at last leave this tragedy and take view of former antiquity chap. 15 of the region and religion of Asia minor since call Anatolia and Turkey next after the turkish religion thus relate it seem fit to discourse of the ancient name and limit of region and of the former heathenish religion of that part of the turkish dominion which among author a a gem. Phrys Haiton maginus Francisco thamara and have since in a singular eminency obtain the name of Turkey and if it seem strange that the turkish religion a new upstart be declare before those former of the pagan the matter we have in hand have thus alter our method that after we have describe the deform disjoint lineament of the mother a arabian saracen her more misshapen daughter this turkish Mopsa may attend she hard at her heel as for the region we have follow the turkish force hither and now that we have glut ourselves with the view of their late affair of state and religion let we cast our eye about we and observe the country itself which because of she long and entire subjection to this nation be style by their b b Turcia and Turcia Maior name the greek c c mel. and Peucer lib. 5. the greek call this Asia simple as be best know to they call it Anatolia (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) because it be the eastern part of that empire as they call Thracia the country about Constantinople which be name (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Romania this Anatolia or Anatolia be of other call Asia Minor and yet Asia in most proper and strict account be peculiar apply to one region in this great Cherosonesus or Peninsula which contain beside that the region of Pontus Bythinia Lycia Galatia Pamphilia Paphlagonia Cappadocia Cilicia and Armenia Minor it be bound on the east with Euphrates now frat on the south with the mediterranean sea on the west with the Archipelago on the north with the black-sea stretch in length from 51. to 72. degree of longitude and in breadth from 36. @ to 45. this country have be ancient renown for arm and art now the d d this part of Asia have be exceed subject to earthquake in the time of Tiberius twelve city be by they prostrate in one night Niger grave of the carcase or some ruinous bone rather and stony relic of the carcase of more than four thousand place and city sometime inhabit many change have it sustain by the egyptian persian macedonian roman tartarian and turkish general conquest beside such exploit as Croesus and Mithridates of old the saracen and the western christian of late time have therein achieve let the studious of these thing search they in their proper author our task be religion who overworn and almost outwear step with much curious hunt in many history we have thus weak trace of the turk we have already speak and we leave the large relation of the christian for why shall we mix light with darkness to their proper place for even yet beside the armenian there remain many christian of the greek church in Cappadocia and other part of this region HONDIUS his map of Asia minor Anatolia next unto those part of Syria before deliver be situate in this lesser Asia Cilicia Armenia Minor and Cappadocia Cappadocia Cappadocia call also Leucosyria and now Amasia stretch four hundred and fifty mile along the euxine sea bound on the west with Paphlagonia Galatia and part of pamphylia on the south with Cilicia on the east with the hill antitaurus and Moschius and part of Euphrates here run halys the end of Croesus empire both in the site and fate thereof the doubtful oracle here give he a certain overthrow for when he consult with the same touch his expedition against Cyrus he receive answer that pass halys he shall overturn a great state which he interpret active of his attempt against Cyrus verify it passive in himself and here beside other stream slide Thermodon sometime make famous by the border amazon of which manly feminine people ancient author disagree amazon Theophrastus derive they from the sauromatae Sallust fetch they from Tanais p. describe they in Germany Trogus and justine report they scythian Diodorus cross the sea to find they in Lybia and thence also in a further search pass into a island in the atlantike ocean Ptolomey and Curtius place they near the caspian sea Strabo f f Strab. lib. 11. doubt whether there ever have be such a people or no. some have find they out anew in the new world g g river of amazon name that huge river of they Goropius confident avouch they to be the wife and son of the sarmatian or cimbrian who together with their husband invade Asia and this he prove by dutch etymology and other conjecture which if it be true show that their religion be the same with the scythian they h h gram. be say to have worship Mars of who they fain themselves to be descend religion it be to speak of their religion of who be we have no better certainty Strabo i i Strab. l. 12. write that in the place ascribe to the amazon Apollo be exceed worship in Cappadocia be seat the city comana wherein be a temple of Bellona and a great multitude of such as be there inspire and ravish by devilish illusion and of sacred servant it be inhabit by the people call Cataones who be subject to a king do nevertheless obey the priest that be in great part lord of the temple and of the sacred servant who number when Strabo be there amount to six thousand and upward of man and woman the priest receive the revenue of the region next adjoin to the temple and be in honour next to the king in Cappadocia and common of the same kindred these idolatrous rite be suppose to have be bring hither out of Taurica Scythia by Orestes and his sister iphigenia where human sacrifice be offer to Diana here at the solemn feast of Bellona those sacred servant before mention call wound each other in a ecstatical fury bloody rite fit Bellona solemnity k k Solinus argaeus who hoary head be cover continual with snow be repute a religious hill and habitation of some God Strabo l l Strab. l. 12. report of the temple of Apollo Catanius in Dastacum and of another of jupiter in Morimena which have three thousand of those sacred servant or religious votary which as a inferior order be at the command of the priest who receive of his temple revenue fifteen talent and be repute in the next rank of honour to the priest of comana not far hence be castabala where the temple of Diana persica m m Strab. l. 12. Coel. l. 26. c. 33. where the sacred or devote woman be report to go barefooted on burn coal without harm it be report n n vadiani that if a snake do bite a Cappadocian the man blood be poison to the snake and kill he many excellent worthy have this region yield to the world mazaca afterward of Claudius call Caesarea be the episcopal seat of great Basil the receptacle of exile chrusostom Amasia now a provincial city of the turkish beglerbeg sometime the country of Strabo to who these our relation be so much indebt Nissa and Nazianaum of which the two Gregory receive their surname but that human and divine learning be now trample under the barbarous foot of the ottoman-horse here be trapezonde also whilom bear the proud name of a empire Licaonia Licaonia the chief city whereof be Iconium celebrate in holy writ and a long time the royal seat of the first Turk in Asia and since of Caramania now Conia or Cogne inhabit with greek turk jew arabian and armenian be of Ptolomey adjoin to Cappadocia and so be diopolis diopolis call before cabira since Augusta which Ortelius place in the lesser Armenia in diopolis be the temple of the moon have in great veneration much like in the rite thereof to that before mention of comana which although it bear o o comana Cappadocia and Ponitica Strab. l. 12. the surname of Cappadocia yet Ptolomey place it in this Armenia and comana pontica in Cappadocia of the same name and superstitious devotion to the same goddess thence have they take the pattern of their temple of their rite ceremony divination respect to their priest and twice a year in the feast which be call the goddess her go out the priest wear a diadem he be second to none but the king which priesthood be hold of some of strabo progenitor Pompey bestow the priesthood of this temple upon Archelaus and add to the temple revenue two Schoeni that be threescore furlong of ground command the inhabitant to yield he obedience he have also power over the sacred servant which be no less than six thousand Lycomedes after enjoy that prelacy with four Schoeni of land add thereto Caesar remove he place in his room Diteutus the son of adiatorix who with his wife and child he have lead in triumph purpose to slay his elder son together with he but when the young persuade the soldier that he be the elder and both contend which shall die Diteutus be of his parent counsel to yield to the young and to remain alive to be a stay to their family which piety Caesar hear of grieve for the death of the other he thus reward at the feast aforesaid be great recourse of man and woman hither many pilgrim resort to discharge their vow great store of woman be there which for the most part be devote this city be as little Corinth for many go to Corinth in respect of the multitude of harlot prostitute or consecrate to Venus zela. zela another city have in it the temple of Anias much reverence of the armenian wherein the rite be solemnize with great sanctimony and oath take of great consequence the sacred servant and priestly honour be as the former the king do sometime esteem zela not as a city but as a temple of the persian god and the priest have supreme power over all thing who with a great multitude of those sacred servant inhabit the same the roman increase their revenue in Cappadocia the persian religion be much use but of the persian rite see more a a lib. 4. in our of Persia the b b the infamous lewdness of the cappadocian Galatia 300000. Galli lewdness of the cappadocian grow into a proverb if any be enormious wicked he be therefore call a Cappadocian Galatia or GALLOGRAECIA so call of the Galli which under the conduct of Brennus say suidas assemble a army of three hundred thousand and seek adventure in foreign part divide themselves some invade Greece other Thrace and Asia where they settle themselves between Bythinia and Cappadocia on the south it be confine with Pamphilia and on the north be wash with the euxine sea the space of two hundred and fifty mile Sinope the mother and nurse city of Mithridates be here seat one of the last city of Asia that subject itself to turkish bondage in the day of Mahomet the second of the Galatae be three tribe Trogini Tolistobogi and tectosages all which Goropius derive from the cimmerij at tavium which be inhabit with the Trogini be a brazen statue of jupiter and his temple be a privilege sanctuary the Tolistobogi have for their chief mart Pisinus wherein be a great temple of the mother of the god who they call Andigista have in great veneration who priest have sometime be mighty this temple be magnificent build of the attalian king with the porch also of white stone and the roman by deprive the same of the goddess statue which they send for to Rome as they do that of Aesculapius out of Epidaurus add much reputation of religion thereunto the hill Dindyma over-looketh the city of which she be name Dindymena as of Cybelus which Orletius suppose to be the same cybele of the galatian deiotarus be king but more fame have befall they by Paul epistle to they Plutarch c c plut. sermo and tell of a history of a Galatian woman name Camma worthy our recital she be fair and noble the daughter of Diana priest and rich marry to Sinatus the tetrarch but Sinorix a man rich and mighty than he become his unjust corrival and because he dare not attempt violence to she her husband live he slay he Camma solace herself as she can cloister herself in Diana temple and admit none of her mighty suitor but when Sinorix have also move that suit she seem not unwilling and when he come to desire her marriage she go forth to meet he and with gentle entertainment bring he into the temple unto the altar where she drink to he a cup of poison liquor and have take off almost half she reach he the rest which after she see he have drink she call upon her husband name aloud say hitherto have I live sorrowful without thou wait this day now welcome i unto thou for I have revenge thy slaughter on the most wicked among man and have be companion and partner with thou in life with he in death and thus die they both the like manly womanhood if a christian may commend that which none but a christian can discommend Valerius Maximus d d val. max. l. 6. c. 1. show of chiomara her countrywoman wife of ortyagon a great man among the tectosages who in the war of Manilius the consul be take prisoner be commit to the custody of a tribune who force she to his pleasure after that agreement be make for her ransom and the money bring to the place appoint while the tribune be busy about the receipt thereof she cause her gallo-graecian to cut off his head which she carry to her husband in satisfaction of her wrong at the funeral of the galatian e e alex. ab Alexandro genial l. 3. c. 7. they observe this custom to write letter and hurl they into that late and fatal fire suppose that their decease friend shall read they in the other world at their sacrifice f f gen. dier. l. 4. cap. 17. they use not a aruspex or divinor which gaze in the entrails but a philosopher without who they think no sacrifice acceptable to their god the devil certain be the god to who their human sacrifice be acceptable which in devilish inhumanity they offer at their bloody altar g g ibid. l. 6. c. 26. when they divine of thing to come which they do by his fall by the dismember and flow forth of his blood h h athenaeus athenaeus out of Philarchus tell of one ariannes a rich Galatian which feast the whole nation a whole year together with sacrifice of bull swine sheep and other provision make ready in great caldron provide of purpose for this entertainment that he make they in spacious booth which he have therefore build Pausanius say that the Pesinuntian galatian abstain from swine flesh the legend of agdistis and Atte which he there add be too filthy to relate between i i d. Niger Asi e com. 1. maginus the mouth of Pontus the thracian Bosphorus Pontus and Bythinia and part of propontis on the west and Galatia on the east part of the euxine sea on the north and Asia proper so call on the south be situate the province call by the double name k k Pontitae Pontico c^^no^inatar Mari l. flor. l. 3. c. 5. of Pontus and Bythinia there be sometime two province divide by the river sangarius now they be call Bursia by Girava by Castaldus becsangial the most famous city therein be or rather have be nice famous sometime for Neptune temple but more for the first general council therein celebrate against arrius in defence of the trinity and Christ divinity Nicomedia sometime the seat of emperor now ruinous Apamia and Prusa or bursa nigh to the mount Olympus where the first ottoman have their seat royal and all of that race except the great Turk themselves be still bury chalcedon build seventeen year before Byzantium and therefore the builder account blind which neglect that better Seat here be a famous council of six hundred and thirty bishop against the heresy of eutyches here jason have build a temple to jupiter in the straits which sever Europe from Asia after Melas measure five furlong of their ancient king other have relate but one can pass this our history without observation and that be Mithridates l l Gramaye pontica justin l. 37. l. Florus t. Liuij Epitom. the six king of that name who lose his father in the eleven year of his age by his tutor be treacherous assail but escape and by use of that antidote which of he still bear the name mithridate outlive their poison conspiracy he live indeed to the death of thousand which either his cruelty or his war consume four year together to avoid their treason he live in the field and wood under a show of hunt both prevent their design and enure himself to hardness he speak two and twenty language be lord of so many nation he hold war with the roman six and forty year who those renown captain Sylla Lucullus Pompey do so conquer as he always arise again with great lustre and with great terror and at last die not by his enemy command but voluntary in his old age and his own kingdom never make to attend the roman triumph Sulla felicity Lucullus prowess and Pompey greatness notwithstanding his aspire thought have greedy swallow the sovereignty both of Asia and Europe he cause in one night all the roman in his dominion to be slay in which massacre perish a hundred and fifty thousand as some have number but it can be conceive say m m p. Oros l. 6. cap. 2. orosius how many there be or how great be the grief both of the doer and sufferer when every one must betray his innocent guest and friend or hazard his own life no law of hospitality no religion of sanctuary or reverence of image be sufficient protection and no marvel if he spare not his enemy when n n cap. 5. he slay Exipodras and Homochares his son and after the poison and voluntary death of monyma his wife Statira and Roxane his daughter his son Pharnaces like to taste of the same cup win to his part his father army send against he with which he pursue his father so hot that he have denounce a heavy curse upon he enter among his wife concubine and daughter and give they poison pledge they in the same liquor which his body accustom to his antidote easy over-came and therefore be fain to entreat another to open a bloody passage for that his cruel soul a man say orosius of all man most superstitious always have with he philosopher and man expert in all art now threescore and fourteen year old the religion in Pontus be little differ from the greek we read of the sacrifice of this king to Ceres and to jupiter in which the king bring the first wood to the fire he pour also thereon honey milk wine oil and after make a feast in honour of Neptune they drown chariot draw with four white horse with which it seem they will have he ease himself in his sea-voyage o o ortel in Parerg dom. nig. Asiae com. 1. at the mouth of Pontus be the temple of jupiter jasus call and nigh thereto a promontory sacred to Diana sometime a island join to the continent by a earthquake hereabout be the cave Acherusium who bottomless bottom be think to reach to Hell I may in the next place set down Paphlagonia Paphlagonia which as it fare with such as have mighty neighbour can scarce find her proper limit some p p maginus Gramay Strab. l 12. epitome in Strab. reckon it to Galatia before describe and sometime Pontus have share it and either the force of arm or bounty of emperor have assign it at other time to Phrygia Cilicia or other part the bound thereof be thus deliver Pontus confine on the north on the east the river halys on the south Phrygia and Galatia on the west Bythinia of the people hereof call heneti some q q maginus derive the veneti of Italy they now call it Roni it have the name Paphlagonia of paphlagon the son of Phineus the mount Olgasys be very high and in the same be many paphlagonian temple Sandaracurgium be another mountain make hollow by the Metal-miners which be wont to be slave redeem from capital sentence who here exchange that speedy death for one more linger so deadly be the Alpha and Omega the beginning and end of this idol of the world which the spaniard have verify in the west by the destruction of another world vitrwius tell of a fountain in Paphlagania as it be mix with wine whereof they which drink without other liquor prove drunken the heptacometae and Mossynoeci inhabit about those part r r Coel. rhod. l. 18. c. 30. a people of that beastly disposition that they perform the most secret work of nature in public view these be not so much notorious for be worse than beast as their neighbour the tibareni tibareni for surpass in justice other man they will not war on their enemy but will faithful before relate unto he the time place and hour of their fight whereas the Mossynoeci use to assault stranger that travel by they very treacherous they have also a venemous kind of honey grow out of their tree with which they beguile and slay three troop of Pompey the Tabareni observe one strange fashion that when the woman be deliver of a child her husband lie in and keep his chamber the woman officious attend he a custom observe at this day among the brasilian chap. 16 of Asia now call Sarcum this region in the strict sense be a particular province of the lesser Asia be a a ptol. l. 5. c. 2. maginus Ortelius in Parergo bound on the west with part of propontis and Hellespont the aegean icarian and mertoan sea on the south with the rhodian sea Lycia and Pamphilia on the east with Galatia on the north with Pontus and Bythinia and part of propontis in which space be contain Phrygia Caria and both Mysias aeolis jonia Doris Lydia some b b Vadianus circumcise from hence both Phrygia and Mysia allege the authority of c c act. 16.6 saint Luke but in the apocalypse chap. 1. these part be also add and 1. pet. 1.1 Phrygia Phrygia be divide into the great which lie eastward and the less call also Hellespontiaca and Troas and of some Epictetus the great Phrygia have not many city here stand Midaium the royal seat of Midas and Apamia the phrygian metropolis d d plin. l. 5. c. 29. Phrygia be call of the river Phryx which divide it from Caria Herodotus tell that e e Herodot l. 2. the phrygian be account the most ancient of all people for the trial whereof Psammetichus king of Egypt have shut up without society of any human creature two child cause only goat to be admit to suckle they who after long time pronounce which they have learn of the goat but because that with the phrygian signify bread therefore they account the phrygian first author of mankind before Deucalion flood Nannacus f f suidas be report to reign there and foresee the same to have assemble his people into the temple with supplication and prayer hence grow the proverb to say a thing be from Nannacus which be exceed old many antiquity be tell of their god who theology thus be recite g g eus praep. l. 2.4 by Eusebius the phrygian tell that meon be the most ancient king of Phrygia the father of cybele who invent the pipe call Syrinx and be name the mountain mother belove of Marsyas but when as attis have raise her belly her father slay he and his fellow she enrage with madness run up and down the country Marsyas roam with she who after be overcome in a musical contention of Apollo be slay quick after these thing do Apollo love cybele with who she wander to the hyperborean and by his command the body of attis be bury and cybele obtain divine honour hence it be that even to this day the phrygian bewail the young man death in pessinus a city of Phrygia after reckon to Galatia they erect a temple to attis and cybele after the death of Hyperion the child of Coelus part the kingdom among they the most famous of which be Atlas and Saturn to the first of which befall the part adjoin to the ocean he have great skill in astronomy of his seven daughter be procreate many of the god and hero and of Maia the elder and jupiter be Mercury beget Saturn the son of Atlas be covetous and wicked marry cybele his sister and have by she jupiter they tell of another jupiter brother of Coelus and king of Crete but there and here they be so entangle with fable that the least inquiry have most ease and no less certainty this cretan hold the empire of the world and have ten son who they call curetes his sepulchre they show to this day Saturn the brother of Atlas reign in Italy and Sicilia till jupiter his son dispossess he who prove a severe prince to the wicked and bountiful to the good thus much Eusebius of the phrygian divinity out of their own legend the mystery whereof he after unfold other tale they have as that Minerva kill there a fire breathe beast of Philemon and Baucis and such like mention by the poet Meander make war with the pessinuntians vow for sacrifice whatsoever he first meet after he return with conquest which he perform on Archelaus his son overcome h h Gramay say one piety with piety impious be that piety which destroy humanity and devilish cruelty both in the idol and idolater as appear also in the event if our story be true the father reward such piety with great impiety on himself and cast himself into the river leave his name thereunto the like be tell of the river Sagaris and Scamander Hercules when he go with the argonaut to Colchos come on shore on Phrygia to amend his oar and be thirsty send his sweeting Hylas to the river for water who fall therein be drown whereupon he leave his companion wander in the wood bemoan his Hylas about these time Tantalus i i a mirror for miser live in these part a man beside other vice exceed covetous not spare the temple of the god hence arise the fable that he be punish in hell with perpetual hunger and thirst while pleasant water and dainty fruit do offer themselves to his mouth but when he will have taste they flee from he so indeed do Mammon torment his follower make they to want as well that which they have as that which they have not the medicine be the increaser of the disease as when fire be quench with oil like gardener ass lade with good herb a burden to they food for other themselves glad to feed on thistle and how many Tantali do we daily see endure a hunger and thirst in the midst of their abundance a monstrous and unnatural sickness to hunger after that which they have yet can yet will not feed on a Dropsy-thirst save that they dare not drink that which they have and thirst unworthy of that life which he sacrifice to that which never have the dignity to be mortal unworthy that body which he pine with plenty or that soul which he damn for a fancy of have or that nature of man which he confine to the Gally to the mine in the service of a piece of earth unworthy of the name of christian who Christ be to one of his k k judas mat. 26.15 forefather worth thirty penny but now this will sell he for three half penny for a piece of bread yea like Aesop dog for the shadow of a piece of bread unworthy of any thing save that his covetise to be his tempter his tormentor his fury his devil once pity it be that he prize a halter so dear else will he rid the world of a burden and himself of his worthless life but whither have Tantalus carry i take heed reader he do not carry thou further or thou he beyond word they say he will have sacrifice his son Pephilops have not divine power relieve he thou be like to find he Tantalus still what the poet tell of ganymedes every one know of Niobe famous for her son and daughter which she lose all in one day of Midas another Tantalus who covetousness become a new alchemy l l the fable be that Midas have his wish grant wish all that he toucht may become gold and so his meat be gold and starve he to turn all into Gold and how do this twofold alchemy gull the world the one make with vain hope a rich estate become poor the other with full hap make all gold but the man only the roman m m la Nove discourser of the pope bull alchemist be master of that art which the former profess that turn so easy a little lead into so much good gold only the wiseman wise in the latter to be master of himself and his wealth not a slave to passion or pelf and yet Midas in a public calamity happen by a earthquake which swallow up house warn by a oracle to cast into those gape jaw of the earth that which be most precious hurl therein much treasure what can he think more precious and how much more easy will many a Midas have hurl in himself but the earth not yet satisfy will not close up her mouth till his son anchurus esteem man to be most precious leap in and the reconcile element receive a altar in witness of his haughty courage there be many phrygian king name Midas the phrygian sacrifice to the river Meander and Marsius they place their priest after death upon a stone ten cubit high they n n stobaeus do not swear or force other to a oath they be much addict to divination by bird Macrobius o o macrob. l. 1. 21. apply their tale of cybele and Atis to the sun Silenus be reckon among the phrygian deity who p p goropij Becces Goropius ferch out of Scythia and make he Midas his master in geography and philosophy the diligent attendance of the scholar be occasion to that fable of his long ear the learning of the master give he divine honour in Phrygia on the river sangarius stand Gordie or as arrianus p p ar. l. 2. call it gordian of which he report that when Alexander come thither he have a great desire to see the tower in which be the palace of gordius and Midas that he may behold the shaft or beam of gordius his cart and the indissoluble knot fasten thereto for great be the fame thereof among the next adjoin people that gordius be one of the ancient inhabitant of Phrygia have a little place of ground and two yoke of ox the one he use to the plough the other to the wain or cart. and while he be one day at plough a eagle sit upon the yoke and there continue till evening gordius astonish at so ominous a token go to the telmissean soothsayer for to the telmissean both man and woman this divine science seem hereditary and there meet with a virgin who he acquaint with this accident she counsel he to return thither and to sacrifice to jupiter the king for the augury be good gordius entreat her company with he that she may instruct he how to sacrifice which she grant unto he and afterward herself also in marriage these have betwixt they Midas a proper stripling now a sedition happen among the phrygian they consult with the oracle which answer that a cart shall bring they a king that shall end that sedition and while they be muse on this answer Midas come ride in his cart with his parent into the throng and be by the phrygian forthwith acknowledge king the car in memory thereof be hang up to jupiter in the tower or temple of jupiter qu. curt. l. 3. so Curtius call it with thanks for that eagle Jupiter bird send before to foresignify thus much to his father the knot fasten unto it be of the bark of the cornel or dogtree weave with such art that a man can neither find beginning nor end thereof bruit it be among the phrygian that he which can untie it shall be lord of all Asia Alexander turn it to and fro and with vain curiosity search how to loosen it at last with his sword chap it in sunder lest he shall otherwise leave some scruple in the heart of his soldier thus far arrianus in the lesser Phrygia of a hill therein call idaea of a river xanthe of the king Troas dardania etc. stand that eye of Asia and star of the east call Ilium or TROY of which all that I can say will but obscure the renown and glory which all heathen antiquity have by a universal consent of poesy and history give to it and what greeke or latin author have not mention her ruin and do exequies to her funeral Dardanus be name her founder after who and his succeed son Ericthonius tros rule who erect the temple of Pallas and re-edify the city leave thereto his name to he succeed ilus and after he his son Laomedon who Neptune and Apollo help in repair the city which Hercules sack and Priamus restore but to a great loss by the grecian ten year siege and one night spoil Dares r r Dares dictys scal. in ep. cas istiusmodi (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) etc. trad. dis. l. 5. Homer eurip. virg. ovid. horat. Seneca Silius Statius claud. etc. and dictys suppose historian of those time beside Homer and the greek and latin his follower have more then enough relate the particular Hesione sister to Priamus be by Hercules give to Telamonius for the first enter the wall her do Priam demand in vain by Antenor and aeneas his ambassador Paris otherwise call Alexander one of the fifty child of Priamus and Hecuba be send in the same business and return with Helena the wife of Menelaus a lacedaemonian prince who consult with the other grecian lord for her recovery first Diomedes and Ulysses be send to entreat after a thousand sail of ship to force her restitution which after a tedious war with much loss on the one side and utter ruin on the other be effect the league of the greek be make by Calchas who divide a boar in two part cause the prince with their sword draw and be sprinkle with blood to pass between swear destruction to Priamus and the trojan the like rite of solemn covenant we read observe by GOD s s gen. 15.15 himself and by the t t jerem. 34.18 jew the religion of Phrygia and Troy and all these grecian part of Asia be little if little differ from the greek superstition of which in our europe-discovery we be to relate therefore adiourn a large discourse till then we be a little to mention here their devotion in Troy be the temple of jupiter at who altar Priam be slay of jupiter of juno Apollo Minerva Mercury Neptune to Neptune they which sail do sacrifice a black bull and ox who hinder part be burn the innards they taste ram and hog be sacrifice also to he to Mercury cleave tongue hurl into the fire to Venus on the hill Ida to Scamander to the nymph in cave to the dead also they sacrifice black sheep over a ditch or hole in the ground with wine water and flower think that the soul drink the blood they have whole flock sacred to the god untouched by man they observe augury thunder dream oracle of Apollo and other superstition the trojan virgin when they be to be marry bathe themselves a little before in Scamander use these word to the river take o Scamander my virginity this give occasion to one cimon to deflower callirrhoe have hide himself in the reed and upon that watchword lift up his Reedy-head and force his maidenhead which cause the cease of that foolish and superstitious custom but of all their superstition the most famous be their fatal Palladium a name give to all image which superstition believe not make with his hand be say to have fall from heaven a pessinus or as t t apollod l. 3. Apollodorus witness at Ilium at the prayer of ilus when he build it for he have a pied ox give he by the king of Phrygia and warn by he to build a city where that ox shall lie down follow he to this place where he build a city which he call of his own name Ilium and desire jupiter to send he some sign find this Palladium the next morning before his tent. some u u nat. com. l. 4. c. 5. say asius a philosopher make it by magical art Apollodorus add that it move up and down hold in the right hand a javelin in the left a distaff it be three cubit long Apollo oracle forewarn that that city shall never be take in who wall it be keep they hide it therefore in a more secret part of the tower that it shall not be public know make many other like it to deceive all future deceiver a woman-priest attend the holy thing in honour thereof keep fire continual burn it be unlawful with common hand or eye to touch or see it and therefore when ilus save it from flame the temple be on fire he be for his blind zeal punish with blindness of which soon after he recover by divine indulgence Ulysses steal it from they and thus perish that famous phrygian city if that may be say to perish which still continue far far more famous by Homer pen than Priam sceptre or Hector valour the ruin thereof be as yet very apparent according to bellonius 10 10 bel. l. 2. c. 6. a eyewitness his report the wall of the city yet stand the remnant of her decay building still with a kind of majesty entertain the beholder the wall of large circuit of great spongy black and hard stone cut four square there be yet to be see the ruinous monument of the turret on the wall they spend four hour sometime on horse and sometime on foot in compass the wall great marble tomb of ancient workmanship be see without the wall make chest-fashion and their cover yet whole there be also extant the ruinous shape of two great tower one in the top of the hill on the bend whereof the town stand the other in the bottom and another in the middle many great cistern make to teceive rain water be yet whole there be the ruin also of church build there by the sometime inhabit christian the soil about it be dry and barren the river so much chant Xanthus and Simois be small rille in summer quite dry as also Mela testify a late traveller y y George sandys lib. 1. say that they be not so contemptible as make by bellonius who perhaps mistake other for they there be sundry rivulet that descend from the mountain he add that these ruin be still ruin and bear not that form lessen daily by the turk who carry the pillar and stone unto Constantinople to adorn the building of the great bassa as they now do from cyzicus this Ilium who sepulchre only bellonius have see be not in that place where old Ilium stand but thirty furlong eastward if Strabo z z lib. 13. be receive yea it change the place and situation often and here at last abode by warning of the oracle which also now have his fate as well as Ilium a small town be this late Ilium have in it the temple of Pallas which Alexander in his time grace enrich the temple with offering and the place with name of a city with building and immunity after his victory over the persian he send they a favourable epistle with promise to build they a sumptuous temple and there to institute sacred game which Lysimachus after his death in great part perform people it from the neighbour city the roman also plant there a colony when as Lysimachus afore have wall it and build the temple fimbria in the war against Mithridates have treacherous slay the consul Valerius Flaccus and seek to enter upon denial assail it and in the eleven day enter by force glory that he have do as much in eleven day as Agamemnon with a thousand sail of greek have do in ten year not so much reply a ilian for Hector be not here to defend the city Caesar emulous of Alexander attempt and derive his pedigree from julus confirm their former liberty add a new region to their territory Mela tell a strange wonder of the hill Ida soon after midnight they which look from the top thereof discern certain disperse fire which as the light approach be more unite and at last gather into one flame like a fire which by degree grow into a round and huge globe and then the degree diminish in quantity but in quality of like increase be at last take up into the chariot of the sun Achilles among the late ilian enjoy a temple and a tomb Patroclus also and Antiochus have their tomb to they all and to Aiax do the ilian sacrifice a honour deny to Hercules for sack their city a unjust quarrel if this yet may be a just excuse of their partial superstition thymbra be a field hard by through which slide thymbraeus disemboke itself into Scamander there where stand the temple of thymbraean Apollo arrianus b b lib. 1. report that Alexander sacrifice to protesilaus erect altar on his grave who be the first of the grecian that in the trojan war set foot in Asia as he have before in the strait of Hellespont offer a bull to Neptune and the sea-nymph pour a golden vial into the sea and in the place from whence he set sail and where he arrive he set up altar to jupiter Decensor to Pallas and to Hercules and be come to Ilium he sacrifice to trojan Pallas and fasten the arm which he use in her temple a rite which the Philistine c c 1. sam. 31.10 observe in Saul their enemy and David d d 1. sam. 22. 21. 9 with the armour of Goliath he take thence the armour sacred to the goddess monument till that day of the trojan war afterward the weapon e e Argeraspidae of his guard he f f Courtesan l. 2. appease also Priamus his ghost perform his exequies at the altar of jupiter Hircius so to reconcile he to Neoptolemus his house of which he by his mother descend he crown achilles his tomb call he happy g g o f rtunate young man who virtue f and so brave a trump thy noble act to sound Spencer ruin of Time who have Homer to blaze abroad his praise to the world in which he be great than great Alexander not far hence be the city and haven Priapus so call of the beastly God like to Orthanes and conisalus and Tyehon drunken god of the athenian this god or devil of more iniquity than antiquity be not know of Hesiod this region be call Adrastia h h Strab. l. 13. of king Adrastus who first build a temple of Nemesis call it Adrastia in the country adjoin be a oracle of Apollo actaeus and Diana who oratory be demolish the stone be carry to Parium where be build a altar famous for fairness and greatness of this Adastria be a temple at cyzicus this cyzicus be a city of mysia-minor for there be another Mysia call Maior according to Ptolemy i i ptol. l. 5 c. 2. division the former be call olympica the late by k k gal. l. 5. ortel Thesaur Galen Hellespontica there be another Mysia in Europe which Volateran distinguish call maesia some ascribe this cyzicus to Bythinia we listen not to umpire betwixt Geographers but to relate our history m m Appian in Mithridatico Gramay which tell that this city be renown for antiquity give by jupiter in dowry to Proserpina who therefore the inhabitant worship the greatness beauty law and other excellency of cyzicus let other show you their temple I can but stay to view with wonder n n Xiphilinus dione gram. plin. l. 36. c. 15. who pillar be measure four cubit thick fifty high each of one stone in which the whole building be of polish stone and every stone be join to his fellow with a thread o o or line of gold the image of jupiter be of ivory crown with a marble Apollo such be the beauty of the work and costliness of the matter that the earth whether with love seek to embrace it or with just hatred for the idolatrous curiosity swallow up both it and the city in a earthquake the like befall to philadelphia another mysian city one of the seven church p p Apoc. 3.7 to which John write and to Magnesia q q pius 2. Asia in the same region near to cyzicus be the hill Dyndima and thereon Cybel temple build by the argonaut who have also use a certain stone for a anchor which they fix sure at cyzicus with lead because it have often play the fugitive r r plin. l. 36. c. 15 call therefore the fugitive stone the cyzican tower yield a seven fold echo the mysian for their great devotion be call smoke-climber a fit name for all superstitious they have in honour the s s l. 6. ap. gra. nymph Brythia under colour of religion the parian cozen the lampsacen of a great part of their territory of this city be Priapus aforesaid a man monstrous in lust admirable in his plentiful issue hate of the man howsoever of the woman belove and by they exile to a wild life in the field till a grievous disease send among they cause they by warning of the dodonaean oracle to recall he fit servitor for such a god hence the tale of his huge genitals and of his Garden-deity offer to ravish a virgin at the time of her wedding he be sear by the bray of a ass a creature for this cause consecrate to sacrifice Lettuce most suitable to such lip a little hence stand abydus t t cor. agrip. Vande sc. c. 63. where be a famous temple of Venus in remembrance of their liberty recover by a harlot over against the same on Europe side be Sestus chant by the poet the guard of the Hellespont one of the key say bellonius of the turkish empire the castle be for that purpose well furnish the strait not above seven furlong over here do Xerxes join Asia to Europe by a bridge profess war not against the greek alone but against the element to mount Athos u u Herodot l. 7. do this mount atheos write his menace letter to the Hellespont he command three hundred stripe to be give and fetters to be cast in with revile speech for the breach of his new-made bridge which the sea disdain the stop of his passage and infringe his liberty have by tempest break in Mysia 10 10 Strab. l. 13. be that famous pinetree four and twenty foot in compass and grow entire threescore a ten foot from the root be divide into three arm equal distant which after gather themselves close into one top two hundred foot high and fifteen cubit Apollo Cillaeus have a temple dedicate to he at Cilla another be erect at chrysa to Apollo Smynthius and twenty furlong thence another to Diana another with a sacred cave at Andira to the mother of the god this cave reach under the earth to a hundred and thirty furlong Attalus reign in these part who furnish the library of Pergamus Pergamus with two hundred thousand volume for the writing whereof those parchment skin be invent therefore call to this day of this name Attalus be three of their king the last of which make the roman his heir here be that cruel edict of Mithridates publish to murder the roman whereby many drive to seek help of Aesculapius in his temple at Pergamus find he either unmerciful or unskilful to cure they although his physic-shop be in this city here be invent by king Attalus tapestry hang call of Aula his hall which be hang therewith here be also a yearly spectacle of the cockfight the mysian priest abstain from flesh and marriage they sacrifice a horse who inward part be eat before their vow southward from hence along the sea-coast trend aeolis whereunto adjoin Lydia Lydia call p p ortel thes. ancient Asia and the inhabitant Asiones it be call maeonia of Manes their first king who beget cotys and he attys and asius of who some say Asia take name camblete q q athen. l 10. c. 1. Xantho lydo a lydian king say athenaeus be so addict to gourmandize that in the night he do tear and eat his wife and find her hand in the morning in his mouth the thing be noise abroad he kill himself the same author tell r r lib. 12. c 4. of king andramyte that he make woman eunuch for his attendant that the lydian be so effeminate that they may not endure the sun to look upon they for which cause they have their shady bower that in a place therefore call impure they force woman and maiden to their lust which Omphale who have endure this violence come after to be their queen revenge by as unjust justice for assemble all the servant or slave she shut up among they their master daughter permit they to their pleasure she be daughter of jardanus of the posterity of attis who set Hercules his task to spin among her maid her husband Tmolus deflower Arriphe in Diana temple of he haply be name the hill Tmolus which yield golden sand to the river Pactolus Halyattis s s Herodot l. 1. be after a long succession the lydian king father to Croesus who sepulchre be a admirable monument be at the bottom stone else where earth build by man and woman slave and hire person it be six furlong in compass and two hundred foot and a thousand and three hundred foot broad all the daughter of the lydian prostitute themselves and thereby get their live and dowry these be the first inventor of coin money the first huckster and pedlar the first player at die ball chess in the time of attys the first drive to this shift by famine which when they know not otherwise to redress they devise these game pass the time of every second day with these pastime then beguile their empty belly and according to their ominous invention now not so much the companion as the harbinger and forerunner of emptiness although some contrary to their first original use they to ease their fullness thus do the lydian live if Herodotus be believe two and twenty year eat and play by course till they be fain to diminish their multitude by send colony under tyrrhenus unto that part of Italy which t t Silius l. 4. of he receive that name here on the wind stream of Meander or nigh thereto be situate Magnesia not that by harmus who inhabitant worship the Dyndimene mother of the god but the old city and temple perish and a new build the temple be name of Diana Leucophryna exceed that of Ephesus in workmanship but exceed in greatness and multitude of oblation and yet this be the great in Asia except the ephesian and dindymene of tralles a neighbour city be metrodorus the priest of jupiter Laryssaeus in the way from thence u u Strab. l. 14. to Nyssa be a village of the Nyssaen acharaca there be the Plutonium compass with a grove and the temple of Pluto and juno and the cave Charonium admirable to the view over-hanging the grove which it threaten seem to devour it they say that sick man which be devote to those god go thither and in a street near the cave stay with such as be expert in those mystery who sleep for they inquire the course to cure they by dream these invoke divine remedy many time lead they into the cave where abide many day with fast and sweat they sometime intend to their own dream by the counsel of the priest to other this place be pestilent and inaccessible here be yearly festival solemnize and then most of all be these devotion practise youth and stripling naked and anoint draw or lead a bull into the same cave with great speed who fall anon dead thirty furlong beyond Nyssa be a festival place solemn frequent by the neighbour inhabitant which be say to have a cave dedicate to the same god and reach to Achataca after Omphale Hercules posterity which he have by she reign carry for their royal ensign that Battle-ax which Hercules have take from Hippolita the Amazon candaules weary of the burden give it to one of his courtier to bear interpret a ominous presage of that which happen he think it not enough happiness to enjoy the beauty of his wife unless some other eye be witness of his possession place Gyges his friend where he may see unseen happy the occasion of that 10 10 cic. off. 3. tale of Gyges ring wherewith he go invisible to take view of his wind nakedness but be perceive by she at his departure she put he soon after to his choice whether he will enjoy what he have see and the kingdom for dowry without other jointure than candaules blood or will there himself be slay easy to judge his choice by which Hercules his race fail of he descend Croesus who history be know he do Cyrus overthrow y y Herodot l. 1. and have set he on a pile of wood to burn he who then cry Solon Solon Solon which Cyrus not understand cause he to be ask why he so call he answer that sometime drunken with wealth and pleasure he think himself happy but then be teach by Solon not to judge any happy till his end which lesson he now learn to his good cost to his good indeed for Cyrus for this pardon his life now the second time save which a little before a soldier in take the city have bereave have not natural affection in his son before this time dumb violent enforce nature to loosen the instrument of speech and proclaim it be the king thus have the oracle prophesy that the day will be dismal and disastrous to the father when the son shall speak whereto he have before in vain seek help of God and man and he can speak free all his life after and this be all that Croesus by his sumptuous z z Croezus have be exceed liberal to Apollo who delude his votary with riddle as in our persian relation you may read present and superstitious devotion can get of Apollo which have foretell he what he himself have no power to avert or alter not to speak of his enigmatical answer snare not instruction nocument not document unto he chap. 17 of jonia and other country in that chersonesus Jonia Jonia be situate on the icarian sea over against the island Chios the inhabitant be account athenian colony whereas Athens may rather seem to be jonian deduce their name from a a coelius rhod. lib. 7. 10. Sard. l. 3. jon the son of Creusa and xuthus but more probable be b b ar. Montan. fr. junius etc. their opinion which derive they from javan as be c c lib. 1. c. 8. before observe by we of the jonian in Asia be reckon ten principal city in the continent Miletus myus priene Ephesus Colophon Lebedus teos clazomenae phocaea erythraea beside Chios and Samos in the island to which they impart their name the jonian have their common sacrifice and ceremony at the promontory of Mycale general by all the jonian dedicate to Neptune heliconius erect there unto he a temple the place be call panionium and the feast in which those sacrifice be offer Panionia to those twelve city d d Strab. l. 14. Strabo mention the founder of they add also Smyrna and say that they be call to the panionian solemnity by the ephesian who be sometime call smyrnaean of Smyrna the Amazon who be name the founder of Ephesus against those smyrnaean the sardian war and will on no condition raise their siege except the smyrnaean matron be permit to their lust e e Gramay the maid-servant of one Philarchus among they devise that those of her condition may in their mistress habit be send to save their master bed which be accomplish as for EPHESUS EPHESUS the place be design by oracle for the building thereof which warn they there to build where a fish and a boar shall show they it happen that as certain fisherman at the sacred fountain Hypeleus be broil their fish one of they leap with the coal into a heap of straw which thereby be fire and a boar which lie cover therein leap out run from thence as far Trachea and there fall down dead of a wound which they give he grunt out his last gasp where Pallas after be honour with a temple great than Pallas and her swinish devotion be that f f act. 19.17 28. great Diana of the ephesian so proclaim in the madness of their zeal and that image which come down from jupiter which all Asia and the world worship this image as g g plin. l. 19 c. 40 Pliny write be think by some to be of ebony but mutianus thrice consul write that it be of the vine never change in seven alteration or restitution which the temple receive it have many hole fill with spikenard the moisture whereof may fill and close up the rift the door of the temple be of cypress h h Solinus c. 49. which after four hundred year be as fresh as if they have be new the roof of the temple be cedar the image which superstition suppose come from jupiter be make say the same mutianus by one Canetia the temple repute one of the world seven wonder be first the building of the amazon as solinus affirm but i i pausanias l. 7. pausanias reprove Pindarus for affirm that the amazon have build it when they make their expedition against Theseus and the athenian for at that time say he the woman go from Thermodon sacrifice to the ephesian Diana in their way as they have do before in the time of Hercules and of Bacchus not the amazon therefore but one Croesus of that country and Ephesus suppose the son of the river cayster found it of he the city also receive her name about the temple dwell both diverse other suppliant and woman of the amazonian race these be spare by androclus the son of Codrus who here plant his athenian colony and chase out the leleges which before be the inhabitant who be slay in this expedition his sepulchre remain in pausanias his time on which be set a man arm Xerxes when he burn all other temple in Asia spare this uncertain whether for admiration or devotion most certain a bootless clemency for k k Lucian Herostratus to lengthen the memory of his name with detestation of his wickedness fire this temple on that day in which Alexander be bear at Pella Diana forsooth who in her Midwife-mystery be call also juno Lucina in her officious care to help Olympias in her travel be then absent it be after restore to a great excellency by Dinocrates or as Strabo term he Chermocrates who be also the architect of Alexandria some l l n. perot cornucope Munst come l. 5. plin. l. 16. c 40. affirm that two hundred and twenty year be spend in build this temple by all Asia Pliny say four hundred it be build on a marish because of earthquake which be say to be more common in Asia then other part be found on coal the second foundation wool there be therein a hundred twenty seven pillar the work of so many king threescore foot in height and six and thirty of they very curious wrought the temple be four hundred twenty five foot long two hundred and twenty broad of the ephesian hold in such veneration that when Croesus have begird they with a straight siege m m Heredot l. 1. they devote their city to their goddess tie the wall thereof with a rope to the temple it be enrich and adorn with gift beyond value it be full of the work of Praxiteles and Thraso the priest be eunuch n n Strab. l. 14. call Megalobyzi great honour and have with they sacred virgin some o o Gramay call these or else another order of Diana priest and Essenae that be good fellow after the appellation of this bad age which by yearly course have a peculiar diet assign they and come in no private house all the jonian resort to Ephesus p p Thucyd. l. 3. at Diana festival which with dance and other pomp they solemnize with their wife and child as they have do before at Delos the temple have privilege of sanctuary which Alexander extend to a furlong Mithridates to a flightshot Antonius add part of the city but Augustus disannul the same that it shall no long be a harbour for villain this the roman find say a q q Asia roman pope relate this history among who be so many sanctuary as cardinal house in which thief and ruffian have patronage which make the city otherwise quiet and noble a den of thief a lake name Selinusius and another which flow into it be Diana patrimony which by some king be take from she be after by the roman restore and when the publican have seize the profit Artimedorus be send in ambassage to Rome where he recover they to Diana for which cause they dedicate to he a golden image in the temple in the midst of the lake be the king chapel account the work of Agamemnon Alexander r r Arrian l. 1. not only restore the ephesian to their city which for his sake they have lose and change the government into a popular state but bestow also the tribute which before they have pay to the persian upon Diana and cause they to be slay which have rob the temple and have overthrow the image of Philip his father therein and such of they as have take sanctuary in the temple he cause to be fetch out and stone while he stay at Ephesus he sacrifice to Diana with very solemn pomp all his army be arrange in battle array but this temple of Diana together with their Diana be perish but never shall that truth perish which Paul write in his epistle to they for observe which by Christ himself in another epistle write by s. John they be commend Apoc. 2. and which in a council there hold be confirm against the heresy of Nestorius and celestius but alas that golden candlestick as be threaten be now almost by greekish superstition and turkish tyranny remove thence a bishop with some remnant of a church still continue the ephesian be observer of curious art which not only Luke s s act. 19.19 mention but the proverb also confirm t t suidas so they call the spell whereby they make themselves in wrestle and other conflict invincible the sum of those magical book burn by they Luke rate at 50000. piece of silver which budaeus sum at 5000. crown bud. de ass l. 5. the many temple u u agrip. de v.s. c. 63. of Venus at Ephesus be not worth memory memorable be the history of a ephesian maid 10 10 Caelius lect antiq. l. 8. c. 13. who when Brennus invade Asia promise he her love which he much desire and withal to betray the city to he if he will give she all the jewel and attire of the woman which the soldier be command to do who heap their gold so fast upon the damsel according to their command that she be therewith cover and slay the Asiarchae which Luke y y Acts 19 name Beza z z Beza annot. say be certain priest whole office it be to set forth public play and game in honour of their god as also be the syriarchae the ephesian a a athenaeus l. 12. 9 as all other jonian be much addict to niceness and sumptuousness of attire for which and other their delicacy they grow into a proverb the jonian have other place and temple among they famous for devotion and antiquity such as no where else be to be see as the temple and oracle of Apollo at myus b b Pausan achaica lib. 7. have a small arm of the sea who water by the mean of Meander fail the soil bring forth a innumerable multitude of flea which force the inhabitant to forsake their city and with bag and baggage to depart to Miletus and in my time say Pausanias nothing remain of myus in myus but Bacchus temple the like befall to the Atarnitae near to Pergamus the persian burn the temple of Pallas at Phocea and another of juno in Samos the remain whereof be worthy admiration the erythraean temple of Hercules and of Pallas at Prienae that for antiquity this for the image the image of Hercules be say to be bring in a ship which come without man help to the cape where the chian and erythraean labour each to bring the same to their own city but one Phormio a fisherman of erythraea be warn in a dream to make a rope of the hair cut off from the head of the erythraean matron by which their husband shall draw the same to the town the woman will not yield but certain thracian woman which have obtain their freedom grant their hair to this purpose to who therefore this privilege be grant to enter into Hercules temple a thing deny to all other the dame of erythraea the rope still remain and the fisherman which before be blind recover his sight in this town also be Minerva temple and therein a huge image of wood sit on a throne hold with both hand a distaff there be the grace and hour form of white marble at Smyrna be the temple of Aesculapius and nigh to the spring of the river meles a cave in which they say Homer compose his poem thus much Pausanius the ionian c c Sealiger in euseb chron. animad. letter be more resemble the latin than the present greek be and be then common as in our first book be show in our phoenician relation at Miletus a mad frenzy have once possess their virgin where by it come to pass that they in great multitude hang themselves neither cause appear nor remedy needs most they go who the devil drive who d d Polyan lib. 3. stratagem neither the sweetness of life bitterness of death tear entreaty offer custody of friend can move modesty detain from proceed in this immodest butchery and which be more to be wonder at a posthume modesty which can not be bear till they be dead for a law be make that the naked body of such as have thus strangle themselves shall be draw through the street which contumely though it be but a gnat to those camel which with the halter they swallow yet strain they at it and it can not be digest but stay their fury before the trojan war be Hercules famous at Militus the jonian be subject to the assyrian after that to the egyptian next to the lydian persian and the other empire which successive follow from Ephesus to Colophon be seventy furlong this town grow into a proverb for e e Eras ad. though their excellency in horse-manship they usual make the victory otherwise doubtful to be certain on that side which entertain they before Colophon be the grove of Apollo-Clarius and here die Calchas that famous wizard for grief that when upon his demand Mopsus have certain answer how many pig be in the belly of a sow by he propound Calchas can not do the like when Mopsus ask of the number of fig grow on a figtree thereby not far from hence be Etythrae the town of one of the sibyl which live in the time of Alexander of which name also there be other in other place and time renown for their prophesy beyond clazomenae be the temple of Apollo and Smyrna famous in those blind time Apocal. 2.9 for the temple and statue of Homer since for the prelacy of polycarpus who our lord himself so high commend Pliny f f plin. l. 7. c. 4. ap. de l. Dis. mag. and Maiol d. 6. write of one in Smyrna which be a maid change her sex and become a stripling of which sort he affirm he have see one in Africa then live when he write which on her marriage day sustain that alteration Phlegon relate of Philotis another smyrnaean maid thus make a male Pontanus tell the like of a woman at caieta marry to a fisher four year and of another the wife of Antonio spensa twelve year which after marry a wife and have child and in late time Spain have yield two such example of which I listen not to play the philosopher whether they be imperfect male or perfect hermaphrodite but to hold on our asian journey neleus build Miletus who also erect the altar at Possidium the milisian oracle be sacred to Apollo Didymaeus g g mela. herm. barb. among the branchidae who betray the treasure of their god to Xerxes the burner of their temple and therefore for fear of punishment follow he after his flight afterward the milesian build a temple which for the exceed greatness remain without roof compass with dwelling-house and a grove adorn sumptuous with gift of ancient workmanship here be the legend frame of branchus and Apollo who they call Ulios and artemis of heal near unto the temple of Neptune at Possidium be heraeum a old temple and oratory after convert into a storehouse but then also retain diverse chapel full of old work as be also a court-yard without from whence when Antonius have take three colossus the work of miro stand on one basis Augustus place there again Pallas and Hercules but translate jupiter to the Capitol and build he a chapel solmissus be not far from hence where the curetes or priest of jupiter dull the ear of juno with the sound of weapon while Latona be deliver here be many temple some old foam new the h h Dict. hist curetes or corybantes for so they be also term be a shave order of priest who ravish with a sacred fury play upon cymbal and dance shake their head to and fro draw other into the same rage of superstition these first begin their devotion at Ida a hill of Phrygia and after sail into Crete and here with their furious sound they deliver jupiter from Saturn gullet who have before covenant with Titan to kill all his male child while he can not by mean of their noise hear Jupiter cry Diodorus siculus write that Corybantus be the son of jason and Cybelo and with Dardanus bring into Phrygia the rite of the mother of the god and call his disciple in that sect corybantes Natalis come i i nat. co. l. 9 c. 7 traverse many opinion about their original and rite their dance be in armour the region of the dorian be almost round with the sea herein be Gnidus a city of name for the marble image of Venus and Halycarnassus the country of Herodotus and Dionysius famous historian and of Mausolus who sepulchre Mala. l. 1. c. 16. erect by Artemisia his wife and sister be account one of the world seven wonder in the suburb of stomalymne be the temple of Aesculapius of great reputation and riches in it be Antigonus of Apelles workmanship there be also Venus naked after dedicate to Caesar at Rome as the mother of that generation by Augustus near to Bargolia be a temple of Diana my another city of Caria have many public building and fair temple among the rest two of jupiter surname Osogo in the one and in the other Labrandenus of labranda a village a little off which have a ancient temple of jupiter much frequent the way lead thither be call sacred pave sixty furlong through which their procession pass in pompous solemnity the noble of the citizen be ordain priest which function dure with their life there be a three temple of jupiter carius common to all the carian of which also the lydian and mysian be partaker Strabo report of k k lib. 24. two temple at Stratonica one at lagina sacred to Hecate where be celebrate yearly solemnity the other near the city of jupiter Chrysaoreus common to all the carian whither they resort to sacrifice and to consult of common affair which their assembly be call chrysaorean in Caria be alabanda a city of no great note except for that notorious impious and impudent flattery of they in build a temple to ROME and appoint anniversary game to be there celebrate in honour of this new goddess that city since the mother of whoredom to the christian world even then receive without scorn of the giver or shame of the present the title of deity they be the word of a worthy l l S.W.R. hist of the w. l. 5. c. 6. @. 6. Lydia historian of we at the gift of such a rascal city as alabanda Lydia call also m m Aelian lib. 4. Strabo lib. 13 maeonia be a rich country who mother city be Sardis the royal seat of Croesus wash by golden Pactolus where idleness be a special fault and punish by the Law five mile from the city be a lake call colous where be the temple of Diana Coloena very religious account of wherein on their festival ape be report to dance the region call burn stretch itself here about the space of five hundred furlong mountainous stony and black as if it be of some burn want tree altogether vine except which yield a very pleasant wine here be another Plutonium at hierapolis over against Laodicea it be a hole in the brow of a hill so frame that it may receive the body of a man of great depth below it be a square trench of half a acre compass so cloudy and dark that the ground can scarce be see the air be not hurtful to they which approach but within it be deadly Strabo put in sparrow which present die but the geld priest call Galli may approach to the mouth and look in and dive in as long as they can hold their breath without harm but not without sign of work passion whether of divine inspiration or reluctation of the natural force no less marvelous than the damp of the air be the harden quality of the water which be hot do harden themselves into a kind of stone n n as strange be that which be report of the water of the lake tatta that if a rope be draw through it or a bird touch it with her wing they be kern with salt Warner mention the like in Hungary and acosta in Peru those Galli here mention with priest of cybele so call of Gallus a river in Phrygia o o warn hungariae the water whereof temperate drunken do exceed temper the brain and take away madness but be suck in large cause madness these priest drink hereof unto madness in that fury geld themselves and as their beginning so be their proceed also in madness in the execution of their rite shake and wheel their head like madman Volateran p p volat. l. 10. out of Polyhistur report that one Gallus the companion of attys both geld impose this name on the river before call teria of cybele and attys we have speak before I add that after some this attys be a phrygian youth which when he will not listen to rhea in her amorous suit geld himself so consecrate his priesthood unto rhea or cybele other q q Natal com. lib 9 cap. 5. affirm that she prefer he to that office first have vow perpetual chastity and break his vow be punish with madness in which r r macr. sat. l. 1. cap. 21. call he Attinis and apply this as the tale of Venus and Adonis to the sun and earth in the winter cybele be draw with lion which signify the influence of the heaven attinis they purtray with his rod the mark of his power and a pipe note the wind cause by the sun their mourn end on the eight kalend of April the first day in which the sun make the day long than the night they solemnize the feast call Hilaria see lib. 1. c. 17. he dismember himself and will also have kill himself but that by the compassionate goddess he be turn into a pinetree that the fable this the history that these geld priest wear also long womanish attire play on timbrel and cornet sacrifice to their goddess the nine day of the moon at which time they set the image of the goddess on a ass and go about the village and street beg with the sound of their sacred timbrel corn bread drink and all necessary in honour of their goddess as they do also in the temple beg money in her name with some musical instrument and be therefore call Matragyrtae thus do the priest of Corona also beg for the maintenance of their goddess with promise of good fortune to their liberal contributor Lucian in his relate the like knavery of the priest of Syria concern his image Albricus thus purtray it a virgin sit in a chariot adorn with variety of gem and metal she be call mother of the god and giant these giant have serpentine foot one of which number be Titan who be also the sun who retain his deity for not join in conspiracy against the god with his brethren this chariot be draw with lion she wear on her head a crown fashion like a Tower near she be paint attys a naked boy who in jealousy she geld Macrobius apply this to the sun s s boc Genealog deor. lib. 2. Boccace to the earth mother indeed of the ethnic deity which be earthly sensual devilish who add to that former description of Albricus a sceptre in her hand her garment embroider with branch and herb and the Galli her geld attendant with trumpet the interpretation whereof they which will may read in he as also in Phornutus fulgentius and other with many other particular of her legend Claudian call she both cybele and Cybelle which name stephanus think she receive of a hill of that name in Phrygia as do hesychius likewise so be she call Dyndimena of the hill Dindymus I can weary the reader with long narration out of pausanias Arnobius lilius Gyraldus and other touch these thing but in part we have before show they in our narration of Adonis in Phoenicia and of the syrian goddess to which Phornutus refer this and when we come to a large handle of the grecian idolatry we shall find more fit occasion it be now high time to leave this proper call Asia and to visit Lycia wash by the sea two hundred mile wherein the mount Taurus arise hence stretch itself eastward under diverse appellation unto the indian sea they be govern by common council of three and twenty city till the roman subdue they here be cragus a hill with eight promontory and a city of the same name from whence arise the fable of chimaera at the foot of the hill stand pinara wherein be worship Pandarus and a little thence the temple of Latona and not far off patara the work of Patarus beautify with a haven and many temple and the oracle of Apollo no less famous if Mela be believe for wealth and credit then that at Delphos the hill telmessus be here famous for southsaying and the inhabitant be account the first interpreter of dream here be chimaera a hill say to burn in the night pamphylia bear eastward from Lycia and now together with Cilicia of the turk be call Caramania herein be perga near whereunto on a high place stand the temple of Diana Pergaea where be observe yearly festival Sida have also in it the temple of Pallas there remain of this Chersonessus t t dom. Niger Armenia minor Armenia minor and Cilicia Armenia call also prima be divide from the great or Turcomania by Euphrates on the east it have on the west Cappadocia on the south Cilicia and part of Syria on the north the pontic nation it be sometime reckon a part of Cappadocia till the armenian by their invasion and colony alter the name as for their rite I find little difference but they either resemble the cappadocian or their armenian ancestor Cilicia Cilicia abut on the eastern border of pamphylia and be divide into Trachea and campestris now have in it few people many great and well furnish the chief city be Hamsa u u Strabo l. 14. sometime call Tarsus famous for the study of learning herein say Strabo surmount both Athens and Alexandria but most most famous for yield he to the world than who the whole world have not happy yield any more excellent that be mere a man that great doctor of nation who fill these country and all region from jerusalem even to illyricum now full of barbarism by preach and still fill the world by his writing with that truth which he learn not of man nor at Tarsus the great school of humanity nor at jerusalem the most frequent for divinity but of the spirit of truth himself who both be at first from heaven convert and after in the three heaven confirm in the same Strabo mention the temple and oracle of Diana sarpedonia in Cilicia where be inspire they give answer the temple of jupiter also at Olbus the work of Aiax from anchiale a Cilician city Alexander pass to solos where he sacrifice with praise to Aesculapius for recovery from a strong fever get before in the water of Cydnus and celebrate Gymnical and musical 10 10 ar. lib. 2. game the corycian and Triphonian den or cave be hold in much veneration among the cilician where they sacrifice with certain rite they have their divination by bird and y y oracle of the corycian den or cave so call of the town almost compass with the sea Mela z z Mela l. 1. c. 13 write that from the hill which ascend the space of ten furlong this cave or strange valley descend by degree the further the more spacious environ with a green circle of pleasant shady grove fill the eye and mind at once with pleasure and wonder there be but one passage into it and that narrow and rough which continue a mile and half under delightful shade the rill run here and there resound I know not what strange noise in those darken bower when they be come to the bottom another cave present present it self which terrify those that enter with the multiply sound of cymbal and uncouth minstrelsy and the light fail by degree it bring they into a dark vault where a river rise and have run a swift course in a short channel be again drunke up of the earth so soon die that stream which be yet immortal the earth deal with this that as some with their child beget and bear in darkness smother that breath which but even now from they they receive always bear and always barren there be a further passage but none dare view it possess with a superstitious fancy of the god inhabit that conceit present all thing to the mind as venerable and full of deity which to the sense be dreadful and full of horror beyond this be the Tryphonian always cover with a black mantle of darkness fabulous suppose the bed of Typhon and natural inveigh the natural life of whatsoever enter unto these thing which have be say of the temple priest and rite observe in Asia thus much may be add out of a a lib. 3. c. 15. sardus of their sacrifice the phrygian sacrifice swine blood this do the Galli priest of cybele and this do the bedlam votary to recover of their madness the Colophonian offer a dog to Enodia which be Hecate as do also the carian to Mars the phaselites in Pamphilia sacrifice fish to Caber the son of Vulcan and the lydian eel to Neptune the Cappadocian king in their sacrifice to jupiter stratioticus or on a high hill build a great fire the king and other bring wood thereto and after that another lesser which the king sprinkle with milk and honey and after fire it entertain those which be present with good cheer Peucer b b Peucerus tell of divination use in some part of Lycia betwixt myra and phellus there be a fountain full of fish by who form nature motion and feed the inhabitant use divination the same lycian in the grove of Apollo not far from the sea have a dry ditch call Dina in which the divine put in fish and ten gobbet of roast flesh fasten on spit with certain prayer after which the dry ditch become full of water and fish of all kind and form by which the priest observe their prediction and not far from hence at in Lycia be the fountain of Apollo Curius where the fish be three time call with a pipe assemble themselves and if they devour the meat give they it be interpret a good bode and happy presage if they strike away the same with their tail it be direful and dreadful at hierapolis in Lycia the fish in the lake of Venus be call by the temple-keeper present themselves endure to be scratch gilled and man hand to be put into their mouth they divine by lot six month of the year together at patara in Lycia in Apollo temple but Saturn have swallow his own child and time which bring forth these both god and religion have also consume they not leave any such memorial of they as may satisfy any curious searcher yet in relation of the greekish rite from which these for the most part have not much swerve you may expect a more full and ample discourse it be now time at last to rest our weary limb enough and more have the pilgrim tell you of the arabian desert of the monster Mahomet and his vicar the c c Calipha signify vicar scal. of this unlike likeness see fox brightman and other upon the Reuelat. caliph even in this title they will parallel Rome of their rapine answerable to their d d Sarak Theeuish name of their viperous offspring the turk and of the elder inhabitant of that asian tract let i here a little breathe i before I ascend the armenian hill of the armenian mede persian parthian scythian tartarian CHINOIS and of their religion the four book chap. i. of Armenia and Georgia and the neighbour nation slow hitherto have we proceed in the discovery of a part of Asia sometime the store sometime the want of convenient matter detain our pen in the one time the consumer of thing cause much time and pain to be spend in curious search that we may produce some light out of darkness in the other store of story and variety of vary author have dim our weak eye with multiplicity of light uncertain in so many tract and tractate where to begin and when to end now at last be we pass Euphrates into a country that often exalt itself as though it will pierce the sky and as often receive the due punishment of aspire pride be cast down into so many lowly valley and deject bottom the world which after the flood be repeople from hence still carry in the several age place people and man thereof the resemblance of her cradle now up now down in all variety and vicissitude of chance and change constant in unconstancy tread this armenian measure with unequal pace over hill and dale like itself only in unlikeness here noah ark settle and here must our ship hoist sail @. i. of the armenian and Turcomanians Armenia have a great part of Cappadocia and Euphrates on the west Mesopotamia on the south on the north part Colchis Iberia Albania on the east the caspian sea and Media part of this great Armenia be now call Turcomania the other part be contain in Georgia Ptolomey a a ptol. l. 5. c. 13 reckon in it principal mountain the moschici Paryarges or Pariedri Udacespes antitaurus Abos and the b b jun. in Annot. gen. 8. gordaei which the chaldean paraphrast call Kardu and q. Curtius Cordei Berosus Cordyes on these hill the ark rest whereof we have speak in the first book c c or Antonius armenius Haithon if we believe he of his own country where he be of royal lineage call this mountain Arath little differ from the scripture-appellation ararat and add that although in regard of abundance of snow always possess the top thereof none be able to go up thither yet there always appear in the top a certain black thing which the vulgar people esteem to be the ark perhaps it may be some cloud or mist which gross vapour do often cause on the top of high hill for before haithon day Benjamin Tudelensis tell that one Ghamar ben alchetab have take thence the remainder of the ark and therewith build a Ismaelitical Meschit and yet a man may herein doubt also for concern relic pretend such antiquity faith can find no foundation in such ruinous rubbish lib. 1. c. 8. and we have before show out of Berosus and nicolaus Damascenus of old and cartwright late travel what may be think thereof Armenia as Strabo d d lib. 11. affirm receive the name of one of jason companion which follow he in his navigation out of Harmenia a city of Thessaly between pherae and Larissa the wealth of this region appear when Ptolomey appoint Tigranes to bring in to the roman six thousand talent of silver he add voluntary beyond that sum to every soldier in the camp fifty dam of silver to every centurion a thousand to every deputy of a country and chiliarch a talon their religion must at first be that which Noah and his family profess after by time corrupt here e e pseudo Berosus lib. 3. say our Berosus Noah instruct his posterity in divine a human science and commit many natural secret unto writing which the scythian armenian commend to their priest only none else be suffer to see or read or teach they he leave also ritual book or ceremonial of the which he be term that be priest or bishop he teach they also astronomy and the distinction of year and month for which they esteem he partaker of divine nature and surname he Olybama and arsa that be the heaven and the sun and dedicate to he many city some say he remain at this day which bear these name and when he go from thence to govern cytim which now as be affirm they call Italy the armenian be much affect to he and after his death account he the soul of the heavenly body and bestow on he divine honour thus Armenia where he begin and Italy where he end do worship he and ascribe to he name heaven sun chaos the seed of the world the father of the great and less god the soul of the world move heaven and the creature and man the GOD of peace justice holiness put away hurtful thing and preserve good and for this cause both nation signify he in their writing with the course of the sun and motion of the moon and a sceptre of dominion persecute and chase away the wicked from among the society of man and with the chastity of the body and sanctimony of the mind the two key of religion and happiness they call also f f the wife of Noah Tidea the mother of all after her death Aretia that be the earth and esta that be the Fir because she have be queen of the holy rite and have teach maiden to keep the holy everlasting fire from ever go out Noah before he go out of Armenia have teach man husbandry more aim at religion and manner than wealth and dainty which provoke to unlawful thing and have late procure the wrath of god. and first of all man he find out and plant vine and be therefore call janus which to the aramaean sound as much as the author of wine thus far Berosus lib. 3. and in the four book he add that nymbrot the first Saturn of Babylon with his son jupiter Belus steal away those ritual or ceremonial book of jupiter Sagus and come with his people into the land Sennaar where he appoint a city and lay the foundation of a great tower a hundred thirty and one year after the flood but neither finish this nor found the other old janus when he go hence left Scytha with his mother araxa and some inhabitant to people Armenia be the first king thereof Sabatius be consecrate high priest from Armenia unto the bactrian all which space say he in our age be call Scythia in his five book he report that jupiter Belus possess with ambition of subdue the whole world close endeavour to make or take away Sabatius who be not able otherwise to escape his treachery flee away secret but Ninus the son of Belus pursue his father intent against Sabatius who substitute his son barzanes in his place and flee into Sarmatia and after from thence into Italy to his father janus barzanes be subdue by Ninus but to come to a author of better credit g g stra. l. 11. Strabo say the armenian and mede have in veneration all the temple of the persian but the armenian especial esteem the temple of h h Tanais a armenian goddess some term she Anaitis Tanais as erect they in other place so in Acilesina they dedicate unto they men-servant and woman-servant the most noble of that nation there dedicate shall I say or prostitute their daughter where after long prostitution with their goddess they be give in marriage none refuse such match how much can the shadow how little can the substance of religion persuade man to the image of Tanais or Anaitis be set up in her temple all of solid gold and when as Antonius war against the parthian this temple be rob the same i i Coel. rhodiq l. 18. c 29. go that he which first have lay sacrilegious hand on the spoil be smite blind and so disease that he die thereof but when Augustus be entertain of a ancient warrior at Bononia ask he of the truth of this report he answer thou now o emperor drink that blood for I be the man and whatsoever I have come by that booty this goddess be suppose to be the same with Diana a region of Armenia bear the same name Anaitis how bloody rite the armenian sometime use appear k k gramay Armen by the history of the river Araxes before call halmus borrow this late name of a king there reign to who in war betwixt he and the persian the oracle prescribe the sacrifice of his two fair daughter piety forbid what piety command and while the king will be a umpire between nature and the oracle which be the usual event in arbitrement he satisfy neither that the oracle may be fulfil he sacrifice two of noble birth of notable beauty that nature may not be wrong he wrong justice the true touchstone of true piety he spare his own and offer the daughter of Miesalcus but so he lose both his daughter by miesalcus revenge sword and himself in this river by himself drown Bacchus love Alphoesibaea a armenian damsel and while Tigris than if you believe the story call sollax be too cool a mediator between the two hot lover he swim over on a tiger back hence the fable of his metamorphosis into a tiger hence that name leave to the river Armenia be subdue to the persian by Cyrus one part thereof pay to the persian twenty thousand colt for yearly tribute l l Valeria max. l. 9 c. 11. sariaster son to Tigranes the armenian king conspire against his father the conspirator seal their bloody faith with a bloody ceremony they let themselves blood in the right hand and then drink it wonder that in such a treachery as immediate before the same author affirm of Mithridates his son that any man will help or that he dare importune the god no wonder that so bloody a seal be annex to such evidence the temple of baris mention by Strabo may happy be some monument of Noah descent by corruption of the word Lubar as before say m m antiq l. 1. c. 5 josephus out of nicolaus Damascenus call it baris with loss of the first syllable Iwenal accuse the armenian of sooth-saying and fortune-telling by view the innards of pigeon whelp and child his word be in sat. 6. armenius Commagenus that be a tender lover or rich legacy of childless rich man for your destiny the armenian wizard in hot lung do spy of pigeon or of whelp the innards handle or sometime bloody search of child mangle the mountain n n pius 2. of Armenia pay tribute unto many sea by Phasis and Lycus unto the pontic sea Cyrus and Araxes unto the caspian Euphrates and Tigris unto the red or persian sea these two last be famous for their yearly overflow the former of they arise amidst three other sea yet by the encroach violence of the beetle-browed hill enforce to a far long more intricate and tedious way before he can repose his weary wave the other for his swiftness bear the name of Tigris which with the mede signify a arrow Solinus cap. 40. say that it pass through the lake Arethusa neither mingle water nor fish quite of another colour from the lake it dive under o o Simocatta have Melabasus which be a part of Taurus l. 2. c. 10. Taurus and bring with it much dross on the other side of the mountain and be again hide and again restore and at last carry Euphrates into the sea the armenian beside their natural lord have be subject to the persian after that to the macedonian and again to the persian after to Antiochus captain then to the roman and parthian toss betwixt the grecian and saracen subdue after successive to the tartarian persian and turk of these present armenian master Cartwright p p preacher travel report that they be a people very industrious in all kind of labour their woman very skilful and active in shoot and manage any sort of weapon like the ancient amazon their family be great the father and all his posterity dwell together under one roof have their substance in common and when the father die the elder son do govern the rest all submit themselves under his regiment after his death not his son but the next brother succeed and so after all the brethren be dead to the elder son in diet and clothing they be all alike of their two patriarch and their christian profession we be to speak in fit place the turcomanians late inhabitant be as other the scythian or tartarian from whence they be derive thievish wander up and down in tent without certain habitation like as the curd also their southerly neighbour their cattle and their robbery be their great wealth of their religion except of such as after their manner be christian which we must defer till a fit time we can find little to say more than be say already in our turkish history this we may here deplore of the unhappy sight of Armenia which though it repeople the world yet be it least behold to her viperous offspring a map of the world misery through so many age for be hem always with mighty neighbour on both side itself be make the bloody list of their ambitious encounter always lose whosoever win always the gauntlet of the challenger the crown of the conqueror this to let pass elder time the roman and parthian greek emperor and saracen turk and tartarian turk and mamuluke turk and persian do more then enough prove @. 2 of Iberia PTOLOMBY place to the north of Armenia Colchis wash by the pontic sea Albania by the caspian and betwixt these two Iberia now together with some part of Armenia call Georgia either for the honour of their patron saint George or haply because they descend of those Georgi which Pliny a a lib. 6. c. 13. name among the caspian inhabitant Strabo b b Strab. l. 11. record four kind of people in this Iberia of the first sort be choose two king the one precedent in age and nobility the other leader in war and lawgiver in peace the second sort be the priest the three husbandman and soldier the four the vulgar servile people these have all thing common by Family but he be ruler with his elder a thing observe of the armenian christian as before be say even at this day constantinus porphyrogenitus c c const romanum f. c. 45. the emperor write that the iberian boast and glory of their descent from the wife of Uriah which David defile and of the child get between they thus will they seem to be of kin to David and the virgin Mary and for that cause they marry in their own kindred they come say they from jerusalem be warn by vision to depart thence and seat themselves in these part there depart from jerusalem David and his brother Spandiates who obtain say they such a favour from GOD that no member of he can be wound in war except his heart which he therefore diligent arm whereby he become dreadful to the persian who he subdue and place the iberian in these their habitation in the time of heraclius they aid he against the persian which after that become a easy prey to the saracen of the roman conquest and exploit in d d dion cassius lib. 37. and 49. Agathias lib. 4. jornandes reb. get. Armenia Colchis Iberia Albania I lift not here to relate @. 3 of ALBANIA ALBANIA e e Boterus coelius Rodiginus lect lib. 18. cap. 27. Asia now Zuiria lie north and east betwixt Iberia and the sea of which Strabo affirm that they need not the sea who make no better use of the land for they bestow not the least labour in husbandry and yet the earth voluntary and liberal yield her store and where it be once sow it may twice or thrice be reap the man be so simple that they neither have use of money nor do they number above a hundred ignorant of weight measure war civility husbandry there be in use among they six and twenty language they have f f Sansovinus and report of such spider in Italy in Calabria call spider which will procure death upon man smile and some also which do man to die weep they worship the sun jupiter and the moon who temple be near to Iberia the priest which rule it be next in honour to the king he perform the holy rite rule the holy region which be large and full of people of the sacred servant many be inspire do divine or prophecy he which be most ravish with the spirit wander alone through the wood he the priest take and bind with a sacred chain allow he sumptuous nourishment the space of a year and after bring he to be slay with other sacrifice to the goddess the rite be thus one which be skilful of this business hold the sacred spear wherewith they use to slay the man step forth thrust it into his heart in his fall they observe certain token of divination then do they bring out the body into some place where they all go over it the albanian honour old-age in all man death in none account it unlawful to mention a dead man with who they also bury his wealth g g plin. lib. 7. Pliny out of isigorus affirm that a people call albani not these I think if any be hoary haired from their childhood and see as well by night as by day @. 4 of Colchis or Mengrelia MENGRELIA sometime Colchis h h Moletius and Iberiam ortel thes. geog. adjoin to the euxine sea in which country Strabo mention the temple of leucothea build by Phryxus where be also a oracle and where a ram may be slay this temple be sometime very rich but spoil by Pharnax and after of Mithridates this country the poet have make famous by the fable of Phryxus and jason Phryxus the son of Athemas prince of Thebes and of nephele with his sister Helle flee from their cruel stepdame Ino upon the back of a golden ram from which Helle fall into the water give name thereto of she call Hellespont Phryxus come safe into Colchis sacrifice to jupiter and hang up the fleece of his ram in the grove of Mars which custom be yearly practise of his posterity jason after by command of Pelias seek by a barbarous enemy or a dangerous navigation to destroy he with fourscore and nineteen other companion in the ship call Argo fetch this fleece from hence by the help of Medea and the ship and the ram fill heaven with new constellation that fable i i diod. sic. l. 4 nat. com. l. 6. justin 42. have ground of history howsoever by fiction obscure for the river here in Colchis be report to carry gold down with their stream and sand which the people take with board bore full of hole and with fleece of wool Spain have of late yield many such argonaut with long voyage seek the golden indian fleece Strab. l. 11. Suid. in (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Delrio mag. l. 4. which their indian conquest may make the ensign of their order more fit than the Burgundian inheritance suidas apply this fleece and ram to book of alchemy write in parchment make of ram skin which Delrio account a art of natural magic and possible howsoever these colchian as well as the armenian egyptian persian and chaldean be infamous for that other which he call devilish and Medea be most renown for that science the ignorance whereof be best learning Herodotus k k lib. 2. be of opinion that Sesostris leave some of his army here at the river Phasis persuade hereunto by the agreement of the colchian and egyptian in the same ceremony of circumcision and in the like work of hemp Vadianus cite out of Valerius Flaccus the like testimony Pliny in his six book and five chapter report of dioscurias Dioscurius a city of Colchis whilom so famous that timosthenes affirm that three hundred nation of differ language live in it and afterward the roman affair be there manage by a hundred and thirty interpreter l l annal. l. 6. Cornelius Tac. say that they account it unlawful to offer a ram in sacrifice because of Phryxus his ram uncertain whether it be a beast or the ensign of his Ship they report themselves the issue of the thessalonian @. v. of the present mengrelian and georgian the present mengrelian be rude and barbarous defend themselves from the turk by their rough hill and ragged poverty so inhuman Quadus that they sell their own child to the turk I read not of any other religion at this day among they but christian such as it be some add these also to the georgian the wife of diverse of these people report to be exercise in arm and martial feat happy give occasion to that fable or history of the amazon busbequius a a aug. Busbeq Epist. 3. say that Colchos be a very fertile country but the people idle and careless they plant their vine at the foot of great tree which marriage prove very fruitful the husband arm be kind embrace and plentiful lade they have no money but in stead of buy and sell they use exchange if they have any of the more precious metal they be consecrate to the use of their temple whence the king can borrow they under pretence of public good the king have all his tribute pay in the fruit of the earth whereby his palace become a public store-house to all comer when merchant come they give he a present and he feast they the more wine any man drink the more welcome he be they be much give to belly-cheer dance and loose sonnet of love and dalliance they much carol the name of Rowland or Orlando which name it seem pass to they with the christian army which conquer the holy land no marvel if Ceres and Bacchus lead in Venus betwixt they which so rule in these part that the husband bring home a guest commend he to his wife and sister with charge to yield he content and delight esteem it a ceedite that their wife can please and be acceptable their virgin become mother very soon most of they at ten year old can bring witness in their arm little big than a great frog which yet after grow tall and square man to prove that there be never a maid the less for they swear they hold a excellent quality and to be a fashion-monger in oath glorious to steal cunning win great reputation as of another Mercury and they which can do it be hold dullard and block when they go into a church they give mean respect to other image saint George be so worship that his horse hoof be kiss of they Dadianus the king of Colchos or Mengrelia come a suitor to Solyman while busbequius be there betwixt they and the iberian their neighbour be much discord and thus much of their present condition Haithon b b Haiton cap. 7 the armenian extend the confine of Georgia to the great sea say in this kingdom be a thing monstrous and wonderful which I will not have speak nor believe have I not see it with my own eye in these part there be a province call Hamsem contain in circuit three day journey and so far be it cover with a obscure darkness that none can see any thing nor dare any enter into it the inhabitant thereabouts affirm that they have often hear the voice of man howl cock crow neigh of horse and by the passage of a river it appear to have sign of habitation this be report by the armenian history to have come to pass by the hand of GOD so deliver his christian servant by Savoreus a persian idolater lord of this place appoint to die and so punish with outward darkness the inward former blindness and rage of those persecute idolater thus or Antonius a Churchi for so Ortelius name he but this darkness seem more ancient and to have be the cause of that proverb c c tull. in academic the georgian gird in with two mighty adversary the persian and the Turk have endure much grievance from they both and in the late war especial from the Turk who d d io. bot. ben. have take and fortify many of their principal place of importance Gori Clisca Lori Tomanis Teflis the chief city of Georgia unto which from derbent there yet remain the foundation of a high and thick wall build by Alexander Ortelius esteem derbent to be caucasiae which Pliny e e plin. l. 6. c. 11. call a mighty work of nature etc. @. 5 of the circassian westward from hence be entrance into the circassian country extend itself on Meotis five hundred mile and within land two hundred christian they be in profession from hence the sultan of Egypt have their slave of which be raise their mameluke their chief city be Locoppa and Cromuco at the mouth of Tanais the Turk have fortify asaph they live in great part on robbery in old time in this tract be phanagoria and therein the temple of Venus surname apaturia f f Serab. lib. 11. because that when the giant assault she she implore the aid of Hercules who slay they all one after another cimmerium a town at these strait give name thereunto of cimmerius Bosphorus but little can be say of these in particular more than general may be say of the scythian to who they be reckon georgius Interianus g g Ramus have write a tractate of these zychi or Circassi call of themselves Adiga express their unchristian christianity and barbarous manner of live which I hold fit in our discovery of the diverse profession of christian religion to relate @. 7 of the Curdi some h h g. bot. Ben. abr. hart. m. Paul Ramus add unto Armenia in their modern map and discovery beside the Turcomani a people that come thither out of Tartary the Curdi both still retain the tartarian and arabian manner of life in tent without city town or house their religion halt betwixt diverse religion of the turk persian and christian of the jacobite and nestorian sect in heart they be neither fast to GOD nor man dissemble with the persian and Turk and better skill in robbery murder and faithless treachery their daily practice than mystery of faith and religion they be also lord of Bitlis and some other city and hold in those part they be call courdine by sir Anthony Shirley who say they know no other fruit of the earth sir a. s. his travel into Persia but what belong to the sustenance of their cattle upon the milk butter and flesh of which they live rule by certain prince of their own which give partly a obedience to the Turk partly to the persian as they be near the confine of the one or the other yet in that simplicity of live through ambition war grow daily among they even to the extirpation of a whole nation as we find fresh when we pass by one of their prince call hiderbeague all who people be devour by the sword or carry away captive by Coatheague and himself remain only with some twenty soul in a rock ten thousand of their courdine subject to the Turk abandon their country and request some waste land to be give they by abas the present persian which give they entertainment one occasion of quarrel betwixt he and the Turk they be suppose to be a remnant of the ancient parthian and never go abroad without their arm Bowes arrow scimitar and buckler even when age seem to have fasten one foot in the grave they adore i i Cartwright travel and worship the devil that he may not hurt they nor their cattle they be cruel to all sort of christian their country be therefore call one of their town be name manuscute a mile from which be a hospital dedicate to saint John Baptist much frequent as well by turk as christian who superstition have persuade that whosoever will bestow kid sheep or money to relieve the poor of that place shall both prosper in his journey and obtain the forgiveness of his sin chap. 2 of the mede ARmenia extend itself if justine k k lib. 42. have measure right eleven hundred mile on the east encounter Media in which lie our next perambulation it receive the name of madai the son of japhet not of medus the son of Medea and jason it limit l l Strab. lib. 11. on the north with the caspian sea on the south with Persia on the east with Parthia ecbatana the chief city build as Pliny m m plin. l. 6. c. 14 affirm by Seleucus indeed far more ancient and by they happy re-edify be distant from the caspian strait twenty mile these strait be a narrow way make by hand through the hill scarce wide enough for a cart to pass eight mile in length the rock manifest their indignation at this interruption by obscure frown and salt n n sol. cap. 50. tear continual stream from they which I know not by what sudden horror be present congeal into ice also all the summer time army of serpent keep the passage well may this be the house of envy so fit do that fable of the poet o o ovid. Metamor lib. 2. agree with the nature of this place domus abdita lose tristis and and invidiam of ecbatana we read in the history of p p jud. 1. judith that Arpachshad build the wall of hew stone seventy cubit high and fifty cubit broad etc. Herodotus q q lib. 1 affirm that after the assyrian have reign in Asia five hundred and twenty year the mede rebel and choose deioces to be their king and at his command build he this royal city and a palace of great beauty the timber whereof be cedar join with plate of silver and gold it be seven furlong in compass his successor be there reckon phraortes Cyoxares Astyages justine r r justin lib. 1. report that arbactus or Arbaces lieutenant of the mede under Sardanapalus rebel against he for his effeminate life and translate the empire from the assyrian with who it have continue thirteen hundred year to the mede Diodorus siculus s s diodo sicul. l. 3. c. 7. Mclan Chro. l. 2. add in this conspiracy unto this Arbaces the Mede Belesus who some call phul Beloch the babylonian who share the state betwixt they the babylonian possess Babylonia and Assyria and Arbaces Media and Persia of this more be t t see l. 1. c. 13. say before in the time of Ninus Farnus say u u diodor. sic. lib. 3. 1. Diodorus be king of Media who encounter with Ninus in battle be there take with his wife and seven son all which the bloody conqueror command to be crucify and thus remain Media handmaid to the assyrian till the time of Sardanapalus but not without some disquiet for in Semiramis time the mede rebel and destroy nineve but Semiramis invade their country with a mighty army and come to the hill bagistanus sacred to jupiter there pitch her tent and 10 10 Diodorus l. 5. cap. 5. in the plain field make a garden contain twelve furlong beyond the garden she cut a rock seventeen furlong high grave therein her own image and a hundred other bring her gift some y y Stuckius gentium tell this otherwise that she portray she own image in that huge quantity and appoint a hundred priest continual to attend the same with offering and divine worship at Chaona a city of Media she espy another huge rock in the plain cause another garden to be make in the midst thereof with sumptuous house of pleasure therein whence she may behold all her army and there give herself a long space to rest and voluptuousness make choice of the likely gallant in her camp for her bedfellow all who she after do to death thence to ecbatana she make the way short and more passsable cast down hill and exalt the valley into a plain still bear her name at ecbatana z z ecbatana be build before deioces yea before Semiramis time she build a palace and bring water thither from the hill Orontes by a laborious and costly channel and thus do she not only subdue the rebellious mede but make a conquest of nature in ostentation of her puissance the same a a diodor. sic. lib. 4. cap. 3. author tell that multitude of sparrow which eat up their seed force the inhabitant to leave their soil as do mouse cause some part of Italy and frog rain out of the cloud the attariotae and as we have b b lib. 3. cap. 15. observe the flea chase away the inhabitant of myus how great be the creator that of the small of his creature can muster army to the conquest of they which swell in conceit of their own greatness we like giant by our wickedness defy the heaven and defile the earth say by our work c c job 21.15 who be the almighty that we shall serve he when as yet the lord of host need not tame we with legion of angel one can destroy senacherib host nor set the heaven in their course to fight his battle as against the canaanite nor arrange the element with a over-whelming chaos to confound we by a sodomitical fire or airy pestilence or deluge of water or devour of the earth nor needs he lion to challenge a part of his glory to their strength and prowess nocent frog and louse and fly shall be pharaoh challenger conqueror jailer and how many nation in Africa have the insult triumph grasshopper exile from their native dwelling proud man well may the base of thy base servant thus make thou to see thy baseness and by rebel against thou argue thy rebellion against their and thy creator but that we be not too far transport with this not unjust passion let we return to our province of Media which Arbaces d d read lib. 1. cap. 13. deliver from assyrian servitude and subject it together with the eastern empire to himself under who posterity it continue three hundred and two and twenty year Astyages the last be by Cyrus his nephew conquer according to two dream which have fore-signify this unto he in the first he dream that he see so much urine stream from his daughter Mandane his only child that all Asia be drown therewith in the other a vine grow from she which shadow all Asia his magi e e Herodot l. 1. val. max. etc. tell he that hereby be foretold his nephew greatness with the loss of his kingdom to prevent this he wed his daughter to Cambyses a persian and when she be deliver of a child he commit it to Harpagus one of his trusty councillor to be make away he fear revenge from the daughter if she shall after succeed her father deliver the infant to Mitradates the king herdsman command he in Astyages name to expose it on the mountain he return home find his wife new deliver of a dead child which by her entreaty be lay forth in stead thereof her name be Spaco which in the median language signify a birch whence the fable grow that Cyrus be so expose be nourish by a bitch this infant grow up and call by the herdsman name after ten year be know by this occasion f f justin lib. 1. a company of boy play together choose this stripling for their king who use his childish royalty with more than childish discipline for he ordain diverse officer some of they to be his guard some builder messenger etc. as he think fit among who be a son of one Artembares a man of great estimation who for neglect his office be by this young kingle severe chastise he complain thereof to his father and the father bring the child to the king accuse the indignity of the fact that his herdsman son shall deal so malapert and cruel show his beat shoulder to Astyages the herdsman and his suppose son be send for that Artembares may be satisfy where the young king give so good account of that his fact that Astyages much amaze take the herdsman aside and with busy inquiry learn of he all the truth of this matter wherewith enrage against Harpagus who ought himself to have do that dismal execution but dissemble the same he tell he that he will do sacrifice for the child safety and bid he send his child to bear Cyrus company invite he also to sup with he where he feast he with the flesh of his own son who head finger and toe be set before he at the last service Harpagus bear it as patient as he can till fit occasion of revenge offer itself which thus fall out the magi tell Astyages that in this childish kingdom of Cyrus the danger of his dream be already pass and that he need not to fear any further danger wherefore he be send into Persia to his parent after he be now a man Harpagus have secret solicit the mede to rebellion against their cruel sovereign acquaint Cyrus with his project to that end enclose a letter in a hare belly which he send to Cyrus by one of his huntsman which be with such industry and success prosecute that Astyages lust his sceptre and Cyrus translate the empire to the persian for Harpagus be make general of the army of the mede revolt to Cyrus with all such as he have make acquaint with his treason and when the mede after rebel in the time of Darius they be force again to subjection the magi be by Astyages command crucify and he himself re-enforcing his power and bid battle to Cyrus the second time be take alive and by his nephew set over the hyrcan the magi have large and fertile possession thus report g g Amm. Marcel l. 23. ammianus assign they in Media their science call magia be by Plato term Machagistia which mystical word signify the pure worship of the god to which science Zoroastres of Bactria in old time add many thing out of the mystery of the chaldee but because the persian have from hence their empire and this religion by who arm they be make know to the world there shall be fit place to speak of these magi when we treat of the persian rite in this region be make the oil wherein their arrow be steep which be shoot out of a loose bow for a swift shot extinguish it do burn the flesh in which it do stick and if water be apply to it the fire thereof increase nor can any remedy cure the same but hurl dust thereon it be compose of Naphta the mede make league with this ceremony h h Boem. lib. 3. Francisco thamara lib. 2. they wound the soldier of each party either lick other blood the north part of Media be barren and therefore they live on apple dry and stamp together of roast almond they make bread and wine of the root of herb this and venison be there food in one plain i i Asia of Media be pasture fifty thousand mare belong to the king the herb whereon they principal feed be still call medica the race of horse call Nisaei be here breed and hence disperse allover the east among k k alex. alex. l. 4. c. 23. the mede none may be king by the law of the country except he be in stature and strength eminent all the mede say bardesanes l l bar. euseb Euang. l. 6. c. 8. a famous chaldaean nourish dog with great care to which they cast man ready to die while they be yet breathe to be devour of they the mede m m Plutarch Orb. Lun Gramaye Curtius l. 3. worship the fire with barbarous honour do thereto their king hold such majesty that none may laugh or spit before they they be seldom see of their people they have always musician attend they their wife and child accompany they in their battle the name of the mede remain famous after the persian conquest as appear by the stile which the scripture n n dan. 6.8 ester 1.8 give they the law of the mede and persian which be unchangeable the king himself not have power to revoke his sentence as for the catalogue of the king which succeed Arbaces until the time of Astyages and the time of their reign we have before show it out of Scaliger o o scalig can. Isag. in our first book chap. 13. true it be that all agree not in that account Reinerus p p r. Reinec Syntag. Famil etc. tom. 1. Reineccius leave out diverse of they and number the year of the median dynasty but 261. whereas our former account have 322. but I have rather refer the reader to that catalogue then trouble he with new out of this or other author Media have be q q maginus Thesaur geog. divide into Media Maior and Atropatia the former contain Tauris suppose by Ortelius to be the forename ecbatana yet now want wall altogether contain in circuit sixteen mile and of people two hundred thousand subdue to the Turk 1585. and before by Selim and Soliman but since recover by the persian Sultania r r g. B.B. famous for the fair Moschee in the east Casbin to which the persian have remove the royal seat from Tauris the lake of van three hundred mile long and a hundred and fifty broad after Strabo s s Strab. l. 11. manlianus Lacus of salt-water the great next to Meotis gyllius t t pet Gyll in ortelij thes. affirm that eight great river run into it without any apparent issue to the sea Atropatia be now call seruan the chief city be Sumachia or Shamaki in which the sophi not long since u u Hak. ant. jenkinson build a turret of flint and freestone and in a rank of flint therein do set the head of the nobility and gentry of the country for a terror to the rest the quarrel be pretend for religion intend for sovereignty their ancient religion 10 10 plut. in Orb. Lun differ not much from the persian and such also be it still their king y y Strab. l. 11. have many wife which custom extend after to the village and mountain in so much that they may not have less than seven the woman z z Coel. l. 18. c. 29 also esteem it a credit to have many husband and a miserable calamity to have less than five Cyrus subdue they to the persian Alexander to the macedon what shall we speak of the parthian who make ecbatana their seat royal in the summer time and of the saracen tartar persian and turk who have successive vex these country not far from Shamaki say master jenkinson a a Hak. voyag tom. 1. be a old castle call Gullistone now beat down by the sophi and not far from thence a nunnery of sumptuous building wherein be bury a king daughter name Ameleck Channa who slay herself with a knife for that her father will have force she she profess chastity to have marry a tartar king upon which occasion the maiden every year resort thither to bewail her death there be also a high hill call quiquif upon the top whereof they b b a fabulous report of the mede say dwell a giant name arneoste have on his head two great horn and ear and eye like a horse and a tail like a cow who keep a passage thereby till one haucoir Hamshe a holy man bind he with his woman lamisache and his son after who be therefore have in saintlike reputation obdolowcan king of this country under the sophi beside gracious entertainment grant unto Mr. Anthony jenkinson for our english merchant great privilege 1563. Gilan also ancient gelae be reckon to Media into these city of Media the c c 2. reg. 17.6 israelite be transport together with their religion by Salmanesar the assyrian GOD in his manifold wisdom so punish their sin and withal disperse some spark of divine truth chap. 3 of the parthian and hyrcanian @. i. of Parthia PArthia be place by Pliny d d lib. 6.29 in the root of the hill have on the east the arian on the west the mede on the south Carmania on the north Hyrcania round with desert he affirm that the kingdom of the parthian be eighteen eleven of they near to the caspian sea and the other seven near the red sea the word Parthian signify with the scythian a exile their chief city be hecatompylos now as some e e maginus affirm Hispaham for the excellency thereof call of the persian half the world these scythian exile in the time of the assyrian mede persian and macedonian be a obscure people the prey of every conqueror which after seem to divide the world with the roman their speech be mix of the median and scythian their army consist most part of servant which they hold in great respect instruct they in feat of arm in a army of fifty thousand wherewith they encoutre Antony there be only eight hundred freeman the parthian f f justin 41. have no use of gold or silver but in their armour they have many wife whereof they be so jealous that they forbid they the sight of other man they perform all business private and public on horseback this be the distinction of freeman from servant their burial be in the belly of bird or dog their naked bone be after cover with earth they be exceed superstitious in the worship of their god a stout unquiet seditious unfaithful people Arsaces first a famous thief after the founder of that kingdom leave no less memory of himself among the parthian than Cyrus among the persian or Alexander among the macedonian the day wherein he overthrow Seleucus be solemn observe every year among they as the begin of their liberty of he they call all their king arsaces as the roman emperor be name Caesar they g g Amm. mat. lib. 23. call themselves the brethren of the sun and moon which be in those place worship this arsaces be worship after his death they be no less bloody to their brethren when they come to the crown than the ottoman be at this day Phrahartes h h justin l. 42. slay thirty of his brethren and before they his father and after his son rather than he will endure a possibility of a competitor about i i Vad see fol. 5. 224. year after Christ artabanus the last persian king be slay by Artaxeres or Artaxares the persian the empire return to the persian who be thereof deprive by the saracen and they again by the tartar and be now for the great part under the sophi they have their cup-quarrel strive who shall draw deep which custom we need not go into Parthia to seek Strabo mention among the parthian a college or senate of magi and wiseman their ancient religious rite I find not particular relate the parthian affair be thus by some k k justin l. 41. dion cassius lib. 40. Asia Gramaye Parthica p. Bizarus l. 30. relate after Alexander death none of the macedonian vouchsafe so mean a province stragonor a foreigner obtain it after which the macedonian contend in civil quarrel for the sovereignty Parthia waver in uncertainty till in the time of Seleucus the nephew of Antiochus theodotus deputy of Cachia entitle himself king so give example of rebellion to the eastern nation which arsaces among the parthian easy follow he combine himself with theodotus and after his death with his son strengthen himself in his new erect government of two city but Seleucus take arm against he be by he overthrow in battle which day first give light to the parthian greatness not unworthy observe therefore of their posterity with solemnity for Seleucus be by more important affair call home the parthian have leisure to establish their hope athenaeus report that arsaces take he prisoner and after gentle usage he send he home after this first come a second arsaces who encounter with Antiochus the son of Seleuchus come against he with a army of a hundred thousand footman and twenty thousand horse the issue be they part friend in mutual league priapatius or Panpatius be their three king to who phraates his son succeed and next his brother Mithridates who subdue the mede and helimaeans enlarge the parthian empire from mount Caucasus to Euphrates he take Demetrius king of Syria prisoner and die in his old age his son phraates be the four on who Antiochus war and the parthian oppose against he his brother Demetrius till then detain prisoner but while he war against the scythian by treason of his own subject he be slay and artabanus his uncle place in his room he also soon after die of a wound receive in the field and his son Mithridates succeed who the parthian senate expel and depose but other reckon between artabanus and Mithridates Pacorus and his son phraates so uncertain be the parthian history for which cause also l l read l. 1. c. 13 Scaliger blame Onuphrius for be too peremptory in such uncertainty next in order reckon Orodes or herodes who besiege his say brother Mithridates in Babylon and take both it and he and cause he to be slay in his sight against he Crassus the roman consul move with covetousness m m l. Florus l. 1. c. 11. hateful to GOD and man say Florus lead the roman legion to win the parthian gold and by the way n n joseph antiq. l. 14. c. 12. pass through judaea spoil the sacred treasury which Pompey spare amount to two thousand talent and rob the temple of eight thousand talent beside he also carry away a beam of solid gold weigh three hundred every mina be two pound and a half roman deliver unto he by Eleazarus the treasurer upon condition to take nothing else but Crassus violate the oath which he have give to Eleazarus and carry all he like Many dismal o o Stadius in Ilorum presage prohibit Crassus his expedition as the curse of the tribune who Dion Plutarch and Appian call Atteius capito those curse be denounce with invocation of some unknown god also the roman ensign be drown with sudden tempest in Euphrates and when p p Plutarch Crassus livij epitome l. 106. eutropij l. 6. Dion cas l. 40. sim. Maioli Canie colloq 16 he have sacrifice to Venus his son stumble and fall and Crassus with he he reject the legate of the parthian allege the former league with Pompey thus post to his destruction one Mazarus as Florus call he or as Plutarch ariamnes Dion and appianus name he augarus encounter he not with arm but with art and wile profess great hostility to the parthian Crassus follow his advice lead his army into byway and desert till be bring into the parthian snare his new guide forsake he and the covetous consul with his son be slay and eleven roman legion take or leave in the place his head and perjure right hand be send by Surinas the parthian general who be say to have then in the field with he twelve hundred concubine and a thousand camel lade with his own furniture unto king Orodes who contumelious if contumely and merit can join society use the same pour into his jaw sometime greedy of that metal melt gold Orodes envy Surinas the glory of his victory slay he and commit the remnant of that war to be pursue by his son Pacorus adjoin to he in that exploit osaces in the civil war they take part with Pompey against Caesar Pacorus be receive into society of the kingdom with his father invade judaea and place Antigonus in the kingdom captive Hircanus but while he aspire to great hope he lose himself and his army in which be twenty thousand horseman in a battle with Ventidius who by a wily stratagem counterfeit flight and fear and suffer the parthian to come up to their tent that they have now no space for their arrow effect this overthrow Pacorus his head reduce the city of Syria to the roman subjection without further war this news make his father mad who before boast of the conquest of Asia by Pacorus now in many day do neither speak nor eat but when he once do open his mouth all his speech be Pacorus who still seem present unto he in this ecstatical mood phraates one of his thirty son which he have by so many concubine slay he and after they his brethren with a son also of his own this cruelty cause many parthian to betake themselves to voluntary exile among which monaeses provoke f f flor. l. 4. c. 10. Dion lib. 49. Antonius to war upon this tyrant he do so but with bad success of sixteen legion scarce bring the three part back again phraates impotent and uncapable of so glorious adventure grow into such insolence that the people exile he and place Tiridates in his room who be soon after displace by the scythian and phraates restore to his place Tiridates flee to Augustus then war in Spain for refuge and aid carry with he the son of phraates who Caesar send back again to his father without any price maintain neither party against the other but allow liberal provision to Tiridates but after this g g Suetonius in augusti cap. 21. Augustus go into the east the parthian fear ill measure redeliver all the roman captive and ensign and give hostage also his two son with their wife and child and resign Armenia to the roman Phraatax his son slay he with great injustice repay that which be most just and due to his former parricide this Phraatax use incestuous acquaintance with his mother Thermusa a italian who Augustus have bestow on phraates and by who help he be slay be kill in a uproar leave his son Orodes his successor he also in a conspiracy be kill and Vonon h h sueton. in tiberij cap. 49. substitute who the parthian not long endure force to seek help of the roman where he be perfidious slay artabanus obtain the empire i i mat. Burghlehner thes. hist lib. 6. tom. 1. from whence he be after chase by Vitellius who place Tiridates in the throne which he have scarce warm when artabanus recover it and after leave it to his son bardanes the arsacian stock be now dispossess this bardanes k k cornel. tacit. annal. lib. 11. while he mind war against the roman be kill of his own gotarzes his brother succeed to the sceptre which he hold notwithstanding the decree of the roman senate for meherdates the son of Vonon who he take and cut off his ear vonones be his successor a little while and present after Vologaeses his son the next be artabanus and after he Pacorus and in the next place cosdroes his brother against who Trajan war with good success who extend the roman empire to the indian but Adrian renew league with the parthian Parthanaspates succeed and soon after Vologaeses who leave heir his son of the same name deprive by his brother artabanus he be unjust deal with by the roman treachery drive they to sue for peace which after that Antonius l l herodiani Macrinus the author of the breach be dead be easy obtain by Macrinus his successor but Artaxares a persian prevail better in a three battle overthrow he and reduce the kingdom after such a world of year to the persian name some reckon this 472. year from arsaces and 228. after Christ Scaliger m m Ios. scal. canon Isagog l. 2. reckon the time of the parthian dynasty 479. year the number of their king after this computation be nine and twenty they which listen to see further of their war with the roman may read the roman author which have write the same the sum whereof be here present to your view Cornelius Tacitus n n cor. Tac. l. 12. tell a merry tale for I think these tragedy have weary you and pertinent to our purpose of a good-fellow-like Hercules who the parthian worship this kind-hearted god warn his priest in a dream that near to his temple they shall set his horse ready furnish for hunt which they do lade they with quiver full of arrow these after much run up and down the forest return home at night blow and breathless their quiver be empty and Hercules no niggard of his venison acquaint the priest at night by another vision with all his disport what wood he have range and the place of his game they search the place find the slay beast better fellowship certain have their Hercules than their king when they invite any to their feast for the king o o athenaeus lib. 4 cap. 14. have his table alone and lofty the guest sit below on the ground and like dog feed on that which the king cast to they and many time upon occasion of the king displeasure they be hale thence and scourge and yet they then prostrate on the ground adore their striker they p p herodiani Macrinus worship the sun at his rise bardesanes q q Eusebius praepar. Euang. lib. 6. cap. 8. in Eusebius say of they that to kill his wife or son or daughter or brother or sister yet unmarried be not prohibit by the law to any parthian nor any way subject to punishment the parthian r r sueton. Caligula 5. ensign be a dragon the royal ensign a bow their stile be king of king they wear a double crown they have a ointment make of a certain composition which no private man may use nor may any else drink of the water of choaspes and eulaeus none may come to the king without a present the magi be in great authority with they their rite be mix of the persian and scythian nothing be more severe punish then adultery a servant may not be make free nor may be suffer except in the war to ride or a freeman to go on foot their fight be more dangerous in fly then in stand or give the onset terga s s Seneca in oedip. the parthian flight do most affright they account t t am. Marcel lib. 23. they the most happy which be slay in battle they which die a natural death be upbraid with cowardice their fight Lucan u u Lucanus describe mile ausa that be light skirmish flee war and scatter band and better soldier when they run away then to bear off a enemy that stand their crafty caltrop on the ground they lay nor dare their courage come to right-down blow but fight further off most trust to their bow many city among they and two thousand village be say 10 10 pius secundus Gramaye parth. to have be overwhelm with earthquake they be say to be of spare diet to eat no flesh but that which they take in hunt to feed with their sword gird to they to eat locust to be false liar and perfidious to have store of wife and strumpet their country be now call Arach in it be make great quantity of silk Isidorus characenus y y be char. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) have set down the several country with their dimension how many each of they contain with their chief city and their way and distance which give great light to geography and the knowledge of the parthian greatness Schaenus be account threescore furlong @. 2 of the hircanian tappyri and Caspian HYrcania now call Strava or diargument have on the west Media on the east margiana on the south Parthia on the north the sea which hereof be call the Hyrcan otherwise caspian famous it have be and be for store of wood and tiger there be also other wild beast here in the city Nabarca be a oracle which give answer by dream some river in this country have so steep a fall into the sea that under the water the people resort to sacrifice or banquet the stream shoot violent over their head without wet they jovius write that the air be unwholesome by reason of the fen strava the chief city abound in traffic for silk the island before it in the sea be no less refuge to the inhabitant in the Tamburlaine-tempest then to the italian in the time of attila who place z z Contaren hist of Venice where now Venice stand their religion as the state both in time past and present have follow the persian of who we be next to speak it be report a a Strab. l. 11. of Tappyri inhabit near to Hyrcania that their custom be to bestow their wife on other man when they have bear they two or three child so do Cato his wife Martia on Hortensius and such say Vertomannus be the custom at this day of the indian in Calechut to exchange wife in token of friendship they have wine in such estimation that they anoint their body therewith the b b Caelius rhod. lib. 18. cap. 28. caspij shut up their parent after they be come to age of seventy year and there in respect of piety what more can the impious do starve they to death some say that after that age they place they in some desert and a far off observe the event if the fowl seize on they with their talent and tear they out of their coffin they account it a great happiness not so if dog or wild beast prey thereon but if nothing meddle therewith it be account a miserable and lamentable case the derbices account all fault though never so small worthy of the utmost punishment the earth be their goddess to their holy they admit nothing female nor to their table they kill such as be above seventy year old call to that bloody banquet their neighbour esteem such miserable as by disease be intercept and take away old woman flesh they eat not but strangle and then bury they they likewise bury such as die before that age chap. 4 of Persia and the persian state in the first and second persian dynasty PErsia if we take it strict be thus bound by a a lib. 6. cap. 40. Ptolomey it have on the north Media on the east Carmania on the west susiana on the south part of the persian gulf but this name be sometime stretch as far as that wide and spacious kingdom all that empire be often call in author Persia and differ in the bound and limit according to the enlarge or contract of that monarchy it be suppose that the persian descend of elam the son of b b gen. 10.22 Shem who name remain unto a region call elymais mention by c c ptol. lib. 6. c. 2. Ptolomey place in the north part of Media Pliny mention d d plin. l. 6. c 18. the Elamitae on the south next to the sea which name Jerome e e Hieron Es. 13. Xenophon in his day give to one of that nation Elamita etc. Xenophon also name the tribe of the elamite Moses tell of the reign and power of Chederlaomer king of elam f f gen 14. in that morning of the world extend to the border of Canaan g g Herodot li. 7. Herodot report that they be call of the greek Cephenes of the neighbour nation artaei suidas h h suidas in verb. Magog affirm that they be call of the inhabitant Magog and magusaei other name be by Ortelius i i ortelij Theat. and thesaurus add Chorsori achaemenij Panchaia etc. it be call Persia of persaeus the son of Danae or of perses the son of Andromeda or as other of perses the son of Medea @. i. of the beginning of the persian monarchy by CYRUS from the time of Chedorlaomer who Abram with his houshold-army overthrow until the time of Cyrus little mention be make of they he free they from the median servitude and erect first that mighty persian monarchy Bizarus k k p. Bizar Christ Pezel mellific 1. which have write twelve book of the persian affair suppose that in that time of their subjection to the assyrian and mede they have governor and law of their own only owe a tributary subjection to the other as their supreme lord this he collect out of Xenophon Cyrus be by name foretell by Esay l l esa 44.28 and the re-building of jerusalem and the temple by his authority before that babylonian monarchy be erect which destroy they GOD after reveal to Nabuchadnezzar and Daniel by dream this persian both rise and fall and by dream do he make way unto the effect of his decree as appear in Herodotus justine and other for Astyages m m Herodot l. 1. justin lib. 1. dream that he see a vine grow on the womb of his daughter Mandane which cover all Asia interpret by his wizard of the subversion of his kingdom by his daughter future issue marry she as before be say to Cambyses a persian descend of the stock of Perseus son of jupiter and Danae and the son of achaemenes n n of this family and other of the persian see Remeccius tom. 1. so that in that remote region mean may fail unto any aspire design the chaldaean report as Alphaeus record out of megasthenes that Nabuchodonosor have conquer all Libya and Asia as far as Armenia at his return ravish with divine fury cry out that a persian mule shall come and subdue the babylonian this agree some what both with the dream and the madness record of that king by Daniel chap. 2. and 4. the oracle of Delphos make like answer to Croesus that the lydian shall then flee when a mule shall govern the mede he be term a mule o o Christ Pezel Mellif histor p. 15. 1. because of his more noble parentage by the mother than the father and their diversity of nation Strabo p p Strab. lib. 15. think he be call Cyrus of a river in Persia be before call Agradatus Plutarch q q Plutarch in say he be call Cyrus of the sun which with the persian have that name Polyoenus r r Polyoenus l. 8. strat call his wife nitetis daughter of Aprias king of Egypt suidas say it be Bardane and that she be daughter of cyaxares otherwise call Darius medus he conquer the median empire first and after add two other the s s a. m. 3402. lydian and t t 3409. caluis babylonian Croesus the lydian consult with the oracle about the success of his war receive answer (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that be Croesus pass hail great state shall make to fall this he interpret of the overthrow of Cyrus but prove it in himself Croesus his son have be mute till now see the sword of his enemy ready to give the fatal stroke unto his father violence of sudden passion break open those bar and stop which nature have set before as impediment to his speech and by his first most fortunate-unfortunate language cry to the bloody soldier to spare his u u great be the treasure which Cyrus gate in his war but his expense in his daily diet engrave in a pillar which Alexander cause to be raze seem incredible the particular whereof see in Polyaen lib. 4. and Opmeerus pag. 105. father after his many great exploit he war upon thamyris the scythian queen where he lose his life I know not how divine providence seem to have set those scythian stint to the persian proceed those great monarch both in the elder and our late world ever find those northern wind cross and in some dismal success prohibit their ambition that way Cyrus be of so firm memory that he can call all the soldier some say but all that have any place of command by their proper name he ordain that his soldier shall in the first join with the enemy sing certain hymn to Castor and Pollux that by this mean they shall not be surprise with sudden fear he give leave to the jew to return and repeople their country and to rebuild the temple 10 10 Scalig. Caluisius alij a. m. 3421. ezra 1.2 scal. Proleg em. t. ed. ult. and in not frag. dan. 5.28 A.M. 3419. ezra call this the first year of Cyrus not the first of his reign but of his eastern monarchy as in his edict himself proclaim the lord GOD of heaven have give i all the kingdom of the earth for after he have overcome Darius medus who Berosus call Nabonnidus in battle and force he to keep himself in borsippa he besiege and obtain Babylon where spend some time for the settle of his affair he after that force Darius to yield and return to Babylon make a conquest of susiana all which achieve the nine year after the take of Babylon the 70 of the jewish captivity the nine and twenty of his reign and the first of that his babylonian empire he make the decree above mention and die the second year after it be probable also that the persian who hold Cyrus in such veneration begin their or new computation from this time of his settle empire a honour give after by the eastern world to Alexander in like manner the babylonian kingdom be thus divide and give to the mede and persian first to Darius by blood and descent a Mede and after by conquest to Cyrus a persian we have large fragment of ctesias who be present in the battle between Artaxerxes and Cyrus as be Xenophon also Xen. exped. cyri. jun. who have write the same at large collect and reserve by photius who say he have read four and twenty book of this ctesias his persica in which he much differ from the report of Herodotus profess phot. Bibliothec. 72. that he have either see those thing which he write or receive they of the persian themselves he affirm that Astygas so he call Astyages be nothing of kin to Cyrus but be by he conquer be first imprison and after enlarge and kind entreat Cyrus take his daughter amytis her husband Spytama be slay to his wife he subdue the bactrian and take amorges king of the sacae prisoner but his wife Sparethra with a army of three hundred thousand man and two hundred thousand woman come against Cyrus and take he and parmyse the brother of amytis prisoner in exchange of they redeem her husband amorges after this help Cyrus in his war against Croesus who the city be take and his son which have be give in hostage slay before his face flee unto Apollo temple whence by magical illusion he make a escape and be take again and bind fast his band with thunder and lightning be loose whereupon Cyrus free he and give he the city Barene near to ecbatana Cyrus after that war against the derbices who by the help of the indian and elephant overthrow Cyrus who receive there a wound by a indian whereof he three day afterward die but by help of amorges the derbices be overcome and their king amoraeus slay with his two son Cyrus before his death make Cambyses his elder son his heir and tanyoxarces his young lord of the bactrian choramnians and parthian and set Spytades son of Spytama over the derbices he reign thirty year @. 2 of the succession of CYRUS and of Cambyses Cambyses ctesias add in his twelve book send his father body into Persia he war upon Egypt and send amyrtaeus the king with six thousand egyptian captive into Susa have slay fifty thousand egyptian and lose seven thousand and two persian in the mean time Sphendadates one of the magi be correct by Tanyoxarees for some offence accuse he to Cambyses his brother who cause he to die with a draught of bull blood deceive his mother and his brother follower as if he have put the Magus to death for that slander and so near do they resemble each other that Sphendadates be send to the bactrian where five year after the mystery of this iniquity be detect by Tybetheus a eunuch by he chasten unto amitis who when she can not obtain he of Cambyses to punishment poison herself Cambyses after he have reign eighteen year die at Babylon of a wound which he have receive in his thigh by whitle a stick to pass away the time have receive before direful presage of this disaster in his sacrifice not bleed and Roxane bring he forth a son without a head Bagapates and Artasyras his chief eunuch procure the kingdom to the Magus reign with the name of tanyoxarces till Ixabates detect he who flee into a temple be draw thence and slay but seven chief man Onophas Idernes Norodabates Mardonius barise Ataphernes and Darius son of hystaspes conspire against the Magus and by the help of Artasyras and Bagapates slay he in his bedchamber have reign seven month ordain the solemn festival Magaphonia in remembrance thereof Darius be mount to the throne by the neigh of his horse as these prince have before agree build he a sepulchre in his life time in a hill which when he will have see the chaldaean forbid he and his parent curious of that sight be let down by the priest with rope but they terrify by the sudden sight of serpent let go their hold and Darius for that loss of his parent slay in the fall cut off the head of the priest in number forty he march with eight hundred thousand man into Europe against the scythian but return with loss die after he have reign one and thirty year Plutarch in the life of Artaxerxes accuse ctesias of absurd fable etc. but before we follow ctesias any further let we see what the common report by Herodotus and other have deliver of these proceed and let the judicious reader choose who he will embrace Scaliger and other rather follow Herodotus who relate of Cambyses that succeed his father he take and after slay psammenitus king of Egypt and when he will have add Aethiopia a a Herodot l. 3. to his new conquest with the spoil of the temple of Ammon for which purpose he send two army the one be almost consume with famine the beast and provision fail and that barren desert deny grass the remainder by consume one another be a strange remedy preserve from consumption every ten man be by lot tithe to the shambles and more return to their fellow maw then on their own leg the other army be quite bury in the sand at his return find the egyptian solemnize the feast of their idol Apis he slay the same it be a bull which they worship and after dream that Smerdis reign he send and slay his brother which be so call in vain seek to frustrate this presage which be fulfil in another of that name he fall in love with his sister and ask whether it be lawful for he to marry she the judge who authority with the persian last with their life answer that they have no such law but they have another that the king of Persia may do what he like whereupon he marry she his cruelty appear in that Prexaspes presume to admonish he of his too much inclination to drunkenness he answer Seneca l. 3. c. 14. he shall see proof of the contrary and present send for Prexaspes his son with a arrow shoot he to the heart the father not dare but to commend his steady hand and art in shoot he die of his own sword which fall out of his scabbard as he mount his horse kill he not fear in this country of Syria any such disaduenture because the oracle of Latona b b Bizar l. 1. in Egypt have tell he he shall die at ecbatana which he understand of Media and be fulfil at another ecbatana more obscure in Syria he cause a judge which have be corrupt with money to be flay and make of his skin a cover for the tribunal Polyoenus tell that against the egyptian he use this stratagem to set the god dog cat sheep etc. in the forefront of his battle he neither deserve nor obtain that honourable funeral which Cyrus have who be bury at pasargadae a tower shadow with tree have in the upper part a chapel furnish with a bed of gold a table cup and vessel of the same metal with store of garment and furniture set with jewel certain magi be appoint to attend it with daily allowance of a sheep and once a month a horse for sacrifice his epitaph be o man I be CYRUS king of Asia founder of the persian empire therefore envy i not a sepulchre Alexander open the same in hope of gold but find nothing save a rot shield a sword and two scythian bow he crown it with gold and cover it with his own apparel depart these thing k k Strab. 15. Arrian 6. Curtius l. 9 Strabo arrianus and Curtius report @. 3 of the succeed monarch until Alexander conquest next to a a 3428. Cambyses succeed for a small time one smerdis which be slay as a usurper by the seven prince and b b 3429. Darius the son of hystaspes succeed design to that greatness by the first neigh of his horse for when no male issue royal be leave these prince agree that meet in a place appoint he who horse first neigh shall be acknowledge emperor Darius his horsekeeper the night before have suffer his horse there to use his brutish lust with a mare which the place present cause he to remember he there by his lustful neigh advance his master to the sceptre Darius for his covetousness first exact tribute be call a merchant Cambyses a lord Cyrus a father of his people Babylon rebel and be c c 3436. recover by the costly stratagem of zopyrus d d justin l. 2. Plutarch in Apophtheg who cut off his nose and ear and flee in that deform plight to the babylonian accuse Darius of that cruelty ctesias tell this of Megabyzus they believe entertain he and know his nobility and prowess commit their city to his fidelity which he upon the next opportunity betray to his master Darius war against the scythian but unfortunate his army be of 700000. man after Darius his death Xerxes e e 3466. scal. animad in euseb pag. 101. reign who Scaliger prove to be Assuerus the husband of Esther this Esther be by some thought to be amestris who the ethnic writer blame for cruelty move haply thereto by the execution commit upon Haman and the jewish enemy in the book of Esther relate they add perhaps in slander and hatred that she kill fourteen child in one bloody vow and other thing which I will not rehearse but return to Xerxes he make league with the carthaginian war upon the grecian with a army as Herodotus f f Herodot l. 7. number of 1700000. footman 80000. horseman 20000. chariot-man other say that there be 2317000. footman in land-force beside 1208. ship ctesias have only 800000. man beside chariot and 1000 sail of ship before the army be draw the sacred chariot of jupiter by eight white horse no mortal man may ascend the Seat he offer to Minerva at Troy 1000 ox he take view of his huge army weep in think that of all that number in a hundred year none will be alive at the pass of the Hellespontic strait he beside other devotion perform at the sunrising take a golden vial full of sacred liquor and cast the same into the sea with a golden bowl and a persian sword uncertain whether in honour of the sun or in satisfaction to the angry Hellespont which a little before in more than mad arrogance he have cause to be whip and hurl fetters therein with many menace threat he write letter with like threaten to mount Athos and according pierce his bowel and make way by force through that high and huge mountain this expedition be in the year of the world 3470. Leonides with his spartan enlarge his glory at the thermopylaean strait g g Xerxes send first 15000. after 20000. and last 50000. choice man against they which all have the worse till a traitor teach Xerxes another way where to pass and come upon their back and then Leonides in the night enter the persian camp and slay 20000. with his 500 man which be kill be weary with kill or narrow passage which a long time with a handful of man hinder the persian from pass Mardonius be slay and Xerxes flee out of Greece after he have take Athens and lose great part of his army which in two year space receive five overthrow at thermopylae at artemisium at salamis at Plataeae at Mycale Xerxes be slay of artabanus his kinsman a. m. 3485. Artaxerxes succeed in who time Egypt rebel help therein by Inarus and the grecian among other the mad part of Xerxes it be report that he fall in love with a h h Aelian var. hist l. 1. plane tree in Lydie which he adorn with chain and costly furniture and appoint a guardian thereto Artaxerxes write to Hystanes governor of hellespontus that he shall give Hypocrates cous who then live and who writing still remain the physician oracle as much gold and other thing as he will and send he unto he in his time the egyptian rebel and create Inarus their king to who the athenian send three hundred galley for defence but by Artabazus and megabyzus they be subdue Artaxerxes die an. m. 3525. after this Artaxerxes surname long-hand another Xerxes succeed and reign a small time as do also sogdianus or Ogdianus or so ctesias call he Secyndianus who Darius nothus slay and possess the throne ctesias name he ochus and say that he change his name to dariaeus in the time of this king be the peloponnesian war which Thucydides have relate Artaxerxes mnemon his son succeed an. m. 3545. he slay his brother Cyrus ctesias be there present with Artaxerxes who he cure of a wound give he on the breast by Cyrus with who be then present and partaker that great philosopher captain and historian hereof Xenophon Artaxerxes be a name give as some write to all the persian king it signify a great warrior as Brisson and Drusius observe this mnemon reign forty year after his death succeed ochus and reign three and twenty year next to he be arses or arsames and last of all Darius who Alexander overthrow the second time at arbela an. m. 3619. and conquer that persian monarchy to the macedonian of the macedonian successor of Alexander so much as concern this place be before handle in our syrian relation they be deprive of these part by arsaces of who and all his parthian follower even now you have read in the chapter of Parthia @. 4 of the persian chronology concern these persian king chronologer after their wont differ not a little master a a Lively his chronology of the persian monarchy Lively have take great pain in this argument beside the painful labour of Scaliger junius and many other both rabbin and greek and latin in who stream elephant may swim and the great student may find enough to busy their studious brain for i it be sufficient to taste or at least to enter so far as a lamb may safe wade without peril of drown the hebrew through ignorance of the olympiad and human author where they be destitute of their own be most absurd some b b Aben. ezra reckon but four persian king in all till Alexander time some account c c rab. Moses five and some d d r. Sadiab and abr. Davison three against these Pererius and Temporarius e e Temporar l. 3. most sharp and not unworthy inveigh as also against their f f Seder Olam Rabath sedar Olam Zota historical cabala see l. 2. c. 3. chronicle which ascribe to the persian from the first year of Darius the Mede but two and fifty year josephus better see in ethnic author dissent from they as for Metasthenes of annius we have before show he to be counterfeit and the rest of his brethren to be either the bastard of annius or changeling which he have nurse and will father upon those author who name they bear Viues g g l. Viues in prooem l. 18. civit. call they monstrous report dregs frivolous pamphlet of uncertain author which if any be in love with he may enjoy without he his corrival h h gorop Becceselan Goropius bestow much pain in the uncase of they and learned man i i mercator Ios. Scaliger Volaterranus Pererius Temporarius etc. do now general distaste they josephus k k joseph ap. lib. 1. city megasthenes in quarto indicorum the four book of his indian history from whence Petrus Comestor allege the same testimony with deprave the word Indicorum and make it annius add not only the corrupt of the name Metasthenes for megasthenes but a history under his l l Metasthenes name wherein no marvel if he proceed in the story as he begin in the title Beroaldus m m Beroaldi chron. l. 3. vid. Reinec p. 2. d. Angelo chrono l. 1. etc. in the persian chronology feign diverse name to the persian king as Assuerus Artaxerxes Darius Assyrius Artaxerxes Pius Lively and other modern writer out of the greek olympiad and history have give true account of the persian time and government begin with the five and fifty Olympiad and continue the same to the three year of the hundred and twelve Scaliger and Caluisius as you have see before do a little differ from this account of master Lively which he lively prove by conference of other history both human and ecclesiastical Clemens Eusebius Herodotus Diodorus Polybius Xenophon Thucydides Dionysius Halicarnassaeus Livy and other as much ado be make about the beginning and end of daniel week and the time of the building and finish the second temple both which be much illustrate by the right knowledge of the persian chronology n n jun. Annot. in dan. 9 junius Lively o o Lively his chronology and some other begin the account of the threescore and ten week and reckon the building of the second temple in the second year of Darius nothus p p Olymp. 89. an. 3. to who reason I refer the reader and return to our persian affair how this persian empire agree to the dream of Nabuchodonosor and the vision of Daniel Broughton q q bring consent eliae reusneri Isag. hist l. 2. Reusnerus and other have write it be too tedious here to relate Artaxerxes other call he perhaps more true Artaxares recover the persian name and empire five hundred thirty eight year as Bizarus lib. 4. reckon after Alexander the great have extinguish they and in the year of our lord 230. other say it be in the year of Christ 233. and in the year of the world 4182. and 563. after Alexander conquest other otherwise the catalogue of r r of this late Persian dynasty see agathias Bizarus Pezelius and lampadius in mellificio Hist. part 2. and 3 cedrenus and zonaras an. l. 3. etc. the persian king in that their second dynasty you may read before lib. 1. c. 13. but for better satisfaction of the reader we will here present a short view of their history @. v. of the second persian dynasty ARTAXARES Artaxares be a man of haughty spirit fight three battle with artabanus the parthian and at the three time deprive he of life and sceptre together he proceed to subdue the neighbour barbarian and pass over Tigris disturb the roman province of Mesopotamia devour in hope and threaten in term all those asian province sometime subject to the persian before the macedonian deluge Alexander Severus son of Mammea the emperor write to he to stay his course but pike not pen be like to prevail with Artaxares who bring into the field seven hundred elephant and eighteen hundred chariot and many thousand of horseman but with much bloodshed be force to leave the honour of the day to the roman herodianus seem to write hard fortune of the roman in this war but lampridius eutropius orosius and zosimus write that Severus obtain the victory and take Ctesiphon and Babylon and subdue also Arabia agathias a a agathias l. 2. affirm that Artaxares be call Magus valerianus be overthrow by sapores sapores the successor of Artaxares in Mesopotamia and there take and be make a footstool for sapores on who neck he use to tread when he take horse and at last be flay alive and sprinkle with salt zosimus say that he be treacherous take at a meeting for conference and trebellius Pollio ascribe it to the treason of his guide this cruel tyrant afflict the roman province to Cilicia and Cappadocia fill with dead body the break space between the hill feed as it be those deform gape jaw with cruel banquet of man flesh odenatus Palmirinus bring some light to the roman in this darken and dreadful eclipse of their sun and recover the roman territory his wife Zenobia after his death like another Semiramis prove a fortunate general and warrior against the persian and also against the roman from who she withhold Syria till Valerius aurelianus carry she to Rome be by unexpected accident surprise as for valerianus it be the just judgement of God for his cruel persecution of the christian who he have at first favour till one of the egyptian priest have persuade he to this and other wickedness as human sacrifice and such like euseb l. 7. c. 9 he be take of sapores an. dom. 260. after caluisius computation Buntingus have two year less in the time of probus the persian sue for peace and obtain it he procure such peace in the east say vopiscus that a rebellious mouse be not hear to peep carus his successor war against the persian and have enter their country as far as Ctesiphon be slay with a thunderbolt no roman emperor by I know not what secret destiny from the time of Crassus pass those part without unfortunate success this be an. dom. 283. diocletian send galerius against narses the persian son to Varranes or Varaaranes the second for after sapores Hormisda his son have reign a year Varranes the first three year Varranes the second sixteen and a three of that name only four month as agathias reckon but not far from carrhae fatal to the roman galerius Caesar lose b b Oros and pom. A.D. 296 almost all his army and therefore find homely welcome at his return diocletian suffer he to lackey in his purple robe some mile after his chariot indignation supply his former defect he recover his credit with the overthrow of the persian narses flee leave his wife sister and child to the conqueror a league be make with return of Armenia Mesopotamia and Assyria to the roman misdates the persian begin his reign an. dom. 301. to he an. 309. succeed his son sapores sapores 2. and reign which I think be never read of any long then he live in view of the world begin his reign before his birth which he continue threescore and ten year for Misdates c c agathias l. 4. die without issue male and leave his wife great with child the prince consult with the magi whether this future birth will be male which they affirm observe their prediction by a mare then ready to foal and the prince set on the crown or royal ensign on the mother belly acknowledge he for their king this sapores in a letter to Constantius the emperor entitle himself king of king partaker of the star brother of the sun and moon he demand all that have before belong to the persian to be restore betwixt they grow a bloody war as ammianus relate sapores take singara and bezabde an. dom. 359. but be repel into Persia by Constantius julian his successor seek to subdue the persian lose himself the best part of himself he have lose before in apostasy which pluck this destruction upon he an. 362. it be uncertain whether divine or human hand execute this justice on he jovinian be present salute emperor but force to agree on dishonourable condition with the persian leave the rabdicen carduen Rhesen Zalen and Nisibis to the persian dominion and a little after in the reign of Valens the league be break by sapores who win Ctesiphon Valens intend this war be by the goth overthrow and burn alive before he can effect any thing an. 377. when Theodosius reign the peace be renew after sapores succeed Artaxerxes and after he sapores his son both which reign nine year then follow varanes Cermasat eleven year to who succeed d d a 400. Bunt Isdigertes Isdigertes who hold peace with the roman Procopius write that Arcadius the emperor on his deathbed ann. 407. ordain in his last will this Isdigertes the tutor and protector to his son and heir Theodosius which he faithful perform agathias also acknowledge it a currant report e e Niceph. callist lib. 14. cap. 18. Maruthas be in credit with this king he be a christian bishop and by his prayer have cure he of a grievous sickness which the magi with their fiery superstition and all their labour can not effect the magi conspire against Maruthas watch opportunity that when the king shall come after the persian wont to worship the fire a man who they have hide before within the earth for that purpose cry aloud that the king shall go forth as be account of their god impious who so love a christian bishop hereupon the king bethink he of send he away but Maruthas suspect the knavery counsel the king to cause the earth to be didded up for the fire say he can speak the king go into the chapel or sanctuary and hear this voice again follow Maruthas his counsel and find out their pack and punish the author allow Maruthas to build a church wheresoever he please in Persia and while the magi yet add to their treachery he not only punish their person but distaste their religion and purpose to become a Christian but by death be prevent which happen an. 421. varanes or Vararanes his son follow not his step but both brake league with the roman and persecute the christian narses his general with his force be defeat Azamaea waste Nisibis besiege by the imperial the saracen which aid the persian strike with a strange fury and amazement drown themselves in Euphrates it be say a hundred thousand man perish Theodosius then emperor know these thing by Palladius f f socrat. hist Eccles. l. 7. c. 19 who in three day do ride from Constantinople hither and back again in as many use to fly in this manner to any the remote part of the empire with such admirable and almost miraculous expedition with his celerity make that spacious empire seem but narrow and strait Vararanes send a army of those expert soldier which be among they for their excellency call immortal but the roman sword soon prove they mortal thus succeed that war which he have begin for despite to the christian religion and profession he be force to seek peace and end or mitigate his persecution to he succeed ann. 441. another Izdigerdes who reign seventeen year and after he peroze who reign four and twenty year after he his brother Obalas Bizarus call he bless rule four year cabades his successor renew the war with the roman and no marvel for he be cruel to his own people and war even against nature for he ordain as some report that woman shall be common any wedlock-band notwithstanding whereupon his noble conspire against he deprive and imprison he bless be enthronize Scaliger have Zamaspes who four year after resign the state unto cabades again who have before reign eleven year add thereto thirty more Necephorus g g Niceph. callist l. 16. c. 36. Cearenus Zovar an. l. 3. tell that he become friend to the christian and permit free liberty of that religion upon this occasion between Persia and India be a castle call Tzundadaer wherein cabades have hear that much money and jewel be keep cabades use all mean to obtain it but in vain so strong be it as the story say guard with devil he therefore use all the persian exorcism to dispossess they and when they prevail not he seek to effect it by the jew but with the former success at last he make use of the christian who expel the spirit and deliver the castle unto he it be report that he slay zeliobe king of the hun for play on both hand and come to help he in his war against the roman have before swear to assist the emperor about these time be the manichee h h Manes first author of his heresy be flay alive and east to the dog Niceph. lib. 6. cap. 22. destroy in Persia for corrupt his son Phatuarsa with their infectious leaven he therefore slay their chief prelate Indagarus and many thousand manichee all in one day have assemble they with a wile profess that he will make that his son king he assemble also the chief of the magi glonaze and Boazanes a christian bishop for the great solemnity with like devotion as jehu sacrifice to Baal with the presence and assistance of jehonadab 2. king 10. Caluisius say this be do an. 523. cabades die an. 531. his son Cosroes Cosroes the great succeed and reign eight and forty year he about the thirteen year of justinian empire an. 539. invade the roman dominion take surus burn Berraea destroy Antiochia and with less success besiege edessa agathias prefer this Cosroes for his great exploit before Cyrus and Xerxes yet be his end ignoble and unworthy his high spirit for mauritius in the time of Tiberius enter into the persian dominion and burn some village near to the place where Cosroes then be for his recreation and see this burn spectacle wherewith indignation and grief muster great multitude of fearful unquiet enrage thought in his heart than mauritius have soldier in his army unable to bear such unwonted sight of hostile flame in his country and such unwonted fight of inward perturbation even greatness of spirit make way to pusillanimity and be weaken with colluctation of contrary passion a fever take that occasion and advantage apprehend he and soon after kill he some say his son Ormisda reign seven year with his father Simocatta hist Maur. l. 3. c. 16. he succeed and reign eight year he be exceed cruel by reason of a prophecy that his subject shall dispossess he which cause he to dispossess thousand of they of their life and make he so odious that they easy after apprehend the occasion to fulfil that subtle devilish oracle against he mauritius perform worthy attempt which make way unto he for the roman empire and then also he have good success against the persian by the valour of philippicus his general insomuch that the persian move with these and other discontent by incitement of Varamus depose Ormisda kill his wife and son before his eye which have remain to perform unto he that their last uncouth unnatural service be present after put out with burn needle thrust into they himself first imprison and after beat to death with club by Cosroes his son that Varamus have a little before be send as general against the roman army which his service be find unserviceable and the roman prevail he be not only deprive of his place but to his further disgrace be by the king commandment f f simocat l. 3. c. 8. and l. 4. c. 3. clothe in woman attire which indignity he repay not in word alone in his letter still Ormisda the daughter of Cosroes but with those unnatural and disloyal practice which he continue also against Cosroes son and heir of Ormisda force he to flee to mauritius the emperor for succour for Varamus do not approve his succession but write unto he to relinquish his royalty for fear of succeed in his father fortune in that letter he style himself Simoc. l. 4. c. 7 8. friend of the god enemy of tyrant wise religious unblamable happy provident etc. chosroes give he a answer wherein he thus write chosroes king of king lord of lord ruler of nation prince of peace salvation of man among the god a man good and eternal among man a god most illustrious most glorious conqueror rise with the sun give eye star to the night noble from his ancestry etc. but for all these great title he be compel to flee as be say and write in a low stile to mauritius theophilactus Simocatta speak of the Abares a scythian nation dwell near Ister Simoc. hist Mauric l. 1. c. 3. and 8. say that they be descend of the hun and that which word signify one that be a priest and Magus for their priest be their diviner have offend Chagan the prince of these abate flee unto their original nation dwell in the east near to the persian common call Turk this I mention to show the turkish original Turcomannia and their common descent with the hun with who posterity in Hungary they now hold such continual dissension by the testimony of a author which write his history a thousand year since in his three book and six chapter he say the hun which dwell in the north-east who the persian call Turk be subdue by king Hormisdas and whereas before the persian have use to pay they forty thousand piece of gold to buy their peace they now force these hun to pay so much for tribute to the persian the persian gold breed such surquedry and excess among the turk that they have their bed table horse-furniture and armour of solid gold which prodigality make they covetous and to demand large contribution from the persian hence arise those war and that thraldom of the turkish nation this author first of all other to my knowledge mention the turkish war which since have yield matter for author more then enough these turk be g g Bizari hist Pers. lib. 5. simocat lib. 5. cap. 10. say to help Varamus in his rebellion but both he and they receive discomfiture by narses the roman general and six thousand be take and slay the turk be ask why they help Varamus answer that they be force thereto by famine they be also mark with a black cross which they say they learn of the christian thereby to expel hunger Cosroes thus recover the kingdom by aid of the empire which Varamus have usurp to himself he h h Niceph. l. 17. and 18. lib. 5. c. 15. be deep see in the chaldaean mystery and be by a roman governor reprove for some excess in those time when he so much need their help he answer that the time do advantage he to those reproof but know say he that calamity shall also befall the roman and the babylonian nation shall rule they three week of year after that in the five week the roman shall subdue the persian which be come to pass a day shall come that shall have no night and the expect end of the empire shall be at hand in which time corruption shall be abolish and man shall live according to divine ordinance this either false or uncertain prophecy according to that deepness of Satan he utter but what effect answerable have follow I know not i i simocat l. 8. c. 1. in his time the saracen confederate with the roman spoil the country of Babylonia this Cosroes reign nine and thirty year he hold peace with the roman while mauritius live but when phocas cruel and treacherous have slay he a world of evil at once assault the empire the german gaul italian hun and persian by their army afflict the public state and the roman bishop then begin to aspire to a universal sovereignty which that murderer first entitle he unto that army which be yet ted with the blood of mauritius by the persian sword be punish and die in their own blood who have overthrow the roman in two battle make way for further conquest thus do God punish that murderer and beside to pay he in his own coin Priscus Heraclon and heraclius conspire against this conspirer and murder the murderer and have cut off his privity and his head hurl he into the sea and destroy his issue horaclius succeed in this trouble state of the empire chosroes prevail by his victorious army enter Apamea cedrenus pag. 334. edessa Caesarea Cappadocie and subdue Asia while the auares or Abares waste and spoil Europe the saracen also as in prelude of their future fortune commit great spoil in Syria this in the three year of heraclius in the four the persian take Damascus in the five jerusalem carry away k k sup. l. 2. c. 22. the cross and slay therein by instigation of the jew 90000. and subdue palaestina in the seven he invade Egypt and Africa and conquer all even to Ethiopia in the nine the auares enter Thrace with a army and Chagan chase heraclius into the city spoil many town but the next year compound on peaceable condition the persian at the same time take ancyra a city of Galatia in the twelve year of heraclius a certain ginger stephanus alexandrinus prophesy that the saracen shall rule in power and dominion three hundred and nine year and then shall endure much disquiet and trouble fifty six year what he see in the star we know not but their fate be longer-lived sae at this time send with a army from chosroes waste all the east and hold fraudulent conference with heraclius who send with he seventy chief man ambassador to chosroes all these sae treacherous lead captive and bind into Persia which yet can not satisfy his tyrannical master who because he have see heraclius and have not bring he alive cause he to be flay quick and send sarbarus against the roman heraclius begin his expedition with penitent and low seek peace with GOD who make his war prosper against the persian some say he send ambassador to chosroes who refuse all condition except they will renounce their crucify god. this GOD prevail against that presumption and deliver Gazacum into the hand of heraclius in which city be the temple of the sun the treasure of Croesus and imposture of Coles there he find the abominable image of chosroes in the globe-fashioned l l (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) etc. roof of the palace as it be sit in heaven about this be the sun moon and star which he worship superstitious and certain scepter-bearing angel stand about the same there be certain device to imitate shower of rain and the noise of thunder these all together with the temple of the fire and the city heraclius commit to the devour not the devotion of the fire he after overthrow Sarbarazai and Sarbarancas and sais persian general with all their force and so prevail that chosroes in impious revenge rob all the christian church in his dominion of their gift and treasure compel all the christian a worse sacrilege to the nestorian heresy he also send sais with a great army against heraclius and sarbarus with another against Constantinople stir up the slavin and geped to help he with the western hun or auares heraclius send one army to the safeguard of the city another against sais and with the three he go to the lazike seek to win the eastern turk call Chazari to his party these break through the caspian strait under Zebeelus next in dignity to Chagan commit exceed spoil heraclius mean while overthrow sais who die with indignation of this loss and grief for his master displeasure can not thus appease his fury but his carcase be despiteful entreat although the heaven fight for heraclius and with a sudden shower of hail cause that persian overthrow ten day be Constantinople besiege but by divine power preserve chron. Alexandrinum his reb. fus we as cedrenus and other write by a miraculous vision chosroes make Razastes his general who encounter with heraclius not far from ninive and lose his life and the field this victorious he proceed chase chosroes before he five and twenty mile in a day which can not before go five and when some have accuse sarbarus as incline to the roman he send to Cardarichas his colleague to kill he which letter be intercept cause sarbarus to become such indeed who adulterate his master letter and put in other four hundred chief man call a assembly and public read the letter cause a rebellion and in the year 626. Cosroes now at his wit end or rather quite beyond they appoint Medarses his son to be his successor and heir apparent wherewith siroe his elder son be discontent conspire to betray his father and brother to heraclius and soon after cause they both to be slay at Ctesiphon peace m m in Chron. alex. you may read the letter of siroe to heraclius be conclude with the roman and their province restore only Arabia be by Mahumet hold as a seminary of a great mischief under which the world with grief and amazement still groan lope Obregon in a large spanish book of the confutation of the Alcoran which he say he gather out of the moor writing tell that Mahemet serve heraclius in his war against Cosroes with more than ten thousand horseman ubiqu^r Homar hozman and Hali be chief commander under he and be after the victory deny pay conquer a great part of Persia to himself and when Siroes successor to Gosroes withstand he he give he the overthrow and therefore the persian choose a new king to repress these arabian and that after this heraclius send for the cross which he have recover from the persian from jerusalem to Constantinople this Palladium be gone he win jerusalem and the country about other prodigious miracle he farse into his story and describe a throne which Cosroes have make a tower of silver garnish with precious stone under the same on one side the sun on the other the moon and just with it the cross which he have take from jerusalem and that he will be adore for king and lord of the World but I will not engage myself far for this historian Siroes Adeser Barazas and Baram the daughter of Cosroes in their order of succession in that disorder and turbulent estate have scarce two year allow to they all to who succeed Ormiz de jezdegird who about the year 63 2 be overthrow and slay by the saracen and that persian kingdom then weaken by civil dissension be subdue to saracenicall servitude and that second persian dynasty continue as Scaliger n n Ios. Scalig. can. Isag. reckon in eight and twenty succession the space of four hundred and two year have a end from thence unto this time their religion be saracenicall their state govern by the Califas o o io. lampadius Mellific hist part 3. and our three book shew the order in succession of they and such commander or sultan as they have place over they till their sultan war with the Califa for sovereignty procure aid from the turk who dispossess they of their kingdom present after they have disburden they of their enemy the turk be displace and chase away by the tartar of these both saracen and turk you have the history in the former book and therefore needless here to be relate of the tartar shall follow in their order now let we a little look back to the greatness and other thing most remarkable in the persian king chap. v. of the persian magnificence and other their antiquity the time of the first dynasty howsoever Dionysius Halicarnass contract it to two hundred year and cedrenus to two hundred and fourteen yet q. Curtius who write the overthrow of the same by Alexander in the time of Claudius under who if Brissonius a a bris reg. Pers. lib. 1. curt. lib. 4. Her. in dan. 9 clem. Strom. l. 1. have gather true he be Proconsul of Africa and Hierom and Clemens alexand. and other little disagree from that our former account reckon two hundred thirty one in which space the greatness of their king appropriate the title of the great king unto themselves as Drusius in his observation and Brissonius out of dio. chrysostomus Aristides Isocrates and other have observe so Artaxerxes ezra 7.12 call himself king of king which the parthian after annex to his style the kingdom be hereditary both in Persia and Parthia the elder son beget in wedlock succeed in long expedition the heir apparent be nominate they use to be inaugurate or crown after our phrase at pasargadae b b plut. in artaxerxis by their priest which Plutarch thus describe the design king go into a chapel of the goddess of war it may be think Minerva and there put off his former habit put on that which Cyrus wear before he be king then do he eat a lump of fig and turpentine and drink a cup of sour milk their other ceremony be not know on his head be set a Cidaris or Tiara Tiara what it be vid. ap. selden tit. hon. this be a kind of cap or turban not like a feel of wool but of diverse piece of cloth sew together tritis the king differ from the common sort because he ascend straight with a sharp top not bow any way to the other persian it be deadly to wear a Tiara except the top bow in token of subjection to their forehead only the posterity of those which with Darius Histaspis slay the usurp Magus may wear they bend to the middle of their head and not hang down to their brow as the other the king Tiara be proper call Cidaris and be set on by the Surena which be a hereditary dignity next to the king about this Cidaris he wear a diadem which some author c c Drus Obseru lib. 12 cap. 12. bris l. 1. pag. 44. confound and make to be the same other otherwise it be a purple band or of blue colour distinguish with white which be wreathe about the Tiara the right or strait Tiara with that purple and white band be the note of royalty as the crown in these part the diadem in d d Diademasasciola etc. am. Marcel other country be a white band wreathe about the forehead the new king be place also in a golden throne and if he please change his former name as codomannus to Darius his subject adore he as a god so do the greek e e Isoc in paneg. ester 13.14 interpret it and Mordecas which refuse this ceremony to Haman prostrate themselves on the ground with a kind of veneration turn their hand behind their back if they have any suit to the king sperchy and bulis lacedaemonian and Conon f f justin lib. 6. the athenian refuse this rite ismenias g g Aelian v. hist lib. 1. the theban dissemble it with take up his ring which for that purpose he lot flip from his finger when he come before the king Timagoras h h valer. max. lib. 6.3 be put to death by the athenian for do it in the time of Apollonius i i Philost lib. 1. none may come to the presence of the king which have not before do the like adoration to his image they also when they come into the presence of the king hold their hand within their sleeve for default herein Cyrus junior slay Antosaces and Mitraeus as Xenophon write likewise for the great majesty they seldom be see of the people and then never on foot neither may any enter the palace without licence of the king signify his attendance first by a messenger this honour be reserve to the prince which slay smerdis which may enter at all time but when the king be in bed with his wife which intaphernes one of the seven transgress therefore lose his head yea the scripture k k ester 5. and 6. note the danger hereof in Haman the king great favourite and ester the queen neither of which have liberty of entrance without the king call or admission it be a capital offence to sit on the king throne to wear the king garment or in hunt to strike any beast before the king have strike the king as before be note of Cambyses be not subject to any law the people be hold in much slavery if that may be so call which be voluntary in this affection they which be l l Stob. ser. 12. scourge at the king command be thankful to he for that they be have in remembrance with he their obedience appear when Xerxes m m Herodot l. 8. be in a ship in danger many at his word leap into the sea to lighten the ship yea they will be their own executioner when they have offend the n n Ambros Hex. 5.21 king none may salute he without a present his birthday be observe a sacred and solemn festival his death be bewail with a silence of law and suit five day and with extinguish o o diodor. sic. lib. 17. that fire which every one observe in his house as his household deity the king abode be according to the season seven month say zonaras p p zon. annal. 1. in Babylon three in Susa and two in ecbatana aelian therefore compare they to crane and Aristides to the scythian nomad always by this shift enjoy a temperate season Susa or shushan be so call of the abundance of lily which in that language be so name say stephanus a region so defend by high mountain from the northern blast that in the summer the vehement heat parch their q q Strab. l. 15. and eustath in Dionys barley it be Strabo report and therefore they cover the roof of their house with earth two cubit deep and it kill the snake as they cross the way it be situate on choaspes and entertain the king court in winter as ecbatana in summer the chief city of the mede sometime it also remove to pasargadae and sometime to Persepolis the rich city if Diodorus r r diodor. sic. lib. 17. be believe under the sun wherein be a tower environ with a threefold wall the first of which be sixteen cubit high and make with battlement the second twice as much the three square and sixty cubit in height of hard stone with brazen gate on the east thereof be a hill of four acre wherein be the sepulcher of the king Alexander in revenge of the burn of Athens and by instigation of wine and Thais his concubine Mars Bacchus Venus three heavy unruly tyrannical enemy conspire burn this sometime treasure-house of Persia the persian court or palace have many gate and guard which take turn by lot you read the word of Aristotle in his book de mundo hereby manifest to be he or at least as ancient in that he write of the persian state flourish before Alexander in his time have subvert it some he say be call the king ear other his eye and other have other office by which the king learn whatsoever be any where do and therefore hold as a god and beside his post which bring news by fire or beacon he may in one day learn the state of that huge empire extend from the hellespont to India the Palace-roof admirable shine with the brightness of ivory silver amber and Gold his throne be of gold bear up with four pillar beset with gem his bed be also of gold which be propound the reward to Zorobabel and his companion ezra 3.3 yea Herodotus tell of a tabernacle of gold of a plane tree and a vine of gold give to Darius by pithius the bythinian this vine athenaeus s s athen. l. 12. vid. bud. as l. 4. report be adorn with jewel and hang over the king bed the grape-cluster be all precious stone in a parlour at his bed foot be three thousand talent of gold in another at the head call the king bolster be five thousand talent garden be t t ester 7. adjoin which they call paradise some very large wherein be keep wild beast as lion bear boar for the king game with spacious wood and plain enclose in wall cic. Tully out of Xenophon relate the industry of Cyrus which with his own hand have measure plant order and husband one of those pleasant paradise Alexander enrich they with tree and plant out of Greece the persian king drink the water of choaspes only which to that purpose be boil and carry with they in silver vessel wheresoever they go the parthian king drink of this u u plin. l. 6.27 and l. 36 3. dan. 8.2 and of the river eulaeus a river rise in Media which after it have bury itself again recover the light compass the tower of Susa and the religious temple of Diana Daniel call it ulay it seem to be or to become the same with choaspes and so do Ptolomey confound they they drink also only Chalybonian wine make at Damascus in Syria and their bread be make of the wheat of assos in Phrygia their sumptuous feast 10 10 ester 1 appear in the scripture beyond what be read in any story of any king in which be somewhat of every y y athen. l. 3. nation subject to he set before he his salt be bring out of Egypt among the baggage and stuff of Darius which Parmenio take at Damascus be find two hundred seventy seven cook nine and twenty scullion thirteen which have charge of white-meat seventeen which be to minister water seventy which belong to the wine-celler forty which look to the ointment and sixty six which make crown how many may we think be there in his settle court idem l. 12. his dining-room be full of musical woman whereof one begin the song the rest follow three hundred of these creature sing play dance spend the night in his bedchamber he z z cic. Tusc. quaest. l. 5. Val max. l. 9 c. 2. which can devise any new pleasure be high reward for which purpose Xerxes promise large to such epicurean-master by a open proclamation the king usual sit alone sometime his mother and wife be admit other guest sit where he may see but not be see of they yea they have slavish sauce to their sweet meat be narrow watch by the eunuch whether they cast any liberal look towards any of the king woman yet the Parthian guest have more servile entertainment as even now we show concern the multitude of their woman and curiosity of their lust the book of ester yield ample testimony Cicero add cic. in Verr. l. 5. that they bestow for the maintenance of their wife robe and dress one city for their hair another for their neck yea the revenue of whole country on such excess Socrates in Plato Alcibiades tell of a ambassador into Persia which be almost a whole day in travel through a region call the queen girdle another call the queen head-tire and so for every other part of her wardrobe the king a a vid. Xenoph. Sard. l c 11. Brisson Keckerman polit. etc. child especial the elder son be present after their birth commit to eunuch which beside education do compose and order their limb at seven year of age they learn to ride and hunt have skilful instructer for that purpose at fourteen year they be commit to the discipline of the royal master which be four choice learn the first in prudence which teach the magia of Zoroastres and the institution of a king the second in justice who teach to speak and deal true the three in temperance wherein he instruct his new disciple as the four in fortitude the persian king have one who office be to salute the king with these word arise o king and think on such thing as Mesoromasdes will have thou almost every day he perform his holy rite for which cause be slay b b athen. l. 3. every day one thousand sacrifice among which be ox ass heart the magi be present before their sacrifice they discourse of piety and when they go to this their devotion there be man on both side the way set in rank with officer call Mastigophori who suffer none but great personage to enter first be lead bull four and four together which be sacrifice to jupiter after they be lead horse to be offer to the sun then follow a chariot draw with white horse have a golden beam and crown sacred to jupiter after that the chariot of the sun like the former then a three chariot the horse cover with Scarlet after which follow man carry fire and next the king in his chariot before which go four thousand target man and two thousand speareman about it there follow three hundred with dart on horseback two hundred horse with golden bridle and after they three thousand persian and in the last place the mede armenian hireans Xenophon indeed which write this in his institution of Cyrus intend rather the frame of a just empire than the truth of history yet profess to relate no other rite and custom then which the persian embrace neither do he in these thing disagree from Herodotus and Curtius the king chariot be draw with white horse the drown of one of which be the cause of dry c c sen. de Ira. l. 3 c. 21. the river gyndes for Cyrus enrage for the loss of his white palfrey divide the river by force of man into three hundred and twenty rill so that it wilderd and lose itself in those many byway a argument what division can do these horse be of the nisaean race in Media when the king descend from his chariot a golden stool be set he to step on one always attend his chariot with such a stool while he ride in his chariot he spend the time in whitling with a knife not in read or any grave meditation and therefore be unlearned when he go on progress into media d d Aelian v. b. 14.12 and l. 15. animal c. 26. he enjoin the country to spend three day before to hunt scorpion which there abound allow reward therefore they use by themselves or their legate to visit their officer in the province and to punish or prefer they according to their merit in judgement they not only consider the crime and accusation but the counterpoise also of their virtue and the clemency e e am. Marcel l. 30. of Artaxerxes in their irrevocable law appear in cut off the Tyarae of condemn person in stead of their head as often as the king enter into Persepolis every matron be to have a piece of gold give she the man also be reward which multiply child but especial reward be bestow on they which be call Orosange which have deserve well of the king who name and fact be therefore record ester 2. aemil. probus as we read of mordecai and his recompense Themistocles receive of the king bounty the city Magnesia to find he bread which region be worth fifty talent yearly for wine myus for cate the chief gift give to any be a mill of gold the king birthday be a solemn feast call f f Herod l. 9 Tycta that be perfect for the magnificence thereof in which he give gift to the people yea he may not deny any petition then make to he the king nourish so many indian dog for hunt that four great village in the plain of Babylon be assign to their sustenance Artaxerxes cause megabyzus as ctesias write to be behead for strike a lion with his dart which be ready to assault the king because he therein transgress the law and prevent the king trial of his valour the revenue of the tribute be 14560. euboike talent the silver and gold be melt and keep in earthen vessel which be break when they come to use the same beside this the subject province yield to the maintenance of the king other thing as Armenia horse Babylonia four month victual and the rest of Asia the other eight and other region their peculiar commodity the king ordinary guard night and day guard the palace the most of they persian another band of 10000 choice horseman be whole persian and be call immortal one thousand of the best of they call Doryphori and Melophori be choose into the king guard curt. l. 3. they receive no money but allowance of victual for their wage Curtius mention a guard next to the king person call the king kinsman which be 15000. but it be too tedious to recite the homotimi ber. reg. Pers. Megistanes and other his court-officer and attendant the Surena which be the chief magistrate and other whereof Brissonius have write as their life be burden with voluptuousness so they prepare for their death that they may descend sudden into the grave job. 21. psal. 73. as job say of the prosperity of some wicked without any band to use David phrase of a linger death certain poison temper of the excrement g g Aelian animal l. 4. c. 41. of the Dircaerus a indian bird which in short time without sense of grief deprive they of life after the king death they extinguish the sacred fire which rite Alexander observe h h Died. s. l. 17. in hephaestion funeral in Persepolis be erect unto they stately monument with title and epitaph inscribe the monument of the king there i i Garcias Figueroa Epist. with other antiquity have conquer time and Alexander fire yet remain so fresh as if they be new make many still shine like glass among which a jasper table be remarkable inscribe with letter which none can read all of a pyramid or delta form in diversified posture twenty such pillar remain of admirable greatness beauty and likeness of a last marble with image in long habit like the venetian senator with wide sleeve and long beard other sit as in high arch seat with footstool in great majesty there be also huge colossean horse with giantly rider of marble and although a goodly fertile country do invite habitation of ten league extent every way yet be there now but one poor village of four hundred householder call Margatean in this plain of Persepolis our author acknowledge Diodorus his relation just agree with his eye and esteem these monument far beyond all other the world miraculous I may here terrify the delicate and already-wearied reader with representation of their marshal march discipline number armour and the like of which Brisson have write a whole book yet because we have thus far wade in matter of the persian magnificence let we take a little view of the heir and successor to that greatness great Alexander in state enter Babylon thus by Curtius relate many come forth to meet he the way be all strew with flower and garland on both side be erect silver altar lade with frankincense and all kind of odour there follow he for present drove of horse and cattle lion and leopard in grate be carry before he the magi after their manner of procession sing have the next place after they the chaldaean and the babylonian both diviner and artificer with musical instrument then the horseman furnish beyond magnificence in excess of prodigality Sac cer. rom. ec. l. 1. the king with his army follow and last of all the townsman he that will compare with these relation that which in the book of the roman ceremony be write of the pope strait Tiara environ with a triple crown the veneration perform to he by all even emperor kiss his foot hold his bridle and stirrup put their shoulder under his chair when he list to ride on man shoulder hold water to his hand and bear the first dish to his table the change of his name at his election his palfrey always white like the nisaean lead before he one of which carry his god under a canopy his scala procession and other rite shall see some hence borrow most exceed the persian excess once all religion with they seem turn into state and ceremony the soul be flee and this bodily exercise body of exercise in exercise of the body only leave chap. 5 of the persian magi. the name of Magi be sometime apply say some to all the persian Boskhieri (@) or else to a particular nation among they sometime it signify the most excellent in philosophy and knowledge of nature or in sanctity and holiness of life thus a a suidas inv Magus psellus de Daem scal. 327. suidas call the persian magi philosophi and Philothei studious of knowledge of nature and of God sometime it signify such as we now call magician practiser of wicked art among the persian this name be ancient and honourable say b b Pevecrus c. magia and Delrio mag. l. 1. Proclus an. and daem Peucerus apply only to the priest which live in high reputation for dignity and authority be also philosopher as the chaldaean be to these be commit the custody of religion of ancient monument of late history of public record and the explanation of the persian wisdom who account appear in that after Cambyses death one of they be report to succeed in the throne now whereas the ethnic have a tradition of two c c Brutus be terrify with such a spectrum^ the like they tell of Marius and many other genij which attend every man one good the other evil proceed in likelihood from divine truth concern good and evil angel which be either minister spirit for man good or tempter unto evil curious man hence take occasion to devise new art which be call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) by the one call upon the good daemon or genius by the other on the evil which evil one can easy turn himself into a angel of light to delude blind people be indeed as in our white and black witch at this day worse when a angel then when a devil hereof be diverse kind d d (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) necromancy which invocate the spirit of the dead diverse kind of divination of which smoky soot the heathen divine poet and our poetical divine in the tale of hell and purgatory strive who shall have the black tincture they have also their lecanomanciae which be observe in a basin of water wherein certain plate of gold and silver be put with jewel mark with their juggle charactar and thence after pronunciation of their word be answer whisper e e (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Peucerus and Reginold scot. in Detect mag. and Calius Calcag Amat. mag. comp. Agrippa van. sci. c. 42. and seq. gastromancy procure answer by picture or representation in glass-vessel of water after the due rite catoptromancy receive those resemblance in clear glass chrystallomancy in crystal dactyliomancy be a divination with ring which perhaps Gyges use consecrate by certain position of the heaven and devilish enchantment onymancy with oil and soot daub on the nail of a undefiled child and hold up against the sun hydromancy with water aeromancy with air but what shall I add the many more name of this artless art unworthy the name infinite diversify be these blind by way of darkness and mischief Delrio have other division of magic which from the efficient he divide into natural artificial and diabolical from the end into good and bad and this bad which be by explicit or implicit compact with devil into magia and Zoroaster be suppose author both of the good and bad unto the persian natural magic be by Delrio divide into that which work wonder not miracle and that which divine but I be weary of this magical search leave we they in their maze circle labyrinth of error and let we take view of the persian magi from whence Pliny f f Plin. l 10. c. 1. derive the first original of magical vanity which be say he compound of three art that exercise most imperious power over the mind of man physic and that offer herself more sublimate and pure in the sacred name and rite of religion beautify also with the addition of mathematical science a threefold cord not easy break like a three-headed Cerberus or treble crown prelate hold the world in fear or love thereof Xoroastres who live at eudoxus testify six thousand year before Plato first invent it in Persia hermippus affirm that Agonax teach he Apusorus and zarate among the mede Marmaridius the babylonian Hippocus the arabian and Zarmocenidas the assyrian have be famous for their practice and writing of this Art. Pythagoras Empedocles domocritus Plato sail far to learn it undertake long exile rather the pilgrimage or peregrination to that end he impious add Moses and jochabel it may be he mean joshua to this impious number the scripture tell of jannes and jambre hier. in dan. 2. plin. l. 30. c. 1. and Simon Magus famous in this infamy Hierom say they be the philosopher of the chaldaean and that the king do all thing after the direction of their art which they be Pliny word in the east rule the king of king porphirius affirm that they which be wise in divine mystery and perform they be call of the persian magi the same say Picus that philosopher be among the greek the like have philo and Proclus and Arnobius of Hosthanes Magus they be studious in prayer institute sacrifice vid. patric zoroa and mystery as the indian Brahmin and grecian theology acknowledge angel paradise the soul immortality Patricius also add to this their philosophy and theology astronomy and physic and all knowledge of nature it be like that in the persian magi concur both a certain stock or kindred which be also so call as be say and the philosophical inquisition of nature and the priestly function and also some either implicit or explicit society with devil the same they be at least in profession and reputation that the philosopher with the greek the priest in Egypt gymnosophist in India chaldaean in Babylon druid in Gallia and in this our isle the italian and other religious person the treasurer of their theology and philosophy in other place as for those magi mention in the g g matth. 2.1 boskhier ara gospel some suppose they to come from Aethiopia some from Arabia some from mesopotamy some from chaldaea and some from Persia and some from diverse of those region whencesoever they come they have a bright star to guide they with divine light than those magical of hellish fire can yield Plato h h Plato Alcib apul. apolog. magus commend this magia and call it Machagistia and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the worship of the god and say that the king of Persia learn it as a knowledge of divine mystery wherein by the world commonwealth they be instruct to govern their own other as they be lead by differ affection do as much discommend they and true as in the chaldaean and egyptian priest their search out the mystery of nature can but deserve commendation but their abuse this natural philosophy to unnatural conspiracy with devil can but be detest of those which be not themselves detest of god. and either from this devilish conspiracy or overcurious vanity do arise their prediction of future event in which respect the ethnic have they in high reputation ammianus marcellinus i i am. Marcellin l. 23. say that Zoroastres add much to this art from the chaldaean mystery and hystaspes the father of Darius from the Brahmanes which he in his indian travel have find in a woody solitariness and learned of they the motion of the star and pure rite of sacrifice which he teach the magi and they together with the skill of divination deliver to their posterity by tradition and that progeny be always consecrate to divine service and keep continual burn certain fire which first come from heaven a small portion whereof be wont to be carry before the king of Asia there be but a few of they at the first and it be unlawful to touch the sacrifice or approach to the altar before the Magus with a certain set speech have pour on his sacred preparative liquor afterward be increase in number they grow into a entire nation and inhabit unwall town be govern by their own law and honour for religion Cicero write cic. divin l. 1. that the magi do assemble together in fana into certain temple or consecrate place to consult about their divination they presage to Cyrus thirty year reign they drink the herb Theangelis and use also the herb aglaophon or Marmaritis when they will divine plin. l. 24.17 vel. l. 2. they divine by the note and mark of the body they foretell the event of prodigy they may not teach any but persian the mystery of their science without the king leave and yet Pliny say that Plato Democritus Empedocles and Pythagoras plin. l. 30. undertake exile as be say before rather then travel to learn the same which after their return they teach Apollonius also for the same cause go into Persia and India who philosophy plain appear by the history of his life to be soil with magical impurity and although some commend one sort of magia as be their theology and philosophy yet see their philosophy be corrupt with curiosity and their theology with superstitious idolatry it can not be free from some kind of at least implicit sorcery as the example of those c c apollinius Hosthanes charendas Democritus and Pythagorici and platenici which be most eminent herein do show such as one pase be who by enchantment will make show and resemblance of sumptuous feast with many attendant and have a magical d d suidas hence come the proverb (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) or enchant halfpenny which will return to he again when he have buy any thing therewith yea howsoever Patricius will not excuse only but high commend the oracle as he term they of Zoroaster yet do he cite out of he that barbarous name must not be change for all thing have their name of God which have a unspeakable power in holy thing which word seem to incline to charm which be common in barbarous unsignificant term other thing which he with great pain have gather out of the Platonic stamp with zoroaster name be many of they divine be interpret in the best sense for they be for the most part obscure and many exceed the sense of such weak reader as I confess myself some I have here express in all the world shine the trinity of which the beginning be unity Zoroas orac. 324. ap patric vid. Heur etc. the father perfect all thing and deliver they to the second mind which all mankind call the first he remain in the paternal profundity it be the mind of the mind which be framer of the fiery world all the world be of fire and water and earth and air he fasten a great company of not-wandring star and seven wander creature join fire to fire the earth in the midst and the water in the receptacle of the earth and the air above they let the immortal soul lift her eye upward not downward into this dark world which be unstable mad heady crooked always emcompass a blind depth hate the light of which the vulgar be carry seek paradise the soul of man will after some sort bring God into itself have nothing mortal it be whole ravish of God it resound the harmony under which be the mortal body extend the fiery mind to the work of piety I desire not sacrifice and innards these be play flee these thing if thou will open the sacred paradise of piety where virtue and wisdom and the good law be gather together if these thing be harsh what will these obscurity be in his theology wherein he first place one beginning than a paternal profundity of three trinity every of which have the father the power the mind next in order be the intelligible jynx and after it Synocheus Empyraeus and Aetherealis and materialis and after these the Teletarchae after which the Fontani patres Hecate and such a rabble of name follow that the recital will seem to conjure the reader into some magical maze or circle they which be curious of those inextricable labyrinth may resort to psellus Patricius and the Platonic which ascribe these thing to the assyrian and chaldean as they do to Zoroaster also Delrio and Patricius find six of the zoroaster mention in author Goropius after his wont paradoxical none at all the first of which be inventor of this magic a chaldaean suppose to live in the time of Abraham Berosus first and after e e suidas in julianus julianus a magician both chaldaean communicate these mystery to the greek and diverse of those heretic f f Vid. iren. Tertul. August and dan. etc. in the prime age of the christian church be not a little sour with this magical leaven as appear by Iraeneus epiphanius Augustine and other that write against they basilides his Abraxas the mystical character of which name make three hundred sixty five the number of day in the year and of heaven after his opinion be suppose the same with Mitbra the persian deity and hence to have derive his magical descent which we may note of other if this belong not to another labour the magi have one chief among they in their society call by Sozomene g g sozom. l. 2 c. 9 magorum Cicero h h Cicero l. 1. affirm that none may be king of Persia before they have learn the discipline of the magi neither be it any more lawful for every one to be a Magus then to be a king such be their estimation in Persia Strabo i i Strabo l. 15. magus say Catullus Sivera sic. luc. l. 8. tell that they use carnal company with their mother and when they be dead be cast forth unbury to be a prey to the bird Heurnius make Zoroaster author of incestuous copulation of all sort and k k otho Heurs indicus c. 28. of the not-burying rite but either to burn or cast forth the carcase yea author write that he himself desire and obtain to be consume with fire from heaven nothing seem to they more unlucky and sign of former lewdness then that no bird or beast will prey on their dead and the soldier which sicken in their army be lay forth yet breathe with bread water and a staff to drive away the beast and fowl which yet when their strength fail they easy devour both the meat and keeper if any recover and return home the people shun he as a ghost nor will suffer he to follow his former trade of life till he be expiate by the magi and as it be restore again to life the roman in pity pass through some part of Persia where they find a carcase in the field bury it but the night follow in a vision a grave old man in habit of a philosopher reprove that fact will they to leave the naked body to the dog and bird agath l. 2. and the mother earth say he will not receive those which have pollute their mother which in the morning they find verify the earth have vomit up that carcase which there lie on the top of the grave the magi hereby appear to have have intercourse with the devil as by their prediction also cic. Tusc. 1. of Sylla ochus sapores and other mention by paterculus Aelianus agathias and other historian thus be the magi bury in the bowel of beast and bird Tully say that the other persian be wrap in wax and so preserve the Ostanae and Astrampsychi be by suidas reckon successor of the magi. Jerome l l jovin l. 2. cite out of Eubulus three kind of the magi the most learned of they live only on meal and herb pausonias m m Pausan l. 6. report that in Lydia in the city Hierocesarea and Hypaepo he see temple have persian surname and in every of those temple a chapel and altar whereon be ash not like in colour to the ordinary sort the Magus enter into the room lay dry wood on the altar after that he have set his mitre on his head and then at the name of a certain God sing barbarous hymn which the greek understand not out of the booke which be do the heap be fire and the flame break forth Diogenes Laertius n n diog. Laert. vit. Philos. l. 1. relate that these magi spend their time in the service of their god offer unto they prayer and sacrifice as if none but they may be hear they dispute of the substance and generation of the god who they reckon to be the fire water and earth they reprehend image especial such as make a differ sex of male and female among the god they discourse of justice to burn their dead body they hold it impious but to lie with their own mother or daughter they account lawful they practise divination and foretelling affirm that the god appear to they that the air be full of form o o (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) or shape which subtle and as it be by evaporation infuse themselves into the eye they forbid outward ornament and the use of gold their garment be white the ground their bed herb cheese and bread their food Aristotle say that they hold two beginning a good spirit and a evil call the one jupiter and Oromasdes the other Pluto and Arimanius Empedocles p p Empedocles translate this plant into philosophy and long after q q manes father of the manichee Manes a persian heretic into divinity theopompus add these opinion of they that man shall again be restore to life and become immortal and that all thing consist by their prayer hecataeus that the god be beget Clearchus that the Gymnosophistae descend from the magi. thus far Diogenes plut. de osir and Isid. Plutarch in his treatise de osir and Isid cite approve and apply the opinion of the magi unto many other which they conceive touch their two beginning Arimanius and Orimazes for whereas they see such a mixture of evil in every good which make Solomon to brand they all with the title of vanity they gather that good can not be either cause or effect of evil find out this remedy worse than the disease to hold two author of all thing call r r or Ormisdae or oromazde this be the sun Orimazes a God and Arimanius the fountain of evil a devil the one cause of light the other of darkness betwixt these two they place Mithres as mediator or intercessor Zoroastres be author of this opinion to the first of these be praise and vow offer to the late mournful devotion for rub a certain herb call Omomi they call on this pater and Orcus than they wash it with the blood of a slay wolf and carry it into a shadowy place where they pour it out they assign plant partly to the good partly to the bad God as they do also quick creature the earthly creature to the good the watery to the bad and therefore esteem he happy that have kill most of they oromaze say they beget of pure light and Arimanius the child of darkness war one against another though first create six god benevolence truth polity wisdom riches honest delight the late as many contrary when Oromazes have thrice enlarge himself he be as far beyond the sun as the sun be from the earth and form the star of which one he fix as a guardian and watchman the dog-star he make other twenty four god which he close in a egg Arimanius do as much but his twenty four break their shell and so become good thing and evil mingle but a fatal time shall come when Arimanius the author of plague and famine shall perish and then shall be one society of all mankind in happiness use but one language theopompus say according to their opinion that one of these god shall reign three thousand year the other be discomfit and other three thousand they shall fight and labour to destroy one another at last Dis pater shall be destroy and man shall be happy this opinion of the magi the chaldean have apply to their astronomy in the seven planet make two good two bad three indifferent the grecian to their jupiter Dis pater and harmonia Empedocles to his friendship and discord Aristotle to his to his one and two Plato to his to his devilish heresy as before be say the persian in this respect as some expound their mystery call Mithra as a three person and reconciler of the other two and there have not want which ascribe this threefold Mithra to that threefold day as they interpret that sign of the sun go back ten degree in the day of hezekiah which if there be hour make the day twice ten beside the ordinary twelve hour but as in Hercules his generation a threefold night attend these misty mystery which I can as willing construe of some misconstrue notice of the bless trinity ap. Briss dio chrysostomus tell of Zoroaster the author of this science that inflame with the love of virtue he forsake the world and go apart into a mountain and afterward leave that habitation he seem to those to who he will show himself which be only to the magi to shine with a fire which come down from heaven upon he this perhaps be borrow and pervert from the shine face of Moses only persian say s s Gramay Asia Gramay be choose into their number the name Magi be among author apply also to the chaldean which in Babylon profess the same art and superstition the disciple say t t luciani Necrom Lucian of Zoroastres of who cunning in charm you may read in his necromantia a pleasant discourse mithrobarzanes a chaldean Magus and Menippus who he wash twenty nine day in Euphrates by the moon and in the morning set he against the rise sun with long charm after that spit three time in his face he bring he back again not once look aside their meat be acorn their drink milk mulse and the water of Choaspi their lodging on the wide field on the grass after all this he bring he about midnight to Tigris where wash he he purify he with a torch and the herb squilla and other thing etc. which howsoever Lucian suit to his scoff humour yet I have insert as somewhat express their superstition observe in charm and divination chap. 7 of the religious and other rite of the ancient persian @. i. of their god and superstition out of Herodotus leave these magi let we take a view of the persian religious rite which u u Herodotus lib. 1. Herodotus thus describe the persian neither erect image nor altar nor temple and impute it to madness in such as do therefore as I think because they be not of the greek opinion that the god have rise from man their custom be ascend up the high hill to offer sacrifice to jupiter call the whole circle of heaven jupiter they sacrifice to the sun and moon and earth to the fire and water and wind to these only they have accustom to sacrifice from the beginning they sacrifice also to Urania which they have learn of the assyrian and arabian the assyrian call Venus Militta the arabian alitta the persian metra their rite in sacrifice be these be to sacrifice they neither set up altar nor kindle fire nor use vestment pipe cake or libament but he which intend to sacrifice place the sacrifice in a clean place call upon that god wear their Tiara 10 10 see sup c. 5. gird about with myrtle the sacrificer pray not for himself alone but general for all persian and especial for the king and after that the sacrifice be cut into small piece he strew under the sudden flesh small herb chief Trisoly and set the flesh in order thereon the Magus stand by sing y y Theogonia some hymn of the generation of the god which they hold to be a most effectual enchantment without one of their magi no sacrifice be account lawful after all this the sacrificer use the flesh at his pleasure of all day every man account his own birthday to be most solemn observe and then make great cheer the rich sort than set whole beef camel horse ass bake in a oven or furnace on the table the poor small beast the persian be small eater but in their drink consult of the weighty affair of which they deliberate fast but pronounce sentence after they be well in drink to vomit or make water open be unlawful to they those that be equal salute when they meet each other with a mutual kiss which be fasten on the cheek only if they be of unequal degree they hold themselves the best of all man their neighbour so much better how much near they they dwell they be much addict to venery with both sex next unto martial valour they repute excellent the procreation of many child the king allow annual present to he who have beget most child and therefore they use many woman the child come not in his father sight till he be five year old but live with the woman that if he die before his father shall thence conceive no grief from that time till he be twenty he learn three thing to ride to shoot to speak truth for to lie be with they the most shameful thing the second to be in debt for one fault only no man ought to be punish whatsoever be not meet to be do ought not to be speak a leprous person if he be a citizen may not enter into the city nor have any society with man for this disease be send say they for some offence against the sun if he be a forrenner they banish he out of their region and for the same cause carry into that region white pigeon in a river they neither spit nor make water nor wash but have they in very religious veneration they may not cast any carcase or pollution therein these thing say Herodotus I affirm of the persian out of my own knowledge that which follow I do not so well know that they bury not their dead body before they be tear of some fowl or dog but I well know that their magi do wrap they up in wax and then bury they these magi differ both from other man and from the egyptian priest in this that these pollute themselves with the death of nothing but their sacrifice but the magi with their own hand kill any thing except a man and a dog yea they esteem it some great exploit if they have kill very many ant or serpent or other thing which creep or fly thus far Herodotus @. 2 of the same and other rite out of Strabo Strabo a a libr. 11. name Anaitis amanus and Anandatus god of the persian when the persian emperor have overthrow the b b these Goropius with dutch etymology and interpretation bring from the cimmerian and saxon see his Saxonica pag. 606. sacae they encompass with a wall a certain rock situate in a field and erect a temple of the aforesaid god there institute yearly solemnity name sacae which of the inhabitant of zela be yet celebrate so they call the place that town in great part belong to they which be call sacred servant to which Pompey add a great country some report that Cyrus have overcome the sacae attribute this victory to divine power consecrate that day to his Country-goddess name it Sacaa and wheresoever the temple of that goddess be there also be celebrate those sacaean feast in manner of the bacchanal day and night the man and woman drink themselves drunken Strabo in the end of the same eleven book mention their temple and among other the temple of Tanais which before in Herodotus be deny to be the use of the persian c c cit. de leg. lib. 2. Cicero blame the magi for procure Xerxes to burn all the temple of Greece because they include their god in wall and to who the whole world be a temple and house their devotion to the sun and moon make they spare Delos sacred to Apollo or the sun and the temple of Diana or the moon at Ephesus as a interpreter of Aristophanes have gloss some hold that Xerxes burn the grecian temple for revenge of the burn of Sardis and the temple of cybele by the athenian and not for hatred of all temple the greek will not permit the temple so burn to be re-edify that those ruinous place may be place of argument for revenge to all posterity the jonian as Isocrates testify curse they which shall repair they d d Strab. lib. 15. Strabo thus also report of the persian they have neither image nor altar they sacrifice in a high place they think heaven to be jupiter they worship the sun who they call Mithra the moon also and Venus and the fire and the earth and the wind and the water they sacrifice in a clean place and present their sacrifice crown and when as the magas ruler of this business have divide the flesh in piece to every one they go their way leave no part thereof to the god who say they be satisfy with the soul of their sacrifice some as it be report lie a part of the numble on the fire they sacrifice especial to the fire and to the water lay on the fire dry stick the bark pull off and lay thereon fat tallow and pour on the same oil they kindle the same not blow with their breath but fan or otherwise enforce the wind thereto if any blow the fire or cast any dead thing or dirt therein he be punish with death they perform their water-ceremony in this sort come to a lake river or fountain they make a ditch and there slay a sacrifice with great heed that none of the next water be touch with the blood after lay the flesh on myrtle and laurel the magi burn the same with small twig and make certain prayer sprinkle oil mix with milk and honey not in the fire or water but on the earth they be a long while mutter their prayer hold a bundle of small tamarisk-twig that which in one place Strabo say they worship Mars only be a fault of the negligent writer as e e be cas Annot. in strab 15. Strabo lib. 15. casaubon have observe in his note in Cappadocia where be very great store of the magi which of the fire be call Pyrethi and many temple of the persian god they slay not the sacrifice with a knife but a club or mallet wherewith they beat it the Pyreitheia be great enclose place in the midst whereof there be a altar thereon the magi keep much ash and a fire continual burn whither they every day resort and make their prayer about a hour space hold a bundle of twig before the fire have their head cover with a kind of labeled mitre hang down on both side that the string cover their lip these thing be do in the temple of Anaitis and amanus for there be their temple and their image of amanus be carry in procession these thing we have see it seem that whereas Herodotus report they have no temple altar nor image and Strabo so often mention their temple and here the altar and image of amanus that in Herodotus day they have none which grow afterward in use as a foreign rite bring in among the persian after the macedonian have conquer they or else that there be differ sect among their magi some as these in Cappadocia embrace altar image and temple some refuse some or all these for otherwise Strabo disager not only from Herodotus but from himself before deny they the use of altar and image and here affirm it of the Cappadocian magi in other thing of the persian religion perhaps the burn of the grecian temple purchase to they that conceit with the vulgar we know they honour the temple and altar at jerusalem and less matter set on the friar last make silly papist believe now that protestant have no church not religion nor scarce the shape of man julius firmicus f f jul. fir. cap. 4. and 5. in his treatise of the mystery and error of profane religion to Constantine and constans emperor speak of the assyrian and persian that the assyrian ascribe the principality of the element to the air the image whereof they worship still it with the name of juno or Venus the virgin who the quire of their priest worship with effeminate voice and gesture their skin polish and attire fashion like woman yea their priest become impure ganymedes and sustain the sodomitical lust of other in the temple not shame but glory of such devotion and compose themselves to all delicate lascivious filthy behaviour and thus wanton dress with much minstrelsy call upon the goddess to infuse into they a divine and prophetical spirit easy may that impure spirit find access and entertainment in such impure body but the persian and all the magi prefer the fire these divide jupiter into two power metamorphose his nature into both sex they make the woman with a three form countenance wound about with monstrous serpent fit ensign for the devil worship and worship a man which have drive away kine apply his holy to the power of the fire he they call Mithra who blind devotion be do in place answerable namely in hide cave @. 3 of the same out of christian and other author hesychius say that Mithras or the sun be chief god with the persian and therefore the most religious and inviolable oath of the king be by Mithra and this be confirm by g g jul. Firm. pro. rel. cap. 5. firmicus also who say that the persian prefer the fire before all the other element and that they call the same Mithra the reason be because they hold as in the begin of this work we note out of Zoroaster that the sun and all the star be celestial fire they perform their devotion to the same in dark cave where they can not see the brightness of that light this Jerome call Mithras den and Tertullian affirm that Mithras knight or soldier be initiate in the same to whatsoever god they sacrifice they first call upon the fire and pour out their prayer thereto to this fire they dedicate certain chapel or oratory wherein to keep it always burn these be call Pyreia of which they suppose that it come down from heaven they worship all (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) whatsoever h h eustath in Dionys have any resemblance of fire as the carbuncle stone they observe differ ceremony in their fire tnd water-devotion to the fire i i max. tyr. they use these set word when they add fuel thereto lord fire eat they offer wine in a cup which they call condy. the costly sacrifice of their king we have already mention Plutarch k k Plutarch in Artax. tell that Artaxerxes marry his own daughter Atossa heraclide add his other daughter amestris and when Atossa be leprous his love notwithstanding continue and he beseech juno for she touch the ground with his hand replenish the way between the temple and palace which be sixteen furlong with offer of gold silver purple horse Plutarch l l de phot. in vit. ath. in 258. write that amestris the wife of Xerxes in sacrifice to Pluto for her health bury twelve man quick in the earth to Mithra say photius they offer man woman and child and as they tell of moloch seven ambry so also be relate of Mithra d d cell ap. Orig. l. 1. according to the number of the seven planet we may further add from Gramay e e gram. as persica his collection out of diverse author and from other concern the persian religion that they sometime observe the grecian deity call jupiter Bel Hercules sand Venus Anaitis to jupiter be sacred a chariot with a beam of gold they sun the worship by the name of Mithra and Eldictus at sunrising and adore also the paint image thereof they account the horse the sun peculiar beast and offer unto he white horse over Darius his tabernacle the image of the sun enclose in the crystal shine forth so that it may be see of all the order also of Darius his march when he war against Alexander have in their first place their fire which they call sacred and eternal carry on silver altar next hereunto the magi sing their country-hymn follow by three hundred sixty five young man so many as their year have day clothe in bright red then come Jupiter chariot draw by white horse after who follow a horse of exceed greatness consecrate to the Sun their rider have white garment and golden rod likewise both side of the king chariot be adorn with image of gold and silver two be most eminent among they the one of peace the other of war that soldier which be initiate in Mithra hollow order be first prove by eighty several kind of punishment and if he continue steadfast he be wash put on his head a f f Tertul. de Coron. crown with a sword interpose chaste virgin be hollow the sun priest or nun they worship Diana who they call Nannea as some will have it in that history of g g 2. mac. 1.13 Antiochus they solemnize certain feast the chief whereof be that of Mithra another holy day they call the destruction h h athenaeus lib. 12. of vice in which the magi kill venomous thing and offer and the servant lord it five day together rule both the family and their master Magophonia they celebrate in memory of the magi slay by Darius Histaspis and his colleague of their holiday Sacaea before be speak in which some report that the servant change office and garment with the master Minutius foelix i i min. foel Octau arnob. con gent. lib. 6. object against they their incestuous copulation with their mother Arnobius deride their worship of Rivers the christian father and heathen author be plentiful in the narration of the persian vanity Eusebius k k euseb praepar. lib. 6. c. 8. cite a say of bardesanes syrus among the persian there be a law to marry their sister daughter and mother which custom the persian observe also in other country and therefore other nation hate they call they Magussaei of which be many in Egypt Phrygia and Galatia who posterity succeed they in the same wickedness this name Magussaei be derive of magi. @. 4 of the persian education and school but of all other thing this be most commendable and admirable which the persian observe for learning and practice of virtue if we give like credit to l l Xenophon cyrop lib. 1. Xenophon herein as m m Briss lib. 2. a. du verdier etc. other have do they have a kind of public school call the free or liberal market not for the sale of merchandise which kind of market the ancient persian n n Herod lib. 1. want but the learning of ingenuous liberal and virtuous condition this be divide into four part one for child till seventeen year of age the second for youth to seven and twenty the three for man till fifty the four for old man in this liberal market or college be a palace and judgement-place early in the morning the child resort hither here also be the stripling and the riper-aged man daily the old man often the stripling board and lodge there except they be marry and present themselves to the magistrate in armour each court have twelve prefect according to the number of the persian tribe to the child be old grave man appoint likewise to the youth man of ripe age as master of manner the child come not in the father sight till five year of age or as Valerius Maximus o o val. max. l. 2. cap. 6. have till seven and especial learn truth they be teach by these prefect the rule of justice not by bare rule but by example for which cause also Augustus p p sueton. aug. cap. 36. will have the senator child present in the Court yea a good part of the day be to this end spend by those prefect in hear and decide such case as fall out among these their scholar about theft reproach or other wrong next to truth and justice they learned sobriety abstinence continence and temperance wherein they be well further by the example of their master neither may they q q cic. Tusc. quast. lib. 5. eat but in their presence and with their leave and that not of the choice fare but bread and cress whereto they add drink from the next river they plant in they a hatred of vice especial of lie and in the next place of debt which can but be attend with much disquiet and therefore wise do Augustus command to buy he the pillow of a roman gentleman that die incredible indebt as if there have therein rest some sleep power whereon one so much indebt can take any rest ingratitude be as little grateful as the former and by the persian law ingrateful person be subject to accusation and punishment as not Xenophon only but r r am. Marcel lib. 23. marcellinus also have mark howsoever Seneca s s senec. de ben. lib. 2. cap. 7. find such a law only among the macedonian which perhaps be hence borrow they hate such as forsake their friend and countryman in need their awful respect to their parent be such that they may not sit in the mother presence without her leave the father have tyrannical power over his child for life and death that which be unto they unlawful in deed be not permit in obscene and filthy word to be speak thus be the nobleman child bring up near the palace gate and in the province near the gate of the deputy or governor for bodily exercise they learn to shoot to cast dart to ride and manage unruly horse and to fight on horseback and this be their education till seventeen year of age at which time they be of the second rank of springal and youth and for ten year after do not repair home at night but lay and abode in this court or college when the king go on hunt half of they attend he in armour their diet be the same but somewhat large as be before relate of the child and in hunt if it continue two day have but one day allowance they use to run long race of thirty or forty furlong they exercise the sling leap and wrestle the king propound reward to the victor the help of these be use by the magistrate against robber murderer and the like wicked person as also of the man which be the three order the seminary of magistrate and soldiery of the persian till they be fifty year old or somewhat more at which age they be free from muster and foreign employment but at home be employ in public and private judgement none may attain this honour in age but by those degree before express nor may any have that education but the child of the rich which be able to bear the charge it be unlawful among the persian t t am. mar. lib. 23. to laugh in loud manner open or open or by the way to do the easement of nature by siege urine or vomit or to make water stand @. v. of the persian luxury and marriage funeral etc. but this ancient persian discipline and sobriety with wealth and looseness be afterward corrupt especial in drink to repress which the king make a order est. 1. that none shall be compel to forget their health in remember of health or other bacchanal device whereof will GOD we have less cause to complain the use of harlot u u Ambros. de Helia cap. 15. be also add to their drink which when the ambassador send to Amyntas king of Macedon to demand earth and water which be the persian custom when they exact full subjection and possession extend to matron Alexander his son 10 10 justin lib. 7. send young man arm in woman habit among they which quench their hot flame of lust with their blood hence haply it be that Assuerus will needs make show of vashti the queen in his magnificent feast which occasion her deprivation and ester succession amidst their cup they consult of war and weighty affair but some say they decree not till afterward the persian use banquet under arras hang before the time of Attalus from who the roman first borrow the use of they of his or hall hang therewith call they but the wall of the rich persian be hang with they the flower spread with costly carpet their cupboard furnish with rich plate their body shine with curious and costly ointment their kitchen store with garlic as a preservative against serpent and venomous creature their chamber swarmimg with concubine yea mother daughter and sister wed and bed with they their second service cell in scripture ester 5.6 the banquet of wine when after the belly full farce with meat with which they drink water they have other table set with wine on which they give a new onset as a fresh enemy these and the like excess will glut our reader loath be I to bring he to their mourn y y vid. Drus obs lib. 12. rite in which they shave themselves their horse and mule they use sackcloth and enter not the court they cover the face of such as incur the king anger as we read of Haman their execution be flay crucify burn bury alive stone cut asunder etc. this pertain to their religion their divination by lot as before Haman they perhaps the magi cast phur that be a lot from day to day and from month to month to see which will be the most lucky and fatal time for his mischievous plot against the jew their marriage they celebrate in the spring and on their marriage day the husband eat nothing but a apple or the marrow of a Camel the persian be account author of make eunuch z z donat. in eunuch which a a petron. arb. satire m. senec. Controu. 4. lib. 10. Petronius arbiter and m. Seneca impute to the curiosity of their lust which may thus be long serve of they they use in salutation to uncover b b eustath in Dionys curt. lib. 3. or put off the Tiara here I may lade you with the persian wardrobe the length and variety of their garment and I may tell you of their earring and jewel paint of their face long hair of their kiss salutation if they be equal and of the knee of the superior by the inferior and adoration of the chief of their woman womanly detestation in the eager degree of hatred and indignation the finger of wool of their inhuman cruelty to the kindred of those which have commit some grievous crime to punish all for the offence of one the persian make banquet to their god and give they the first fruit thereof but it be time to leave their god and they and let i obtain pardon that this great monarchy sometime stretch from India to Ethiopia in one hundred twenty seven province have stretch so far and command i so long attendance in this discourse let i now look upon the mahometan face thereof chap. 8 of the alteration of the state and religion in Persia under the saracen @. i. of the saracenicall conquest and schism in Persia the three dynasty the saracen as be already show a people breed as it be of putrefaction in that corrupt estate of the world dispossess of his state and life Ormisdas the last persian king their religion have sustain small alteration in Persia before this time for aught I find save what the christian have in these part prevail which belong to another task but from that time that the saracen be conqueror the soul of the persian have no less be subject to those foolish mahometan superstition than their body too cruel slavery yea the c c Curio Sarac hist lib. 1. Blondus say that Mahumet be present at their first conquest and that by his command they relinquish their name and accept the Saracen dec. 1. l. 9 so also affirm lope Obregon in confut. of the Alcoran fol. 44. see supl 3. c. 2. name of persian be drown in the title of saracen Homar be then caliph but when jezid the son of Muavi be priest and king such be the caliph of the saracen Mutar the deputy or governor of Persia proclaim himself a prophet and seize on the state from he the persian sophi derive his original when jezid be dead the inhabitant of Cufa in Arabia proclaim hocem the son of Ali Caliph but Abdalam the son of jezid entrap and slay he and at his sepulchre be after erect the city Carbala this hocem have twelve son zeinal Abadin zeinal muamed Bagner muame Giafar caden Ciafar Musa Cazin Musa holi macerat awl muamed Taguin muamed Halmaguin all hacem Asquerin hacem muamed Mahadin this last d d barr. as dec. 2. lib. 10. c. 6. the persian say that he be not yet dead but that he shall come sit on a horse to preach their law to all nation beginning in Massadalle where Ali his grandfather lie bury and therefore they have there always a horse prepare ready which in time of divine service on a certain festival day they bring with light burn to the temple in which Ali be bury pray he to send his nephew quick that day be solemn celebrate with so great concourse of people as a Portugal there present say he have never see the like the other eleven brethren be bury in diverse place to return to Mutar Abdimelec one of the follow calipha send Ciafa against he by who overthrow that new prophet win new and great estimation than before but another tyrant Abdala Zubir arise among the saracen send his brother musub against Mutar who slay Mutar and be soon after slay himself of Abdimelec who recover again the province of Persia Abdimelec be dead in the year seven hundred and two and twenty gizad his son e e Curio Sarac hist lib. 2. succeed and another gizid usurp the sceptre in Persia but be overthrow by Masabner the captain of abdimelec son in the reign of Maruan Asmulin take on he the protection of mutar sect affirm Ali to be great than Mahumet he be prince of the corasen in Persia and by one Catabanus his counsel incite the servant by force or treachery to kill their master and these be grow great by their master wealth be divide into two faction the Caismi and the lamonite Asmulin captain of the lamonite destroy the Caismi and with his Lamonites and Catabanus invade Persia and be there encounter by Iblinus the lieutenant with a army of a hundred thousand man but the lamonite by the encouragement of asmuline and Catabanus who they reckon holy man discomfit he and he and afterward encounter Maruan himself with three hundred thousand man and make he to flee with four thousand into Egypt where salin the son of Asmulin overthrow he thus the maruanian race be expel the relic whereof settle themselves in Fez and Spain Asmulin from who the family of the sophi descend with Catabanus reign over the saracen but let the reader observe what in the former book and second chapter we have write of the division and schism often happen in Persia follow the relation of mirkond a persian author and therefore more to be observe then the more uncertain relation of christian author by all which have be say appear a continual difference betwixt the persian and other saracen about their religion either as some affirm for that the persian prefer Ali before Mahumet or for that which be more likely they account Ali and not any of the other three eubocar osman or Homar to be the true successor of Mahumet the sultan or deputy of Persia which govern there under the caliph use that their schismatical fancy as they see occasion to their own ambitious design under colour of religion some say that the turk obtain Persia strip the Chalifa of Bagadet of his temporalty which the sword be decider of controversy in their religion be no new thing not do it become old or continue long for by the relation of Benjamin Tudelensis and other it appear that the Caliphas of Bagdet recover their state till the tartar dispossess both the Turk and they as we have already show out of Zachuthi and mirkond in our history of the saracen @. 2 of the tartar rule in Persia which be the four dynasty we be to speak more full of the tartar afterward here yet we be enforce by necessity of the persian story to mention they mirkond write mirkond hist persica that chingius can great founder of the great empire the sun have see in the year 1219. invade Maurenahar which be to the north of Persia and chase Mahomet Koarrazmcha into Karason the tartar put all he find to the sword the like he do at balk and thence send 30000. man after Mahomet which overtake and slay he in Gueylon and put the country to fire and sword in Rey and the country about the tartar be say to have slay 600000. person some say 1600000. and in the province of Nichabur 1150000. man beside woman and child commit the like spoil during a whole year throughout all the province of Persia Almostancher Byla the chalife force they to retire into Maurenahar but Oktaykahon or Occoda can his successor both subdue Persia and root out the whole family of Mahomet Koarrazmcha Gelaladin his son be vanquish near Multon in India whither have retire himself Mango Chan give Persia to Ulah Kukhan or Halaon who overthrow the saracen take Bagdet stay therein and in the country about 1600000. person in the year 1261 he subdue Alep and damas. he die in Persia and give his country to his three son Aleppo and Damascus to Habkaikahon Haithon call he Abaga Hierak Mazandaron and Karason to Hyachemet aron or Armeni and aderbaion to Taudon Diarbek and Rabyah to other other part as Bagadet to Atalmok jawiny to repair it which he do Habkaikahon the elder reign in Persia seventeen year and then his four brother Nicudar Oglan Haithon call he tangador succeed he who make himself a mahometan and call himself Hamed after who short reign Argonkhon Geniotukhon Badukhan Gazun he make Casbin his imperial city alyaptu succeed in order this last make himself mahometan a cason keep his court at Tauris and first bring in the custom of tribute child which he take from their parent Christian and jew to frame to his service he build Sultania his son and successor abuzayd spend his summer at Sultania and his winter at Bagadet after who death which happen a. h. 736. the tartarian be divide into Persia every one make himself king of that which he hold which continue till the time of Tamerlane thus have I out of mirkond relate these tartar-persian affair but if I add some what out of Haithon which live in the midst of these time let it not seem tedious first of a paradise destroy by the tartar Haalon and then of the successor till his time nor mention some which rule but a little while in Persia in the north-east part of Persia which of this new heresy they call mulchet there be a old man name Aloadin a mahometan as all those part than be which have enclose a goodly b b Aloadin paradise valley situate between two hill and furnish it with all variety which nature and art can yield as fruit picture rill of milk wine honey water palace and beautiful damosel rich attire and call it paradise to which be no passage but by a impregnable castle and daily preach the pleasure of this paradise to the youth which he keep in his court sometime he will minister a sleepy drink to some of they and then convey they thither where be entertain with these pleasure four or five day they suppose c c a right fool paradise of the many foolish opinion touch paradise see sup. l. 1. c. 3. and if that weary he not let he read Moses barcepta his dispute thereof in three book in biblio e. pat. to 6. where he shall also find many of the ancient father conceit thereof themselves rapt into paradise and then be again cast into a trance by the say drink he cause they to be carry forth and after will examine they of what they have see and by this delusion will make they resolute for any enterprise which he shall appoint they as to murder any prince his enemy for they fear not death in hope of their Mahumetical paradise but this d d m. Paul and odour Haolon or Ulan after three year siege destroy he and this his fool paradise some tell e e Cartwright this of Aladeules in the time of Zelim the first Abaga succeed he in the government of these part 1264. but not in the christian religion Tangodor the next become a saracen and call himself Mahomet and at Tauris and other place destroy the church of the christian as Haolon have do of the saracen he banish the christian and pervert as many tartar as he can to Mahometism but argonus the son of Abaga rebel and take he cut he asunder in the middle succeed in his place 1285. after he Regayto who the tartar slay place in his stead baydo a christian who forbid the preach of Mahometism among the tartar and re-edify the church of the christian Casan succeed in his dominion and devotion and after his death carbaganda who in his childhood have be baptize and name Nicholas but when his christian mother be dead he become a saracen thus far out of haithonus in which history appear the vicissitude of diverse religion sometime tartarian sometime Christian sometime mahometan as in the prince who govern these country under the great cham or can of the tartar so also no doubt in a great part of the country themselves which usual be of the king religion this carbaganda reign about 1305. be the last tartar prince which rule in the part of Syria and in Persia the state be soon after divide into many sovereignty for as their religion so also their empire fail the egyptian sultan prevail in Syria the ottoman Tukes in Asia and Gempsas in Persia this Gempsas be sultan of the parthian f f Pencer l. 4. and 5. and about the year 1350. restore that persian kingdom to the parthian g g or to the turcoman for mirkond make that the nation of Usuncassan thus our christian h h the story of christian touch these part be much defective neither agree with mirkond nor cantarini and Barbaro which be in Persia and learn these thing more true historiographer mirkond mention he not likely it be when all fall to share he get his part of Tamerlan mirkond relate that when chingius send Occoda into Maurenahar Carachar Nuyon be make his first Visier in which dignity he and his posterity continue there till teymur or Tamurlan the five from he with other great government teymur be Visier and captain general to sciorgat Meckhom which reign in Chagaty and die a. 1370. be proclaim king in his steed he by his prosperous arm subdue Maurenahar Turquestan Koarrazm Karason sistom Industan hyerakhen parc kermon Mazandaron Aderbaion and kusistam bagadet Alep Damascus defeat sultan farache king of Egypt and after take Bajazet the great Turk prisoner he die 1405. his victory be by i i Albacen in the life of Tamerlan other enlarge to Russia and China and the great Cham state settle on he Mirzab charok his four son succeed he in the empire and after he 1447. his son Mirzah Oleghbek but as after Alexander so after Tamerlan their hasty get empire be much distract among the great soldier his follower which hold great share to themselves make war on their master son and one of the descendant of they abtelatife slay Oleghbek in the field 1450. and be slay of his soldier six month after sultan abusayd grandchild to Miromcha the three son of Tamerlan succeed slay Abdula the brother of abdelatife but he also be slay by Mirzah Yadigar mahamed one of Acembec or Usuncassans partaker who have before slay jooncha Contarini and Barbaro which be in Persia with Usuncasan call he jausa other I know not why malaonchre other Demir after who death Abusayd be call to the government of kermon Hierak and Aderbaion and be solicit for peace by Asembelus Acembec or Usuncassan aforesaid reject it and so lose himself and leave those part of the persian empire to the conqueror but in Maurenahar sultan Hamed his son succeed 28. year and after he his nephew babor the last of Tumberlan blood there reign Ichaybekan come from Usbek 1500. and dispossess he yet do babor possess Gaznehen and some part of India till his death 1532. where his son Homayon succeed he and to he his son Geluladin akbar common call Melabdim Echbar the great mogul father of he which now reign of who in the next book Yadigar that slay abusayd be also of Tamerlans race the son of mahamed son of baysangor son of Mirzah Charok he by Acembecs help chase ocem another of Tamerlans posterity by hamar cheque three son king in katason and strabat out of those part into Faryab and Mayman near balk whence he sudden return with a small force by advantage of Yadigar or Hiadigar his negligence slay he and recover his realm he die 1506. two of his son succeed he bahady and Musafar who Chaybec Usbek chase out of their kingdom bahady flee to Ishmael sophy who give he the land of chambe Gazon in Tauris and ten scraf i i a Seraf be eight shilling of gold by the day thence he be after carry prisoner by the Turk to Constantinople where he die beside these of the posterity of Tamerlan there be other prince in Persia and the part adjoin as those of the faction of black sheep and white sheep of the former be Kara Issuf which conquer Tauris Sultania Casbin and the country of seruan and Diarbech but die be spoil to his shirt of his soldier yea they cut off his ear for his jewel and leave he in the open field Charrok hold long war with Scander and jooncha his son the latter of which after many conquest be slay by Acembec and Acen Aly his son and successor and thus the white sheep faction prevail ozun Acembec or vusun-casan the head thereof of the Tarcoman nation heir of Diarbech and lord of many province which he conquer as before be note but defeat by Mahumet the great Turk he die 1471. his son Calil succeed who be slay by his brother jacob or Yacub who wife bear dishonest affection to one of the court seek by the murder of her husband to advance this courtier to her husband bed and empire and k k viaggio ramus have convey venom into a golden cup present her husband the same to drink who somewhat suspect she cause she to begin himself and his son follow she both in dink and die and thus be Persia by the wickedness of one woman make the stage of civil war while the chief noble seek each to possess himself of the state which at last after five or six year war befall to l l mirkond reckon of this family king after jacob Baysangor Rostan Hagmet Alwan and Morat alumut or eluan-beg then be but fourteen year old who be slay by Ishmael in the year 1499. and thus you have have the succession of the persian king in the first and second dynasty of the saracen you hear in the former book next after who the tartar and these here mention till Ishmael obtain the state who posterity still hold it Benjamin Tudelensis tell that Senigar then king of Persia have two and forty kingdom subject to he and that his dominion extend four month journey and speak as though he be not subject to the caliph in his temporality master polo reckon eight kingdom of Persia Casibin Curdistan Lorrique Suolistan Spaan sirrah Soncaia Timocaim m m in this discourse we have reckon many other region in regard of subjection persian not reckon Hirak the chief city whereof be Tauris and diverse other country now and before his time subject to the persian and by most historian it appear that Persia have before the day of Tangrolopix and till the tartar conquest sultan which yield small subjection to the chaliph @. 3 of Ishmael Sofi first founder of the present persian empire or five dynasty the history of Ishmael because it give much light both into the state and religion of Persia be more full to be report after that Mustacen Mumbila or almustacenbila Abdula the caliph of Bagdet have be by the tartar do to death in the year after haithonus account 1258. about the year 1369. there arise in Persia n n i. BB. par. 2. l. 2 Osor re. em. lib. 10. Surius comment Knolles t. histor pag. 464. a nobleman call sophi lord of the city Ardovil report himself to be of the blood of awl or Hali descend from Musa Cazin or Cersin one of the twelve son as be say of hocem thirteen descent distant this sophi or as our Tarik mirkond aforesaid call he cheque Safy have issue cheque Mucha the father of cheque Ali who beget cheque Ebrahem and he sultan juneyd father of cheque Aydar who beget Ishmael these continue their hali-holies our author mention none from sophi to juneyd who they make his son call he guinne otherwise write Guini guine and Giunet o o minadoi l. 2. minadoi say that sexchiuni or more distinct siec Giunet be author of the persian sect who under the name of p p e. t. pag. 490. mirkond reckon Ishmael the thirteen after Aly be the son of aidar he of juneyd he of Ebrahem he of Aly he of Mucha and he of safy who live in tamerians time so and of Siec that be of a wise man and a author of religion or rather under the pretence of holiness begin to persuade the people that the three first successor of Mahomet be usurper only Ali ought to be name lawful successor and aught to be call upon in their prayer and by all mean ro be honour from this time forward the sepulchre of Ali and his son in Cafe grow in great credit and be visit every year after the same sort that the turk visit the sepulchre of the other three and the king of Persia use there to be crown and gird with their sword and their great calife there keep his residence because this case be near Babylon hence grow the common error that these thing be do at Babylon or Bagdet jovius also be deceive where he make Arduelle or Aidere author of the persian faction Sofi be by minadoi derive of Sofiti a people subdue by Alexander but Scaliger more fit tzophi which in Arabic signify a man of pure religion in this respect there be no less contention between these and other Muhammedans then between the samaritan and the jew so that the persian be a kind of catharist or puritan in their impure muhammedry claudet duret mention another etymology that sophi signify wool and that this profession in token of humility wear nothing on their head more precious than wool be so call but the former derivation be more probable nic. Nicolai in his three book have also that woollen derivation and Geffrey ducket say that sophi signify a beggar and that the king be not there in Persia so call but shaugh which agree with their report which say that Ishmael renew or continue the name Sofi or Sofiti but his successor leave that and the name of Siec have retain only the title of Saha which some write shaugh some Xa a royal title communicate by the head of this superstition to those king which participate with they therein joseph Scaliger p p scal. can. Isag. lib. 3. say that sa or Scha be the same with among the french and don among the spaniard the jew and arabian write it (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and the grecian (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) it be sometime set before the name as in the present king Scha Habas sometime come after as Melixa for melic-scha barrius q q io. bar. Asia dec. 2. l. 10. c. 6. begin this pedigree at the father of Giunet or guine so he call he and not as minadoi with Guinet himself he add that for the ensign character or cognisance of his sect he ordain that in the midst of their turban which they wear with many fold there shall arise a sharp top in manner of a pyramid divide into twelve part in remembrance of Ali his twelve son from the top to the bottom they use the colour red on their head say minadoi by ordinance of Arduelle and therefore be call cheselbas that be redhead some write it cuselbas sophi as mirkond affirm be hold in such reputation of holiness by Tamerlane that he come to visit he as a saint and at his request set free 30000. slave which he have take in the war against Baiazat to who sophi give apparel and other necessary and send they home to their house whereby he win great fame and affection barrius and other attribute this to guine and say that these slave become his disciple first and after soldier to his son aidar against the christian georgian this r r Surius com. knoll t. hist pag. 464. aider Erdebil or after jovius harduelle forsake as some say the world lead a straight life in continency and austerity and be therefore admire as a prophet and resort to out of all part of Armenia and Persia come to Tauris to see he he inveigh against the common opinion concern Mahomet successor as guine and sophi have do shut up heaven to all save Hali his follower for so the persian use to say in their prayer curse be Ebubeker Omar and Osman GOD be favourable to Hali and well please with he Usuncassan move with his fame give he in marriage his daughter Martha beget of the christian lady Despina daughter of calo joannes emperor of Trapezond both of they by this alliance strengthen themselves against the Turk aidar have by this Martha Ishmael who she train up in the principle of christian religion jacob successor of Usuncassan jealous of the multitude of aidar disciple and the greatness of his fame cause he to be secret murder persecute all his profess follower with fire and sword Ishmael then a child flee into Hyrcania to one pyrchale a friend of his father who afterward aid he to the recover of his patrimony Boterus say that jacob after the murder of aidar commit his two son Ishmael and Solyman to Amanzar a captain of his to be convey to Zalga a strong mountainy place but he bring they up liberal with his own child and in his last sickness give they horse and two hundred ducat with advice to repair to their mother where take upon he the protection of the sect of Hali and the revenge of his father death his enterprise succeed prosperous s s cap. 11. Giouan Maria Angiolelio say that jacob be poison 1485. the signiory be possess by a kinsman of Jacob call julaver after who three year reign succeed Baysingir two year after Rustan seven year who send Solimanbec t t mirkond say Solyman be send by jacob in succour of Farrok king of Seyruan upon who Aydar war against Sechaidar the father of Ishmael who make challenge to the state in right of his wife the daughter of Usuncassan who slay he in the field Rustan will also have kill the mother and her son have not entreaty of his noble prevent it he commit they to ward in the island of the armenian in the lake Astumar whither he send for they again after three year but they for fear flee to Ardovil and there live close for a time Rustan be slay by Agmat through his mother procurement who love that Agmat who abode sultan five month and be slay by rustan soldier and Aluan the kinsman of Usuncassan be signior who Ishmael slay a certain 10 10 to 2. merchant who abide a long time in Tauris and travel through the most part of Persia skilful of the turkish persian and arabian language either see himself or learning of they which do see in the time of Ishmael relate this history somewhat otherwise who as learning of the persian themselves the persian affair we may reckon worthy to be follow he say that this sechaidar in Ardovil be this head of thy sophian sect and have three son and three daughter by the daughter of Usuncassan he be a zealous enemy against the christian oftentimes with his follower repair into circassia do the people much damage which when in the day of sultan Alumut he attempt as before time he be by alumut order forbid at Darbent further passage but seek to make way by force he be by the force of alumut take and his head on the top of a lance present to Alumut and by his command give to the dog to be eat the cause why the sophian be such enemy unto dog kill all they find this news come to Ardovil his three son flee one into Anatolia another to Aleppo Ishmael the three to a island in the lake of van in which be a city of christian armenian where he abide four year in the house of a armenian priest be then about thirteen year old who use he courteous and instruct he in the rudiment of christian religion a year after he go from Arminig to Chillan where he keep with a goldsmith his father friend in this time he have intelligence by mutual writing with his friend at Ardovil and with this goldsmith have gather together eighteen or twenty man of their sect secret to take a strong castle call Maumutaga and hide in ambush two hundred horseman of his friend in ardovill sudden slay the guard and possess himself of the castle he enter a town not far from the castle kill the inhabitant and carry the spoil to the castle this castle be very rich because it be a principal haven of the caspian sea and so strong that when Alumut have news hereof he be dissuade from send any power thither to besiege he two day journey from hence be Sumachi which with his power now increase he also take and divide the spoil every where to his soldier which with fame of this liberality come from all part unto he he send also into hiberia three or four day journey from thence which be then govern by seven great lord three of which Alexander Sbec Gorgurambec and Mirzambec with many promise of present spoil and future exemption from tribute he win to his side receive from each of they three thousand horse so that he be now grow fifteen or sixteen thousand strong Alumut with thirty thousand valiant soldier go to meet he between Tauris and Sumachia and have pass a great river over which be two bridge he present cause they to be break Ishmael arrive there the next day with great diligence find a passage through the stream and with his whole force in front in the break of the day assail alumut his army little suspect such a good morrow that alumut with a few companion hardly escape the pavilion horse and other booty Ishmael bestow on his soldier and then haste to Tauris where enter without resistance he make great slaughter kill all the race of jacob open his sepulchre and the grave of other nobleman which have be at the battle of darbent against his father and burn their bone three hundred harlot he cause to be cut asunder in the middle he kill all the dog in Tauris and because his mother have marry to one of those noble which be in the battle of Darbent he cause her head to be strike off in his presence in this while many town city castle and lord submit themselves to he and wear his red-coloured turban but the castle Alangiachana whereto be subject eighteen village of christian which use yearly to send to Rome two man from the patriarch to the pope of who faith they be speak armenian have some book but quite lose the use of the italian language this castle I say hold out for alumut until his death while Ishmael be sultan in Tauris the sultan in Bagadet murat can son of jacob with a army of 30000. march against he and in a plain meet with Ishmael be there overthrow not seventy person escape to Bagadet with murat can the place bear witness of the slaughter bury under many new hill of bone all these thing be do an. 1499. and while I be in Tauris many come from Anatolia Caramania and Turkey to serve he of who they be gracious entertain an. 1507. our author be then in malacia see with his eye the sultan Alumut convey prisoner by Amirbec who with four thousand man go from Mosul near to the sometime-Ninive to Amit where the sultan keep with promise and profession of his succour be admit the city take he and cast a chain about his neck who head Ishmael smite off with his own hand he be present to he by Amirbec in the country of Aladuli against who Ishmael be now war where take the city Cartibirt he cut off the head of Becarbec son of Aladuli lord thereof with his own hand from thence return to Tauris he have almost do as much to his two brethren who he have leave governor in his absence for transgress their commission but with much entreaty of his lord spare their life yet confine they to ardovill not to depart from thence the next year he pursue murat can who be come to Syras a city not inferior to cairo in Egypt with thirty six thousand man but malcontent and therefore many of they fly unto Ishmael whereupon murat can scent two ambassador with five hundred follower with offer of vassalage unto he Ishmael cut they all in piece say that if murat can will be his vassal he shall come in person not by embassage murat can have close send spy to observe the sequel of his business and be hereof by they advertise flee for many of his noble have already put on the red turban of who he fear to be take as Alumut have be and therefore with three thousand of his most faithful he flee unto Aleppo but the sultan of cairo not admit he he go to Aladuli who entertain he honourable and give he his daughter to wife Ishmael after great slaughter in sirrah and Bagadet be force to return to q q ispahan Spaan with his army for jeselbas the tartar have take all the country of Corasan and the great city of which be in compass betwixt forty and fifty mile well people and full of merchandise he have take also Strava Amixandaran and Sari on the caspian shore and with intent to beguile Ishmael desire leave to pass through his country to Mecca on pilgrimage Ishmael with denial and other sharp word repel his suit and abide a year in Spaan to withstand his enterprise after he return to Tauris where be great triumph solemnize in his honour this sophi be so love and fear say this merchant that they hold he as a god especial his soldier of which some go into the war without armour hold it sufficient that Ishmael will succour they other because they content themselves to die for Ishmael go into battle with naked breast cry Schiak schiak that be God God and they forget the name of God always name Ishmael they hold that he shall not die but live ever and where other mosulman say Mahamet the persian say Ishmael vellilalla repute he a God and a prophet I have learn that Ishmael be not content to be call or worship as god their custom be to wear red bonnet with a certain thing like a girdle large below and straight upward make with twelve fold a finger thick signify the twelve sacrament of their sect or those twelve brethren nephew of ali. Ishmael be of fair countenance of reasonable stature thick and large in the shoulder shave all but the mustachee left-handed strong than any of his noble but give to sodomy at his second come to Tauris he cause to take twelve of the fair boy in the city to serve his lust and after give to each of his noble one for the like purpose and before take ten of the best man son for the same intent Osorius de reb. emman lib. 10. i. bot. ben. thus far have we have commerce with this nameless persian merchant in ramusius his shop who sometime attend on his court and camp other add that he send ambassador to all the mahometan prince of the east to receive that red-hat ensign together with his sect as do his son tammas after he when Nizzamulucco only accept thereof but it be the common opinion that the great part of the mahometans in Soria and of Asia Minor be secret of that Sect Ishmael after this war and win upon the Zagatai tartar and other adjacent nation that he leave unto his successor a very great estate Knol Turk hist reach from the caspian sea to the persian and between the lake jocco and Tigris the river abbiam and the kingdom of Cambaya more than twenty degree from east to west and eighteen from north to south he ordain a new liturgy and form of prayer differ from the ancient such be his authority that they will swear Ishmael call Chaliph by the head of Ishmael and bless his name say Ishmael grant thou thy desire upon his coin on the one side be write and on the other Ismail halife that be Ishmael the vicar of god. the jew at the first Surius Comm. in an. 1500. have this Ishmael in such admiration that they foolish reckon Ishmael to be their promise Messiah gratulate themselves in this conceit throughout the most part of Europe celebrate festival solemnity with mutual present in testimony of their joy which yet be soon dash ant. jenkinson none hate the jew more than Ishmael he lie bury at Ardovil in a fair meskit with a sumptuous sepulchre make by himself in his life time where be a fair stone hospital erect by he for stranger allow to all traveller three day relief for horse and man free Ardovil be in latitude thirty eight degree angiolello c. 13. the life of Ishmael have be answerable to the bloody presage in his ominous birth for he come forth of his mother womb with both his hand shut and full of blood for which cause his father will not have bring he up but command he to be slay but they which carry he away ph. Camerar medit. histor cent. 2. c. 4. move with compassion secret nourish he three year and after present he to his father who then acknowledge and receive he with love and kindness for this his bloody and warlike spirit dwell in a lovely and amiable body adorn with all the ensign of beauty he die 1524. HONGIUS his map of Persia persicum regnum @. 4 of Shah TAMAS the persian trouble after his death SCHIACH thecme or shaugh Tamas succeed Michael Isseit in an. 1576. and reign above fifty year he live devout and yet for their law reconcile both very voluptuous inherit his father throne but a a Busbeq epist. 3. not his valour and spend the great part of his time among his woman so zealous he be of their superstition that when m. jenkinson come to his court with the queen letter ant. jenkinson Hak. 10. 1. p. 349 to treat with he of traffic and commerce for our english merchant before his foot touch the ground a pair of the sophy own shoe or basmacke such as himself use to wear when he arise in the night to pray be put upon his foot lest their holy ground shall be pollute with christian step and be admit into his presence and ask of his religion whether he be a Gower that be a unbeleever or a Muselman so they call they of their own profession have answer that he be a christian believe Christ to be the great prophet oh thou unbeliever say he we have no need to have friendship with the unbeliever and so will he to depart which he do and after he follow a man with a basanet of sand sift all the the way that he have go within the say palace even from the sophy sight unto the courtgate in his time Solyman as our turkish relation before be show much endamage the persian and take Babylonia Tauris and other part of their dominion lib. 3. cap. 8. yet do Tamas recover some part thereof again and drive Solyman out of Tauris or ecbatana minadoi of the war between the turk and persian l. 1. as minadoi interpret and by a composition cause he to raze the fort of char erect by the turk in his frontier he die the eleven of May 1576. leave behind he eleven child Mahamet the elder who have live a while in heri sometime call aria and after in sirrah ancient name Persepolis his second son be Ismahel who for his fierceness his father have confine to the castle Cahaca the three Aidere the rest mamut Solimano Mustaffa emanguli Alichan amet Abrahim and Ismahel the young he appoint his second son Ismahel his successor esteem he more worthy than Mahomet Codabanda this surname be give he for his disease eye b b other say blind mirkond and sir a. s. as be give to a studious and quiet life and content himself that abas mirize which now reign be confirm in the city of heri and honour with the title of the Visier of that country Periaconcona the daughter of Tamas and elder than any of the brethren be in commission with other counsellor of state to see her father will execute while the post run with advertisement to Ismahel be attempt by Aidere with earnest solicitation for the crown who ambitious desire she so far satisfy as that she cause he to be invest in regal apparel and fettle in the great gallery attend the acclamation of the people be public install as though he be elect king but mean while she set sure guard of man devote to Ismahel at the gate of the palace thus purpose to entertain he with dream of dangerous honour till Ismahel arrive at Casbin but while he suspect the deceit seek to flee he leave his head behind in the hand of Sahamal his uncle which he cast all-bloody in the midst of his conspire partaker Ishmael soon after come and receive with public applause the desire sovereignty turkish parricide imitate in Persia and as he have before addict himself to the study of the turkish law enough if it have be know to have bar his succession so now after the turkish manner he found his throne a foundation to slippery to stand in blood cause the head of his eight young brethren to be cut off together with all such as be near they in blood or affinity and all the favourite of the late slay Aidere thus be Casbin die in the blood of her hopeful gallant and entertain her beholder eye with stream of blood run from the slay which cause another stream of tear to issue from their live friend who fill the air with mournful complaint which return answer by echo seem to sympathize their grief and in compassion of those die body then gasp their fatal breath imitate with true affection and not affect imitation the same in deep and break sigh view also their own danger in the present ruin of their near and dear sometime ally and acquaintance toss with this variety of turbulent passion conceive in this confusion of thought that which be true the daughter and mother also of confusion treacherous Disloyalty to the author of these their sorrow Ishmael post on to his own destruction have now forbid the dovotion of Aly the persian prophet and enjoin the turkish rite of Abubachar and other the follower of Mahomet by imprison rail pull out the eye and kill Ali his observant establish his decree not spare in this persecution to torment the tender lady some of they of his own blood nor reverence age or profession deprive even the caliph of Casbin the eye of their blindness of both his eye because he will not see equity in this novelty and purpose as the fame go to go to Bagdat there to receive the crown from he whosoever he shall find the successor of the great Califfe in the midst of his cruelty he be with like cruelty murder by Periaconcona the executor of her father will be thus make a executioner of her father son have bring in the conspirator apparel in woman weed to strangle he among his paramour this be do the twenty four of November 1577. after he have reign one year seven month and six day @. v. of MAHOMET CODABANDA and his son abas Mahamet CODABANDA think it now time for he to look to his right which by mean of mirize Salmas the chief of the sultan he obtain this sultan present he with the head of that virago Periaconcona upon the top of a lance with the dishevel hair ghastly look and bloody impression yield a uncouth though not undeserved spectacle to the beholder which if like the snaky scalp of Medusa it do not transform they into stone de Medusa and Megaera yet as if it have be the banner of Megaera seem to display new quarrel kindle inward hatred tumultuous sedition and civil broil which expose they to Amurath force who think it fit time for he to fish with his turkish net in this trouble persian stream of these war be already speak c c lib. 3. cap. 8. i. siluest. in Du Bartas transl much loss do the persian by this mean sustain and much more have follow have not Emir hamze Mahomet elder son with his valorous attempt stop the turkish proceed and like the eastern sun with his great brightness disperse those weak beam of the moon standard of proud ottoman but soon be this sun eclipse not by the moon interposition for that be natural if we understand it of the heavenly and ordinary if of the earthly and turkish but by extraordinary and unnatural procurement as be think of his ambitious brother abas or of other suspect of his father effect by a treacherous eunuch that guard he which sudden strike he through the body and slay he abas his brother by solemn oath clear himself of this odious imputation and yet he be no less suspect of a more monstrous and unnatural treachery against his own father who be think d d minadoi l. 9 in his nine book translate by master Hartwell the reader may see these war at full relatione di Persia and in Thesoro Politico Henricu Porsius Laurentius Riseburgious anonymus scrip to be poison by his mean that by these bloody step he may ascend to that throne which now he enjoy but all this notwithstanding he have since so subtle handle the matter that he be both belove of his own and fear of his enemy his subject swear and bless in his name e e Cartwright 1603. he have recover from the Turk both Tauris and other region of Seruania and Georgia which the Turk have before take from the persian he be report also to have take Bagdat but it seem not true jansonius f f janson merc. Gallobelg in his news 1610. report of diverse victory obtain by he against the Turk which cause public fast and supplication to be appoint at Constantinople and of the persian embassage with rich present and holy relic to the emperor at prague Gotardus Arthus likewise in his g g got. a. merc. g. 1613. Gallobelgicus relate of abas his embassage to Constantinople about a peace but when his ambassador return with article whereby the persian be bind under show of gift to pay a annual tribute to the sultan he therefore put he to death put out the eye also and cut off the hand of the turkish ambassador which be send with he of Bagdat and old Babylon we have speak elsewhere let this be here add out of Balbi h h Gaspar Balbi that travel from Felugia to Bagdat which he reckon a day journey and a half one whole day journey thereof be by one side of the ruin of Babylon which he leave on the left hand as for Tauris in the year 1514. Selim take it as some say on composition which he break and carry thence three thousand of the best artificer to Constantinople 1535. Solymar give it for a prey to his soldier 1515. Osman spoil it with uncouth and inhuman cruelty whatsoever the insult conqueror in the utmost extent of lawless lust can inflict or the afflict condition of the conquer can in the most deject state of misery sustain be there execute abas in recovery hereof use the canon a instrument which before they have to their own loss scorn the prince be say our i i Cartwright author excellent both of composition of body and disposition of mind of indifferent stature stern countenance pierce eye swart colour his mustachee on the upper lip long his beard cut close to the chin he delight in hunt and hawk run leap and try of mastery he be a excellent horseman and archer in the morning he use to visit his stable of great horse and have there spend most of the forenoon he return to his palace about three of the clock in the afternoon he go to the at-maiden which be the high street of Hispaan the city of his residence round about which be scaffold for the people to sit and behold the king and his noble at their exercise of shoot run play at tennis etc. all on horseback in this place very often in his own person he hear cause and pronounce sentence execute justice severe now that we may mention some of the chief city of Persia under which name I here comprehend as usual in this history their k k Media Gheilan Mastandran or Hyrcania Parthia aria candahat heri Corassan farsi or Persia with the caramanian desert the kingdom of Lar and the Turcoman nation be subject to this king and he have also subdue and ruin the house of some great man which in his father day will do what they listen dominion not as it be measure by the pen of geographer but by the sword of their prince in Sumachia master Cartwright say they see the ruin of a cruel spectacle which be a turret erect with freestone and flint in the midst whereof be place the head of all the nobility and gentry of the country a mile from this town be a nunnery wherein be bury the body of Amaleke can the king daughter who slay herself with a knife for that her father will have force she to marry a tartarian prince the virgin of the country resort hither once a year to lament her death Sechi be four day journey thence not far from which be Eres which because they yield to the Turk be by emir-hamze utter destroy man woman and child arasse be the chief city of merchandise in all seruania especial for raw silk Tauris have outlive many death and be very rich by reason of continual trade nourish almost two hundred thousand people within her compass for wall it have l l sir Anthony Shirley say it have mudwal not this be sometime the Seat-royal and after that Casbin which be situate in a fertile plain four day journey in length wherein be two thousand village the building be of brick dry in the sun as in Persia be most usual the At-Maidan or chief street be four square almost a mile in circuit near to it be Ardovil of chief note for beginning of the sophian superstition Geilan be four day journey from Casbin and stand near to the caspian sea near to Bachu be a fountain of black oil which serve all the country to burn in their house cassan be well seat and rich in merchandise but subject to heat more than other part of Persia no person be there permit to be idle Hispaan be think by some to be Hecatompolis the wall be a day journey about on horseback before the great now the royal city of the persian it have a strong fort two seraglio the wall whereof glister with red marble and parget of diverse colour pave all with Mosaique work all thing else combine majesty and loveliness magnificence and beauty the inhabitant as do the ancient parthian who chief city it sometime have be buy sell talk and perform all their public and private affair on horseback the gentleman never go on foot sciras be think to be Persepolis it be rich of trade and there be the best armour make in all the east of iron and steel cunning temper with the juice of certain herb the government of this state in war and peace I leave to m m Sansouino reg. l. 6. Botero etc. other @. 5 a appendix touch the present persian king out of sir ANTHONY Shirley have thus follow the currant of author in these relation of Persia there have since the first edition be publish the travel of sir Anthony Shirley into these part with sir Robert Shirley his brother pen by himself with some extract whereof to furnish this chapter already tedious as with a second service after a full stomach will I hope renew appetite with the variety so far fetch and so dear buy howsoever before cloy with fullness to let pass therefore those worthy brethren worthy indeed in this kind beyond the reach and worth of my blur praise and eclipse commendation and to come to their travel and observation have pass not without manifold danger to Aleppo and thence to birr and so down Euphrates by the way they adventure to see the camp of Aborisci king of the arab inhabit the desert of Mesopotamia a poor n n this king be a saniack of the Turk whereas they on the westside of the river in a huge extent and infinite number rove and rob all the Turk keep against they fifteen hundred janissary at Damascus and twelve thousand at cairo old Babylon be north from Bagdat about five and twenty mile io. newbury king with ten or twelve thousand beggarly subject live in tent of black haircloth well govern they come to Bagdat which be whole on the other side of Tigris except one suburb in the Peninsula to which man pass by a bridge of boat every night dissolve for fear of the arab or storm whence through the bounty of a italian merchant sir victorio Speciero they escape for they be not unsuspected with a caravan of persian pilgrim which come from Mecca thirty day they be on the way to the confine and fifteen from thence to Casbin where they stay a month attend the king arrival be in the mean time well use upon conceit that the king will like well of their come the people otherwise be ill in themselves and only good by example of their king and strict obedience to he for of the ancient persian there be few these be the posterity of those which have be here seat by the transplantation of Tamerlane and Ishmael not to mention any more ancient out of o o courdies tartar Turkman etc. other country the king himself by our author relation in his virtue and government be as if some philosopher shall discourse of what shall be rather than a historian declare what be as do Xenophon p p some have foolish believe as history those thing which Xenophon write as a philosophical poem etc. sometime in his Cyrus of those imputation of parricide and ambition not a word his order of attain the crown be thus report the persian custom be that only the elder brother rule the rest be make blind by burn bason have otherwise all contentment fit for prince child when xatamas be dead without issue his brother so he call he contrary to our former relation and to that of mirkond the persian which I more marvel at xa-codabent be call blind to the kingdom he have issue sultan Hamzire Mirza the elder who succeed he and this present king call abas the elder in his father life time administer all thing which blindness make the other unfit for but abas at twelve year of age under the government of tutor hold the province of yasde where the love of the people make he suspect to his father who secret resolve his death abas by his friend hear it flee to Corasan a tartar people on the east of Persia both by their religion and dependence turkish and of themselves otherwise unquiet and addict to spoil this king honour abas as his son his father soon after die sultan hamzire succeed who be force to renew his truce with the Turk by reason of the rebellion of the turcoman who by force he subdue behead their prince and for his security slay twenty thousand of the able among they for the war and then whole bend his thought against the Turk be by treason slay by his barber his prince author of this fact share his state among they every one make himself lord of that province which he govern unite their resolution against abas who also the Turk which have his hand in the business have undertake shall be keep still in Corazan abas nevertheless so wrought that the king of Corazan dismiss he with three thousand horseman to win possession of that state which since have devour the tartar and be grow terrible to the Turk be no less in extent then the Turk have in Asia and better both people govern and devote to their sovereign but it be not easy achieve in sistane one of the near province he be encounter with twenty thousand his troop cut in piece himself force to flee to the mountain where he live three month unknown among the herdsman flit up and down with ten or twelve follower weary of this life he determine to show himself in yasd his quondam province which so well succeed that number come flock to he and ferrat can also a great prince discontent with the present state no part of which have fall to he have at that time no province in his government when the king be slay resort to he with his brother and ten thousand follower they be welcome but he much more as a great soldier and a wise prince with these force he overthrow his near enemy which cause those of Shyras Asphaan cassan assist by the king of Gheylan and Mazandran to gather mighty force in the mean time the turk arm at Tauris and the prince of Hamadan have call in a strength of the courdine be march towards Casbin thus beset with army he leave ferrat can with zulpher his brother and five thousand man in Casbin and himself with the rest of his power march towards the can of Hamadan now do ferrat can according to former agreement between the king and he profess himself alter from the king part and write to the rebel offer to join his strength with they and to mutiny the king army also which be lodge in the mountain in show to keep the strait indeed to expect the event thus the can assemble at Casbin and after long deliberation conclude that it be needless and not safe to call in the turk force and dispatch a messenger and present to the bassa of Tauris to reserve his favour till a time more needful hereof ferrat scent word close to the king and of a banquet which shall be at his house a few night after where the principal of the army shall meet hither abas bid himself a guest post thither with five thousand of his best horse which he dispose in the mountain cover with ferrat troop expect the appoint sign which be give late in the night when the whole company be heavy with wine and sleep the king be receive into the house with three hundred man where without any uproar he slay seventy and at the break of the day the king people make as great shout and noise as if all the army have be there whereat the alarm be give all betake they to their arm repair to ferrat lodging to their prince who head lace upon a string be there present to they out of a terrace upon which the king present show himself with ferrat can zulpher have his five thousand man ready in a troop in the great place all these thing together so amaze they that they think the king pardon a high preferment which he free grant both they and the succour send thither by the king of Cheylan and Mazandran the report hereof make hamadan army to vanish and the king take order present by new can for the government of those part he lead his soldier to Hisphaan give out that the treasure of the kingdom be there lay up by the rebel a good policy to win it which with as much pretend indignation he raze for fail of his seem hope to satisfy his soldier better he lead they against the king of Gheylan and Mazandran where the entrance by nature difficult through the unpassable wood and hill be make easy by the revolt of those to who the charge of keep the strait be give who life abas have before spare at Casbin the success be the two king be slay and the soldier enrich with the spoil of a country exceed fertile thus subdue to his sceptre the people he remove into other part of his dominion send the former inhabitant into Cheylan and Mazandran not long after the brother of that king of Corassan which have be tutor to abas rebel against his brother and slay he and all his child except one with who his tutor flee into the mountain this occasion abas apprehend for the subdue of that country in the infant right which notwithstanding the treason of ferrat now weary of his former loyalty and conspire with the Turk and Tartar to betray his master to they he effect these thing with large circumstance abas himself relate to sir Anthony and sir Robert as for his government the same be there also describe but I have be too long in the former he have post once a week from all part the visire sit in counsel with the king counsel every morning and the king himself every Wednesday the poor may offer he any supplication which he read register order one example of justice be admirable which he sentence on the governor of Casbin convict of many extortion bribery and other crime that all his good and land shall be sell for satisfaction to those who he have spoil and if any thing want since the king by give he that authority be partly the cause of those excess he condemn himself to pay the residue out of his treasury if any thing advance it shall be give to his child with a grievous edict that no succour shall be minister to himself neither shall he at once end his punishment by death he carry with he 500 dog and as many hawk for all game sparrow for fly marlin for bird eagle etc. but during his life wear a yoke like a Hogs-yoke and have his ear and nose cut off nor may any relieve he but he shall get his live with his own hand that he may feel in himself the misery of poverty this make the turk ambassador there present swear that such fortune and such virtue must needs be his master ruin his bounty to our author his magnificence otherwise let the reader there learn as likewise his private disport and exercise at his entrance into Hisphaan the way be cover two english mile with velvet satin and cloth of gold where his horse shall pass he feast sir Anthony before his employment in that honourable embassage to the prince Christian after the manner m m Esther 1. athenae l. 4. tell of 15000. guest and 400. talent spend in one of those feast but that of Assuerus be great of the ancient feast use by the persian thirty day together in a garden of two mile compass under tent pitch by small ril of water where every man that will come be place according to his degree under one or other tent provide abundant with meat fruit and wine drink as they will without compulsion the joy of which feast be augment by the tartar of n n Bucara or Bogharre buckhawrd yield themselves to his subjection and by the great mogor great offer with his elder son daughter to the young son of king abas in marriage but I refer the more desirous to sir Anthony own book have thence gather this because it differ so much in some thing from other then who he have far better mean of intelligence chap. 9 of the sophian sect or persian religion as it be at this present @. i. the difference betwixt the Turk and persian with the zeal of both part it have be already show how the saracen have one Calyfa or caliph who they esteem the head of their religion and empire in right unto both succeed their grand seducer Mahomet and how the four captain or doctor each aim under colour of religion to further his ambitious project make way to difference of sect in the beginning and in succeed age the sword decide who be rightful successor the posterity of each challenge to himself that right according as they be able in the field to maintain it these persian affect Hali as true interpreter of their law and lord of the state to who Mahomet give his daughter in his life time and his Alcoran at his death be his kinsman also by birth and although by the violence of the contradict caliph they do not always make hereof open profession yet ever and anon as occasion be offer this fire break out yet never into so great a flame as after the year 1369. by sophi guine Aidar Ishmael and their successor unto this day their sect be that only of the seventy two saracenicall so many some a a Theodorus cantacuzen ap. cras io di bar. as dec. 2. l. 10. c. 6. account which shall in the persian estimation have admission into paradise all the rest and why not this also lead to hell from that division betwixt the persian and arabian about the successor of Mahomet it be barrius his relation in which the persian call themselves siam which signify the union of one body but the arabian call they Raffadin that be unreasonable and themselves Cunin proceed other sect among the mahometans and among the persian two call Camarata and Mutazeli which follow little the say of the prophet but will have all prove to they by natural reason not allow Moses or Mahomet any further there be one sect among they call Malaheda which subject all thing to chance and to the star not to divine providence there be other call Emozaidi which reject many thing in the Alcoran and follow the doctrine of Zaidi the nephew of hocem second son of Ali devil do-evil or devil of (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) a accuser or caviller these inhabit on the confine of Prester John and in Melinde but to come to the common persian and to observe out of barrius the diversity of opinion betwixt they and the arabian their doctor reduce these difference into seventeen conclusion the persian say that GOD be the author and worker of every good and that evil come from the devil the arabian say that will bring in two god one of good the other of evil the persian say that God be eternal and that the law and creation of man have a beginning the arabian answer that all the word of the law be praise of the work of God and therefore eternal like himself the persian say that the soul of the bless in the other world can see the essence of God because he be a spirit of divinity only they shall see his greatness mercy pity and all other good thing which he work in the creature the arabian answer that they shall see he with their eye even as he be the persian say that when Mahomet receive the law his soul be carry by the angel Gabriel into the presence of God the arabian affirm it of his body also the persian say that the child of Ali or awl and Fatema and their twelve nephew have pre-eminence above all prophet the arabian grant it above all other man but not above the prophet the persian say that it be sufficient to pray thrice a day unto God in the morning when the sun rise which be call sob the second Dor at noon the three Magareb before sunset because these three contain all the part of the day the arabian require twice beside according to their law call hacer and assa the rest of their seventeen article of difference my author have not express these be sufficient to show that they not only differ about the successor of Mahomet as minodoi affirm but about dogmatical point also in their ridiculous theology and interpretation of their law these difference have continue of old and long continuance what have in latter time accrue hereunto by the sophian addition of guine and his follower be in part touch in the former chapter let we now take view thereof as the same at this present have infect Persia and the neighbour region there be resident in b b Minadoi lib. 2 the chief be now at Hispaan Cartw. Casbin their profane priest call mustaed-dini that be to say the chief of the law who be as the muft among the turk and in the other subject city be certain peculiar head obedient to this chief priest who notwithstanding be not choose or displace at his pleasure but by the king himself who shall not only be a king but a priest as Ali and Mahomet be from who he challenge succession and we have show before that Ishmael be call halife or chalife that be the vicar of God howbeit for avoid of great trouble he grant that favour and put over that burden from himself unto other to who judgement he also refer himself whensoever there be any consultation or treaty touch their law and religion under the mustaed-dini be the calif say minadoi and these be they that execute their daily service in their Mosches or temple the chief of these calif be he that put the horn upon the king head when he be first enthronize a ceremony now perform in Casbin because the turk forbid it to be perform in Cafe near unto Babylon according to the ancient wont other city also have a mustaed-dini and Calif although inferior to they of Casbin these inferior calif seem to be vicar so the word signify of the mustaed-dini the difference between the Turk and persian as common it happen in case of religion be so hot pursue on both side betwixt they phil. Camerar i. f. ob. subciscent 3. c. 12. that they neither use mutual marriage nor merchandise as some affirm there can be no certain peace or continue truce and if one altar his religion and turn to the other side he be not receive without a new c c there be mean to draw up that skin by art which may endure a new cut circumcision Bajazet the great Turk burn two hundred house in Constantinople infect with this sect together with the inhabitant and set forth a public edict against it Ishmael be say in like hatred of the turk to have cause a swine to be nourish which in despite of the ottoman he name Bajazet Solyman return from Amasia be entertain in the house of one of this sect who therefore after the departure of his prince purify his house with wash perfume and other ceremony as if it have be pollute with a turkish guest for which cause himself be slay and his house raze but let we take a further view of this sect in other country @. 2 of the spread of the persian opinion neither can it contain itself in the limit of the persian kingdom but be spread further and receive even in the heart of Turkey and skirt of India Knol t. h. Surius Comm. in an. 1500 for among other the disciple of aidar Chasan shelife and Schach culi afterward surname cuselbas flee the fury of the persian king who have slay their master and persecute his follower come into Armenia Minor and there take up their dwell at the great mountain antitaurus at the soot whereof the break rock have many dark cave the work of art partly partly of nature which place of the inhabitant be call teke-ili whereof schach culi be after call Techellis here these two give themselves whole to a contemplative life in a strict austerity content themselves with such thing as the earth voluntary afford begin to grow in knowledge first of the herdsman and shepherd after of the husbandman and country people admire their new holiness yea Bajazet himself than emperor of the turk move with zeal of their devotion send they yearly six or seven thousand asper afterward become fortune-teller and prognosticate thing to come they be by the superstitious people draw into village and city where they preach Hali according to aidar doctrine enjoin their disciple the red band on their turban of which the turk term they cuselbas that be redhead with which in short time the city and town be fill when they be thus multiply there meet ten thousand of they at a fair at tascia or Attalia where they execute the chief magistrate and be persuade by these new master they swear never to forsake their captain or refuse any labour for their most holy religion vow their soul and body in defence thereof these captain not have otherwise to maintain their follower give they leave to forage the country adjoin and to live upon the spoil of they that will not receive their new doctrine which they in many troop and with many prey according perform they enter into Lycaonia and the people flee out of the country into Iconium there two prophet set up proclamation of blessing to all such as will receive their sect and of destruction to the gainsayer Ishmael also to increase their strength have send they some troop of horseman in the politic history which Crusius have give we in the first book of his Turcogracia it be say that two hundred thousand follow Sach Cules in this war Baiazet two nephew with the force of the country encounter they in battle receive the overthrow Corcutas the son of Bajazet with his army dare not assail they thus march they into Bythinia where near unto the river sangarius caragose bassa viceroy of Asia affront they have before command Achmetes the elder son of Bajazet to levy force in his government of Cappadocia and Pontus to shut they in at their back but Techellis after the loss of seven thousand man and all his ensign chase he out of the field into cutaie the seat of the viceroy where he besiege and take he with his wife and child and after be pursue by alis Bassa with force out of Europe he empale this caragose in the way on a sharp stake fasten in the ground here be he force to fight and his fellow Chusan shelife slay but Techellis recover the battle almost lose leave alis bassa slay in the place the turk flee before he jonus bassa be send against he when have lose a great part of his strength he have retire his weaken force into antitaurus out of the wood and mountain often assail the Turk whence at last he flee into Persia jonuse cause strait inquisition to be make for these new sectary do such to death with exquisite torment as have bear arm in the late rebellion and burn the rest in the forehead with a hot iron and after transport they together with the friend and kinsman of such as have be execute into Europe there to be disperse through Macedonia Epirus and Peloponnesus for fear of a second return of Techellis the remainder of Techellis his power as they flee into Persia rob a caravan of merchant for which outrage come to Tauris their captain be by ismael command execute and Techellis himself burn alive but yet be this sect close favour in Asia @. 3 of their rite person place and opinion religious we have now see the proceed of this sophian sect both in Persia and Turkey gef. duck. Hak. tom. 1. both here keep down and there establish by force to wear red on the low part of their body be to these redhead scarce piacular touch Hali they have diverse dream as that when they doubt of Mahomet successor a little lizard come into a council assemble to decide the controversy and declare that it be Mahomet pleasure that mortus Ali or morts Ali shall be the man he have a sword wherewith he kill as many as he strike at his death he tell they that a white camel will come for his body which according come and carry his dead body and the sword and be therewith take up into heaven for who return they have long look in Persia some say it be for one of his nephew for this cause the king keep a horse ready saddle and keep for he also a daughter of he to be his wife but she die in the year 1573. and they say further that if he come not short they shall be of our belief they have few book and less learning there be often great contention and mutiny in great town which of mortus Ali his son be great sometime two or three thousand people be together by the ear about the same as I have see say master ducket in shamaky and ardovill and Tauris where I have see a man come from fight and in a bravery bring in his hand four or five man head carry they by the hair of the crown for although they shave their head common twice a week yet leave they a tuft of hair upon their head about two foot long whereof when I inquire the cause they answer that thereby they may be the easy carry up into heaven when they be dead in pray they turn to the south because Mecca lie that way from they when they be on travel in the way many of they will as soon as the sun rise light from their horse turn themselves to the south and will lay their gown before they with their sword and bead and so stand upright do their holy thing many time in their prayer kneel down and kiss their bead or somewhat else that lie before they when they earnest affirm a matter they swear by God Mahomet and mortus Ali Knol Tupk hist pag. 964. and sometime by all at once say Mahumet Ali and sometime Shaugham bosshe that be by the shaughe head abas the young prince of Persia charge with imputation of treason after other purgatory speech swear by the creator that spread out the air that found the earth upon the deep that adorn the heaven with star that pour abroad the water that make the fire and brief of nothing bring forth all thing Arthur Edward Hak. tom. 1. by the head of Ali and by the religion of their prophet Mahomet that he be clear if any christian will become a bosarman or one of their superstition they give he many gift the governor of the town appoint he a horse and one to ride before he on another horse bear a sword in his hand and the bosarman bear a arrow in his hand ride in the city curse his father and mother the sword signify death if he revolt again before the shaugh seem to favour our nation the people abuse they very much and so hate they that they will not touch they revile they by the name of cafar and gawar that be infidel or misbeliever afterward they will kiss their hand and use they gentle and reverent drunkard and riotous person they hate rich. for which cause Richard johnson cause the english by his vicious live to be worse account of then the Russ their opinion and rite mostwhat agree with the turkish and saracenicall their priest be apparel like other man they use every morning and afternoon to go up to the top of their church and tell there a great tale of Mahomet and mortus ali. ducket they have also among they certain holyman call sete account therefore holy because they or some of their ancestor have be on pilgrimage at Mecca these must be believe for this saintship although they lie never so shameful these sete use to shave their head all over save on the side a little above the temple which they leave unshaven and use to bray the same as woman do their hair and wear it as long as it will grow Ios. barb. ramus josafa Barbaro at Sammachi lodge in a hospital wherein be a grave under a vault of stone and near unto that a man with his beard and hair long naked save that a little before and behind he be cover with a skin sit on a piece of a mat on the ground I say he salute he and demand what he do he tell i he watch his father I ask who be his father he quoth he that do good to his neighbour with this man in this sepulchre I have live thirty year and will now accompany he after death and be dead be bury with he I have see of the world sufficient and now have determine to abide thus till death another I find at Tauris on allsoule day in the which they also use a commemoration of soul depart near to the sepulchre in a churchyard have about he many bird especial raven and crow I think it have be a dead corpse but be tell it be a live saint at who call the bird resort to he and he give they meat another I see when Assambei be in Armenia march into Persia against signior jausa lord of Persia and Zagatai unto the city of Herem who draw his staff in the dish wherein they be and say certain word and break they all the sultan demand what he have say they which hear he answer that he say he shall be victorious and break his enemy force as he have do those dish whereupon he command he to be keep till his return and find the event according he use he honourable when the sultan ride through the field he be set on a mule and his hand bind before he because he be sometime accustom to do some dangerous folly at his foot there attend on he many of their religious person call daruise these mad trick he use according to the course of the moon sometime in two or three day not eat any thing busy in such foolery that they be fain to bind he he have great allowance for his expense one of those holy man there be which go naked like to the beast preach their faith and have obtain great reputation he cause himself to be immure in a wall forty day there to abide without any sustenance but when this time be expire and some wonder one more nosewise than the rest smell the send of flesh the sultan hear it commit he and his disciple to the Cadilasher who by torment cause they to confess the cozenage for through a hole which be make in the wall by a cave he have broth convey to he and therefore they be both put to death in the year 1478. Chozamirech a armenian be in his shop in Tauris a Azi or saint of they come to he and will he to deny his christian faith he answer he courteous and pray he not to trouble he but when he persist he offer he money the saint will not have the money but importune his first suit Chozomirech say he will not deny his christian faith whereupon the other pluck a sword out of a man scabbard which stand by and with a wound which he give the armenian in the head kill he and run away but the armenian son complain to the sultan procure his apprehension at Merin two day journey from Tauris and be bring before he he with a knife kill he with his own hand and cause he to be cast on a dunghill for the dog to eat say be this the way to increase the faith of Mahomet but when some of the more zealous people go to one daruiscassun which be in guard of the sepulchre of Assambei the former sultan and as it be prior of the hospital and request of he obtain the body to bury it the sultan hear it send for he and say to he dare thou countermand my command away and kill he which be sudden dispatch he further to be revenge of the people commit the town to the sack which for the space of three or four hour be do and then he forbid further spoil and fine the town in a great sum of gold last he cause the armenian son to come before he and with many kind word comfort he this long history I have insert to show the extremity of blind zeal and religious fury in the secular and votary of these persian if justice shall not withstand their rage before be mention the commemoration of their dead which be thus perform over their sepulcher thither resort great multitude of man and woman old and young which sit on heap with their priest and with their candle light the priest either read or pray in their language and after cause to be bring somewhat to eat in the place the place contain between four and five mile the path which lead thither be full of poor people which beg alm some of who offer to say some prayer for their benefactor the sepulcher have stone upon they engrave with the name of the bury party and some have a chapel of stone thereon Ios. barb. at Merdin he see a naked man which come and sit by he and pull forth a book read thereon and after draw near and ask he whence he be he answer a stranger I also be a stranger say he of this world and so be we all and therefore I have leave it with purpose to go thus unto my end with many word beside touch meekness and the denial of the world he say I have see a great part thereof and find nothing therein that content i and therefore have determine to abandon it altogether to this merdina man can pass but by a way make of stone continue a mile at the head thereof be a gate and way to the town and within the town be another hill with a like way of five hundred pase in height there be a hospital for entertainment of all stranger make by Ziangirboi the brother of Usuncassan and if they be of better sort they be entertain with carpet spread for they worth a hundred ducat a piece and victual for all comer we may here take further view of their stately temple their great and populous city and other thing worthy observation if that our turkish history have not relate the like also among they especial touch the person and place religious for the rest I refer the reader to other author sir ant. sher. the present king abas more as it seem in policy to secure himself of faction and against the Turk than conscience be a great persecutor of that sect of Mahomet which follow the interpretation of Ussen and Omar this he labour to extirpate and make odious have in use once a year with great solemnity to burn public as main heretic the image of Ussen and Omar then do he cause his great man public in scorn of their institution to go with a flagon of wine carry by a footman and at every village or where they see any assembly of people to drink which himself also use not for love of the wine but to scandalize the contrary religion yet be there of the great exceed precise Turk if they dare show it i. Ward to m. Haywood in a letter of John Ward write in Tauris may 14. 1605. this king be blame for make slave of poor armenian and force many to Mahometism pull down church and use more rigour than the Turk @. 4 of nature wonder and the jesuit lie of Persia the f f ducket wonder of nature in these part be near Bachu a fountain of oil continual run and fetch into the far part of Persia and another near shamakie of tar whereof we have good use and proof in our ship hereabout you shall have in the field near to any village in the night two or three hundred Fox howl kine they have like we and another sort great bone and lean as hard savour as those which Pharaoh dream of in Persia grow great abundance of Bombasin cotton this grow on a certain tree or brier not past the height of a man waste with a slender stalk like to a brier or carnation july-flower with very many branch bear on every branch a fruit or cod round which when it come to the bigness of a walnut open and show forth the cotton which grow still like a fleece of wool to the bigness of a man fist and then be loose be gather the seed be flat and black as big as pease which they sow in their field and plough ground in great abundance I have think I have end this chapter and our persian expedition but our good friend the jesuit will needs entertain your weary eye with read a exploit of they relate by g g John copley his doctrinal and moral observation concern religion p. 85. one sometime their fellow catholic now I hope our fellow Christian for the credit of this honest and loyal of their honest return not with a and loyal with a ^^e all society be a french pamphlet by they disperse a little before the Powder-treason among their catholic friend in England report the miraculous conversion of the king of Persia by one campian a Jesuit a Englishman that have expel a devil out of a possess party and command the devil at his departure to give a sign thereof by strike down the top of a steeple which be effect the king conversion follow together with many of the nobility to the roman faith liberty also be grant to preach it open and to build church and Monastery throughout the kingdom this be believe in England especial by a friend of our author unto who that pamphlet be send who request he to say mass in thanksgiving to GOD for so great a benefit but in the end that jesuite who send the pamphlet give out that it be but a thing devise by french huguenot to disgrace their society gracious society that can sometime cure their lie with a distinction of piaefraude h h devout deceit have ever any but a Jesuit dispensation to marry devotion and deceit godliness and cozenage together sometime cover they with a robe of the new fashion aequivocation sometime can expose their bastard at other man door to shield themselves from shame with lay the blame on other and have a mint in their pragmatical head of such suptersubtle invention what be they now disgrace and that by huguenot even as true as the Parliament-house shall have be blow up by puritan i i proceed against the traitor this also be the ignatian device or like to that news of the late queen k k Relat. of religion who ambassador be at Rome for the pope absolution or that of Beza recantation and Geneva submission to the pope bless Ignatius let i also invocate or let he deign to read in that all-seeing glass l l this poor supplication infuse some better spirit or some cleanlier and more witty conveyance at least into thy new progeny lest the protestant grosser wit send see feel the palpableness and impute the jesuitical course to that author which say he m m 1. kin. 22.22 will go out and be a lie spirit in the mouth of all achab prophet which n n John 8.44 Apoc. 18.15 when he speak a lie speak of his own because he be a liar and the father thereof hitherto we take Ignatius for their father but now we find a new of who they borrow bankrupt shift beseem only the merchant of Babylon disgrace humanity deface divinity worthy range o o sir ed. Sands Relat. of religion in the West a. l. merc. ga. 1610. among the poor policy of the hospital of the desperate since also jansonius in his Mercurius Gallobelgicus have tell we news of the king grant to build a temple and monastery for christian himself as he say much incline to that religion whereupon many have be baptize and not a few through the power of holy-water p p who can cure these miracle of lie an. 1608. have be cure the king have further send to the georgian to unite they to the romish church and the armenian also by a embassage to Rome have protest all obedience to that sea as they before have do in the covent of saint Augustine which be in the chief city of Persia he set down the copy of king abas his letter to the pope wherein he request he to send a prelate to govern at where the chief of the armenian christian use to reside the like he write in another letter to the king of Spain which if it be so argue rather his policy to obtain good will and help of the christian against the Turk than any love to christian religion chap. x. of the scythian sarmatian and seres and of their religion @. i. of the scythian name people region language and manner of life under the name Scythia be contain a very great part of the world it be divide into Scythia Europaea and asiatica Pliny a a plin. l. 4. c. 12. say that this name reach unto the sarmatian and german and to those far nation which be unknown to other man and Strabo in his first book say that all know region towards the north were-called scythian or Nomades and in his eleven book he affirm that the greek call all those northern nation scythian and celtoscythians those beyond the adriatic and pontic sea and the river Ister or Danubius be call hyperborei sauromatae and arimaspi those beyond the caspian sea sacae and massagetae some b b Scythae (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Caelius li. 18. 24. will have this name to be give they (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) which signify to be angry other of their shoot c c plin. l. 7. c. 56. say that scythes son of jupiter invent the bow and arrow call still of some of those nation and in some other language Schieten of which our word shoot be derive Mela in his three book and five chapter call they all sagae and in the fragment which bear the name of d d Cato orig and ap. a. Riccobon Cato de originibus be mention Scythia saga this word Berosus e e pheudo Berosus lib. 2. and 3 and 5. interpret a priest say that Noah leave the scythian armenian his ritual book which only priest and that only among priest may read who be therefore call as Noah himself have be these people the country from Armenia to the bactrian all which place be call Scythia saga over which Sabatius reign in the time of jupiter Belus araxa with his son Scythia possess all from Armenia westward to Samatia in Europe the grecian fable Hercules to be the father of these nation beget scythes f f Herod. lib. 4. diod. sic. lib. 2. on a monster who upper half resemble a woman the nether part a viper it be a endless and boundless work to seek and set out the true and proper beginning and bound of this so large a tract of the world call Scythia the particular nation of they will be but harsh to recite out of Pliny Mela Strabo and other the multitude whereof he that will may find in g g ortel thes. Ortelius his collect together the Sarmatae or sauromatae be sometime make one peculiar people of the scythian and sometime the name be confound Sarmatia also be divide into Europaea and asiatica whereof the one be interpret by h h oliu. in Melam ortel thes. Oliverus Polonia by Ortelius Russia and the other Tartary Goropius i i gorop Beccesel in his Becceselana admire his own language conjecture that while Nimrod and his company fall to babel or after our pronunciation babble at Babel other namely the cymbrian or posterity of gomer stay still in margiana a country fruitful of vine whither he imagine Noah descend out of the ark and there abide after the flood these he suppose be not at Babel retain their old and first universal language but margiana grow too little for their multiply number they be force to send out colony and thus the saxon tectosages sauromatae getes or goth the dane gall and other scythian nation the true posterity of gomer and keeper of the first language as he by dutch etymology gather people both Scythia and Sarmatia in Asia and Europe together with all Germany France England Norway Denmark and some part of Asia Minor he that will be further inform of his reason let he read his Saxonica Gotodanica and other treatise of his becceselanian antiquity Ptolomey k k ptol. l. 3. c. 5. distinguish Scythia from Samatia he confine Sarmatia Europaea with the sarmatian ocean and the land unknown on the north with vistula on the west the eastern border be Tanais from whence unto the hyrcanian sea eastward be Sarmatia asiatica on the north abut on the unknown part of the earth on the south with the euxine sea and a line draw right from thence to the caspian sea Scythia be by l l ptol. l. 6. c. 14. he place to the east of Sarmatia divide by the hill imaus extend unto the region call serica have on the north unknown place on the south the sacae sogdiana margiana and India but our purpose be to take they here in their more general sense understand all the north of Asia now Tartary asiatica for of Europe save wherein the european scythian agree with the asian we be not now to speak and of these first to consider their ancient scythian rite and in the next place their late tartarian appellation and religion justin lib. 2. out of tragus relate the argument use of the egyptian and scythian each seek to challenge to themselves to be the ancient of nation in which quarrel the scythian prevail their manner and custom he thus report they have no limitation of land nor tillage nor house but always wander through place not inhabit feed their herd and flock they carry their wife and child with they on cart which also be cover with hide they use for house no offence be more heinous among they then theft gold and silver they as much contemn as other desire milk and honey be their food their clothes skin of beast for the use of wool they know not they have three time seek the empire of Asia never conquer of other they chase Darius the persian king out of their coast they slay Cyrus with all his army they overthrow Zopyron a captain of Alexander the great with all his force they only hear of never feel the roman arm and themselves found the parthian empire that which credulous and fabulous antiquity have report of the monstrous people inhabit the northerly and unknown part of Scythia be not here to be recite the country be at this time discover and know to have no such man as either by nature be bald and flat nose with huge chin or have but one eye where there be also griffin keeper of their treasure or man with goat foot or other monster of man which n n plin. lib. 7. Solinus cap. 20. Pliny herodatus and other have rather mention then believe Mandavil and Munster follow they in like relation next to these both in place and credit we may reckon the hyperborean of who the delian o o Herod lib. 4. Asiae confute this tale lib. 2. cap. 1. not she barb. etc. report that they send to Delos virgin with sacrifice to Lucina bind up in wheat-straw through so many nation inhabit between of the issedones be report that when one die his kindred bring thither beast which they kill and cut and dress and eat together with the flesh of the dead man who skull also they keep and gild use it as a idol to which they perform yearly ceremony these exequies do the son there perform to his dead father @. 2 of the religion divination and other scythian rite general of the scythian religion thus of the god they worship first Vesta who they call in their language Tabiti next of all jupiter in their speech papaeus and the earth suppose she to be the wife of jupiter and call she apia in the next place they worship Apollo and Venus by the name of Octosyrus and Artimpasa and Mars and Hercules some of they sacrifice also to Neptune or Thamimasades image altar and temple they think ought not to be make except to Mars their manner of sacrifice be general this the sacrifice be present with the forefoot bind the sacrificer at his back have lay aside his holy vestment wound the same and while it fall call upon that god to who he sacrifice and then put a halter about the neck and strangle it without kindle any fire or vow or other ceremony and slay it the flesh pluck from the bone he cast into a great cauldron the bone he use for fuel to seethe the same for wood the country do not yield and if they have not any such vessel they put all the flesh with water into the paunch and so the beast do seethe itself after it be boil he which sacrifice offer the libament or offering of the flesh and innards their sacrifice be beside other beast especial of horse their temple to Mars they build on this manner scythian temple they heap together bundle of twig three furlong in length and breadth and above on they be make a square plain three side thereof be upright the four be make slope and the bending-wise thereby to get up thither they bring every year a hundred and fifty wane of twig to supply the waste of they underneath this work be erect a old iron sword and this be their image of Mars to which they offer yearly sacrifice both of other cattle and of horse and more to this blade then to other god of their captive they offer one of a hundred but after another manner for after they have offer wine on their head they kill they by a certain vessel and after lift they upon that their heap or temple they imbrue the sword-god with the blood this they do above beneath in the temple they cut off all the right shoulder of the slay man and hurl they up in the air together with the hand wheresoever the hand shall fall there it lie and the dead body apart when they have perform all their solemnity they depart swine be so odious to they that they will have none of they nourish in their country there be among they diviner who rite be these scythian divination they bring great bundle of willow twig which they lie on the ground and untie and lay they asunder one by one divine some of they practice divination with the leaf of the teil-tree which they fold and unfold in their hand the king when at any time he fall sick send for three choice man of those diviner who for the most part name some man unto he which have forswear himself have swear by the king throne a oath use of the scythian present the man be bring forth who if he deny what their art have accuse he of the king send for twice the number of diviner and if they by new practice of their art find he guilty his head be cut off and the first diviner share his good but if they shall absolve he more diviner be send for and if the most of they do absolve he than those three first be thus do to death they lade a wain with twig and bind the diviner hand and foot and stop their mouth cast they into the wane and set all on fire burn ox wain and man together unless some of the ox by the burn of their harness escape this punishment inflict they on their false prophet they make their league with other nation in this sort they pour wine into a great bowl mix therewith the blood of they which join in league cut some part of the body with a knife or sword and then dip in that bowl or mazer a sword arrow a axe a dart and after curse themselves with many word last of all drink the wine Nicephorus p p nic. greg. hist rom. lib. 2. gregoras relate the scythian custom and expedition and their contempt of gold and ignorance of the use of it these on the one side and the christian on the other force the turk which be also a kind of scythian to settle themselves as they can in the part of Mesopotamia chaldaea and Assyria where they leave there own and learn the rite and custom of the mahometans the king be bury among the Gerrhi with many ceremony carry the dead body through all the country over which he reign which cut and shave themselves and with he be bury his best belove paramour his cupbearer cook master of his horse waiter messenger horse and the first fruit of all other thing and also golden cup and then they cast on earth make a very great hill when the year be go about they take fifty of his principal attendant which be not slave but freeborn scythian and strangle they with so many horse of the best and fasten the dead man on the dead horse with much solemnity but to relate all the particular hereof and their burial also of private man who dead body be carry about forty day from one friend to another entertain every where with feast etc. will be too tedious he that will have a sight of these thing let he resort to Thomaso Porcacchi his Funerali Antichi where these thing be not only discourse in word but describe in artificial picture the scythian so far hate foreign rite and religion that Anacharsis a scythian philosopher have travel through a great part of the world and vow to the mother of the god if he return home in safety that he will sacrifice to she with such rite as he have see observe in cyzicus in the performance of his vow be slay by king Saulius scyles q q ph. Camerar med. hist cent. 1. 58. yet the turk their offspring hold diverse religion also be king of the scythian when he bring in foreign rite and observe the mad bacchanal solemnity which he have see among the greek lose both his kingdom and life r r athenaeus lib. 12. cap. 8. they cut off the nose of man and imprint picture in the flesh of woman who they overcome and general their custom of s s Herodot li. 4. war be bloody what man soever the scythian first take he drink his blood he offer to the king all the head of the man he have slay in battle otherwise he may not share in the spoil the skin of their crown flay off they hang at their horse-bridle t t plin. lib. 7. c. 2. their skin they use to flay for napkin and other use and some for clothing once a year the chief man have a solemnity among they in which they pour wine into a mazor of which none may drink which have not slay a enemy these custom be general to the scythian in Europe and Asia for which cause u u Polyb. hist l. 9 grow into a proverb of immane cruelty and their land be just call 10 10 Barbara etc. Tibul. lib. 3. barbarous other be more special and peculiar to particular nation scythian @. 3 of particular nation in Scythia their act and rite of the barbarous y y a. mar. l. 22. cruelty of the scythian the sea confine be call Euxinus by the contrary as the fury be call eumenides say ammianus because they sacrifice stranger to Diana who they worship under the name of orsiloche and hang up their head on the wall of their temple the isle leuce near to taurica be dedicate to Achilles where none of his devout worshipper dare abide in the nighttime for none may spend the night on shore without danger of his life Arrianuus in his Peripius or sail about of the euxine sea speak of this island and the devotion therein perform to Achilles and Patroclus that certain bird keep the temple water and sweep the same with their wing and the goat which feed in the i will there present themselves for sacrifice when the price be first pay at the altar to the contentment of that deity or devil who illusion if not other collusion it must needs be but because this island adjoin to Europe I must forbear these thing till another time he also describe the nation both in Asia and Europe which abutt round about that sea jornandes z z jor. de reb. geticis Scanzia officina vid. w. laz. gent. lib. 8. bring these scythian border from Scanzia so he call that Peninsula which other name basilia scandia scandinavia etc. wherein be the kingdom of Sweden gothland and Norway and attribute to the goth those war which the egyptian and persian be say to have make against the scythian near to Maeotis king Filimer plant himself and his follower in dacia Thracia and maesia zamolx who be also a great philosopher these and the rest be not only a terror to the skirt of Asia but to the heart of Africa and Europa in process of time sack Rome and shake that roman monarchy almost to the ground Simocatta a a simocat hist Maur. lib. 7. c. 7. Cedreni compend in his mauritian history give the pre-eminence of martial valour among the many many scythian nation to the ABARES Chaganus the scythian king send ambassador to mauritius with a epistle wherein he style himself governor of seven nation and lord of the seven climate of the world he comquer the Abdelae or Nephthalites the Abares some of which flee to Tangast to the turk and the b b his Mogor tartarica ogor-nation which dwell by the river till or Volga who ancient prince be call war and Chunnai he conquer also the prince of Colch in which war he slay three hundred thousand people their carcase lie scatter four day journey he subdue also the turk at the hill which be four hundred mile distant from the golden mountain so they call a mountain in the east because of the fertility and store of cattle therein which always the great Chagan among the turk possess for Chagan be not a proper name but a princely title which in those part and the country adjoin be still continue the tartar call their prince Chan which c c vid. jac. pont. Annot. in Simoc. some perhaps false write cham and the persian and turk still use that title these turk vaunt themselves never subject to earthquake or pestilence they call their priest Taisan that be the son of god. their religion I have before mention they have a custom that the male never wear gold this city be divide by a stream sup. lib. 3. c. 8. which sometime separate two disagree nation no less distinguish by their disjoin mind and differ habit the one wear black the other red this city they say be build by Alexander when he have overcome the sogdian and bactrian the king wife shine with jewel be carry in golden chariot each draw with one bull Niceph. the bridle emboss with gold the prince as be say elsewhere spend the night with seven hundred woman fame attribute another city not far hence to Alexander call Chubdan the prince thereof be dead his wife in black with shave head continual mourn and may never forsake the sepulchre these have many elephant and traffic with the indian which dwell northwards and make silk thus much I think worth the add out of Simocatta for better knowledge both of the turkish and of the tartarian history as well as of the scythian the massagetae d d Strab. lib. 11. famous for the overthrow of Cyrus esteem the sun alone for God and offer unto he a horse they have one wife to each man and yet every one use also his neighbour wife open hang mean while his quiver on the wain or cart the best death and most happy among they be when they be become old to be cut in piece and to be eat together with sheep flesh if he die natural they bury he in the earth as die a base and beastly e e joan. Boem. death their weapon be of brass their furniture of gold of both which they have much store little of iron and silver f f Caelius lib. 11. cap. 21. the bactrian when they be old or wear with sickness cast their parent to dog which they keep for this purpose and call burial dog the bactrian woman be pompous g g euseb praepar. Euang. lib. 6. cap. 8. ride in great state and lie with their servant and with stranger they have among they Brahmin Zoroastres the bactrian be account first author of the magi and of liberal art he live twenty year in a wilderness with cheese but other account this another Zoroastres the sacae sometime make near sometime further invasion they possess Bactria and a great part of Armenia which after of they be call Sacasena and proceed unto Cappadocia where in the midst of their feast be in the night surprise by the persian and slay they leave their name Saca or Sacea to a yearly solemnity among the persian in memory of this victory of the sacae some hold h h gorop Bececs our saxon to be descend Dionysius in his greek verse give they the high praise for shoot of all other the amazon of who be before relate be say i i justin lib. 2. jornandes reb. get. to be descend of the scythian who under the conduct of Plinos and scolpythus settle themselves by the river Thermodon and possess the field of themiscyra but when they continue to spoil the adjoin country they be by secret conspiracy of those people destroy their wife k k gorop think and I with he that these amazon be but the wife which exercise arm and follow warfare with their husband become warrior both in defence and offence and do great act under their two queen Marthesia and Lampedo after Ohera and Antiope the daughter of Marthesia in the time of Hercules reign then Penthesilea who in the trojan war be slay yet the relic of that nation continue until Minthia or Thalestris in Alexander time and by degree wear out altogether one of their queen institute the sacrifice to Mars and Diana call tauropolium say Diodorus l l diodor. sic. l. 2. cap. 11. who add that they live not without man but that they put the man to domestic drudgery and exercise the woman in the field yet do he no less than Strabo make doubt of these amazonian or Unimammian nation m m the amazon be still one nation further than the relater or their author have travel in two place of Asia two of Africa two of America the amazon have be till that man come there and find none and no less of the hyperborean which he thus relate out of hecataeus that they dwell in a island in the ocean near unto the pole in which Latona be bear and Apollo be most of all worship and that the islander general be Apollo priest every day chant hymn in his praise they have also a huge grove and a round temple dedicate to Apollo to who their city be sacred these and other thing fable they of the hyperborei to which salinus n n sol. 21. add many other of the clemency of the air of the innocence of the man of their freedom from sickness and voluntary seek for death in the fullness of day after they have make merry cast themselves from a certain rock into the sea all these pleasure concur notwithstanding thing contrary both to truth and nature except with Goropius o o gorop Bec. l. 9 pag 1032. we turn some part at least of this history into a allegory he yet historical interpret that they which place the hyperborei beyond the arimaspi these beyond the issedones and those also beyond the scythian and these again beyond the cimmerian intend the european scythian or inhabitant about Maeotis the livonians and muscovite the issedones to be in scandia and all alongst those freeze or icy sea as he prove by etymology of the word north-east and eastward from these in the continent of Asia he place the arimaspi and in the continent of America Mexicana he seat the hyperborei they which listen to have recourse to his learned discourse of this argument porcacchi p p porc. Funer. Antichi tell of some scythian which hang their dead on tree as the Colchi of old and some tartarian be still report to do esteem it a disgrace to be bury in the earth the taurici bury with their king some of their best friend the derbices q q aet Var. lib. 4. cap. 1. call they berbiccae where he say also that the sardoan custom be to kill their old man with club lib. 3. cap. 34. that the ceij be old at a solemn feast or sacrifice end their age with a draught of hemlock feast with the flesh of their kinsman which be seventy year old the woman at that age they strangle and after bury the caspian straight imprison such as attain to that age and their famish they some say they lay they among the wood and observe what become of they esteem they as be say before of the persian high honour and next to a canonise who the bird tear with their talon in the next degree of happiness who dog or wild beast pray on but beneath all disaster and disadventure which can find neither the one nor the other to become unto they such enemy-friend the tibareni crucify those old man which they have best love the herule be sick or old be place by their kindred on a pile of wood and there by another which be not of that kin slay with a dagger who be descend the pile be fire his wife be force to hang herself or else to abide perpetual infamy but I be loath to bury you in these burial rite the scythian punish r r alex. alex. lib. 3. cap. 11. no fault more severe than theft they will make themselves drunken with the smoke of herb burn in the fire they swear by the king throne by their sword and by the wind s s Zonar ann. tom. 2. when they have sack Athens and pile a heap of book to the fire which other have compile with studious pain one of the company dissuade burn of then lest that the greek neglect the muse will become martial t t Viu trad. dis. l. 2. they double their number at four as we do at ten through unskilfulness in number @. 4 of the seres we may proceed further in these cold scythian narration if the deep snow long desert beastly man and mankind beast men-eater and other monstrous adventure in the way do not make it both perplex and dangerous leave therefore these horrid and uncouth nation the first civil country eastward be the u u soli. cap. 53. plin. l. 1. yet Dionys call they (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) seres the quiet and mild of man flee the commerce and traffic with other nation barter yet with such nation as resort to they not value ware by word but by their eye among they be report to be neither thief nor whore nor murderer nor hailes nor pestilence nor such like plague a woman after conception or in her purgation be not desire none eat unclean flesh none know sacrifice but every one be judge to himself of that which be right they 10 10 io. Boem. lib. 2. cap. 9 Strabo lib. 15. tell that they live two hundred year that the commonwealth be govern by a council of five thousand every one of who find a elephant to the commonwealth they have this name of sera the chief city by Ptolomey y y ptol. l. 6. c. 16. place in 177. 15. and 38. 36. this region he limit on the west with Scythia Imaum on the east with and likewise on the north here some place the promontory Tabin there the eastern ocean on the south with part of India our silk have the name of this region where it be make of a most fine wool grow on the leaf of tree Dionys say of flower of the earth say Pliny this serica z z Castald ortel thes. Castaldus call Cataio and so do most of our new writer orosius a a Oros l. 1. c. 2. number from the Seric ocean to the caspian sea two and forty nation of hyrcanian and scythian and from thence westward to the river Tanais thirty four the region betwixt Albania and the caspian he attribute to the amazon the b b dom. Niger Asia come 8. seres be suppose to inhabit the country now call cathay which name Niger derive from a scythian nation call Chata they have a law against idolatry and worship of image they have no temple chap. 11 of the tartarian and of diverse nation which they subdue with their pristine right the name of Scythia and Sarmatia be now together with those nation swallow up and drown in that Tartarian deluge which about four hundred year since with a sudden torrent overwhelm the gteat part of Asia that we speak not of Europe the heart whereof quake and tremble with fear of this tempest from Rome do pope a a Vincent Belluac spec. hist lib. 30. innocent the four send ambassador by entreaty to prevent their arm when as they have already overrun beside those country which still bear their name Russia Polonia silesia moravia Hungaria even as far as Austria so far be the huge unwiedly empire of Alexander or of the roman short of the tartarian greatness that the expedition of some one b b Bathu of the subject of this empire have pierce as far into the west as ever Alexander into the east and that happy among more resolute courage than the persian or indian effeminate with wealth and peace can afford and Tamerlane alone some age after if we credit that history c c Alhacen arab. of the life of Tamerlane of his life translate out of the Arabic subdue and obtain more beside his own inheritance than all that which the roman have achieve in that eight hundred year and upward wherein their empire be grow to the full but of he afterward @. i. of the beginning of the tartarian nation the name tartar be proper to a river in Mongul from whence it be derive to the people inhabit near the same which after give both name and law to so great a part of the world for thus write joannes d d io. de planc carpini Hak. Tom 1. mar. sanut l 3. sar 13 c. 3. de plano carpini which be send ambassador to the tartarian court from pope Innocent 1246. there be a country in the east part of the world call Mongol which have sometime four sort of inhabitant yeka-mongol that be the great Mongols Sumorgul that be water-Mongol these call themselves e e Mercat tartar of a river which run through their country name Tartar the three merkat the four metrit these all be alike in person and language but divide among themselves into several province and unto several prince in the land of yeka-mongol be f f Chingis secund. in Spec. hist Cangius Haitono See lud. reg. lampadius in mellific etc. Niceph. greg. hist rom. lib. 2. call he Zitzischan Cingis who begin to be a mighty hunter before the lord for he learn to steal man he range into other country take as many captive as he can and join they unto himself also he allure the man of his own country unto he who follow he as their ringleader to do mischief then begin he to war upon the Sumongols or tartar and slay their captain and after many conflict subdue they to himself and bring they all into bondage afterward he use their help against the merkat who also he vanquish in battle proceed from thence he fight against the metrite and vanquish they also Naimani hear that Cingis be thus exalt great disdain thereat for they have a great and mighty emperor unto who all the foresay nation pay tribute who son when he be dead succeed he in his empire howbeit be young and foolish they know not how to govern the people but be divide and fall at variance among themselves these invade Cingis his country put the inhabitant to the sword but be after overthrow by the Mongols and either slay or make captive some g g g Botero ben. fetch the tartarian pedigree from the ten tribe of Israel which Salmanasar carry captive and in their map h h ortel theat place hoard of Danites Nepthalites etc. in the further northerly and easterly bound of Asia which yet be a great part of the world not only from Media whither those people be convey but from any part of the assyrian empire the king of tabor or Tybur in these part be say to have come into France to francis the french king about the year 1540 and be after at Mantua by Charles the emperor burn for secret solicitation of he and other christian prince to Judaism and Opmeerus i i opmeer Chro. in an. m. 3413. report of that their journey pass through Euphrates miraculous stay his stream to wonder at the vanity of writer when they go into a region call Aisarich which be a year and a half travel there to keep their law where never before have be any habitation but these thing have small probability m. Paulus k k cap. 42. ram. the latin copy of m. Paul be very unperfect g. Mercat. tab. un. mirkon recite Chingis his pedigree etc. who with his father and uncle live many year in the court of the great Chan above three hundred year since say that they dwell at first if such wander may be so call in the north where they have no lord over they but pay tribute to a great signior there call Uncam and here in these country presbyter John to who they pay the ten of their beast but this Uncam or presbyter John fear their number every where multiply devise to disperse they through the world which the tartar perceive with joint consent forsake their former habitation and depart thence far off into the north deny further tribute unto Uncam after they have there continue a certain time they choose to their king about the year 1162. one which be call Cingis can who rule they with such modesty and justice that they love and fear he as a god his fame reduce all the other tartar in other part under his obedience he thus strengthen weary of those desert command they to arm themselves with bow and other weapon and begin to invade and conquer city and province to his subjection the principal inhabitant whereof he carry with he kind entertain they leave such discreet governor in the same that the people be secure in their person and good when he have thus subdue about nine province he send his ambassador to l l Uncam subdue Uncam to demand his daughter in marriage which uncam with much indignation and many threaten deny Cingis assemble his force march against he and by the way inquire of his astrologer and diviner touch his success they take a green reed cleave it a sunder place the part thereof a good distance one from another and write upon the one the name of Uncam and Cingis on the other tell the king that while they be read their conjure charm these reed will fight together and the victory shall remain with he who reed get the better which accord come to pass in the sight of the army Cingis his reed overcome the other as after Cingis himself do Uncam who he slay in the field and possess his daughter and state wherein he continue six year conquer city and kingdom and at last be wound at a castle call thaigin in the knee whereof he die and be bury in mount altay the next emperor after his account be Cin can the three Baythin can the four Allau the brother of mangu Esu can the five mongu can the six the seven Cublai can who not only inherit what the former have conquer but in the 60 year of his reign subdue in a manner the rest of those part of the World the word can signify emperor wheresoever these emperor die they be bury in altay aforesaid they which carry he kill all they meet within the way bid they go to the other world to serve their emperor for this end they also slay the best horse to serve their dead lord in another world when mangu can be bury there be more than ten thousand man slay by the soldier which convey he in this history of m. Paul observe that this catalogue of emperor be unsound for w. de rubruquis in bathye time be at the court of mangu can to who bathy be subject occoday be leave out and Esu put in the cause of this error seem to be the give of this name can to the chief duke as bathy etc. and the want of exact write chronicle in those time among they @. 2 the great exploit of CINGIS or CANGIUS the first tartarian emperor for further light into this history I think it not amiss to set down what Haithon or Anthony the armenian have write of the tartarian beginning this our author be royal descend in Armenia where he live about three hundred year since and at the request of pope Clement the five write the history of the tartar from Cingis or Cangius till Mango can take out of the tartarian history the rest he partly see with his eye and partly learned of his uncle a eyewitness of the same who have attend on Haithon the armenian king in the great khan Court the country where the tartar first dwell say m m the tartar legend of Hait Armen Haithon be beyond the mount belgian where they live like beast have neither letter nor faith nor habitation nor Souldiery nor reputation among their neighbour-nation there be of they diverse nation call by one common name Mogli which be divide into seven principal tribe who name be tartar tangut cunat Talair Sonieh monghi Tebeth these all be subject to their neighbour a poor old man be a smith who as they believe be engender of the sun beam see in his sleep a arm man on a white horse which say unto he o Cangius the will of the immortal GOD be that thou be the governor of the tartarian and ruler of the seven nation to free they from their bondage and tribute this his vision when he report to other they will not believe he until that the night follow the chief man among themselves see the same man with command from the immortal GOD to yield obedience unto Cangius this they perform with all reverence and spread in the midst of they a black felt with a seat thereon on which the seven prince or chief man place Cangius call he can that be emperor and kneel before he this happy be then the most sumptuous n n a feel the tartarian throne in their coronation throne their state can afford but continue in the royal investiture of their succeed sovereign their exceed riches and conquest notwithstanding at two of which solemnity say our author I myself have be present Cangius thus enthronize on his felt command they many thing first to believe the immortal GOD and from thence forward the tartar begin to call upon the name of the immortal GOD seek for his aid in all their enterprise second he command to make a general view of all such as be able to bear arm appoint captain over ten over thousand and over ten thousand which make a full regiment he command also those seven principal head of their tribe to bereave themselves of their dignity and for further trial of their obedience each of they to bring thither his elder son and to cut off his head each with his own hand which they refuse not to do in reverence to that divine ordinance whereby he be make their sovereign Cangius have thus make trial of their fidelity subdue many nation and one day have his horse slay in battle under he be forsake of his tartar despair his recovery after they see he fall and may easy have be slay have not his enemy through ignorance neglect he to pursue the rest which Cangius perceive convey himself into a thicket of shrub and when his enemy return to despoil the dead a owl come and sit on the shrub under which Cangius be hide which cause they not to suspect any to lurk there and so they depart he the next night flee to his people who see he and hear the order of his escape give thanks to the immortal GOD who by mean of that bird have preserve he they also have after this that o o the owl observe fowl in such reverence that it be account a happy thing to wear one of her feather on their head Cangius afterward assault his enemy bring under both they and all the country on that side of belgian the exact time of these thing Haithon can not learn notwithstanding his much enquiry which he impute to their want of letter at that time these country thus conquer the arm man appear to he the second time and command he in the name of the immortal GOD to pass the mountain belgian and go towards the west where he shall conquer kingdom signory and land and that thou may be assure that this be the will of GOD arise and go with thy people towards the mountain to that part which join on the sea there thou shall dismount and turn thou towards the east and kneel down nine time shall worship the immortal GOD and he which be almighty shall show thou the way by which thou may commodious pass Cangius present command his people with their wife and family to accompany he in this enterprise and when they be come to the sea forget not with his follower to perform those nine worship and stay there that night in his prayer the next day he see that the sea have go nine foot back from the mountain and leave a spacious way by which they with all their substance pass westward hence it be that the tartar ascribe some happiness to the number of nine and he that will offer a present to any tartarian signior must offer nine p p the number of nine thing which custom they use in their tribute unto this day as master jenkinson find by experience to his cost Cangius after many adventure and many law which of he be call jasack Cangis can have first persuade his twelve son wherein I think his nephew be also reckon to concord bid each of they to bring he a arrow which together none of they asunder the least of they may easy break he die this history of Cingis or Cangius I have thus full relate for knowledge both of the beginning of their state and religion and if these vision seem fabulous yet may Cingis in his subtlety deal with they as Mahomet with his arabian or Numa with the roman the one make Gabriel the other Aegeria author of their policy and what he in part pretend may by fame and time be augment although I see not but that this history of Cingis may as well be credit as that of Alexander in josephus to who appear one in the habit of the jewish high priest command he to undertake that enterprise with promise of assistance for which cause he who the world worship as a king and as a god do worship q q antiq. lib. 11. himself prostrate before jaddus the high priest and the same r r Ios. antiq. lib. 2. in fine author also say that the pamphylian sea divide itself to give way unto his macedonian soldier have no other way to destroy the empire of the persian to return to our friar with who we begin he report s s jo. de plano carpini that Cingis after his victory against the Naimani war upon the kythayan where he be overthrow and all the noble except seven slay have breathe himself a while at home he invade the Huyri a christian people of the nestorian sect who they over-came and receive of they letter of which before they be ignorant after they he subdue the saroyur Karanites and hudirat this do he wage war against the kythayan or cathayan who emperor he shut up into his chief city where Cingis besiege he till that victual fail in his camp he command that they shall eat every ten man of the army they of the city fight valiant with engine dart arrow and when stone want they throw silver especial melt silver but by under-mine the tartar make way from the army into the midst of the city where they issue up and open the gate by force and slay the citizen this be the first time that the emperor of the kathayans be vanquish Cingis cham obtain the empire the man of kaytay t t kytayans and their religion be pagan have a special kind of write by themselves and as it be report the scripture of the old and new testament they have also record in history the life of their forefather and they have eremite and certain house make after the manner of our church which in those day they great resort unto they say that they have diverse saint also and they worship one God they adore and reverence Christ jesus our lord and believe the article of eternal life but be not baptize they do also honourable esteem and reverence our scripture they love christian and bestow much alm and be a very courteous and gentle people they have no beard and they agree partly with the mongal in the disposition of their countenance there be not better artificer in the world their country be exceed rich in corn wine gold silk and other commodity of their writing friar Bacon from the relation of w. Rubruquis which live in his time and rubruquis himself as in the manuscript thereof appear testify that it be do with pencil and in character as the Chinois and japonites still use the jugres write from the top to the bottom of the page and from the left hand to the right the man of Tebeth as we do those of tangat from the right hand to the left but multiply their line upward the cathayan say rubruquis be little man and speak through the nose they be good artificer the son succeed in the father trade their physician deal with herb but not with urine there be among they nestorian who have a bishop reside in segni their book be in Syriac themselves ignorant of that tongue they be drunkard usurer and some of they have many wife they wash their low part when they enter their church they feast and eat flesh on friday as the saracen their bishop visit they scarce once in fifty year and then all their male even infant also be order priest the idolater among they be more moderate some of which wear yellow broad cowl some be eremite and lead a austere life in wood and hill Cathaya have not then any vine but they make drink of rise wherewith they also take a kind of ape which will drink themselves drunken with that pleasant liquor out of who neck they take the blood wherewith they die purple after the conquest of cathay Cyngis send his son thossut can for so they term he also against the people of comania who he vanquish another son he send against the indian who subdue India Minor these indian be the black saracen u u black Saracen which be also call aethiopian thence he march to fight against christian dwell in India Maior who king be common call presbyter John who by a stratagem repel they out of his dominion in travel homeward the say army of the mongal come unto the land of Buirthabeth the inhabitant whereof be pagan and conquer the people in battle this people have a strange custom when any man father die he assemble all his kindred and they eat he they have no beard but with a iron instrument pluck out the hair if any grow Cyngis himself go unto the land of Kergis which they then conquer not and in his return home his people suffer extreme famine and by chance find the fresh entrails of a beast they cast away the dung sod it and bring it before Cyngis and do eat thereof hereupon Cyngis enact that neither the blood nor the entrails nor any other part of a beast which may be eat shall be cast away save only the dung he be afterward slay by a thunderclap leave behind he four son the first occoday the second thossut can the three thiaday the name of the four be not know @. 3 of occoday the next emperor and cvine can. CYNGIS be dead occoday be choose emperor he send duke bathy his nephew the son of thossut can against the country of altisoldan occoday 2. tart. imp. and the people call bisermini who be Saracen but speak the language of comania who he subdue thence they march against orna a port town on the river don where be many gazarians alanian russian and saracen which he drown with the river run through the city turn it out of the channel thence they pass into Russia and make foul havoc there destroy Kiou the chief city they proceed against the hungarian and polonian and in their return invade the morduans be pagan and conquer they in battle then they march against the people call Byleri or Bulgaria magna and utter waste the country from hence they proceed towards the north against the people call Bastarci or Hungaria magna and have conquer they subdue also the parossitae and samogetae thence proceed unto the ocean sea at the same time occoday send Cerpodan against Kergis who subdue they in battle the kergis these be pagan have no beard at all they have a custom when any of their father die in token of lamentation to draw as it be a leather thong overthwart their face from one ear to the other hence he march with his force southward against the armenian which they conquer with part of Georgia receive tribute of the other part and from thence into the dominion of the mighty sultan call Deurum who they vanquish in fight and to be short they go on further sack and conquer even unto the sultan of Aleppo who country they subdue they march against the caliph of Baldach and exact at his hand the daily tribute of four hundred byzantine beside baldakine and other gift thus far of their conquest out of friar John aforesaid who be in person with bathy or baydo and at the court of Cuine the emperor Haithon 10 10 Haithon Armen call baydo the second son of occoday or Hoccota can affirm that he send his three son jochi into the west as far as Tigris baydo towards the north and chagoday towards the south he send also one baydo whither the same or another with thirty thousand horse against the sultan of the turk who realm he subdue in the year 1244. he add that baydo have conquer Cumania y y Cumania which he confine on the east with the corasmian on the west with the euxine on the north with cassia haply Casan on the south with the river etil he subdue Russia Gazaria Bulgaria and so pass into Austria follow the stream of his victory in the passage of a great stream be there drown his heir succeed he in the place which he have conquer which signory Tochay possess in haithon time this history of baydo his death be not likely for Yvo of Narbona in a epistle to the archbishop of Bordeaux record by z z mat. Paris matth. Paris in the year 1243. say that in the same present summer they have depart out of Hungary and lay siege to Neustat wherein this Yvo then be and in the year 1246. friar John be with the say baydo who also rehearse that hungarian expedition and his return unto those part about Volga or etil likewise William de rubruquis a friar minorite be send to Baatu so he call he from jew the french king in 1253. and to this agree Mathias a michou a a mat. a michou sarmat lib. 1. in his sarmatian history who witness that in the year 1241. the tartar under Bathu come into Russia and destroy Kiou a city before stately and beautiful have in it three hundred church and more very fair of which some remain to this day among the shrub and brier receptacle for wild beast it be the seat of the metropolitan who have under he many bishop through Moldavia Valachia Russia and Muscovia he send Peta into Polonia who destroy the country and on Ash-wednesday turn Cracovia into ash abandon before both of the prince and people and after overthrow duke Henry and other nobleman with the force of the country assemble against they together with Pompo the great master of the dutch order in Prussia in which battle a certain tartarian standard-bearer carry in a great standard the greek letter 10 and on the top of the staff a black and terrible image with a long beard begin b b tartarian sorcery with enchantment strong to shake the head of the image whereupon a smoke and cloud of intolerable stink be present disperse over the polonian and they become heartless and unable to fight duke Henry and duke Boleslaus and Pompo with the flower of their nobility be here slay and the country miserable spoil from hence they go into moravia where they put all to fire and sword more than a month together and thence to Hungary to bathy who enter Hungary with 500000. soldier where first overthrow those force which king bela have send to prohibit they passage they after chase the king himself with the power of his kingdom oppose himself against they out of the field who flee into Austria and after into Sclavonia leave his country a prey to the tartar who make spoil on that side of Danubius the next winter pass over the river then freeze and fill all with blood and slaughter bathy send Cadan to pursue the king into Sclavonia still flee before he who waste Bosna Servia and Bulgaria and after two year sackage in Hungary they pass by the fen of Maeotis into Tartary and haply have return to make fresh spoil in Europe if the embassage of pope Innocent have not divert their purpose or rather that Occaday their great Chan be about that time poison they be to expect a new commission from his successor which be Cuine who when he be install even in the presence of friar c c io. de plano c. John the pope legate erect a banner against all kingdom of the christian except they will be subject to he for their intent be to subdue all the world as Cyngis cham have ordain and the superscription of his seal be God in heaven w. Rubruq m. s and Cuine Chan upon earth the strength of God the seal of the emperor of all man he keep his court usual in the land of nayman the plain whereof be extend like to the sea without the rise of any hill the cold most eager and sharp till march little wind nor snow except in the end of April at caracarum rubruquis meet with a english man bear in Hungaria which be expert in many language his name be Basilius here he find two Mosches and one church @. 3 of MANGV CAN and his successor CVELAI Cuine 3 imp. mangu 4. but Cuine in short time after die and leave the empire to mangu can to who aytonus d d haithonus de tart. the armenian king go voluntary in person about the year 1257. and receive gracious entertainment make unto he seven petition first that he and his people shall become christian second that there shall be perpetual peace between the tartar and christian three that in all country conquer by the tartar the church and clergyman of the christian shall be free from servitude and tribute four that he will redeem the holy sepulchre and the holy land from the saracen five that he will destroy the caliph of Baldack six that himself may have aid as need shall require in his defence of such tartar as be near unto Armenia seven that such part of Armenia as the saracen now possess and the tartar shall recover from they may return to the crown of Armenia mangu-can answer after deliberation with his noble to the first that himself will be a Christian and persuade other his subject but force none thereunto and to the rest in order that his request in all shall be fulfil and to that end he will send his brother Haolon into those part as be before already show thus be mangu baptize by a bishop than chancellor of Armenia and all his household and many noble of both sex but before jerusalem can be recover Cublai 5. imp. mangu die and Cobila or Cublai can succeed in who time m. Paulus e e m. Paul l. 2. be a eyewitness of the tartarian proceed who affirm that this Cublai exceed in power not his predecessor only but all the kingdom of christian and saracen although they be join in one before he obtain the sovereignty he show himself a valiant soldier but after he be emperor he never fight field but once against Naiam his uncle who be able out of the province wherein he govern to bring together four hundred thousand horse to who Caidu shall have add a hundred thousand horse more these both conspire against their master and lord Cublai 1286. but before their force be join Cublai stop the passage that none may pass to carry news sudden assemble within ten day journey of Cambalu three hundred and threescore thousand horse and a hundred thousand footman with this power ride day and night he come sudden on his enemy and have first consult with his diviner after their manner give the onset and take Naiam prisoner who he strangle betwixt two carpet lest the earth shall drink or the sun shall see the blood of that imperial family Naiam have be secret baptize and now also have the cross for his banner which occasion the jew and saracen to scoff at the christian but Cublai understand hereof call they all before he and say that the cross will not help such wicked man as Naiam who be a traitor to his lord say you not therefore that the GOD of the christian be unjust to forsake his follower for he be the chief bounty and justice Cublai by his captain conquer the kingdom of mien Bengala Mangi etc. HONDIUS his map of Tartary Tartary chap. 12 a continuation of the tartarian history and the question discuss whether cathay and China be the same and the journey of Benedict go by land from labour @. i. of the tartarian succession to our day after a a m. p. l. 2. c. 5. Tamor 6. Cublai can succeed Tamor can son to Cingis the elder son of Cublai in who time Haithon which then live say that there be beside three great tartarian prince but subject to the great can Chapar which rule in Turquestan who be able to bring into the field four hundred thousand horseman arm Hotchtay in the kingdom of Cumania who be able to arm six hundred thousand horseman to the war but not so resolute as the former Carbanda the three rule in Tauris able to assemble a army of three hundred thousand horse well provide and all these live in the western bound of the tartarian empire every way inferior in wealth and number to the southerly and easterly part thereof Tarik mircond a persian in his catalogue of the can or tartarian emperor call Cublai by a transposition of the syllable Ulaku for thus do he recite their name with the year of their coronation chinguis in the year of the Hegira 602. Otkay Khaon 626. Gayuk Khaon 643. Manchu Khaon 644. Ulaku Khaon 657. Haybkay Khaon 663. Hamed khan or Nicudar Oglan 680. argon Khon 683. Ganiaru Khon 690. Budukhan 693. Gazunkhan 694. Alyaptukhan 703. Sulton abuzayd Bahader khan 716. these from Cublai or Ulaku be the can or viceroy of Persia and those part adjoin and not the great can themselves but of these and of Tamerlane and his issue we have before relate at large in the four persian dynasty I have see the transcript of a letter send by king Edward the second write 1307. in the first year of his reign October 16. to diolgietus king of the tartar against Mahomet and in behalf of William Liddensis episcopus and other to preach to his people but these tartar it seem be of the near mahumetan and not the great can of cathay since Tamor can we have not so continue a history of their empire and emperor as before and yet we have have succeed testimony a long time of their state and magnificence but neither so diligent observer nor so exact writer as the former beside that their history seem in some thing more fabulous of this late sort be Odoricus b b Odoricus ap. Hak. a Frier which live three year in the emperor court and travel as far as Quinsay who die in the year 1331. sir John Mandevile c c sir John Mandevile our countryman spend many year in those country a few year after Odoricus and write the history of his travel in the reign of Edward the three of England echiant can be then emperor of the tartar in which if many thing seem not worthy credit yet be they such as Odoricus or some other not of the worst author have before commit to writing and haply by other after his time in those day when print want foist into his book once he set down the distance and passage of country so exact as I think he can not then have learn but by his own travel after his time d d nic. di conti. ap. Ramus Ios. Barbaro Nicholo di conti a venetian travel through India and cathay after twenty five year return home and go to Eugenius the four then pope to be absolve because he have deny the christian faith to save his life his enjoin penance be true to relate to Poggius that pope secretary his long peregrination this be in the year 1444. about the same time e e Ios. Barbaro josafa Barbaro a venetian in the year 1436. have learn of a tartarian ambassador which have be at Cambalu and return by Tana be entertain of the say josafa some particular touch the great cham and cathay some part whereof he hear after confirm by the mouth of usuncassan the mighty persian king in the year 1474. so that from the year 1246. thus far we have continue succession of the cathayan history beside that which a arabian f f Ashacen arab have write in this history of Tamerlane now extant in english @. 2 the question discuss whether cathay be the same with China I be the more curious in name these author lest any shall think that which be write of this people to be fabulous all these in a manner concur in the most substantial thing and because many confound h h ludovicus reg. Contugo Contughi in thes. polit. part. 4. etc. the country and affair of China and cathay the cause of both which opinion may be because that in these last hundred year and more in which more of the world than ever before have be discover yet nothing of moment be find out of this country or people whereunto may be answer that since diverse of the great tartarian lord before subject to the great cham have make themselves absolute lord of their several state the way have not be so open to pass be otherwise of itself exceed both long difficult and dangerous and the adjoin prince recover themselves from tartarian servitude will neither suffer their own to go out nor other free to enter their dominion as the Muscovite the king of China and other master ant. i i Hak. tom. 1. pag. 303. jenkinson which go as far thither-ward as bogharre can not pass further for war in those part neither have any go thither by sea and yet even in this time we have not altogether want witness Ludonicus k k l. Vertoman Vertomannus a hundred year since in Bengala meet with diverse christian who affirm that there be in their country diverse signior christian subject to the great cham. these be white man of a city call sarnau in m. hakluit l l tom. 1. pag. 336. and seq. painful labour we may read of diverse passage out of Russia and Persia by Caravans into cathay ramusius also in his annotation m m ramusius before m. Paulus tell of one Chaggi Memet a persian merchant who have be at Campion and Succuir in Catay damircan then reign and have acquaint he with diverse partiulars thereof also in the epistle of n n Emanuel Carval Epist. ap. pierre du jarric liure 4. la histoire des Indes orient cap. 16. Emanuel carualius a jesuite date at malaca in January 1599 be contain the transcript of Jerome Xaverius his letter from Lahor the city royal of the great Mogor date August 1598. wherein the jesuit relate that while he be in conference with the prince there enter into the palace a old-man of Mahomet religion threescore year of age who affirm to the prince that he have come from Xatai by the way of Mecca present some which know he affirm that he have distribute in alm a hundred thousand piece of gold at Mecca the prince ask if it be so he affirm that he do it because he be old and can not long live nor carry those thing away with he be demand of the state of Xatai he answer that he have there live thirteen year in the city royal Xambalu the king whereof be very mighty and have in his empire a thousand and fifty city some of they very populous he say he have often see the king with who no man speak but by a supplication nor be answer but by a eunuch be ask how he have access thither he answer that he sustain the person as well of the ambassador of the king of caygar as of a merchant and be detain in the first city by the magistrate he show his commission and post be present send to the king who return in a month ride ninety or a hundred mile a day with change of horse bring he letter of admission no man be troublesome to he in the way they punish thief severe which also be observe of the cathayan in josapha Barbaro and in Marcus Paulus aforesaid the people he affirm be white comely long-bearded and very personable in religion he say they be isavite or christian professor of jesus and some among they Musavite or jew and many mahometans who hope to draw the king be a Christian to their Sect the jesuit add that he further confer with he another day about their religion who tell he that they have many church and some very great many image both paint and carve especial of the crucifix which they religious worship every church have his priest much reverence the priest live single and keep school wherein they instruct the youth which shall after take order they have also one among the priest supereminent and be all maintain at the king cost as be the church also both build and repair they wear black clothes and on holiday red with cap much like the jesuit but great he add that he have often see the king go to church that there be many of both sex which in cloister live a monastical life some observe also a single life in their own house this agree with Vertoman report he report that the country be rich and have in it many mine of silver the king have four hundred elephant which they say be bring from malaca and from Pegu also he say that merchant resort thither which voyage be half a year it seem through the sea between China and japan Xaverius add that while he be at Caximir he hear of many christian in rebat a kingdom join to Xatai who have church priest and bishop to who he have write three way in the Portugal and the persian tongue the great objection against this history that distinguish cathay from China be the report of jacob Pantogia o o jacob a jesuite in a letter date from Paquin the seat royal of China in march 1602. in which he blame a double error of our map both for make China large than it be and for adjoin to the same this question kingdom of cathay whereas say he China or Sinai be cathay and this Paquin where now we live be Cambalu this he prove by the incredible riches which he here see agree to that which be common report of cathay and by the testimony of certain moor and mahometans who he find in Paquin which usual every five p p go say six year resort hither under show of a embassage and pay of tribute indeed for gain by way of traffic their tribute mean while obtain sufficient retribution out of the king coffer who sustain they and they all the time of their abode in China at his own cost beside other gift of these merchant which resort hither out of Persia and the country of the Mogores the jesuit by enquiry learned that this country of China be call cathay and have no other name in Persia and among the Mogores nor do they know any other country so call and ask further how they call the city Paquin they answer Cambalu whereupon the jesuit conclude without all scruple as be say and again in the chinian epistle date 1607. be report that q q bane go Benedictus go send six year after of the jesuit by the way Mogor to find out cathay remain in the border of China in the province of Xanti from whence he write 1606. that he can find no other Catay than the kingdom of China this report further Pantogia opinion but if it be not sufficient to oppose the former report of xavy to these of Pantogia and go and the different quality of the chinian and cathayan as in their proper place shall follow both in thing private and public divine and human I answer that the name of Cambalu be by Marcus Paulus r r marc. Paulus lib. 2. cap. 7. and other interpret the city of the prince or cam. and Perera s s Galeotto pevera Chin. Pequim sig. interpret Pachin or Paquin where the king of China always reside to signify the town of the kingdom t t Narquin as he be there advertise the same signification in manner remain to the diverse appellation in differ language as a common name to be apply to any city u u lit. jac. Anon. 1603. royal now for custom of both whereas in China thief and malefactor be seldom execute and none have power to execute any without special commission from the king but either they die by stripe hunger or imprisonment except some few once in a year Marcus Paulus and josafa Barbaro from the relation of eye-witness affirm that in Cambalu be such sudden and rigorous execution of justice that one take a jar of milk from a woman head and beginning to drink upon the woman outcry be apprehend and present with a sword cut in sunder that the blood and milk issue together a tartarian ambassador affirm both this and that he have see the like execution upon another for take a piece of bay from a woman so chap in twain but the relation of the chinian and cathayan differ rite will further yield scruple in this case as for the name of cathay ascribe to China by the moor I answer that William de rubruquis 10 10 wil. de rupr Hak. tom. 1. who be in the court of mangu can suppose cathay to be serica regio describe by Ptolomey far more northerly than the jesuite report China to be by his own Astrolabical observation and to these seres y y Ptol l. 6. c. 16. Ptolemey join the sinae or Chinois on the south and our late geographer general concur in this opinion he also which read z z io. de plano Carp. cap. 5. joannes de plano carpini shall find that the tartar conquer the kara-kitai or black cathayan and then the emperor of Kithai be undermine his city as be say in the day of Cyngis and yet a great part of Kitai remain still unconquered and withstand his force and namely that part which be near the sea and this wealthy country of great Cathaya have many province the more part whereof do yet withstand the mole or tartar it be the last print period in I hence gather that the name Kitai be apply to a great part of the north-east of Asia happy no less general to many region on that side than India to the southerly part and why may not the name of Kathay as well by the Mogores and persian be give to the north part of China one parcel of the north-east of Asia as the name of India not only to so great a part of Asia but to America also which be call India because the first discoverer think they have encounter the indian continent and these part of China may much fit retain the name of cathay to which empire it have so long be subject and by the cathayan conquest be first know to our world since my first edition I meet with the other part of rubruquis which master Hakluit than who I know none in this kind more industrious copy out of a entire book in the library of Bennet college in Cambridge where between Cataya and India he place a sea which fit agree to the chinian map make by the Chinois themselves who paint a great bay or gulf of the sea betwixt the northern part of China which we reckon to Cathaia and the southern which may be account to India further he add that all the nation of great Cathaya which epithet be not a little to be observe be situate among the caucasean hill on the north side even to the eastern sea but they know no country else so name true c c the name of China have often alter and so we may think of cathay that sometime more general it be now restrain by the saracen the only traveller into these part of China where they trade for the law of the cathayan forbid egress of the native and ingress of alien and a more forcible law of mountain and desert wild beast and wild man the manifold small and more beggarly segniory between every one challenge their nine if not themselves confiscate or they rob ala now in so long a space may bury even the name and knowledge of the great can whereas neither arm of prince nor traffic of subject can open any new or retain the old notice of nation what dream do the west conceive of the east in Asia and south in Africa till the army first and merchant after of the carthaginian macedonian and roman discover they and yet how do those flood of barbarous people afterward drown with barbarous ignorance the knowledge of all art and this of geography among the rest and till the tartarian like a terrible thunderclap with the lightning and noise of their army bring a more sudden than welcome knowledge of themselves to the world who ever in Persia or Assyria have hear of their name or of diverse people else and these cathayan among the rest first know by their conquest further the jesuite himself to Paquin ascribe just forty degree and Marcus Paulus his father and uncle go from Boghar the altitude whereof master jenkinson d d Hak. at his be there observe to be thirty nine degree and ten minute or as e e Abilsada Isap Ramus Abilfada Ishmael place it thirty nine and a half north and north-east to go into cathay the like course do the same man hold go into cathay from Armenia afterwards with Marcus himself f f lib. 1. cap. 1. volta di graeco and Tramontana whereas a course direct east or incline to the south must have be take if China have be Catai neither be be likely that their journey will have be so much let by frost and snow the same may be gather out of the discourse follow in Marcus Paulus g g lib. 1. and l. 2. where he abut the country in succeed link to cathay from the east to the northwards and from the north-east decline westward in reckon from thence and whereas Pantogia raise the most northerly part of China but to forty two degree at the most wherein as to a eyewitness we yield he credit how can it stand with reason how can it be likely that in those temperate clime the world can yield but a few nation and those base moor and ethnic when as a good part of Spain half Italy Greece all France Germany and Hungary to omit other wealthy part of the world be subject to the same parallel and indeed herein Pantogia have well help we whereas our modern map have cause no small scruple to a diligent observer in place cathay a country report to be so fertile and civil in so northerly a clime very indiscreet h h tab. raise Cambalu to the height of sixty degree and parallel cathay with Norwey which can stand with other thing thereof report howsoever the tartar themselves be happy of a more northerly climate than this mention other go not so far yet they place Cambalu too far within land which Paulus say be within two day journey of the sea it seem that now this great tartarian prince if there be any such have no strength at sea and therefore be less know and herein participate other great and mighty prince Prester John so call of Aethiopia in Africa and the sophi and great Mogor in Asia rank just among the great emperor of the world who have some part of their dominion adjoin to the sea make little or no use thereof Abilfada Ishmael a syrian prince who write a exact geography in Arabic about i i ab. Ishmael cite by Ramus vol. 2. three hundred year since place Cambalu in 144. 8. long. and 35.25 it may happy be 45. degree in latitude one figure be falsify or else invert for 53. and as this latitude disagree from that of Paquin so the longitude a great deal more this confirm this opinion further that Chaggi Memet mar. polo Mandevil Odoricus Nicolo di conti and other eye-witness speak of China or Mangi and of cathay as diverse country and Farfur king of Mangi k k M.P. l. 1 55 possess his country now know by the name of China in peace till an. 1269. be count a rich country than cathay itself which be conquer before if we understand it proper and Cambalu seem to be the city wherein Cingis the first cham besiege and take the cathayan emperor Paulus also mention among the great city of Mangi Panghin and nanghin report further that Mangi alone have in it a thousand and two hundred great rich and illustrious city as much as be report of whole China and more and that after Cublai can have conquer that state he divide it into nine tributary kingdom govern by so many viceroy under he and these city he fortify with garrison not of the natural inhabitant but of cathay and these thing be report by he who long live in these part possess the place of governor under the can three year according to the tartarian custom in jangui f f marc. Paulus lib. 2. cap. 60. one of the chief city of Mangi have under it twenty seven other city and the whole province of Mangi he place southeast from cathay and wherefore do the king of China always abide in Paquin in the northerly part of his kingdom but as all which write here of affirm because of the tartar which from those part conquer the kingdom which if they be so base a people as Pantogia affirm can not be so dreadful to the Chinois that their king for their sake shall there make his residence in the skirt and border of the kingdom Alhacen g g Alhacen his h story of Tamerlane translate by jean du Bec. a learned arabian write the history of tamerlane life wherein he tell of the great cham of Cambula and the king of China as diverse prince of diverse country one of which accrue to tamerlaine by marriage of the Cham only daughter and the other by conquest what need such a wall which I myself have see draw in a map of China of a very large form and make in China itself with chinian character hang in master hakluit chamber at Westminster make by the Chinois if the tartar be not mighty neighbour especial themselves be so mighty and populous but it be unknown and who know that there be such a kingdom as China a hundred year ago or who have sail that way to seek this since and how long be it before it be know in our world that there be such a prince in the world as the great negus above mention in Aethiopia especial he have no ship for war or merchandise nor many scarce any good haven by sea to make himself know and within land nature have as it be imprison he bar up the passage with mountain and desert which seem now to be the case of the cathayan further by the jealousy of many great prince not to admit any foreigner in or license any of they to pass our for fear of innovation say h h scal. reb. can. Isag. lib. 3. Scaliger it be hard to determine in these misty mystery even as in nature it fall out that the sun shine there many hour before it arise to we so in history it may happen that there may shine a tartarian sun in cathay when as a dark night in this long iniquity of distance hide he from our eye thus have I argue the question and well know not which way to determine if this can any thing further the Jesuitical vow to the papacy I can then suspect this opinion of novelty they indeed be the novatores scal Elench. tr. n. si. step. de lip a word which Serarius so delight to fix upon we or veteratores as Scaliger answer he as h. stephanus object to some lypsian mimike but in matter of geography we may follow he more safe then in ouranography job. 1.17 as near of kin to that great compasser of the earth I know not how to answer many objection against this chinian cathay but by denial of truth in traveller assertion some take too hyperbolical and diabolical i i Diab authority or in the conjecture of saracen which see paganism in China so conspire with popish imagery in self-imagined worship with white light funeral rite and other black dark dead devotion wherein the Chinois and jesuit seem alike think they of one religion the jesuit k k Trigaut l. 5. c. 11. own conjecture or that time the consumer of all thing have devour city people and religion or what else soever if any respect my opinion in this controversy I confess the journal of go late publish and hereafter insert have make i make a new search and take a near view and though time the father of truth must determine the question more full yet this be for the present my judgement if I may so style it that neither they which confound cathay with China nor they which whole separate they be to be follow they seem in this altercation to let truth fall between they which in my conceit be this that the present kingdom of China comprehend the best part of cathay beside the ancient chinian limit n. Trigaut l. 1. by polo call Mangi for Mangi which be the true China be by the great can divide into nine province or kingdom as Paulus which assist in that conquest relate but when humvu expel the tartar out of China he endeavour the same in all the best part of Cathaya now the northerly part of the chinian kingdom where the tartar be strong and have keep their residence these northerly part be govern by Yunlo his nephew and general of his force who after humvu his death dispossess his son and fix his usurp imperial seat at Paquin or Pequim in the north as be better secure there of his friend and against the tartar also his practise neighbour this city he call Pequim that be the northern court in relation to Nanquim or Nanquin which signify the southerly court where humvu have before reside both which continue royal city or supreme court to this day the same which in respect aforesaid they call in China language quim the tartarian founder call in their idiom Cambalu city of the prince which name the tartar and saracen as you have hear continue but that all cathay be not include in these six province subject to China our reason before out of rubruquis be sufficient and that there be yet a grand can in those part lord of great city which be also rich and fortify have print ordinance and other civil art as in China may appear by the persian Chaggi Memet his journey into these country relate by himself to Ramusio go from Camul in nine day come to the northern part those famous wall of China but Memet travel from camul fifteen day to Succuir five day further to Gauta and then six to Campion not mention any wall or impediment from the Chinois these city he place in Tanguth which Paulus also do more northerly the china or cathay both of they mention the plenty of rhubarb which draw merchant thither from far Marcus Paulus call Tanguth a great province contain many province and city himself have live at Campion a whole year the emperor reign about seventy year since Memet call daimircan this last syllable usual be annex to all prince name in those part and call he the grand can affirm that Succuir and Campion be but the begin of his estate and his frontier town towards the mahometans his people be idolater now Tanguth be never that i know by any reckon either to cathay in proper signification or China and therefore still we may believe that there be a great can though little in comparison of those time when all Asia be in manner subject to they still hold some northerly and worse part of cathay with Tanguth and other m m such as those which presbyter Johannes asiaticus hold in Paulus his time better country and perhaps another Cambula too this be a name appellative though the king of China be lord of the best part of cathay of the world which will be more apparent by the relation of this ensue journey through a great part of the tartarian province on the west of China here for the studious geography insert out of Ricci and Trigautius their relation of China publish ann. 1615. touch before out of the jesuit epistle @. 3 the long and dangerous journey from LAHOR a city of the great mogul to China by Benedictus go upon the relation of that mahometan before mention out of Xaverius his letter Pimenta the father visitor of the jesuit send notice thereof into Europe to the pope and Spaniard they hear of so mighty a nation Christian the viceroy of India be command to follow pimenta direction who employ Benedictus go a Portugal jesuite in that expedition furnish as a n n armenian be permit free passage than other armenian merchant change his name to Abdula Isai this late appellation signify a Christian thus obtain the great mogul Achabar his letter patent to his viceroy and neighbour prince accompany with one Isaac a armenian he depart from Lahor the six of january 1603. every year there be a carravan of merchant which pass out of these part into the kingdom of Cascar about five hundred together for their better defence against robber with these adjoin himself in a month travel he come to athee in the same province of Lahor after passage of a river and some stay he come after two month to Passaur thence travel to a small town they meet with a certain eremite who tell they that thirty day thence be the city Capherstam o o it seem to be therefore so call for capher signify a infidel in which no saracen be permit entrance but ethnic may enter except in to their temple he taste also of their wine of which the country be fertile they go to their temple in black here where they meet this eremite they stay twenty day and be fain to hire four hundred soldier of the governor for their defence in twenty five day they travel from hence to ghideli the merchant travel arm on the top of hill the carriage at the bottom to prevent thief which use from those top to stone the traveller they be yet assault and many wound by these robber after twenty day more they come to Cabul where they stay eight month pilgrimage to Mecca by and from the skirt of China at this place there happen into their company the sister of Mahamet can king of Cascar by who country they be to pass towards cathay she be call Agehane age be a honourable title annex to her name for her pilgrimage to Mecca from which place she have now return who be in some want borrow six hundred ducat in merchandise of go which she repay after in most fit merchandise for cathay namely a kind of marble they call it jasper diverse for stone as for pearl this be also mention by Marcus Paulus the Chinois which be of two sort one take out of the bottom of the river Cotan by such as dive for it as they do for pearl it be like to great Flintes the other mean draw forth of the mountain call Consangui Cascio the solitariness of the place distant from Catan twenty day and the hardness of the stone which they mollify with fire over the place make it costly the merchant which buy this privilege of the king carry with they a year provision for their labourer from Cabul they go to Ciarcar where the Mogor patent which have make he hitherto tribute-free be neglect by the unruly borderer from thence to parua the last town in the mogor subjection after five day stay they pass in twenty day over exceed high mountain to the region of Aingharan and fifteen day after to Calcia where the people resemble the hollander ten day be past they come to Gialalabath where the Bramenes exact custom grant they by king bruarate fifteen day after they come to Talhan where by civil broil they be stay a month the calcians be in rebellion thence they travel to Cheman under Abdulahan king of Samarhan Burgavia and bacharate and other confine kingdom where the calcians rob they of great part of their good in eight day troublesome travel they come to Badascian where they be again fleece neither be they free at ciarciunar their next rest from whence in ten day they come to Serpanill a desert place and twenty day after to Sarcil a country full of village two day journey from this place they come to Ciecialith a hill cover with snow where in six day travel many of the company perish with cold thence they attain to tanghetar in the kingdom of Cascar and in fifteen day more to jaconich which journey be so irksome that go lose fix horse he go from hence to Hiarchan p p Paulus call it ciarcian the royal city of Cascar in November 1603. a mart famous for concourse of merchant and variety of merchandise he present the king with a watch a look glass and other european gift obtain his letter patent for furtherance of his journey this journey for the principal place unto Camul agree with that report of Chaggi Memet in ramusius from hence he go with the caravan bassa or captain which buy this place at a dear rate of the king about the midst of November 1604. to jolci Hancialix alceghet hagabate egriar Mesetelec Thalec horma Thoantac Mingrieda Capetalcol Zilan Sarc Guebedall Canbasci Aconsersec Ciacor Acsu in twenty five day a very tedious way by stone and sand in this journey they pass the desert of Caracathay thence they travel to Oitograch Gazo Casciani Dellai Saregabedal Ugan and Cucia and after a month stay here in twenty five day more to Cialis govern by the king of Cascar base son with who at first he have some difference about religion which with a gift be pacify and in a disputation with the mahometan doctor before he the viceroy take part with go affirm that the christian be the true q q musulman that be right believer misermans and that their ancestor profess that law a thing worthy by the way to be observe here he meet with some merchant return from cathay which can tell he of Ricci and the other jesuit at Paquin as before you hear out of Pantogia and here first do he learn that China be cathay at his depart from Cialis the viceroy give he his letter of pass and inscribe he a christian according to his desire whereat a mahometan priest much wonder affirm that they with the region shift also their religion in twenty day they come to Pucian thence to turphan a fortify city thence to Aramuth and so to camul the last city of this kingdom of Cialis in nine day they pass from Camul to the northern wall of China where they stay twenty five day expect the viceroy answer for their admission at a place call Chiaicuon and then be enter the wall they come in one day journey to the city socieu all the space between Cialis and the border of China be subject to the out-road of the tartar the cause that merchant travel in great fear in the day time look not whether the coast be clear and travel the night with great silence and secrecy they find many saracen slay in the way the country people they seldom kill but rob of their cattle as for corn and rice they hold it food for beast and not for man feed on flesh and live above a hundred year the saracen in these part be effeminate and may easy be subdue by the Chinois if they will on the west part of China be that wall before mention to exclude the tartar and two fortify city with strong garrison have their proper viceroy and other magistrate canceu the head city of the province scensi and Soceu which be divide into two part one of which be inhabit by Saracen which trade here for merchandise the other by Chinois who the saracen here call cathayan every night the saracen be enclose in their own city in other thing as the Chinois subject to the same law and magistrate neither may any forreyner return into his country which have stay there nine year every six year seventy two legate come after a old custom to pay a kind of tribute to the king this but a show the intent be to enrich themselves as be say with merchandise be maintain in respect of that pretence at the king charge into Soceu go come at the end of the year 1605. and here meet with other saracen return from Paquin which tell he of the jesuit there reside add that the king do not tell but pour out of a measure a daily allowance of money to they which I mention to show that a man must be spare of credit to saracen traveller and merchant but go can not a long time certify these his fellow of his arrival be ignorant of their China name and it be four month journey to Paquin from soceu and the force of winter be there very great yet do they send in that unseasonable season one of their convert a Chinois call joannes Ferdinandus who after a tedious journey find go then lie on his deathbed when he bring he the letter from the society eleven day after he die not without suspicion of poison give he by the saracen who have also before devise by the way many shift to make themselves master of his good they have likewise a custom that if any die by the way his good be share among the rest here do the saracen offer to seize all into their hand but Ferdinandus profess himself his nephew bear of a China mother and with much a do eat swine flesh together with the armenian in token they be not Saracen obtain that little which be leave of go his substance scarce enough to pay charge yet this and all the other tedious circumstance of this long narration I have thus large relate for the instruction of geographer and merchant of these part desirous to know or trade those country the knowledge whereof I think no european else have learn by experience in some hundred of year last pass his companion the armenian be send from Paquin to Macao and thence to India and be take by hollander in the way at Sincapura be redeem by the portugal and return to Ciaul where he yet live as Trigautius our author affirm but it be high time for we to take view of our tartarian religion chap. 13 of the religion of the tartar and cathayan JOANNES r r io. de pl. car. c. 3. op. Hak. to 1 de plano carpini thus write of their religion they believe that there be one GOD the maker of all thing visible and invisible the author of good thing and punishment yet do they not worship he with prayer praise or any certain rite they have also idol of felt in the fashion of a man and the same they set on both side of their Tent-door and under they they put a thing of felt fashion like a dug these they account the keeper of their cattle author of their milk and young store other they make of silk and do they much honour some place they in a fair chariot cover before the door of their station and whosoever steal any thing out of that chariot be slay without all pity their captain have one always in the midst of their tent. to these idol they offer the first fruit of their milk and the first morsel of their meat and first draught of their drink at meal and when they kill a beast they offer the heart to their idol leave it before he till the morning and then they take and eat it they make a idol also to their chief emperor and offer thereunto with great solemnity as well other creature as horse which none after dare ride on till death they break not a bone of the beast which they kill for meat but burn they with fire they bend themselves to this idol towards the south as to a God they worship the sun light and fire water also and the earth offer thereunto the first of their meat and drink and in the morning before they eat or drink they have no set rite prescribe by law nor do they compel any to deny their religion simple although in some of their custom they be very rigorous thus they martyr Michael duke of Russia because he refuse to do reverence to the image of Cingis can which have be their first emperor and compel the young brother of Andrew duke of Saruogle in Russia to marry his say brother wife according to their custom after that they have slay her former husband they have certain tradition their sin according to which they reckon these thing follow to be sin to thrust a knife into the fire or any way touch the fire with a knife or with their knife to take flesh out of the cauldron or to hew with a hatchet near to the fire for they think that they shall so cut away the head of the fire they account it sin also to lean on the whip wherewith they beat their horse for they ride not with spur also to touch arrow with a whip to take or kill young bird to strike a horse with the rain of their bridle and to break one bone against another likewise to pour out meat milk or any kind of drink upon the ground or to make water within their tabernacle which whosoever do willing be slay but otherwise he must pay a great sum of money to the enchanter to be purify who cause the tabernacle with all thing therein to pass between two fire beside if any have a morsel give he which he be not able to swallow and for that cause cast it out of his mouth there be a hole make under his tabernacle by which he be draw forth and slay without all compassion likewise whosoever tread upon the threshold of any of the duke tabernacle he be put to death thus be these gnat strain when as hostile invasion murder and such other camel be easy among they swallow they think that after death they shall live in another world and there multiply their cattle eat drink and do other action of life at a new moon or a full moon they begin all new enterprise they call she the great emperor and bow their knee and pray thereto the sun they say be the moon mother because she have thence her light their sorcery they be give to divination augury sooth-saying witchcraft enchantment and when they receive answer from the devil they attribute the same unto God who they call Itoga and the comanian call he Chan that be emperor who they marvellous fear and reverence offer to he many oblation and the first fruit of their meat and drink according to his answer they dispose all thing they believe that all thing be purge by fire therefore when any ambassador prince or other personage whatsoever come unto they they and their gift must pass between two fire to be purify lest peradventure they have practise some witchcraft or have bring some poison or other mischief with they and if fire fall from heaven upon man or beast which there often happen or if they think themselves any way defile or unclean they thus be purify by their enchanter if any be sick a spear be set up in his tent with black feel welt about it and from thenceforth their sickness and funeral no stranger enter therein for none of they which be present at his death may enter the hoard of any duke or emperor till a new-moon when he be dead if he be a chief man he be bury in the field where please he and he be bury with his tent sit in the midst thereof with a table set before he and a platter full of meat and a cup of Mares-milk there be also bury with he s s vin. l. 30. c. 86. a mare and colt a horse with bridle and saddle and they eat another horse who bone the woman burn for the soul of the dead stuff his hide with straw set it aloft on two or four pole that he may have in the other world a tabernacle and other thing fit for his use they bury his gold and silver with he the chariot or cart in which he be carry forth be break his tent be destroy neither be it lawful to name his name till the three generation they observe also other funeral rite too long to rehearse they lament their dead thirty day more or less their parent and those of their family be thus cleanse they make two fire and pitch near thereunto two spear with a line from the top of the one to the other fasten on the same line some piece of buckram under which and betwixt the fire pass the man beast and tent there stand also two woman one on this side the other on that cast water and repeat certain charm if any thing fall or be break the enchanter have it and if any be slay of thunder the man in the tent must thus be cleanse and all thing in the tent their condition be otherwise repute unclean and not to be touch no man be more obedient to their lord then the tartar they seldom contend in word never in deed they be reasonable courteous one to another their woman be chaste adultery be seldom hear of and theft be rare both punish by death drunkenness common but without brawl among themselves or discredit among other they be proud greedy deceitful they eat dog wolf fox horse and in necessity man flesh mouse and other filth and that in as filthy a manner without clothes and napkin their boot and the grass can serve to wipe their greasy hand they have no beard herb wine meat or beer nor do they wash their dish it be a great sin among they to suffer any of their food to be lose and therefore they will not bestow a bone on a dog till they have eat the marrow Yvo Narbonensis in a epistle recite by mat. Paris t t mat. Paris 1243. report the confession of a Englishman which be take with other tartar by the christian he say that they call by the name of god the ancient founder and father of their tribe and at set time do solemnize feast unto they many of they be particular and but four only general they think that all thing be create for themselves alone they be hardy and strong in the breast lean and pale-faced rough and huf-shouldered have flat and short nose long and sharp chin their upper jaw low and decline their tooth long and thin their eyebrow extend from their forehead down to their nose their eye inconstant and black their thigh thick and leg short yet equal to we in stature they be excellent archer vanquish they ask no favour and vanquish they show no compassion they all persist as one man in their purpose of subdue the whole world their proud swell title appear in the copy of those letter of duke Baiothnoy and Cuin can express by u u Vincent bel. Spec. hist l. vit. c. 51. and 52. vincentius one of they begin thus by the precept of the live GOD CINGIS cham son of the sweet and worshipful GOD say that GOD be high above all the immortal GOD and upon earth CINGIS c be only lord etc. these letter of the emperor the tartar call the letter of GOD and so begin duke baiothnoy to the pope who have send friar Ascelline with Alexander Albericus and Simon thither in embassage the word of baiothnoy send by the divine disposition of cham know this o pope etc. friar John 10 10 io. de p. c. say he style himself the power of God and emperor of all man and have in his seal engrave word of like effect as be already show mandevill y y c. 37. sir io. mand. have the same report Will de rubruquis z z w. de Rubr. say that they have divide Scythia among they from Danubius to the sun rise every captain know the bound of his pasture which they feed in the winter descend southwards ascend in the summer northwards their house be movable remove on great cart which contain twenty foot between the wheel their house on each side overreach five foot draw by above twenty oxen. when they take they down they turn the door always to the south over the master head be a image of felt call the master brother and another over the head of the good wife or mistress call her brother fasten to the wall and betwixt both of they be a little lean one which be the keeper of the whole house she have also at her bed foot a kid skin fill with wool and a little image look towards the maiden and woman next to the door on the woman side which be the east as the man side be on the west there be a image with a cow udder for the woman who office it be to milk the kine on the other side another with a mare udder for the men. when they make merry they sprinkle their drink upon these image in order begin at the master then go a servant out of the house with a cup full of drink sprinkle thrice towards the south and bow the knee at every time and this be do for the honour of the fire then perform he the like superstition towards the east for the honour of the air next to the west for the honour of water and last to the north in the behalf of the dead when the master hold a cup in his hand to drink before he taste thereof he pour his part upon the ground if he drink sit on horseback he first pour part thereof on the mane of the horse after the servant aforesaid have discharge his cup to the four quarter of the world he return to the house and two other servant stand ready with two cup and two basin to carry drink unto their master and that wife which lie with he the last night sit together on a bed their soothsayer or enchanter be their priest Rubruq alt. m.s. to this may be add out of the manuscript above mention their divination by three bone through which be first burn black the look and if the sight pass straight and right it be a good token but if it be inward crooked or break he then upon this evil presage cease from his enterprise master jenkinson travel with certain tartar which divine by the blade-bone of sheep sod and then burn to powder which be mingle with the blood of the sheep they write therewith certain character with diverse word and ceremony and thence divine of their success which they find true to their cost they use divination also by four sword mangu can desire a conference betwixt the christian saracen and idolater to see which of they can make best proof of his religion the moal tartar profess to believe one only GOD the author of life and death but as the hand which be one have diverse finger so think he and they that this one GOD be please with diverse way of devotion their priest be diviner they be many but have one captain or chief bishop who always place his house or tent before that of the great can about a stone cast distant he have charge of the wain which carry the idol the other priest have their place appoint they some of they be astrologer special that highpriest which foretell the eclipse of the moon all the people provide they their meat that they may not go out of their tent when a eclipse happen they sound their organ and timbrel and make a great noise and when it be past they make great feast drink and mirth they foretell holiday and those which be unlucky for enterprise no war be begin or make without their word they cause all present which be send to the can to pass through the fire they purify the household of the dead by the like rite which before may not be touch on the nine day of may they assemble all the white mare and hallow they at which the christian must be present with their censor they then cast on the ground new a a churned Mares-milk and make a great feast they foretell the destiny of infant new bear and when one be sick they divine by charm whether the disease be natural or proceed of sorcery they be themselves witch sorcerer inuoker of the devil this they do in the night set flesh in the midst of the house ready boil use charm timbrel and fall into mad fit be bind then come the devil and give they answer thus much rubruquis m. Paulus thus report of their religion they say b b l. 1. c. 46 that there be a GOD on high in heaven of who lift up their hand and smite their tooth three time together every day with censer and incense they desire health and understanding l. 2. c. 26 they place a table aloft in the wall of their house in the which be write a name that represent this god they have another which they call Natigay or Itogay of feel or other stuff in every house they make he a wife and child and set his wife on the left hand and his child before he which seem to do he reverence this they call the god of earthly thing which keep their child beast and corn and when they eat they anoint his mouth with the fat and the mouth of his wife and child and then cast out the broth out of the door unto other spirit and when their God have have his part they take they of this Natigay they with like ceremony of lift up their hand and smite of their tooth desire temperature of the air l. 2. c. 26. fruit of the earth child and such like their wife be exceed chaste and observant and though they be many yet can Rachel and Leah yea ten or twenty of they agree with a marvelous union intent unto their household and other business whereby they be gainful and not chargeable to their husband when they marry n n w. de rich. in this sort the husband covenant with the father of the maid who have give he power to take she wheresoever he shall find she he seek she among some of her friend where she have then of purpose hide herself and by a kind of force carry she away they marry with any except their own mother and sister their widow seldom marry because of their service to their former husband in another world except the son marry his father wife or the brother his brother because they can there in the next world be content to resign they to their former husband again the woman buy sell and provide all necessary into the house the man intend nothing but their arm hunt and hawk if one have bury a male-child and another a female the parent contract a marriage betwixt those two and paint in paper servant horse clothes and household and make writing for the confirmation of the dower burn these thing in the fire by the smoke whereof they in their smoky conceit imagine all these thing to be carry and confirm to their child in the other world and the parent of the two dead party claim kindred each of other as if they indeed have marry their child while they live in Xamdu do Cublai can build a stately palace encompass sixteen mile of plain ground with a wall wherein be fertile meadow pleasant spring delightful stream and all sort of beast of chase and game and in the midst thereof a sumptuous house of pleasure which may be remove from place to place here he do abide in the month of june july and August on the eight and twenty day whereof he depart thence to another place to do sacrifice on this manner he have a herd or drive of horse and mare about ten thousand as white as snow of the milk whereof none may taste except he be of the blood of Cingis can. yea the tartar do these beast great reverence nor dare any cross their way or go before they according to the direction of his astrologer or magician he on the eight and twenty of August aforesaid spend and pour forth with his own hand the milk of these mare in the air and on the earth to give drink to the spirit and idol which they worship that they may preserve the man woman beast bird corn and other thing grow on the earth their sect and order these astrologer or necromancer be in their art marvelous when the sky be cloudy and threaten rain they will ascend the roof of the palace of the grand can and cause the rain and tempest to fall round about without touch the say palace these which thus do be call Tebeth and Chesmir Tebeth and Chesmir two sort of idolater which delude the people with opinion of their sanctity impute these work to their dissemble holiness and for this cause they go in filthy and beastly manner not care who see they with dirt on their face never wash nor comb themselves and if any be condemn to death they take dress and eat he which they do not if any die natural they be also call Bachsi bachsi that be of such a religion or order as if one shall say a frier-preacher or Minor and be exceed expert in their devilish Art they cause that the bottle in the hall of the great can do fill the bowl of their own accord which also without man help pass ten pace through the air into the hand of the say can and when he have drink in like sort return to their place these Bachsi sometime resort unto the officer and threaten plague or other misfortune from their idol which to prevent they desire so many mutton with black head and so many pound of incense and to perform their due sacrifice which they according receive and offer on their feast-day sprinkle broth before their idol there be of these great monastery which seem like a small city in some whereof be two thousand monk which shave their head and beard and wear a religious habit and hallow their idol feast with great solemnity of hymn and light some of these may be marry other there be call sensim sensim a order which observe great abstinence and strictness of life in all their life eat nothing but bran which they put in hot water and let it stand till all the white of the meal be take away and then eat it be thus wash these worship the fire and be condemn of the other for heretic because they worship not their idol and will not marry in any case they be shave and wear hempen-garment of black or bright yellow and although they be silk yet will they not alter the colour they sleep on great mat and live the austere life in the world of their astrologer in Cambalu be not few than five thousand Christian catayan and saracen maintain with food and raiment at the great can charge these by their astrolabe foretell of the change of weather mortality war disease etc. and if any enterprise any great work he resort unto they and tell the hour of his nativity by their art be inform of the success they hold the soul to be immortal and according to every man merit in his life to pass into a more noble creature till it be deify or ignoble as to a peasant and then to a dog and so by degree to the vile they show much reverence to their parent to who if any be ungrateful in their necessity there be a office and officer appoint to try and punish the offence in the emperor hall none dare spit but for that purpose carry a little vessel to spit in nor dare any there make any noise or loud talk the tartar be at first very uncharitable to the poor and will curse they say that if God have love they he will have provide for they but after the idolatrous Bachsi have commend alm for a good work there be great provision make for they and every day at least twenty thousand dish of rice mill and Panike by certain officer distribute among they and for this liberality they adore he as a God cingis among his first law enact as say vincentius the punishment of death to be inflict upon offender in those three vice Vincent bel. spec. histor lib. 30. ca. 70. which before time have be most rife among they namely lie adultery and theft of which yet towards other man that be not tartar they make no conscience they be great usurer take ten in the hundred for a month beside use upon use ca. 75. insomuch that a soldier in Georgia which have borrow five hundred piece of coin call Yperpera retain the same five year be constrain to repay seven thousand and a tartarian lady for seven year use of fifty sheep demand seven thousand they be so covetous that though they abound in cattle they will scarce allow any to their own expense while it be sound and good but if it die or be sick they be addict to sodomy or buggery they eat sometime for necessity man flesh sometime to delight themselves and sometime to terrify other reckon it a great glory to have slay many ca. 76. ca. 77. and that by variety of cruelty their head they shave from ear to ear in manner of a horse-shoe wear long lock at their ear and neck there be some of the tartar which when they see their father grow old and disease they give they fat meat which may choke they and when they be thus dead they burn their body ca. 26. reserve the ash as a precious jewel sprinkle their meat with that powder but if any think not this enough which I be afraid the most will deem too much let he resort to the large report of vincentius in his three last book a author I confess otherwise fabulous and monkish but herein to be believe as receive his report from the eye-witness chap. 14 of the festival solemnity and of the magnificence of the grand can. we have already speak of the solemn sacrifice observe on the eight and twenty day of August we read in our author a a Marcus Paulus Marcus Paulus a eyewitness of these his relation of other the grand can grand solemnity of which two be principal one on his birthday which in Cublai khan time be the eight and twenty of September on which himself be royal clothe in cloth of gold and twenty thousand of his baron and soldier be all apparel in one colour and like except the price to himself every one have a girdle wrought of gold and silver and a pair of shoe some of their garment rich set with pearl and jewel which they wear on the thirteen solemnity according to the thirteen moon of the year on this day all the tartar and several prince subject present he with rich gift and all sect of religion pray unto their god for his health and long life but their chief feast be on the first day of their year which they begin in February celebrate by the grand can and all the country subject to he in which they be all array in white a colour in their estimation portend good luck and then he be present with many clothes and horse of white colour and other rich present in the same religious observe the number of nine as nine time nine horse if they be able and so of piece of gold cloth and the rest then also the elephant which be above five thousand be bring forth in sumptuous furniture and camel cover with silk and in the morning they present themselves in the hall as many as can the rest stand without in their due order first those of the imperial progeny next the king duke and other in their due place then come forth a great man or prelate which cry out with a loud voice bow down yourselves and worship which they present do with their face to the earth this prelate add GOD save and preserve our lord long to live with joy and gladness they all answer GOD grant it the prelate again GOD increase his dominion and preserve in peace all his subject and prosper all thing in all his country whereunto they answer as before thus do they worship four time after this the say prelate go to a altar there rich adorn on which be a red table with the name of the great can write in it and a censer with incense which he incense in stead of they all with great reverence perform unto the table this do they return to their place and present their gift and after be feast when Cublai have overthrow Naiam his uncle as before be say understand that the christian observe their yearly solemnity of easter he cause they all to come unto he and to bring the book of the four gospel which he incense often with great ceremony devout kiss it and cause his baron to do the like and this he observe always in the principal feast of the christian as Christmas and Easter the like he do in the chief feast of the saracen jew and idolater the cause he say be because of those four prophet to which all the world do reverence JESUS of the christian Mahomet of the saracen Moses of the jew and Sogomambar can the first idol of the pagan and I say he do honour to they all and pray he which be the great in heaven and true to help i yet he have best opinion of the christian faith because it contain nothing but goodness and will not suffer the christian to carry before they the cross on which so great a man as Christ be crucify he also send Nicolo and Maffio the father and uncle of Marco Paulo our author in embassage to the pope to send he a hundred wise man which may convince the idolater that boast of those there magical wonder whereas the christian that be there be but simple man not able to answer they which if it have be effect he and his baron will have be baptize Thomas a jesus a jesuite in his second book of procure the conversion of all nation report that Clement the five ordain John a monte Coruino a minorite archbishop of Cambalu and nine other of the same order he consecrate bishop and take order for the successor of the archbishop when he die whether these go or no be uncertain great pity it be that the Jesuit man of so refine wit and such mighty miracle-monger our world must witness the one and the east and west the other be but of yesterday hatch and that Ignatius have not break his leg before those time these have be if they than have be the only man to have remove those object scandal of the simplicity of christian and to have confront these magical mountebank as the can here require but these be reserve to time more fatal to the pope to help at a dead list by perverting here and converting there to hold up the suppose sanctity of the triple diadem but look we to our tartar h h Odoricus vinc. and io. Boem. Odoricus say that in his time the can celebrate beside the former the feast of his circumcision marriage and coronation but before the conquest of cathay they observe not any day at all with festival solemnity Cublai can be of mean stature of countenance white red and beautiful he have four wife which keep several court the least of which contain at least ten thousand person he have many concubine every second year have a new choice of the fair maiden in the province of ungut most fertile belike of that commodity which pass a second election at the court and the fair and fit of they be commit to lady to prove and to instruct they their parent hold it a great grace so to have bestow their child and if any of they prove not they impute it to their disastrous planet they hold it for a great beauty to have their nose flat between the eye in December january and February he abide at Cambalu in the north-east part of the province of cathay in a palace near to the city build on this manner there be a circuit wall in the grand can palace four square each square contain eight mile have about they a deep ditch and in the middle a gate a mile inward be another wall which have six mile in each square and in the south side three gate and as many on the north. betwixt those wall be soldier in every corner of this wall and in the midst be a stately palace eight in all wherein be keep his munition there be a three wall within this contain four mile square each square take up one mile have six gate and eight palace as the former in which be keep the grand can provision and between these two wall be many fair tree and meadow store with many beast within this be the grand can palace the great that ever be see confine with the wall abovesaid on the north and south the matter and form thereof be of such cost and art with such appurtenance of pleasure and state as be too long here to recite he for a superstitious fear suggest by his astrologer of a rebellion which sometime shall be raise against he in Cambalu build a new city near thereunto call Taidu i i Odoricus call it Caido twenty four mile in compass and yet not able to receive the inhabitant of the old city whence he remove such as may move suspicion hither this city be build by line in four square each whereof contain six mile and three gate so straight that upon the wall of one gate one may see the gate right against it in the midst of the city be a great bell which be ring in the night to warn man to keep within door the great can have 12000. horseman under four captain to his Guard he keep leopard wolf and lion to hunt with and with they to take wild ass bear heart etc. and one sort of eagle able to catch wolf the two master of his hunt game have ten thousand man under each of they the one part clothe in red the other in sky-colour and when the emperor hunt one of these captain go with his man and dog on the right hand the other on the left compass a great quantity of ground that not a beast can escape they from October to march they be bind daily to send in a thousand head of beast and bird he have also when he travel Odoricus reckon a great number ten thousand falconer divide in diverse company himself abide in a chamber carry upon four elephant whence he may see the game have also his tent pitch for his solace near thereby none may carry hawk or hunting-dog out of his dominion nor may hawk or hunt near the court by many day journey nor at all in their time of breed from march to October but he that listen to be more full inform herein let he read m. Paulus and k k Vincent l. 30. 31. io Boem Munster maginus g. B.B. etc. other which have write of this argument it be religion to we further to suspend our discourse of religion chap. 15 of the alteration of religion among the tartar and of the diverse sort sect and nation of they now remain @. i. of the precopite or crimme tartar after so long narration of the religion of the ancient tartar and of the cathayan where their emperor fix their abode it follow to consider of the time follow wherein they have be divide both in policy and Faith l l mag. Geogr: Precop desert Zagathai Cazai and morgat divide they into five principal sort which may likewise be subdivide into many inferior branch of horde the first of these he call Tartary Minor or the less which be in Europe betwixt Boristhenes and Tanais comprehend taurica chersonesus inhabit by the precopite tartar or as broniovius m m mart. Bronie Tartary term they perecopense of perecopia a town and castle in taurica they be call also ossovense and crim of two town bear those name these be now subject to the Turk both in state and religion have some town and Mahometan temple and monastery and turkish garrison and a few temple and person christian of the armenian grecian and western profession they live in their homely cottage in the winter but in the summer wander in their cart as the other tartar than who they be somewhat more civil they pay three hundred christian yearly to the Turk for tribute of who their can since the time of Zelim receive a banner and his approbation to the empire give his child or brethren in hostage they elect also a heir apparent to their empire who they call Galga and if the can will prefer his son to that dignity he kill all his brethren as the turk also deal with they it shall seem that they derive their pedigree from Cingis descend if I may conjecture where certain history fail of some of the son of bathy the great Conqueror in those part of the World Lotchton can be the first which rule in taurica long since bathy time they n n his tar. vid. l. chalcond l. 3. a Guag sarmat Sigism Herberst pet. bertius in tab. Chyrraeus anto. geufr we 4. sect. Mahum. etc. use the chaldaean and arabian letter they have their cady to administer religion and justice as have the turk they count the don or river Tanais holy in respect of the commodity which it yield they these o o ph. Camerar in med. hist cent. cap. 98. tartar pass through the confine of Polonia and Podolia to help the turk in the war of Hungary the way be secure and defend with the garrison they use a new stratagem to make way by drive a multitude of bull before they which contrary to their expectation affright with the ordnance recoil upon their driver tread they down and scatter they the Chan when saint bathor king of Poland be dead send his ambassador to be elect their king affirm that their pope shall be he their Luther his also and for dainty horseflesh will content he his suit be reject with laughter guil. brussius de tar. William bruise a scot from the relation of Anthony Spinola descend of that family in Genua and then ambassador from casghere the crim-tartar into Polonia affirm diverse thing of the tartarian as namely of threescore and ten diverse kingdom of they the name whereof be scarce know to any tartar differ in language and manner but all agree in the tartarian appellation war wander hard and spare diet all sometime subject to the great can now inferior in power as the crim say which know nothing of he but by tradition to the crim or precopite these Precopites abhor drunkenness punish adultery with death steal not from their countryman nor conceal any thing which they find walk not with weapon have few law the interpreter of which be their priest which they great reverence as they do also those of the christian if any thing be not express by law they refer it to that general head whereon hang the law and the prophet to do as man will be do to the sar or emperor sit himself in judgement with the Galga and sultan so they call the prince child and the chancellor with other senator who sentence be first deliver he determine and present execution follow all metal be the sar prerogative except gold which be the turk peculiar he have also the ten of the spoil and of every captive a chekine and if he be of great estate three he receive 5500. ducat a year from the Turk for which he be bind to war upon none but the Muscovite without his leave he bring into the field 150000. horseman leave at home but one man in a house and when the circassian and astracans adjoin their force two hundred thousand it be pain of death not to come they bring with they three month victual which be dry flesh cheese garlic root and a spare horse for food beside a better for service their hair tie to long pole be their banner only the prince receive from the Turk one of silk both horse and man be exceed skilful in swim in pass over large stream they set their saddle and baggage on reed or rush which they tie to diverse horsetaile themselves hold they by the mane and guide they sometime they sit themselves on those rush and sometime they kill and flay some of their horse and turn the inside outward timber they with the rib of the horse and sow they with the hair make boat for transportation they take off the wheel of their cart and set they on rush as aforesaid transport they the spoil be divide in common and every man loss thence make good to conceal any thing be death whether pillage from the enemy or find of their own people d. Fletcher Desc of Russia 19 in the year 1571. they come to Musco and fire the suburb which be of wood burn with such rage that in four hour space it consume the great part of the city be thirty mile or more in compass the ruefulness of this sight be second with a more dismal event the people burn in their house and street and while they seek to fly out of the city they wedge themselves with multitude so fast in the gate which be further from the enemy and the street adjoin as that three rank walk one upon the other head the uppermost tread down those that be low so that there perish at that time as be say by the fire and the press the number of eight hundred thousand people or more the tartar send the ruff a knife as upbraid he this loss and his desperate case therewith to stab himself the cause of this quarrel be the tartar title to Cazan Astracan and Moscow itself which the Moscovite be wont to acknowledge with this homage yearly in the castle of Mosko to give the can or crim horse oat out of his cap himself on foot the crim abide on his horse this homage Basilius change into a tribute of fur which also by his son John be deny hereupon once or twice every year sometime about Whitsuntide but often in harvest he invade the country either in great number if the can himself come or otherwise in few with light border-skirmish their common practice be to make diverse army and draw the ruff to one place to invade another they be all horseman carry nothing but a bow a sheaf of arrow and a falchion sword they be expert rider and shoot as ready backward as forward the morse or noble have armour like the turk the common-people none other then their apparel viz. a black-sheep skin with the wool-side outward in the day time and inward in the night with a cap of the same they have a rule that justice be to be practise but towards their own and therefore will promise any thing when they besiege a city but be once possess of the place perform all manner of hostility when their number be small they make great show with counterfeit shape of man set on horseback in give onset they make a great shout cry together g g God help we they will die rather than yield contrary to the turk custom the chief booty they seek for be store of captive special young boy and girl for which purpose they have band intend nothing else and basket like baker Pannyer to carry they tender if they tire or sicken on the way they dash they against the ground or some tree and so leave they dead the ruff border be use to their invasion keep few other cattle but swine which their religion abhor to touch they differ herein from the turkish religion their image that they have certain idol puppet make of silk or like stuff of the fashion of a man which they fasten to the door of their walking-house to be as januss or keeper of their house and these idol be make not by all but by certain religious woman which they have among they for that and like use they have beside the image of their king of a huge bigness which they erect at every stage when the army march to which every one must bow as he pass by both tartar and stranger they be much give to witchcraft and ominous conjecture in marriage they only abstain from the mother sister and daughter neither do they account that woman a wife which have not honour they with the name of a father and then begin he to take a dowry of her friend of horse sheep kine etc. if she be barren after a certain time he turn she home again under the emperor they have certain duke or Morseys which rule over hoard of ten twenty or forty thousand which be bind to serve the emperor with a certain number of man double-horsed they prefer horseflesh before other meat esteem it strong nourishment this notwithstanding they use to send thirty or forty thousand horse yearly to Musko to exchange for other commodity their herd of kine and flock of black sheep they keep rather for the milk than the flesh though they sometime eat it they drink milk or warm blood and for the most part cure they both together as they travel they sometime let their horse blood and drink it from his body town they plant none not stand village but have walk house build upon wheel like a shepherd cottage which they move in the spring from the south to the north and so with winter return southwards when they come to their stage or stand place plant their house in a rank make the form of a town and street gold and silver they neglect as they do also tillage which free their country from invasion for person and complexion they have broad and flat visage of a tan colour into yellow and black fierce and cruel look thin haired upon the upper lip and pit of the chin light and nimble body with short leg practise themselves to ride and shoot from their childhood their parent not suffer their child to eat till they have shoot within a certain scantling of the mark their speech be sudden and loud as it be out of a deep hollow throat their sing like a cow low in the description of these Crim I have be thus long because they be now the chief know nation of the wander tartar and the rest differ little from they except in great barbarism master George barkly g. barkly a friend of i a merchant in London have travel livonia Russia Lithuania and Poland go from Cracovia with a tartar duke which have come thither to the parliament to sue for his two daughter take by the polach and stay with he in he hoard which consist of about a thousand household of a kindred six month these tartar sow a three square grain call totarka they live in great ease and pleasure every day hunt that for worldly pleasure he never any where enjoy such a life with such love and like of his tartar-host as if he have be his son these use to make sudden inroad upon the polach the gentleman of Poland not dine without their piece and soldierly-serving-me ready to give they entertainment if the christian make head against they they know not where to find they resolute they be and will ride with their bow in the face of a piece @. 2 of Tartary deserta the second part in this division be attribute to Tartary deserta so call of the desert huge tract of the country between Tanais the caspian sea and the lake kitay sometime know by the name of Sarmatia asiation it contain many tribe of which the principal be Zunelhensis call Burgar tartar of Volga between which river and jaich they have their abode this they call the great hord and the emperor thereof Ulucan in the year 1506. subdue by the crim-tartar before mention and after that by Basilius the Muscovite to who large stile Bulgaria be add take that name of Volga as it be Volgaria or of bulgar a town upon that river gazan and Astracan horde of these zavol-tartar have be subject also many year to the say great duke h h anth. jenkinson who cause the prince of Cazan be take prisoner when he be young to be baptize near unto Cazan be Vachen the people whereof be gentile and the cheremize half gentile half tartar and Mangat or Nagai mahometan tartar which in the year 1558. be through civil war famine and pestilence destroy to the number of above a hundred thousand these nagayan have their diverse horde subject to their several duke who they call murze have no use of money corn or art they in the time of their distress will for one loaf of bread worth six penny have sell son or daughter to master jenkinson if he will have buy a thousand although otherwhiles they deride the christian as live on the top of weed so they call our corn this our author and countryman travel down the river Volga to Astracan which river after it have run above two thousand english mile have threescore and ten mouth or fall into the caspian sea through this sea he pass to manguslave another part of the desert Tartary the prince whereof Timor Soltan he find and salute in a i i little round house not have town or castle make of reed cover without with felt within with carpet accompany with the great metropolitan of their country esteem of among that field-people as the bishop of Rome be in most part of Europe and have he not present himself to he with the great duke letter he have be spoil of all that he have they pass thence with a caravan of merchant twenty day not find water but as they draw out of old deep well brackish and salt and pass sometime two or three day without the same after that they come to a gulf of the caspian sea again where the water be fresh and sweet not so the people for the customer of the king of turkeman toll of every five and twenty one and seven ninth for the say king and his brethren into this gulf the river oxus do sometime fall but be now intercept by the river Ardock which run towards the north and as it be loath to view so cold a clime and barbarous inhabitant after he have run with a swift race a thousand mile as it be in flight he hide himself under ground for the space of five hundred mile and then look up and see little amendment drown himself in the lake of Kithay thence they have three day journey to sellizure where find Azim can to who he present a nine he receive there the like festival entertainment as before with that be the k k flesh of a wild horse and mare milk without bread he and his brethren rule all from the caspian sea to urgence and have continual war with the persian which space be call turkeman for the other horde of that huge tartarian desert the Kirgessen Melgomazan Scibanski Thumen which still be say to remain under the obedience of the grand can bascheridi heseliti harsh name of harsh people in those most harsh and horrid desert will hasten my pen and your ear to some more please subject the thumen and their neighbour be great enchanter and by their art they say raise tempest and overthrow their enemy the Kirgessen observe these stink holy their l l Ortelius priest mix blood milk and cowdung together with earth and put they in a vessel therewith climb a tree and after his devout exhortation to the people he besprinkle they with this sacred mixture which they account divine when any of they die they hang he on a tree in stead of burial the tartar in turkeman use to catch wild horse with hawk tame to that purpose which seize on the neck of the horse with his beat and the horse chase tyre he and make he a easy prey to his master who always ride with his bow arrow and Sword they eat their meat and say their prayer sit on the ground crosslegged spend the time very idle as master jenkinson with his company travel from hence towards Boghar they be assail with forty thief of who they have intelligence somewhat before and therefore certain holy man for so they account such as have be at Mecca cause the caravan to stay while they make their prayer and divination touch their success they take certain sheep and kill they and take the blade-bone of the same which they first sod and then burn mingle the blood of the say sheep with this powder of their bone with which blood they write certain character use many other ceremony and word and thereby divine that they shall meet with enemy which after much trouble they shall overcome which according prove true of the faithfulness of these holy man he have good proof both here and elsewhere they refuse not to expose themselves to danger and faithlessly-faithful to forswear themselves rather than betray he and the christian to their thievish countryman for these robber will have dismiss the bussarman so they call their catholic if they will have deliver the caphar that be infidel as they esteem the christian unto their power one of their holy man which the enemy have surprise by no torment will confess any thing to the prejudice of his fellow but at last they be force to agree and give the thief twenty ninth that be twenty time nine several thing and a camel to carry the same away Simocalta and Niceph. cal. l. 11. cap. 30. this country of turkeman or Turchestan be the first habitation of the turk and the people be call by that name both in haithon time and in the time of mauritius as in the turkish history you have hear Pliny name the turk near Maotis but whether in devour the people with their sword as they do the pasture with their cattle they come from hence or these from thence or that Pliny may easy wander in so wander a subject all aver that from hence they go first into Persia and in succeed age have make many fertile country like their Turcomania where master jenkinson say grow no grass but heath whereon the cattle feed the ottoman-horse blast with his breath the ground he tread on according to their own proverb there never grow grass more the turkeman nation be say Haithon for the most part mahometan and many of they without law at all they use the Arabic letter @. 3 of the zagathayan tartar these desert and thief have almost make we forget our division according to which we shall have tell you that from the caspian sea hither you must according to maginus call the tartar general zagathayans m m m. Paulus l. 1 so call of Zagathay the great can brother sometime their prince which name n n g. boter comprehend also diverse other nation more civil than the former possess the country sometime know by the name of bactriana sogdiana margiana now jeselbas that be green head of the colour of their turban differ from the persian who they call for like cause redhead these have cruel war continual with the persian who they call caphar as they do the christian for their suppose heresy of which in the persian relation have be show and for that they will not cut the hair of their upper lip for which they be account of the tartar great sinner in o o ant. jenkins Boghar be the seat of their metropolitan who be there more obey than the king and have sometime depose the king and place another at his pleasure there be a little river run through the city who water breed in they that drink thereof especial stranger a worm of a ell long which lie in the leg betwixt the flesh and the skin and be pluck out about the ankle with great art of surgeon well practise herein and if it break in pluck out the party die they pluck out a inch in a day which be roll up and so proceed till she be all out and yet will not the metropolitan suffer any drink but water or mare milk have officer to make search and punish such as transgress with great severity Zagatai live the space of one hundred twenty and one year before Marcus Paulus and be as he say a christian but his son follow he in his kingdom not in his religion here in this country be samarcand the city of great tamerlaine of some call Temir Cuthlu that be as Mathias a Michou p p micbovius lib. 1. cap. 8. interpret it happy sword who army contain twelve hundred thousand who conquest exceed if history exceed not all the great Alexander Pompey caesar or any other worthy of the World and one of the great monarch now of the earth the great Mogore be say to q q jesuit Epist. rel Mogor descend of he of he be many history write by some r r Leunclav perond jovius etc. that have live since his time and can not well know his proceed it be general deplore that this Achilles want a Homer s s cic. orat. pro arch. which Alexander applaud in he but want for himself only one Alhacen a arabian which then live have write large thereof and that as he say by Tamerlans command which jean du bec t t this history of Alhacen or the principal part thereof I have publish in my pilgrim to. 2. li. 1. Brusius also tell of his lameness with other thing of his school in Caramania where his fellow scholar choose he their king and other thing not seem credible abbot of Mortimer in his voyage into the east country meet with and have it interpret to he by a arabian and we upon his credit which if any think to be insufficient I leave it to his choice and censure that author say that Tamerlan descend of the tartarian emperor and Og his father be lord of sachetay who give to his son Tamerlan which name signify heavenly grace in their tongue his kingdom while he yet live appoint two wise counsellor Odmar and Aly to assist he he be well instruct in the arabian learning and a lover of learned man nature have set in his eye such ray of majesty and beauty that man can scarce endure to look on they he wear long hair contrary to the tartarian custom pretend that his mother come of the race of Samson he be strong and have a fair leg whereas Leunclavius say he be call Tamurleng of his lameness his first war be against the Muscovite who he overcome the second against the king of China with like success I mention not his battle in civil war the three against Bajazet the Turk who he captive pass thither by the way of Persia where guines author of the sophian sect a great ginger and account a holy man encourage he with prophecy of his good success this war he make against Bajazet in behalf of the greek emperor and other who the Turk oppress he go private to Constantinople and have sight of the city with all kindness from the emperor he invade Syria and Egypt overthrow the sultan and win cairo destroy Damascus visit and honour jerusalem and the holy sepulchre and grant great privilege thereunto the prince of Lybia and by their embassage in Egypt acknowledge his sovereignty in his return by Persia he be encounter by guines who bring with he a infinite number of sundry kind of beast which he make tame and by which he teach man as soon as he see Tamerlan he make his prayer towards the heaven for his health and for the religion of the prophet excommunicate the ottoman as enemy to the faithful believer Tamerlan give he fifteen or sixteen thousand of his u u some say 30000. prisoner which he instruct in his opinion and after conquer Persia and so return to samarcand where he have vow to erect a church and hospital with all sumptuous magnificence thence he go to mount Althay to bury his uncle and father in law the great Chan in who state he succeed he enrich samarcand with the spoil get in his war and call the temple which he there build the temple of Solomon wherein he hang up trophy and monument of his victory and cause all his battle there to be engrave thereby say he to acknowledge the goodness of god. his religion be not pure Mahometism for he think GOD be delight with variety of worship yet he hate polytheisme and idol only one GOD he acknowledge and that with much devotion after this manner thus he beat down all the idol in China but honour the christian with great admiration at the strict life of some votary when Aly his counsellor be dead he build a stately tomb for he at samarcand and cause prayer to be say three day for his soul be near his end he bless his two son lay his hand on the head of Sautochio the elder and press it down but lift up the chin of Letrochio the young as it be presage unto he the empire although the elder be proclaim but this empire be too great and too sudden erect to continue of his success and successor in Persia you have hear before in the eight chapter of this book these three sort of tartar which we have hitherto mention be all for the most part mahumetan there be some yet as Michovius 10 10 lib. 1. cap. 7. affirm near the caspian sea which be not mahumetan nor shave their hair off their head after the tartarian manner and therefore they call they calmuch or pagan @. 4 of the cathayan and Mogol tartar etc. the four be those which in greatness be first namely the cathayan call carabas that be black-head of their turban as the former jeselbas but of their religion further than that which have be before express we can say little and it seem by the relation mention in the former chapter that they be gentile or christian and not of Mahomet error Chaggi Memet y y Chag memet a persian merchant relate as in part be say before to ramusius that he have be at Campion Damir can then reign and that unto Camul the westerly part of Tanguth they be idolater and ethnic from thence westward musulman or saracen in the epistle of carualius z z carual Epist. the jesuite it be report by a Mahometan merchant that they be christian for those reason be seem you have hear before by Benedictus go his observation you have see they so devote to Mahomet that a tender lady of the weak sex in the strength of sect from the remote part of Cascar border on China visit Mecca in pilgrimage and their zeal or pretence thereof put he into often peril for his faith shall I say or his good yet do he make a difference between the saracen and the tartar these it seem profess robbery and little mind any religion they worship in those part to the west for that way stand Mecca the five and last form of our tartar be those which abide in those place whence the tartar first issue to overwhelm all Asia with their army of which be relate at large in the eleven chapter of which for want of probable intelligence I can say little more our map place there the horde of the danite Nephthalites Ciremissian turbite and other which some derive from the dispersion as be say of the ten tribe here be tabor also who king be by Charles the five emperor in the year 1540 as before be say burn at Mantua for solicit to juduisme pope innocent king jew of France by mean of William de rubruquis and the king of Armenia solicit as you have partly hear both the great can and his chief prince to become christian and it be likely that the tartar might if diligence have be use and some superstition have not darken the christian profession have thereunto be persuade which many also of they be as appeareth in Haiton mat. westmonast and vincentius but the saracen which have before pollute those country where the mahometan tartar now abide by that suitableness of their law to their lawless lust of rapine and polygamy prevail as Michovius a a lib. 3. cap. 5. report with bathi and those other tartar to embrace Mahumet and refuse Christ they say Eissa Rocholla that be jesus be the spirit of the lord Mahomet Rossollai that be Mahomet be the justice of god. they obey say he the pentateuch of Moses be circumcise observe the legal ceremony they have no bell but every day cry la illo illo loh which signify that there be but one god. they profess themselves ismaelite the christian they call Dzintzis that be pagan and gaur infidel b b see the saracen history they observe three feast the first Kuiram to which they prepare themselves with their thirty day lend and in that feast offer ram bird etc. the second they celebrate for all soul for which they fast a month visit the grave and do work of mercy the three they keep for themselves and their own salvation and fast twelve day josafa Barbaro c c l. 1. ram. a venetian which live among the tartar about the year 1437. say that they embrace not the faith of Mahomet general but as every man like until about that time in the day of Hedighi a captain under sidahame can who first compel they thereunto be before free unto their idolatry if they please and of the other tartar near the zagathayans he say that many of they be idolater and carry idol in the cart yea some of they use to worship whatsoever beast they first meet with after they go abroad in the morning this doctor Fletcher report of the mordivit tartar add that they use to swear by it all that day whether it be horse dog or whatsoever else and when his friend die he kill his best horse and flay off the skin carry it on high upon a long pole before the corpse to the place of burial the moxij at a certain time in the year take a horse which they set in the field with his four leg tie to four post and his head to another post fasten in the ground this do one of they stand in a convenient distance shoot he to the heart afterward they flay he and observe certain ceremony about the flesh eat the same the skin they fill with chaff and in each of his leg thrust a straight stick that he may stand upright as if he be alive last they go to a great tree and lop there from as many bough as they think good and make a room or sollar in that tree where they set this horse on his foot and worship he offer unto he fox and diverse beast which bear rich fur of which offering the tree hang full master jenkinson mention a nation live among the tartar call king which be also gentile as be also the Kirgessen of who we have speak and the Colmack which worship the sun as they do also a red cloth fasten to the top of a pole and eat serpent worm and other filth near to which he place in his map of Russia certain statue or pillar of stone which sometime be horde of man and beast feed transform by divine power if it be not human error into this stony substance retain their pristine shape these nation be either tartar or in manner of life like unto they and may therefore pass under that general appellation and this may suffice touch the tartarian nation and religion which in the west and south part of their abode be Mahometan in the more northerly and easterly partly heathenish partly jewish or moorish or mix or as may best advantage they and most please they wander in opinion in like sort as in their habitation d. flet. of rus cap. 19 doctor Fletcher reckon these thing as general to all the horde of tartar first to obey their magistrate whatsoever they command about the public service second except for the behoof every man to be free and out of controlment three no private man to possess any land but the whole country to be common four to neglect all daintiness and variety of meat and to content themselves with that which come next to hand five to wear any base attire and to patch their clothes whether there be any need or not six to take or steal from any stranger whatsoever they can get seven towards their own to be true in word and deed eight to suffer no stranger to come within their dominion but the same to be slave to the first taker except they have a passport but by this time I think the reader will wish i their passport to be go from they who have show myself no tartarian while I dwell so long on this tartarian discourse happy herein as tedious to he as stay in one place will be to the tartar a thing so abominable as in anger he wish it as a curse will GOD thou may abide in one place as the christian till thou smell thy own dung indeed this history not thorough handle before by any one draw i along and I hope will purchase pardon to this prolixity chap. 16 of the nation which live in or near to those part now possess by the tartar and their religion and custom m. Paulus l. 1. from those country inhabit by the persian and zagathayan tartar eastward we can see with m. Paulus his eye the best guide we can get for this way any religion but the saracen till we come to bascia a province somewhat bend to the south the people whereof be idolater and magician cruel and deceitful live on flesh and rice seven day journey from hence be chesmur wicked cunning in their devilish art by which they cause the dumb idol to speak the day to grow dark and other marvelous thing be the wellspring of idol and idolatry in those part they have hermit after their law which abide in their monastery be very abstinent in eat and drink contain their body in straight chastity and be very careful to abstain from such sin wherewith they think their idol offend and live long there be of they many monastery they be observe of the people with great reverence the people of that nation shed no blood nor kill any flesh but if they will eat any they get the saracen which live among they to kill it for they northeastward from hence be Vochan a saracenicall nation and after many day journey over mountain so high that no kind of bird be see thereon be Beloro inhabit with idolater Cascar the next country be mahometan beyond which be many nestorian christian in Carchan there be also moores or Mahometan which have defile with like superstition the country of Cotam and Peym where the woman may marry new husband if the former be absent above twenty day a a this marriage admit no nonresidence and the man likewise and of Ciarcian and lop. from lop they cross a desert which ask thirty day and must carry their victual with they here they say spirit call man by their name and cause they to stray from their company and perish with famine when they be pass this desert they enter into Sachion the first city of Tanguth a Idolatrous province subject to the great can there be also some nestorian and saracen where they have have the art of print these thousand year they have monastery replenish with idol of diverse sort to which they sacrifice and when they have a male child bear they commend it to some idol in who honour they nourish a ram in their house that year and after on their idol festival they bring it together with their son before the idol and sacrifice the ram and dress the flesh let it stand till they have finish their prayer for their child health in which space they say their idol have suck out the principal substance of the meat which they then carry home to their house and assemble their kinsfolk eat it with great reverence and rejoice save the bone in goodly vessel the priest have for their fee the head foot innards skin and some part of the flesh when any of great place die they b b funeral observance in sabion assemble the astrologer and tell the hour of his nativity that they may by their art find a planet fit to the burn of the corpse which sometime in this respect attend this fiery constellation a week a month or half a year in all which time they set before the corpse a table furnish with bread wine and other viand leave they there so long as one may convenient eat they the spirit there present in their opinion refresh himself with the odour of this provision if any evil happen to any of the house the astrologer ascribe it to the angry soul for neglect of his due hour agree to that of his nativity they make many stay by the way wherein they present this depart soul with such cate to hearten it against the body burn they paint many paper make of the bark of tree with picture of man woman horse camel money and raiment which they burn together with the body that the dead may have to serve he in the next World and all this while of burn be the music of the city present play idolater how understand in this book CHAMUL the next province be idolatrous or heathenish for so we distinguish they from Saracen jew and christian which I will be not as guilty of idolatry as the former in so many their forbid rite although these have all and the other part of the scripture whereof those heathen and idolater be utter ignorant here they not only permit but account it a great honour to have their wife and sister at the pleasure of such stranger as they entertain themselves depart the while and suffer all thing to be at their guest will for so be their idol serve who therefore for this hospitality they think will prosper all that they have and when as mangu can forbid they this beastly practice they abstain three year but then send a pitiful embassage to he with request that they may continue their former custom for since they leave it they can not thrine who overcome by their fond importunity grant their request which they with joy accept and do still observe in the same province of Tanguth be Succuir who mountain be clothe with rheubarbe from whence it be by merchant convey through the World Campion be the mother city of the country inhabit by idolater with some of the arabian and christian nation the christian have there in the time of m. Paulo three fair church the idolater have many monastery abound with idol of wood earth and stone cover with gold and artificial make some great ten pace in length lie along with other little one about they which seem as their disciple to do they reverence their religion person live in their opinion more honest than other idolater although their honesty be such as that they think it no sin to lie with a woman which shall seek it at their hand but if the man first make love it be sinful they have also their fasting-day three four or five in a in which they shed no blood nor eat flesh they have many wife of which the first marry have the first place and pre-eminence here Marcus Paulus live about a year touch the religion and custom in Tanguth the report c c ramusius of Caggi Memet in Ramusius who of late year be in Campion be not much diferent he say that their temple be make like the christian capable of four or five thousand person in they be two image of a man and woman lie in length forty foot all of one piece or stone for which use they have cart with forty wheel draw of five or six hundred horse and mule two or three month journey they have also little image with six or seven head and ten hand hold in each of they several thing as a serpent bird flower etc. they have monastery wherein be man of holy life never come forth but have food carry they thither daily their gate be wall up and there be infinite of friar-like companion pass to and fro in the city when any of their kindred die they mourn in white they have print not much unlike to that which be use in Europe and artillery on their wall very thick as have the turk all the catayan and idolater be fordidden to depart out of their native country they have three science chimia limia and simia the first alchemy the second to make enamour the three juggle or magic succuit also be according to his report great and fair beautify with many temple their rheubarbe they will not bestow the pain to gather but for the merchant which from China Persia and other place fetch it from they at a cheap price nor do they in Tanguth use it for physic as we here but with other ingredient make perfume thereof for their idol and in some place they burn it in stead of other fire and give it their horse to eat they set more price by a herb which they call Membroni medicinable for the eye and another call Chiai Catai grow in Catay at Cacianfu admirable against very many disease a ounce whereof they esteem as good as a sack of rhubarbe who description you may see at large according to the relation and picture of the say Chaggi in ramusius for to add that also they have many painter and one country inhabit only by they these tanguthians be beard as man in these part especial some time of the year northwards from Tanguth be the plain d d m. Paul of BARGV in custom and manner like to the first tartar confine with the scythian ocean fourscore day journey from Ezina in the north part of Tanguth and situate under the north star eastward of Tanguth somewhat incline to the south be the kingdom of erginul addict likewise to ethnic superstition wherein yet be some both nestorian and mahumetan here be certain wild bull as big as elephant with mane of white and fine hair like silk of which some they come and betwixt they and their tame kine engender a race of strong and laborious oxen. here be find a beast also as big as a goat of exquisite shape musk of a beast which every full moon have a apostemation or swell under the belly which the hunter at that time chase the say beast do cut off and dry against the sun and it prove the best musk in the world the next easterly country be EGRIGAIA idolatrous and have some christian of the sect of Nestorius but Tenduc next adjoin be at that time govern by king George a christian and a priest of the posterity of presbyter John subject to the grand can. and the khan give common their daughter in marriage to this generation and stock of presbyter John the most part of the inhabitant be christian some idolater and mahometans be there also there be also that be call argon descend of ethnic and moor the wise and proper man in those part all the people from hence to cathay be Christian mahometan and gentile as themselves like best in Thebet the next country the people in time past say e e w. de Rubr. c. 28. Odoricus say the same William de rubruquis bestow on their parent no other sepulchre than their own bowel and yet in part retain it make fine cup of their decease parent skull that drink out of they in the midst of their jollity they may not forget their progenitor they have much gold but hold it a high offence to imprison it as some do with we in chest or treasury and therefore have satisfy necessity they lie up the rest in the earth fear otherwise to offend god. Cambalu be in the north-east part of cathay and forty mile westward from hence all which way be enrich with palace vineyard and fruitful field be Gouza a fair city and great with many Idol-monasterie here the way part lead westward into cathay and southeastward unto Mangi or China TANIFV and Cacianfu be province which tend westward from hence inhabit with idolatrous nation and here and there some of the arabian and christian profession full of city Cunchin and Sindinfu be ethnic as be Thebeth where they have a brutish custom f f l. vert. report the like custom in Calicut not to take a wife that be a virgin and therefore when merchant pass that way the mother offer unto they their daughter much strive which of they may be the most effectual bawd to her child they take to their pleasure such as they like gratify they with some jewel or other present which on her marriage day she wear and she which have most of such present bring the most accept dowry to her husband as testimony of the great favour of their idol this Thebeth contain sometime eight kingdom with many city but be now desolate by the tartarian there be great necromancer which by their infernal skill cause thunder and tempest they have dog as big as ass with which they catch wild ox and all sort of beast CAINDV be a heathenish nation where in honour of their idol they prostitute their wife sister and daughter to the lust of traveller which be entertain in the house the good man depart and the woman set some token over the door which there remain as long as this stallion-stranger for a sign to her husband not to return till the guest be as well go from her house as honesty from her heart and wit from his head they make money of salt as in cathay of paper in Caraian also a large province adjoin there be some christian and saracen but the most Ethnic which be not discontent that other man shall lie with their wife if the woman be willing CARAZAN be of like irreligion their soul captivate to the old serpent and their body endanger to mighty huge body of g g the serpent of Carazan serpent ten pace long and ten span thick which that country yield they keep in their den in the day and in the night prey upon lion wolf and other beast which when they have devour they resort to some water to drink and by their weight leave so deep impression in the sand that hereby man know their haunt do under set this their tract with sharp stake head with iron cover the same again with sand by this mean prey on the spoiler and devour the devourer esteem nothing more savoury than the flesh nor more medicinable than the gall of this serpent more serpentine than this diet be that custom which they use when any proper and personable gentleman of valorous spirit and goodly presence lodge in any house among they in the night they kill he not for the spoil but that his soul furnish with such part of body and mind may remain in that house much hope of future happiness to that house do they repose in so unhappy attempt but the great can kill this serpent also overthrow this custom in the conquest of that province CARDANDAN confine on the western limit of Carazan they make black list in their flesh raze the skin and put therein some black tincture which ever remain h h naked pride account it a great ornament when a woman be deliver of a child the man lie in and keep his bed with visitation of gossip the space of forty day they worship the ancient person of the house ascribe to he all their good in this province and in Caindu vocian and jaci they have no physician but when any be sick they send for their witch or sorcerer and acquaint they with their malady they cause minstrel to play while they dance and sing in honour of their idol not cease till the devil enter into one of they of who those sorcerer demand the cause i i infernal physic of the party sickness and mean of recovery the Demoniake answer for some offence to such or such a god they pray that god of pardon vow that when he be whole he shall offer he a sacrifice of his own blood if the devil see he unlikely to recover he answer that his offence be so grievous that no sacrifice can expiate but if there be likelihood of recovery he enjoin they a sacrifice of so many ram with black head to be offer by these sorcerer assemble together with their wife and then will that god be reconcile this be present do by the kinsman of the sick the sheep kill their blood hurl up towards heaven the sorcerer and sorceress make great light and incense all this visit house make a smoke of aloe and cast into the air the water wherein the sacrifice flesh be sodden with some spice drink laugh sing dance in honour of that God after all this revel-rout they demand again of the Demoniake if the God be appease if so they fall to those spice drink and sacrifice flesh with great mirth and be well apay return home if not they at his bid renew their superstition ascribe the recovery if it happen to that idol and if he die notwithstanding they shift it off to the want of their full due fleece or taste the same before to the idol defraud thus do they in all cathay and Mangi thus much out of the large report of Paulus that renown venetian k k of he his wealth and family see Ramus preface his palace be yet in Venice now divide into 70. dwelling mich. lock see both it and his mention by Ramus and his sepulchre to who our relation be so much indebt rubruquius tell the like of CAILAR and CARACORAM where he have be in these catayan province concern their Christopher or giantlike idol and idol temple in one of which he see a man with a cross draw with ink on his hand who seem by his answer to be a christian with image like to that of saint Michael and other saint they have a sect call jugure who l l hypocritical shaveling priest be shave and clad in saffron-coloured garment unmarried a hundred or two hundred in a cloister on their holy-day they place in their temple two long form one over against another whereon they sit with book in their hand read soft to themselves nor can our author enter among they by any mean break this their silence they have wheresoever they go a string about they full of nutshell like the popish beadrol always they be utter these word God thou know expect so many reward as they make such memorial of God they have a churchyard and a church-porch with a long pole on it as it be a steeple adjoin to their temple in those porch they use to sit and confer they wear certain ornament of paper on their head their writing be downward and so from the left hand to the right which the tartar receive from they they use magical character hang their temple full of they they burn their dead and lay up the ash in the top of a pyramid they believe there be one God that he be a spirit and their image they make not to represent God but in memorial of the rich after their death as they profess to rubruquius the priest beside their Saffron-jackets button close before wear on their left shoulder a cloak descend before and behind under their right arm like to a deacon carry the houselboxe in Lent they worship towards the north clap their hand together and prostrate themselves on their knee upon the earth hold also their forehead in their hand they extend their temple east and west in length upon the north side they build as it be a vestry on the south a porch the door of their temple be always open to the south a certain nestorian priest tell he of so huge a idol that it may be see two day before a man come at it within the quire which be on the north side of the temple they place a chest long and broad like a table and behind that chest stand their principal idol towards the south round about which they place the other less idol and upon that chest they set candle and oblation they have great bell like unto we the nestorian of those part pray with hand display before their breast so to differ from that jugurian rite of join hand in prayer thus far William de rubruquius who be there 1253. in thebet say Odoricus reside the Abassi or pope of the idolater distribute religious preferment to those eastern idolater as the roman pope do in the west chap. 17 of other northern people adjoin to the tartar and their religion the permian and samoit that lie from Russia north and north-east d. Fletcher c. 20 be think to have take their beginning from the tartar-kind who they somewhat resemble in countenance the permian be subject to the ruff they live by hunt and trade with their fur as do the samoit which dwell more towards the north-sea the samoit or samoe have his name as the ruff say of eat himself as if they have sometime be cannibal and at this time they will eat raw flesh whatsoever it be even the very carrion that lie in the ditch they say themselves that they be call Samoie that be of themselves as if they be there bread and not transplant from any other people I talk say our author with certain of they and find that they acknowledge one God but represent he by such thing as they have most use and good by and therefore they worship the sun the Ollen the losy and such like the PERMACES a a w. Pursglove and sebyrians be of the ruff religion the yougorians be clothe after the pormacke fashion but worship image as do the samoed the tingosey a people far more easterly be say to worship the sun and moon they wear their apparel all of Deer-skin make close to they then the samoed be also a tall people beyond b b Russ travel translate by rich. Finch onecko hist ap. Hessel gerard. who map make these thing more plain the tingosey live the Boulashees beyond they the Seelahee beyond the river Yenisey the Imbaki and Ostaki a kind of tartar beyond the tingosey be a river call Geta this space extend eastward from ob a ruff be a summer in travel and live there six year onecko another ruff be first occasion of subdue the samoyed to the russian dominion in the reign of Pheodor juanowich he send his son into the samoyed country find that about the river ob they be govern by the ancient have no city live in hoard or company eat the beast they take know not corn nor bread be good archer sharpen their arrow with fish bone and stone sew fur with bone and sinew for their clothing which they wear inward in winter outward in summer cover their house with elks-skin he grow rich by trade with they for fur the Muscovite send thither messenger gallant attire which easy obtain leave to erect castle near ob to which he send condemn person and bring it into the form of a petty kingdom boris the next emperor build Tooma 200. league up the river ob and many other town on both side the river the which be people with samoyed tartar and Russ it be ten week travel from ob to the tingosey through the desert they in hoard have deform swell under the throat these travel eastward pass a river which they call c c the Russ call it great ob. w. Pursglove and Ios. logan pisida and hear the sound of brazen bell which if it be so be argument of some more civil people either of cathay or the part adjoin the cathayan be say to trade to sergolt from the mouth of Pechora to ob be ten day sail ob and jenisey run north and south the samoy report that in jenesey be great vessel draw with rope in the year 1611. josias logan and William Pursglove sail to Pechora where they anchor july the ten and on the sixteen come to Pustozera where master logan winter but Pursglove travel from thence by land to Colmogro the nine and twenty of November he depart with Russ and permack for Slebotca in a sled draw with two dear in their Argeshey so they call their whole company be two hundred and ten sled and they have above five hundred for change when the other be weary these keep company till the four of December and then in company of four sled and a samoy for a guide he leave the lade sled and go in post for Slebotca where he arrive the nine day at night and thence travel day and night to colmogro where he arrive the twelve be two hundred and fifty verst or ruff mile somewhat short than we he return again with a better passage to Pechora by reason of much snow fall in the mean while and freeze pass over the mountain which be not high but a champain country he leave the company the five of january and in forty hour continual post pass by report three hundred and fifty verst about the mouth of the river ob d d elata Baba ortel g. b. e. be say to be a ancient idol in form of a old woman hold in each arm a child and a three at her foot call by her worshipper the jugri Obdarani and Condorani Zlata Baba that be the golden old wife to which they offer precious fur and sacrifice heart besmear the mouth and eye of the idol with the blood in the time of their sacrifice the priest demand of the idol touch thing to come and sometime receive answer doctor Fletcher e e d. Fletcher Desc of R.C. 20. find this to be a very fable only say he in the province of Obdoria on the seaside near the mouth of there be a rock which natural be some what help by imagination seem to bear the shape of a ragged woman with a child in her arm as the rock by the north cape the shape of a friar where the obdorian samoite use to resort by reason of the commodity of the place for fish and there sometime practice their sorcery and ominous coniecturing about the good or bad success of their journey fish hunt and such like the samoit or samoyed be clad from head to foot in Deers-skin or in Seal-skin with the hairy side outward down as low as the knee with their breech and nether-stock of the same both man and woman they be all black haired natural beardless and therefore the man be hardly discern from the woman but by the lock which the woman we be down their ear they live a wild and savage life rove from one place to another without any property of house or land their leader in every company be their Papa or priest the samoyed be idolater and witch observe devilish superstition as witness rich. johnson who on the five of january in the year 1557. see among they as f f r. Johnson Hak. to 1. follow the samoyed about the bank of Pechore be in subjection to the Muscovite and when they will remove from one place to another than they will make sacrifice in manner follow every kindred do sacrifice in their own tent and he that be most ancient be their priest and first the priest do begin to play upon a thing like a great with a skin on the one end like a drum his drum stick be about a span long and one end be round like a ball cover with the skin of a hart. also the priest have as it be a white garland on his head and his face be cover with a piece of a shirt of male with many small rib and tooth of fish and wild beast hang thereon then he sing as we use here in England to hollow whoop or shout at hound and the rest of the company answer he with this oute Igha Igha Igha to which the priest with his voice reply and they answer he with the self same word so many time till in the end he become as it be mad fall down as he be dead have nothing on he but a shirt and lie on his back I perceive he yet to breath and ask why he lie so they answer now do our god tell he what we shall do and whither we shall go and when he have lie still a little while they cry thus three time together Oghao Oghao Oghao and as they use these three call he rise with his head and lie down again and then he rise up and sing with like voice as he do before with the like answer Igha Igha Igha then he command they to kill five Ollen or great deer and continue sing still both he and they as before then he take a sword of a and a span long I do mete it myself and put it into his belly half way and sometime less but no wound be to be see they continue their sweet song still then he put the sword into the fire till it be warm and so thrust it into the slit of his shirt and thrust it through his body as I think in at his navel and out at his fundament the point be out of his shirt behind I lay my finger upon it then he pull out the sword and sit down this be do they set a kettle of water over the fire to heat and when the water do seethe the priest begin to sing again they answer he for so long as the water be in seethe they sit and sing not then they make a thing be four square and in height and squareness of a chair and cover with a gown very close the forepart thereof for the hinder part stand to the tent side their tent be round and be call Chome in their language the water still seethe on the fire and this square seat be ready the priest put off his shirt and the thing like a garland which be on his head with those thing which cover his face and he have on yet all this while a pair of hose of Deer-skin with the hair on which come up to his buttock so he go into the square seat and sit down like a tailor and sing with a strong voice or hollow then they take a small line make of Deer-skin of four fathom long and with a small knot the priest make it fast about his neck and under his left arm and give it to two man stand on each side of he which hold the end together then the kettle of hot water be set before he in the square seat which seat they now cover with a gown of broad cloth-without line such as the Russ use to wear then the two man which do hold the end of the line still stand there begin to draw and draw till they have draw the end of the line stiff and together and then I hear a thing fall into the kettle of water which be before he in the tent. I ask what it be and they answer his head shoulder and leave arm which the line have cut off I mean the knot which I see afterward draw hard together then I rise up and will have look whether it be so or not but they lay hold on i and say that if they shall see he with their bodily eye they shall live no long and the most part of they can speak the russian tongue to be understand and they take i to be a russian then they begin to hollow with these word oghaoo oghaoo many time together in the mean while I see a thing like a finger of a man two time together thrust through the gown from the priest I ask they that sit near to i what it be that I see and they say not his finger for he be yet dead and that which I see appear through the gown be a beast but what beast they know not nor will not tell and I look upon the gown and there be no hole to be see at last the priest lift up his head with his shoulder and arm and all his body and come out to the fire thus far of their service which I see during the space of certain hour but how they do worship their idol that I see not for they put up their stuff to remove from that place where they lay and I go to he that serve their priest and ask he what their God say to he when he lie as dead he answer that his own people do not know neither be it for they to know for they must do as he command William Pursglove tell i of the like either juggle or magical prank practise by Samoyed-conjurors or priest who they have in great veneration they have as he report certain image some in likeness of a man other of a bear wolf etc. which they be hang with the rich fur they can get hide they in cave in the wood for fear of the Russ who travel those country to hunt after wild beast as sable Fox and beaver who if they light upon those fur deity take away the fur and bestow on they great heat in fire Pustozera be in 68 degree 50. minute the inhabitant hold trade with other Samoied which have traffic with the ougorians and Molgomsey for sable black and white fox beaver downe Whales-fin the Russ malegn other that gain which themselves find in the samoied-trade traduce the english among they as spy the Ozera or lake before the town be freeze over the thirteen of October Ios. log. and so continue till the twenty of may. josias logan there observe and the eleven of December he can see but the way of the sunbeam on the thirteen the beam but not the sun which on Christmas day he see rise at south and by west and set at south west and by south not whole elevate from the horizon but all the way the nether part of the sun seem just and even with it they find the harbour of Pechora full of ice in july r. Finch the tide strong and dangerous the town of Pechora be small it have three church the poor in the spring and summer time live by catch partridge goose duck swan salt the flesh and live on they most of the winter sail from Pustozera in August towards Zimla w. Gourden they fasten themselves to a piece of ice which cause their return homeward w. Pursglove the Samoieds know these unknown desert and can tell where the moss grow wherewith they refresh their weary deer pitch their tent of Deer-skin near the same their wife and daughter fetch will sometime ten verst off they hang kettle on the fire with snow of which melt every one drink a carouse when they have sup they spread a deer skin on the snow within the tent. whereon he rest cover with his day-apparel ten or twelve of the boy or maid watch the dear to keep they from wolf or bear make a great shout if they see any for two hundred and fifty sled they pitch every night three tent the light of the moon and snow help they in their travel the hollander in the year 1494 send to discover a way to cathay and China by the north-east g g Hak. voy. 10.1 Gerad de veer ap. de bryin 3. par. jud. orient which by master Burrough pet and jacman englishman have be long before in vain attempt William barent be the chief pilot for this discovery this year h h Navig 1. they sail through the strait of vaygat and think themselves not far short of the river ob the next year they return for the same discovery they i i Navig 2. land in the samogithians or samoyed country and name a place because they there find image carve of wood Idal nook they give name to place long before discover by the english as if they have be the first founder they learn of certain muscovite that the inhabitant of noua Zemla have neither religion nor civility prescribe they by any law but worship the sun moon and north-star and every year offer unto they sacrifice of dear and other thing on the nine and twenty of August there arise a thick fog whereupon Oliver Brunel which have be three several year send by the king of Denmark for the discovery of Groenland report that in 76. degree he have often observe such thick fog that some perish thereby these happen most common in October and November the last of August they have speech with the samoyed they be of k k description of the samoyed short stature scarce four foot high with long hair broad face great head little eye short and bow leg very swift clothe with beast skin whereof the hairy side be outward they know no God the sun who presence they be long deprive of in the winter which be recompense in their nightless summer be worship among they and when the sun be decline out of their sight the moon or north-star be his receiver or successor if you will in that tribute of their devotion they have beside many idol rude carve in time past they have no king but now they choose one to that dignity they bury the dead and offer yearly their sacrifice for they to the sun moon and north-star of their deer which they burn except the head and foot they eat the flesh of wild beast either raw or dry in the air which make they have very unsavoury breath on the six of September two of they go on shore on the continent of Moscovia and encounter with a bear which kill one of they his cry bring in other of their fellow which be also straggle about to his rescue but the bear lay hold also upon one of they and can not be drive to forsake his prey till himself become a prey in recompense the two tear carcase be there bury they take from one bear which they kill a hundred pound of fat which serve they for their lamp the skin be nine foot l l from cherry island they bring home a bear skin 13 foot long jonas Pooly long and seven wide in the year 1596. m m Navig 3. there be send other two ship to prosecute this discovery which on the four of june have sight of a triple sun attend and guard with a double rainbow one encompass they the other cross they overthwart after many dreadful combat with the ice and one of the ship depart from the other they be force to winter in noua Zemla where they build they a house to serve they for a fortification against the savage bear tempestuous storm continual snow ice and unspeakable cold and if worse may be a worse than all these they endure a continual night of many week wherein neither the sun nor any of his courtly train the least ray to be the harbinger of his desire presence do present themselves to their eye and the fire can scarce prevail against the insult tyranny of the cold to warm they the bear together with the sun forsake they but plenty of fox remain and with the sun the bear also return sometime lay violent siege to their house from the four of November till the seven and twenty of January they see no Sun their watch also or clock be by violence of the cold force to stand still that they can not measure their time thus do they wait in expectation of the sun return that they also not able further to pursue the voyage may return home which eleven of they do in October follow but see these northeasterne sea be so freeze and unpassable I will therefore in a inky sea find a easy passage for the reader with more both ease end security to the mighty kingdom of China whereof we be next to speak chap. 18 of the kingdom of China @. i. of the name province city and situation thereof China be suppose of some to be that country who people of Ptolomey be a a ptol. geog. l. 7. cap. call sinae some think they to be the people mention by the prophet isaiah b b Es. 49.12 Osor. in parap jun. Annot. whereunto junius also incline the arabian call they (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Tzinin and the portugal first of all other because they can not pronounce it aright call they chinian say c c scal. cau. Isag. l. 3. joseph Scaliger pierre du jarric say d d pierre du arric l. 4. deal histoire des indes orient cap. 17. gotard Arthus hist indiae orient c. 49. that before that time in all the east they be call chijs and the inhabitant of Ceilan be call chingale because they be mix with the Chinois and cinnamon be of the persian name that be wood of China as some think he add their opinion that derive that name from the chinian salutation in which they use the word as a nickname therefore give they and other that think the city Chincheo give name to the whole region but it be tedious to recite here the several opinion in this question and fit it be to hear ricius judgement who be send into the Indies 1578. after four year stay at goa and cochin be by the Jesuitical visitor employ for China in which he live about eight and twenty year some of which he spend in Nanquin and other place but the ten last in Paquin the royal city and residence he out of his experience can best inform we of China affair and a little before his death which happen the eleven of may 1610. silk when invent write certain Commentary of his observation which Trigautius another chinian jesuite have since revise and publish protest sincere truth in his relation which he say many former writer even of their society want in many thing partly receive by hearsay of china-merchant partly stay small time and but in the skirt of the country this I premise that none impute to i a fault so much after so good intelligence to have increase this history of China the most admirable this day in the world for the name he acknowledge Ptolomey his sinae and the ancient serica regio to agree with this where the poor be clothe in silk and whence other country be therewith store the whereof their annal report 2600. year before Christ but of all these name e e as neither of Cin Cauchin-China Batte-china cathay etc. the Chinois know none who custom be that when any new family attain the sovereignty the country receive with the new lord new law and a new name so they write that it have sometime be call than which signify broad after that thou that be rest next Hia or great afterward sciam adorn then Cheu which be perfect Han the milken way in heaven with other name many but in the reign of this family which be call 104 the kingdom be style Min which signify brightness to which they add ta call it f f Perera have this name Escalanta tangis n. di conti Mangi polo this and cin. longobard say that the magistrate call the Country far from the court mangine that be barbarous stamin or great brightness few of the neighbour nation observe this and by diverse of they it be diverse name those of siam and cochin call it Cin whence the portugal call it China the japonite than the tartar han the western saracen as have be observe cathay and the Chinois themselves have one name common to all age Ciumquo as also chium hoa which signify the former a kingdom the other a garden in the midst they conceive the earth square and their country in the midst thereof which make they offend with our map that place they in the further east and ricius so dispose his map after that he place they in the middle of the same the king be entitle lord of the universe which how boisterous soever be more excusable then in many other inferior potentate the Chinois think according to their geography that the world contain but few other nation and those for the most part so contemptible that they willing relinquish they or think they not worth the conquer neither be ever any one kingdom so worthy the name of great begin at the isle Hainam which signify the south sea in the 19 degree and extend northwards to 42. and from the 112. degree in longitude reckon from the canaries in the province Yunan to the 132. eastward this have be observe by mathematical instrument and observation of eclipse in their calendar and especial for the northern computation it be out of doubt but for illustration hereof we will add out of one of their own book entitle a description of that kingdom print 1579. thus interpret in this kingdom be two royal or parliament province Nanquin and Pequin the one signify the south court the other the north and beside these thirteen other in these fifteen province or kingdom be number by another division 158. region or shire they call they fu the most of which have twelve or fifteen city beside town village castle and hamlet in these be two hundred seven and forty great city which they call chev rather in dignity then greatness or otherwise exceed the inferior city call Hien of which be 1152. the person of such as be grow to man estate all which pay tribute to the king be 58. million 550. thousand 801 not reckon the feminine sex boy stripling or youth eunuch soldier magistrate the king kindred student and many other and yet of soldier notwithstanding their long peace be maintain in perpetual pay and service above one million the three northern province be almost half of they in military stipend the border kingdom tributary be to the east three to the west fifty three number in that book though this tribute be of no great value the kingdom be also fortify by nature and art the sea on the south and east and steep precipice join together with a strong wall the space of four hundred and five league to the north and a sandy wilderness on the northwest all conspire to the strength thereof and for the south-west it be full of hill and desert with a few small seignory unworthy their fear or desire it be divide into fifteen province i. Pantogia six whereof border on the sea Cantan foquien chequiam Nanquin Xantum Paquin the other nine be in land Quiamsi huquam Honan xiensi xansi suchion quoicheu junan coansi some sound these name some what otherwise the king residence be at Paquin though Paquin enjoy also a court royal as be the royal seat of the ancient king which some place in quinsay but of that afterward 2 of the commodity of China and commodious river and ship with two map one make by HONDIUS the other h h of the large China map see a exposition to. 2. of my Pilgrim m. Ricci take out of a China map make there by the Chinois by reason of this large extent both east and west and north and south it come to pass that no country yield such variety of thing grow in such variety of clime and soil make other indebt to it but itself not indebt to any country either for necessity or delicacy of diet neither have we scarce any thing in Europe which be not there find and what be miss be more than recompense in other thing exceed there be store of wheat barley Miller Panike and other kind of grain in Rice their chief food it far excel Europe of beanes and pease wherewith they feed their beast in some province they have two or three harvest in a year none of our principal fruit but olive and almond be want other they have unknown to we as those which they call Longanes coco-nut and other indian fruit their orange lemon pome citton far excel the european in variety and delicacy the like we may say of their garden heathe which religion to some to other poverty have make their only food great be their variety of flower many hear unknown but there the colour more respect than the send as for distillation they never till of late by we have hear of such a Art Bettele and arecca2growes in the four southern province their wine be the map of China MATHAEUS ricius a picture of a chinese man picture of a China woman HONDIUS his map of China China far inferior to we for their grape be few and less pleasant nor do they make wine of they but of Rice and other thing which be both well taste and not so burn as we they common feed on pork they have store also of beef mutton goat flesh hen duck goose they feed also on horse mule ass dog which be sell in the shambles as well as other flesh but in some place either for superstition or husbandry they spare their beef and buffall venison especial of red deer be plentiful hare and other thing all very cheap their horse be not so comely as in these part but in number cheapness and use for burden excel yet be there less need of such carriage by reason of plenty of river which nature or art have provide through all the country hence be there such store of ship that a modern author have write that there live as many on the water as on the land which to such as sail in those stream will not seem too excessive a hyperbole and I dare affirm this as a thing credible that there be as much ship in this kingdom as in all the world beside understand this assertion of freshwater vessel for their sea-vessel be few and worse than we Pantogia1 report his own journey from Macao to Paquin the space of six hundred spanish league which the next way by land be reckon 1450. in all that space travel but one day by land for shorten his way otherwise all the way by water carry in a river call of the chinian a little sea for the greatness be the great which ever he see in some place two or three mile broad often tempestuous and cause of many shipwrack the Chinois dare not sail in it by night and they say that if one fall in he be so whirl that swim can scarce save he they call it Yamsu or the son of the sea it abound with sea-fish a hundred league from the sea he sail after that in another river of like bigness who water be thick and miry which they clarify with alum before they can drink it all the rest of the stream that he pass be make by man hand above two hundred league that yellow or muddy stream at his beginning make a lake and then run westward beyond the wall to the tartar and then back again by those wall compass the province of sciensi run south and after east to the sea it often overflow and do much harm not subject to their wall and law and often change the sandy channel some magistrate be appoint to appease the spirit thereof with rite for they ascribe spirit to the rule of many thing from Nanquin to Paquin the space of three hundred league it seem to be as it be a continue street of ship and though they come in the morning betimes to Nanquin yet be there the same hour above five hundred sail of vessel under sail ready to enter which be lade with provision for the city the king ship in that region about Nanquin be report to be about ten thousand to carry his rent and tribute beside a thousand sail belong to private man the ship where in the mandarine or magistrate and officer be carry be not inferior in sumptuous stateliness to the ship royal in Europe and some exceed they have parlour large hals kitchens with other office and many window with silk curtain and curious paint without environ with gallery at the height as of high house and paint within and without with a certain liquor make of a gum call Claran of shine brightness and long continuance beside great store of carve work that they seem prince palace Escalanta and Gaspar de cruz report a proverb of the Chinois that their king be able to make a bridge of ship from China to malacca which be near five hundred leqgue they have so great store of timber that a ship may there be build for a four part of that which it will here cost the river be no less adorn and beautify with city town and village so many as that in all this way be near or against one they have always sight of another that all the way seem a continual habitation and so great that sometime they sail two or three hour alongst the wall of some city their town and city have high wall but to return to their horse such as be for war be innumerable but unfit for service run away at the first neigh of a tartarian horse beside that they be unshod with iron and therefore too tender-hoofed for hard travel neither have they skill to manage they fish be there abundant by the neighbourhood of the sea store of river and lake for their greatness and depth as it be little sea beside fishpond plenty maintain to that intent and purpose which every day store the market their forest breed no lion but great quantity of tiger bear wolf fox elephant none but at Paquin for show in the court flax they have not but cotton enough for the world and yet not above four hundred year since it be bring thither silk be plentiful and cheap of hemp and certain other herb they make cloth their wool they shear and make thereof slight clothes but good cloth they know not how to make although that b which be thither bring be dear sell and this note I will commend to our english merchant that can best furnish they for the cold in the northern province seem more than the climate threaten far beyond the country of Europe in the same height their huge river and lake be freeze over the cause unknown but guess to be the tartarian mountain snowy top not far distant against which they use fur garment all sort of metal be here find beside the ordinary brass and copper they make another kind white as silver no dear than the former of melt iron they make cauldron bell mortar furnace ordnance and the like all cheaper far than here their gold be not base but not so fine as we silver be use for money but by weight not by coin and so in all bargain they use the balance the price high or low as the silver be in fineness wherein much fraud be use in many place they have small coin of brass which come out of the public mint their great man have vessel of silver and gold but not so common as in Europe but the woman spend much gold silver in adorn their head porcelane be their usual table-furniture the most excellent whereof be make in the province of Kiamsi of yellow earth whence it be disperse into the other province and even to vs. they will with wire sow the break piece together and make they hold liquor as we do with wooden dish their glass be not comparable to we their building be of timber even the king house the low wall sometime of brick which together with their store of ship argue their plenty of timber the kind most part such as with vs. Okes be scarce but in stead thereof they have a hard kind of everlasting wood which the portugal therefore call iron be like it also in colour cedar they use for funeral coffin and tomb in which they be curious and costly they have also a kind of reed the portugal call it Bambu almost as hard as iron the great sort though hollow and distinguish with knot yet supply the room of stud or post in small house be as big as with both hand may be gripe the small serve for lance and other manifold use of these be exceed plenty and cheapness for fuel they have wood coal reed stubble and a kind of pitchy bituminous matter call l l this seem to be some kind of coal such as be find in diverse place of our island they have the like in the bishopric of liege dig out of the earth very cheap and not troublesome with the smoke here grow plenty of Rhubarb and here be also store of musk salt be make not only by the seaside but of diverse water within land sugar be more use than honey yet like plenty of both wax be there not of honey alone but another white and better and burn clear make by certain worm which they keep on tree to this purpose and a three sort make of the fruit of a tree their paper will not last with we nor bear ink but on one side yet they have as white as we make of Cotton they have marble of diverse colour precious stone odoriferous wood and gum with other rarity among the rest a certain shrub the leaf whereof be gather in the spring and dry in the shadow and so preserve to their daily decoction which they drink continual both at table and when one friend enter another house or often if he make any stay they call it Cia sup it hot more healthsome than toothsome for it have a bitter smack the japonian will give ten or twelve ducat for one pound of the best and drink it in powder mingle with two or three spoonful of boil water but the Chinois steep the leaf they have another pitchy substance like milk which they strain out of the bark of a certain tree whereof they make their cie the portugal call it Ciacon wherewith they varnish their house and householdstuff and ship in diverse colour with glass-like shine to the eye smoothness to the touch beside the long continuance please majestical the cause they need no clothes for their table which be easy restore to their crystal lustre with a little wash if by any fatty substance dim oil be also express out of the fruit of another tree of use like the former but inferior somewhat and more plentiful cinnamon and most excellent ginger be here grow pepper nutmeg aloe and other like be here plentiful out of the land and border kingdom gunpowder they have in great store which they use not so much in piece whereto they be more unapt as in firework in which they be curious artificial lively express tree with their fruit and other rarity in the first month of the year we see as much this way spend at Nanquin as will have serve for two year continual war @. 3 of the city and castle in China and of Quinsay of the number of their city and their differ sort be mention before ant. Dalmeida Barros Escalanta c. 8. Gaspar de Cruz. beside these they have two sort of castle both for fortification and habitation with privilege also of market the great sort name hue 293. the less of great number 2593. their village be innumerable in each city be a officer that have charge of the wall whereby they be keep fair and strong and for further beauty beside commodity of shadow they plant tree at their door which continue green all the year long the city general be like one another except in greatness the street be straight yield prospect from one gate to another Canton so the portugal call it according to the name of the province the Chinois call it quamcheu or canceu be account the least of the metropolitan city it have on one side a great navigable river elsewhere environ with a deep trench fill with water which be navigable also the wall have fourscore and three bulwark the street so broad that ten man may ride in front and pave adorn with many triumphant arch and shop on both side the bridge there and elsewhere in the kingdom be many of large free stone very costly the high way very stately which lead to the city and the king house for the public officer very magnificent after their manner such be the plenty and abundance that in this one city be spend every day between five and six thousand hog and between ten and eleven thousand duck beside a great number of kine bird hen coney frog dog fish of many sort and yet the most usual meat of the Chinois be Rice boil with water Nanquin stand in two and thirty degree and be eight or ten league from the sea with a river lead thither m m pantegia it have three fair brick wall with large and stately gate the first wall contain the king palace which itself also be compass with three wall in manner of a castle with ditch full of water round about they this I dare be bold to say it be n n Christ exp l. 3. cap. 10. ricius his report that no king in the world excel this king in a palace if we compare not particular but all thing together this first wall be in circuit four or five italian mile the second wall contain the first and withal the best part of the city have in it twelve gate place with iron furnish with ordnance it comprehend eight dend italian mile the three wall be not continue but art supply nature elsewhere fortify it the compass whereof can scarce be know the inhabitant say that two go out on horseback one this way the other that and meet again at night have spend the day each in his semicircle the great part be very populous howsoever there be also mountain garden grove and lake within the city this circular form be to be observe as of great capacity there be forty thousand soldier in continual garrison it be full of palace temple bridge tower of best air fertility and ingenious inhabitant the river do not only pass by but enter the city with diverse channel make by art capable of great ship the street be say Pantogia of two league or of two and a half in length wide and pave the compass be at least eleven or twelve league and contain by conjecture two hundred thousand house and according to all the opinion of the jesuit there abide equal or exceed in people four of the great city in Europe Paquin in 40. degree Paquin or as ricius always call it Pequin be situate about a hundred mile from that famous wall against the tartar in greatness and neatness exceed by that of Nanquin but in multitude of inhabitant soldier and magistrate exceed it two high and strong wall compass the south part so wide that twelve horse may easy run thereon together without hindrance those wall be of brick save at the foundation of huge stone fill with earth in the midst far high than those in Europe on the north side there be but one on these wall as diligent watch be keep every night as in the hot war in the daytime eunuch watch at the gate or rather exact custom the king palace be within the inner southern wall near the gate and so run unto the northern wall the rest of the city stretch on both side it be less than the palace at Nanquin but more glorious that seem by the king long absence a carcase without life the city be troublesome be little of it pave in winter with dirt in summer with dust which in that region wherein it seldom rain upon any blast of wind fill their house and to prevent the trouble there be none of any rank which go on foot or ride without a veil hang down to their breast and cover their face so thin that it may hinder the dust and not the sight prevent also the tedious knowledge and salutation by other there be muletter and hackney-man in every corner to let their beast to such as will hire they who also know all chief place and make way in those populous street unto their customer both for a little money but for this there be also a book which relate the and street of the city they may also hire chair and bearer to carry they in the province of Sciantum be Cinchiamsu which in Paulus his time have two church of christian whence be a river make by hand a thing usual in China whereby they have passage to suceu and to the metropolitan city of Chequian hamceu this river be so cloy with ship because it be not freeze in winter that the way be stop with multitude which make exchange his way by water into another more strange to we by waggon if we may so call it which have but one wheel so build that one may sit in the middle as it be on horseback and on each side another the waggoner put it swift and safe forward with lever or bar of wood those wagon drive by wind and sail he mention not and so he come speedy to suceu and hamceu which be of the Chinois esteem paradise Trig. ep. 1612. they have a proverb Xam sum Ham that which the hall of heaven or presence-chamber be in heaven that on earth be Sucen and hamceu and first for suceu suceu the beauty plenty frequency situation make it admirable it be seat as Venice but better in a pleasant river of fresh water if it may not rather be call a lake for the stillness they may pass quite through it either by water or land all the street and house be found upon pile of pinetree and the merchandise bring from Marao and other part and port be here sell as the fit centre for dispersion it have one gate into the land other passage by boat innumerable bridge very stately and durable but in those narrow rill have one only arch butter and milk-meat nowhere more spend nor better wine of rice which be carry thence to Paquin by the frequency of the haven and multitude of ship almost deny faith to the eye which will think all the ship of the kingdom here assemble and notwithstanding the continual go out so supply as if they never weigh the hand-made river that be make from nanquin-ward hither so people with town city village as nowhere in the kingdom more as from hence also to hamceu it be scarce two day journey from the sea and the head of that region in which be eight city when Humui expel the tartar this region hold out long against he and therefore to this day pay a excessive tribute even half of all which the earth bring forth some two small province not pay so much as this one region and the o o pantagio city alone as in the print book of the king tribute be extant pay twelve million to the king more than the great kingdom in Europe if some have not account p p Botero. Relat. part. 2. which yet of France etc. can be justify ep. 1612 province of Chequian false and he which know this city will not marvel at it it be still keep with a strong garrison for fear of innovation but hamceu or hanceu the metropolitan of Chequian be perhaps more to be admire situate southeast from Nanquin almost nine day journey not two day from the sea in 30. degree this province of Chequian be the chief of the thirteen wash on the east with the sea have Nanquin and Kiamsi on the west Fuquian on the south xanton on the north number twelve great city the chief of sixty three less beside innumerable town castle village the best wit and most learned student in the whole kingdom it yield a fertile soil art contend with nature for variety of river so many as may seem impossible to human industry adorn with numberless bridge of many arch make of huge stone equal to the european workmanship and so abound with mulberry tree and silkworm that all the China market beside other country be hence furnish and ten vest of silk may be here have at a cheap price than one of cloth in Europe hamceu be the chief city of this province yea in all this kingdom hamceu hamcheu or hanceu less perhaps somewhat in compass of wall than Nanquin but better people no place in the city empty nor occupy with garden but all build and all the building almost with diverse story which in other city of China be not usual the inhabitant be so many and the tribute so much that the jesuit dare not relate that which hereof they have hear by grave testimony for the incredibility the description will ask a whole volume the chief street be almost half a day journey in length and can be less than admirable for whereas the Chinois use to erect triumphal arch as monument to well-deserving magistrate and ornament to their city this one street have at least three hundred such beside very many other in other part of the city of massy stone and exceed curious workmanship that if the house on both side yield the like splendour the world can not show such a spectacle but they occupy it all with shop and build the most magnificence of their house inward and yet those not like the european palace there be also a lake close to the city which the eye can scarce measure the lake see the Map which slide into a valley encompass emboss with diverse hillock have give occasion to art to show her utmost in the adorn the same beautify all those spacious bank with house garden grove a very labyrinth to the bewitch eye not know whereat most in this maze to be most amaze wherein most to delight and in delight do they spend their day fill the lake with vessel furnish with feast spectacle and play on the water there be a pleasant hill in the middle of the city whereon be a fair tower or steeple where they measure their hour by a strange device out of huge vessel water drop from one to another the low be very large in the middle whereof be perpendicular raise a rule distinguish with hour-space which by the ascent or descent of the water divide the rise and decline day and declare the hour every half hour some man appoint by table with cubital letter to give notice of the time to all man from this hill be a prospect over all the city all the street be set with tree make show of pleasant garden it be so full of river lake rill pond both in the city and suburb as if a man will frame a platonical idea of elegancy to his mind Quinsay see it describe supr. 98. the idol temple be many and stately which idolatry where it be want in China have a worse successor atheism let we stay a while and gaze for where have you such a object be not Quinsay whilom the royal seat of the king of Mangi as venetus record suppose by our modern geographer to be swallow up with some earthquake or in Bellona all-consuming belly here raise up from the grave the lake situate on the one q q ha Lago etc. side so Paulus report of Quinsay the name Quinsay signify the city of heaven and this call a heavenly paradise by the Chinois and Han signify in heaven and perfect yea Quinsay or as Odoricus call it Canasia and Han or chanceu not so disagree in sound as different dialect be wont the excellency be chief city in the kingdom and this province sometime royal as Pequin now and Nanquin be the situation southeast from Cinczianfu and r r that which be before say almost two day journey be to be understand of the Chinois journey which make slow passage sometime but six mile a day five and twenty mile from the sea the high house and shop underneath the exceed trade revenue pastime by water multitude fairness and length of the street all so conspire to prove this Han or hamceu to be that Quinsay of Paulus true it be that Quinsay be then great be as venetus say a hundred mile about but the evert of that farfur and his family then reign the divert of the court to Cambalu by the tartar and after to Nanquin by Humun and never return hither may lessen the same and may not war in that long siege by the tartar in the recovery thereof by the Chinois easy circumcise her superfluity beside who know whether all this huge lake may be contain in that account of Paulus still compass about with building or before those war the lake itself may as suceu now be be build on which time and war have consume nor since the remove of the court be so necessary Mandevile mention war at Quinsay in his time Nicolo di conti which be here about the year 1440. say Quinsay be in his time new build of thirty mile compass or if any like better that suceu itself to which also many of these argument agree shall be this Quinsay I contradict not that which sometime I have think that Quinsay after so long a sickness and consumption of war die bequeath her Land-greatness to Nanquin her sea-treasure to suceu both arise out of the ash of that quinsay-phenix I find not I mean for Nanquin agree with the distance betwixt suceu and Nanquin above four day journey of this Quinsay M.P. l. 2. c. 68 let the reader take a large and leisurely view in Marcus Paulus which but for tediousness I can hither have transcribe whether hanceu or suceu be it or whether both these paradise do now succeed that city of heaven or wheresoever else it be it be which these be the wonder of the world report say Paulus to have 12000. bridge 1600000. household in which be a rich mart of all commodity of the world there be spend every day 9589. pound of pepper it have ten principal market-place square each square half a mile the chief street lead thereto be forty pace wide and run straight from one end of the city to the other these market-place four mile asunder but I forbear the rest this city have twelve principal company or art each of which have 12000. shop the adjoin country reckon the nine part of Mangi pay six million and 400000. ducat to the great Chan yearly for custom of salt make of the sea-water by the heat of the sun in large plain beside sixteen million and 800000. ducat otherwise but let we look on some of the mean city one of those call Hien be Scianhai in the province of Nanquin in 29. degree over-against Cerra and within four and twenty hour sail of japon and therefore be defend with a garrison and a navy it have about 40000. household and the jurisdiction adjoin seem a continue city with Gardena intermix pay to the king 300000. ducat there be great store of rice and Cotton and in this city and the suburban liberty be 200000. weaver thereof the air wholesome and they live ordinary to a great age some to fourscore and fourscore and ten and many to a hundred year the key of city be every night bring to the governor and thousand appoint to watch to prevent thief themselves be the worst they ring bell at certain space to each other these city of China ordinary want that elegance and magnificence which stately temple and sumptuous building do afford unto our city of Europe their house be low without the ornament of porch gallery window and prospect into the street beside these habitation they have many which dwell not on land but in their ship for their ship be of two sort one for sail another for habitation also and these mean or fair according to the wealth of the owner in the one side they carry their family in the other side their passenger many bark be as victual house by the way and likewise as shop of merchandise many of the poor water-dweller get their live by labour on land their wife ferry over passenger and use mean to get fish they bring up thousand of duck hatch with artificial heat in dung which have feed with a little rice in the morning they put out at a door into the water which present swim on land and eat the weed which grow among the rice these weeder thereby procure some wage of the husbandman to their owner and at night be call home with a tabor each resort to their own bark they have certain Sea-crow or cormorant wherewith they fish tie their gorge that they can swallow the fish which they take till their master turn be serve they be suffer to hunt for themselves which one in this city of London have late imitate and effect in the winter s s anth. Dalmeida they have store of ice and snow whereby the river be freeze even about Nanquin they have abundance of all thing necessary to the life of man fruit flesh and fish with price correspondent they have two and somewhere three harvest in the year few mountain but plain of a hundred league wine they make of Rice they eat thrice a day but spare there drink be it water or wine they drink hot and eat with two stick of ivory ebony or like matter nor touch their meat with their hand and therefore little nappery serve they their warm t t of the wholesomeness and use of warm drink see a. pierce drink and abstinence from fruit be great preservative of their health which for the most part they enjoy and none of they have the stone which some say be with we cause by cold drink but let we take more full view of their person and condition @. 4 of their person attire and many strange rite some of the Chinois have face almost square many in the province of canton and Quamsi have two nail on their little toe a thing common to all the cauchin Chinois their woman be all of low stature and account small foot their great elegance and therefore bind and swaddle they so from their infancy all their life that they seem in go stump-footed which seem to be by device of some to keep they within door neither man nor woman ever cut off their hair which be general black and other colour a deformity they let it grow on their crown only till fifteen year of age after that all their head over lose on their shoulder till twenty year when they put on their u u to the Chinois as to the roman the cap of manhood and then gather it up the man into cawl or hat hollow at the top for the hair to pass through which the woman use not but trim up their hair on knot with gold silver stone and flower earring also at their ear but no ring on their finger both man and woman wear long garment with wide sleeve the man wear shoe of silk with curious work and knot none wear of leather but the base yea their sole they make of cloth the learned man wear square cap or hat other round they bestow long time every morning in trim their hair they use no shirt but wear their inmost garment of white cloth and use often wash they have visant or umbrella to keep off the sun or rain bear over they by their servant the poor carry they of less form themselves the general colour of the Chinois be white more or less according to the climate their beard be thin long before it come of a few stare hair in some none nose little scarce stand forth eye prominent black little of egg-fashion many dream they have of pantogia eye of a dark gray colour as if jewel and precious thing may thereby be know where they be hide their ear be small if they will paint a deform man they give he a short garment great eye and beard with a long nose like to we their custom of name be very strange the surname be ancient unchangeable and significant of which there be not a thousand in all china the name be also significant name surname few and arbitrary at the father pleasure if a son for daughter have no name beside the surname but be call after their age and order the son also be so call by other first second or otherwise with their surname the parent only and ancestor call they by their name and themselves in their writing it will be account a injury if any other shall call they thereby or if he shall call his father or kinsman by his name when first a child betake himself to study his master give he another name which he and his schoolfellow may call he by and no man else when he put on his man hat and marry a wife some chief man give he another name more honourable by which all man may call he but his servant or such as be subject to he this they call the letter last when he be of full ripe age some grave man give he his most honourable name which they call great and by this any one may style he which yet his parent and elder do not but only by the letter if any make profession of religion in any of their sect his ghostly father or author of his profession give he a new name which they call of religion when one visit another if he do not write in his letter of which afterward his honourable name or surname the visitee ask he of it that he may call he thereby without injury and the jesuit do also take to themselves in china-fashion such honourable name they be studious of antiquity picture artificial draw with ink seales without other colour they have in high price the character also and write of the ancient with their seal annex for many will seek to gull man with counterfeit all magistrate have the seal of their office deliver to they by humvu which if they lose they be both deprive and punish most diligent therefore preserve carry it with they to all place and lay it under their head at night man of good sort go not in the street on foot but be carry in a close chair by four man the curtain draw on all part but before to distinguish they from magistrate who chair be every way open the matron be also carry in chair close every way by the form easy know from those of men. coach and chariot the law forbid die and card be common play in China chess also somewhat unlike we for the king go not out of four place next he and the two bishop have their queen two man also go before the knight beside the ordinary pawn they have another play which make the skilful therein well esteem though he can do nothing else with two hundred man some white some black on a table of three hundred division this be use by the magistrate woman go not abroad except seldom to see their near kindred or some of base condition in their office of urbanity and courtesy they go beyond all other have many book thereof and reckon it one of those five virtue which they call cardinal I fear to be in the relation as they in action tedious and will but salute their salutation they uncover not the head to any nor stir the knee or foot or use embrace or kiss the hand their hand be hide and join in their wide sleeve except they do some work or with a fan cool themselves and in salutation first lift up both sleeve and hand aloft in a modest manner and then let they fall again stand face to face and say Zin Zin which word be a ritual interjection without any signification when one visit another or when friend meet in the street they do thus bow also their body with their head almost to the ground they call this so you the inferior place the superior and the visit the visitor on the right hand in the northern province on the left and then turn themselves both to the north. in solemner salutation on high day or after long absence after the first bow they kneel and touch the ground with their forehead and then rise and do it again three or four time over in visitation after other officious ceremony they offer he Chia to drink of which we have speak with other junket except there be great familiarity he which will salute a friend must at the door deliver to the servant a letter before for his harbinger to signify his name in modest term and affection towards he with term answerable to his estate he be hereby warn to prepare himself for entertainment clothe himself with apparel for that purpose as must the guest also if they be unknown to each other they prostrate themselves and knock the ground diverse time with their forehead if they send a present they send withal a letter contain the inventory of the thing send with term very complemental which he must answer with another letter of thanks and a present of like or great value beside a recompense to the messenger their part from each other be as full of ceremony in their feast they set each guest to table one furnish with flesh and fish the other with fruit and junket they send a Paitre or letter the day and sometime five or six day before to invite they and he which can come with another letter must excuse himself on the day with the first light he send new invitation and again a little before the time or else his guest will not come much courtesy be in the meeting exceed much strain and strive about the place of sit as much solemn ceremony in eat as if they be bid to be witness of their host ostentation to view and a little to taste his meat but after six hour spend in this banquet they may go home to fill their belly in this officious trifle the Chinois spend a great part of their life but especial at the begin of the new year fifteen day together and at their birthday when servant salute their master or the base people their superior they fall on their knee and thrice touch the ground with their forehead just as they do to their idol and when the master speak to his servant they stand at his side and at every answer fall on their knee and so do the people to the great man when one speak to another they never use the second person nor the first when they speak of themselves except master and superior to their servant or inferior many form of complemental modesty in term they have but the low to call himself by his proper name as we use the pronoun I and if they speak of any they use some more honourable name and circumlocution if of themselves some modest term the jesuit observe a state and keep within door not easy to be speak with because the Chinois contemn such as observe modesty and price man by their majesty and solemn reservation when they send present to each other they may without incivility take some and refuse other they also use to send present in money if a man be not within when one come with his letter to visit they leave the letter at the door to signify his purpose and this be enough also for the visit party when in revisit he find he absent for every one that visit must within three day be visit in which respect the jesuit be force to cause their porter or servant to keep a note of they all lest they shall forget to repay these office if one meet another which have not on his salutatory habit he may not perform these rite till the other be vest for it for which cause their servant attend they with these robe or else he that be attire must put off and both salute in ordinary habit in drink the inuiter begin hold up his cup in a dish with both hand all the guest turn to he and pledge he together at once sup up their liquor at four or five time although it be water and not at one draught no bread be bring into their feast nor rice none be compel to drink more than they please the majesty of feast be in variety of dish none be take off the table that be once set on till the feast end and then bestow on the guest servant their book be full of precept of observance to parent and superior which outward be there perform more than in all the world beside they never sit in equal site or over-against their better but on the low side this the scholar perform to their master speak to they with great reverence and if they be poor nourish they while they live with their own labour and when one be admit scholar to another Trigaut the master sit in the high end of the hall which be ordinary to the north all the temple and private building if it may be open to the south with his countenance to the door the scholar come before he and four time bow his body and as often kneel down and touch the ground with his forehead ever after though high prefer sit at his side in every meeting although he have be his scholar but one day @. v. of the mechanical art in China their print etc. where nature be so provident of material m. Ricci l. 1. c. 4. art be easy induce to trial of experiment of which we will name such as to we seem rare they general be not so curious for exquisite workmanship as to make thing saleable at easy and cheap rate where Nobility be want and the mandarine pay what they please and sometime force their employment they build for themselves not mind continuance to posterity nor will they believe without much astonishment the magnificence and antiquity of european building Foundation they lay not deep usual not at all within the earth which make the great building short live and their city wall to be often repair the roof of their house even where the wall be brick be sustain with pillar or post of wood and not on those wall print print be with they of ancient use at least five hundred year some say more than a thousand and six hundred their manner differ much from we and be rather a expression than impression they provide a table of peartree or other smooth wood and upon the same light glue the whole sheet or write copy which be dry be cunning taken off so as the character remain on the same table which be p esent carve and cut with iron instrument that nothing but the draught or lineament of the letter be eminent and stand up then with incredible celerity and facility they print off the same one man sometime fifteen hundred in one day and in cut their table they be so ready and expedite that one of our composer seem to i as long in set a sheet of we as they in cut they the reason be the greatness of their character for so small as our letter can not easy be engrave in their table this commodity they have that they may be lay by for as many impression as they please and in the mean time be may print off for number of copy as he find sale both which be want in our manner of print this make their book so many and so cheap and this easiness make the jesuit print at their own house what book they like they have also another way of print a epitaph or other copy be cut in stone or wood they lay thereon a leaf of moist paper and on the same a woollen cloth and then beat it on with a hammer till the thin paper insinuate itself into the empty space of the mould or form and then light lie on ink or what other colour they please so that the epitaph or copy remain in a elegant white provide that this be use where there be use of great character that which some hold of sleep and burn the earth of which their porcelain be make a hundred year in the earth remove it every eight day other gainsay and our jesuite be silent Linschoten affirm that the earth be natural hard beat small steep scal ex. 92. Mons. de Monfart Linsc l. 1. c. 23. often stir and of the fine swim in the top the fine make paint be much use but not in such perfection as with we which be true also of grave and carve to adorn their picture with oil or shadow and landscape they know not and in statue they have no other rule of symmetry but the eye their bell have wooden clapper and seem not able to endure iron and therefore not comparable in sound to we musical instrument they have many and manifold but they want organ except some blow with the mouth and all such as go with key their string be weave of rawsilke and know not our way of make they nor do they know the discord-concord in musical harmony of diverse voice so that their music to we be harsh in their own opinion glorious for measure hour they use hourglass of water and other device but in this and dial very rude they be much addict to comedy and therein excel we many young man travel through the kingdom in this profession and practice or abide in chief place of resort but there as here the dregs of mankind they be hire unto feast whither they come provide for what play shall be demand offer to that end their book of comedy to the feast-master to choose which he like which the guest behold in their feastingtime with such pleasure that they continue sometime ten hour in feed their eye and taste with one service after another in both kind their comedy be ancient few of late writing which the actor pronounce in a sing accent they have also dancer on the rope tumbler and other feat-worker Mathan a eunuch feast the jesuit where all these kind be employ be of his own family one of they cast three knife up into the air still catch they by the haft another lie on his back toss with his foot lift up a earthen vessel every way so as hardly may be do with the hand the like tennis-play with his foot he use with a bell and a great table they have also dumb show act and a boy dance very artificial on a sudden start up a boy of earth keep the same measure and much admirable sport betwixt they seal be in much use not only for their letter but for other their writing poem picture and other thing they contain only their name surname degree and dignity they use not one but diverse not in wax but colour red the have at table a box full of seal which contain their diverse name engrave for every Chinois be call by many name and be of diverse matter wood marble ivory brass crystal coral and other stone more precious the maker of they be many and those learned the character differ from the vulgar and savour antiquity the art of ink-making also be not here illiberal which they make up in ball 10 10 I have bad of it in a square form to be carry in a man pocket as it be a mark stone of the smoke of oil and grind with water on a stone and then take it up with pencil make of hare hair and write therewith not with pen their paper be like thin transparent parchment they all of both sex use fan without which none of they come abroad not so much for necessity especial in cold place and season as for a kind of grace even as glove with we be most for ornament and the most usual present so be fan in China of diverse matter and form reed wood ivory with paper silk or a kind of odoriferous straw round square oval with sentence write therein in these thing these differ from we in other thing be very like in the use of table stool bed which other people near and far observe not but sit feed and sleep on carpet spread on the ground thing be there exceed cheap y y Pantogia and Mendoza c. 4. a hundred pound of sugar may be buy for nine or ten six-pence and other thing proportionable so that though there be none rich as we interpret the word in Europe for such and such revenue yet this cheapness do recompense that other defect they have artificer of all trade and in idleness none may live the impotent be well provide for in hospital they have no gentleman but every man be a plebeian until his merit raise he preferment be achieve only by learning this make they general studious @. 5 of their language writing astrology philosophy and physic the beginning of this discourse must be with their word letter and write wherein this be first to be admit that they have not one book write in the vulgar idiom or common language Quonhoa signify of the court by this mean the Magistrate need not in every new province learn a new language but they have one language call Quonhoa for their court and writing which be common through all china which alone the jesuit learn and which the learned and stranger common use woman also and child attain by this common use to the understanding thereof as for the differ language of each province it be not so necessary nor commendable be but of vulgar both use and reckon but in every tongue and dialect the word be every one monosyllable howsoever sometime two or three vowel fall into one diphthong as for they they mention not vowel or consonant or letter but in writing the letter syllable and word be all one be nothing else but hieroglyphical character of which there be no few than word or thing which yet they so compound and connexe that they have not above 70. or 80000. if we pronounce any of their word in two syllable it be when two of their character be apply to signify one thing some 10000 of these character be necessary for usual writing for to know they all be that which few either can or need their sound also be in great part the same and yet both figure and signification different so that there be no so equivocal a language neither can a hearer write out a oration or speech from the speaker mouth nor a book be understand of they which hear it read but they must look and discern with their eye that equivocation which their ear can and in speak they be often hereby force sometime to repeat that which have before be elegant deliver sometime to write it or if such mean be want with water on the table or character form with the finger in the air to express their mind to the conceit of other and this be most common among the most learned which speak in print and affect inkhorn rhetoric they have fine accent by which they also distinguish this equivocation that one and the same word thus by accent diversify shall signify five several thing nothing alike this make the language hard to be learn of stranger which yet the jesuit have learn to write and read and I will all the equivocator among they that teach to illude oath and delude the world by their twofold two-forked serpentine equivocation in mental reservation and verbal double-signification be all there equivocation mental and verbal learn the China language to convert heathen rather than here practise the romish equivocate dialect to pervert christian to worse than heathenism perverse master lover of strange language in prayer to GOD in oath and assertion to man in the one parrot without reason in the other devil without religion this be the strong bond which religion have bind at once to GOD and man and yet these religious mountebank by juggle quirk dissolve these bond and at once delude both GOD and man foolish roman that send back the legate to Hannibal cic. offic. l. 3. that by equivocation have before fulfil their oath of return foolish Regulus that return to thy tormentor choose thyself rather then thy oath to be torture and most most foolish martyr that so slight for want of this slight run upon fire sword lion and may not we begin a contention with that assertion that a oath for confirmation be to man a end of contention hel. 6.16 which in this equivocate Hydra be rather multiply that neither Rome ethnic nor primitive christian Rome can at least by imitation of diabolical ambiguous oracle devise in those day so transcendent a subtlety but modern Rome by Jesuitical midwifery must be the mother of so super-fine a babe but what do this brat in our way I will rather follow the jesuit in China then in Rome except when Rome follow they thither too and herein with thankfulness accept their report the reason of this equivocal sound of word be ascribe to the Chinois account of eloquence in write rather than speak and therefore to furnish that neglect this insomuch as familiar message be send by writing and not by word of mouth musical skill be a good help to the jesuit in learning the language by reason of their variety of accent and although this multitude of character be to the memory burdensome yet it help it as much another way in save the labour of learning diverse language while every province of China speak diverse agree in writing the japonian also corayan cauchin-chinois leuhiees all conceive the same character although the japonian have a alphabet of letter to write after our manner which the Chinois have not China write they write their line from the top of the page to the bottom downward which they multiply from the right hand to the left whereas our custom be quite contrary from the left hand sideways we have three consonant B.D.R. which the Chinois neither use nor can by any character express and in our word which have they they borrow some sound near the same likewise they never have two consonant without a vowel between and all their word end in vowel except m. or n. of consonant only this and the diverse pronunciation of their character in diverse place make the latin form of baptism hard to be express by the jesuit now for the subject of their study their chief be moral Philosophy in natural they be rude and their ethic be confuse deliver not digest into formal method for of logic they be ignorant but in confuse sentence and discourse the great of the chinian philosopher be Confutius who be bear five hundred and fifty one year before the incarnation of our lord and live above seventy year in great show of learning and holiness and few of our ethnic philosopher have equal he many he have exceed the Chinois have he in such reputation that they think there never live man more holy and all his say be of authority beyond gainsay among the learned and the king themselves have ever since have he in veneration not as a god but as a most excellent man and author of their learning honour his posterity the chief of which enjoy by inheritance ample title immunity and revenue they be also indifferent skill in astrology and diverse mathematical science astrology with ep. Thaisonis sinae ad ric. see the next chap @. 4. in geometry and arithmetic they have be more expert the constellation they do not distinguish as we do and number four hundred star more than our astrologer reckon some small which do not always appear they tell the quantity and foretell eclipse but not exact and refer all their astrology to that which be call judicial esteem a fatal dependence of all thing from the star and have borrow in these art many thing from the saracen the author of this royal family forbid the study of judicial astrology to all but one family in which it continue by inheritance but he which now reign maintain many at great cost both eunuch in his palace and magistrate without which have two court in Paquin one observe China calendar the other the saracenicall and compare both together both of they have a open place on the top of a small hill to contemplate the star in which they have mathematical instrument of exceed greatness of melt brass which seem to be ancient on this hill always one of their college do watch by night to observe college of astrology in Paquin and Nanquin and not elsewhere if any new comet or other rarity appear in the heaven which if it happen the next day they by libel admonish the king thereof together with their opinion of good or evil ensue this place of contemplation at Nanquin be within the city and in massiness of instrument excel that at Pequin z z Ricci call it always not Paquin but Pequin or Paquin the pequin-astrologer have privilege of foretell the eclipse of sun or moon and the magistrate and priest be command to meet in a certain place in their robe and vestment to help the labour planet which they think they do with musical sound of cymbal often bow their knee all the time of the eclipse fear as I have hear lest some I know not what serpent shall then devour the same in natural philosophy natural philosophy they be too natural and have very little Art they know not the cause of the moon eclipse by the interposition of the earth but think that be opposite to the sun it lose the light by some amazement other think that the sun have a hole in the midst against which when the moon come she lose her light that the sun be great than the earth seem to they a strange paradox much more that this may be speak of the star the like be it that the earth be round for they think it square and the middle and best part thereof to be their kingdom or that there can be antipode without fall or that heavy thing be attract by the centre or that there be orb and for the air they think it a vacuum or emptiness not reckon it among the element of which yet they number five metal wood fire water earth their arithmetic be with bead on wire-string fasten to a linen cloth in these thing ricius declare their ignorance and the european science flower of china-learning wan great admiration they which before think all beside themselves barbarian say that they be to we as the rude tartar to they and that they leave where we begin namely at rhetoric and grammar which with ethic and politike be the chief some of the idolatrous sect have more monstrous and ridiculous fancy that the sun hide himself every night in a certain hill call Siunni which they say be fix in the sea 24000. mile under the water and for eclipse they hold that a certain god name Holochan eclipse the sun cover it with his right hand and so the moon with his left their astrologer rather observe their old rule little know or seek the natural cause the instrument which they have in their two college at Nanquin and Paquin be alike very admirable seem to be make in the reign of the tartar four of they be very great one a globe mark with parallel and as great as three man can fathom set upon a great cube of brass likewise the second be a sphere five foot in the diameter with chain in stead of circle divide into 365. degree and a few minute the three be a Gnomon ten foot high on a huge marble the four and great consist of three or four each five foot in the diameter with other appurtenance very admirable their rule of physic physic differ much from we yet agree with we in feel the pulse and be not unhappy in their cure they use simple medicine root herb and the like their whole art in manner the same with our herbarist they have thereof no public school but as each private learn of some teacher in both the royal city degree be grant to the professor after examination but both this and that of little worth none be thereby of great authority or without it hinder to practice and neither in physic nor astrology do any take great pain which have any hope of proficience in their ethic those be the refuge of poverty this the highway to honor. their geography be such that they call their country thien-hia that be all under heaven think the world to have little else of any worth @. 7 of their ethic politike and degree in learning CONFUTIUS their philosophical prince compile four volume of the ancient philosopher add a five of his own these he call the five doctrine they contain moral and political precept of good life and government with the example rite sacrifice and poem of the ancient beside these five volume out of Confutius and some of his disciple be gather into one tome diverse rule sentence simile touch the well order of a man self family or the kingdom which be call the Four-book and into so many part divide these nine be their ancient and fountain of the rest of their book contain most part of their hieroglyphical character authorize by royal privilege and ancient custom to be the principle and foundation of all chinian learning wherein it be not enough to understand the text but sudden to write of every sentence to which purpose that a a four book aforesaid schoolmaster graduate and commencement tetrabiblion must be cun by heart they have no public school or university where reader undertake to expound they but every one be to provide he a master at his own choice and charge of which be great number because in that multitude of character one can teach many and each man desire to have his child teach at home they have three degree which be confer upon such as by examination be find worthy this examination be only in writing the first degree call Sieucai 1. Sieucai be bestow in every city by the Tihio a learned man appoint thereunto by the king in that place which be name the school and somewhat resemble our bachelor this Tihio visit every city in the province for this purpose whither when he be come all the student in the city and confine that aspire to that degree resort and submit themselves to a threefold trial first he be examine of certain master which be set over the bachelor till they attain a high degree in which all be admit to trial that will sometime four or five thousand in one city these master be maintain by the king to this Office these pass they over to a second proof by the four magistrate of the city which of so great a number choose some two hundred of the best writer who they commit to the three examination by the Tihio who entitle twenty or thirty of the chief of they and number they with the bachelor of former year these be privilege to wear a gown cap and Bootes in token of their degree and in public assembly have high place beside large compliment and immunity and be subject to their Tihio and those four master other magistrate little meddle with their case this Tihio do also examine those former bachelor to see how they have profit or decay which according to their writing be divide into five rank the first be license unto some public office of less reckon the second have a reward but not so great the three have neither reward nor punishment the four be public scourge the last degrade and rank with the commonalty their second degree be call Kiugin 2. Kiugin somewhat like the licentiate in some european university this be confer but once in three year in the chief city of the province in the eight month and with great solemnity to few or more according to the dignity and largeness of the province in pequin in Nanquin 150. do proceed licentiat in Cequian Quiansi and fuquiam 95. in the rest few unto this trial only bachelor and but the choice of they be admit not above thirty or forty of one city which yet sometime in one province amount to 4000 competitor that three year therefore which happen with they 1609 1612 1615 etc. a few day before the eight moon which often fall out in September the magistrate of Pequin present unto the king the name of 100 the chief philosopher in China out of which he choose thirty two for every province to be send examiner one of these two must be of the king college call Han lin yvem as soon as ever they be name by the king they must post to their design province many spy attend that they speak not with any one man of that province before the Kiugin be entitle other principal philosopher also of that province be choose to assist these examiner in the first trial in every provincial city be a huge palace erect for this end enclose with high wall in which be many room wherein without noise they may discuss those writing and in the midst of the palace above 4000 cell or little study which can hold nothing but a small table a stool and one man out of which one be not permit to see or speak with another when these poser be come to the city they and their assistant of that province be shut up in their several station before they may speak with each other or any one else and so continue all the time of this act or commencement many soldier and magistrate attend to prohibit all commerce and conference on all hand with any within or without the palace in this examination three day the nine the twelve and the fifteen of the moon be spend in every provincial city from the early light till the evening darkness the door careful shut some refection be the day before allow they at public charge when the bachelor come into the palace they be narrow search whether they bring any book or write with they and be allow only their pencil paper ink and write plate or stone if any fraud be find they be both exclude and punish then the door be shut and seal the two examiner propound out of their tetrabiblion three sentence on which every one be to write so many theme also out of those five doctrine four sentence the argument of so many other theme or oration these seven write must be adorn both with eloquent phrase and elegant sentence according to the chinian rhetoric not any one write exceed five hundred character or word the next day of trial they have three question of state propound out of the old chronicle or of thing which may after happen to which they return answer in three write likewise the three day three case propound of such thing as may be demand in execute public function which they answer in so many writing thus every one have that day argument write out be by some thereunto appoint bring unto his design cell in these study they so spend their ambitious spirit that many die thereof pantog where he write in a book his meditation subscribe his own his father grandfather and great grandfather name then close the book that none but they which be depute may open it to who they offer it these book before they come to the examiner be new copy and transcribe by other in red ink whereas the former be in black and these transcript without the author name deliver to these provincial examiner which be choose to assist the two principal which reject the worst and offer twice so many of the best as be to proceed at that time unto the king examiner these make a new examination choose out so many as be to be admit graduate and observe which be best second and three compose they in their due order this be do all the examiner together compare the copy with the Original know by certain number endorse and take out the author name expose they write on large table in Cubital letter about the end of the eight moon with great concourse of magistrate and applause of their friend this degree enjoy far great privilege and immunity with a peculiar habit and if they seek not to proceed further they be capable of many public office after this the king examiner publish a book which contain the name of the licentiate and the chief writing on every theme especial he who obtain the first name among all the competitor who be call quiayven the three degree answer to our doctor they call it cin-su 3. cin-su this be confer every three year also but only at pequin the year next after the former proceed every Kiugin or out of all province may be admit to the examination but only three hundred be speeder of five thousand competitor the examiner be principal magistrate the time the second moon on the same day and in the same manner as the former these be create and pronounce doctor in that place where the licentiate be make all in the king palace before the chief magistrate of the court the king himself be wont to be present do undergo a new trial and make a writing on a theme propound according to which the order of office whereof they be make capable be declare be of three rank or form he which have the first place in the examination of doctor be here sure to have the three but he which here obtain the first or second place be dignify with a honourable title like to that of a duke or a marquess with we if it be hereditary all his life and obtain the high place in the government 1604. three hundred and eight doctor be make and then another trial be make for the king collegiate of hanlinyen of that number be name twenty four choose out of those three hundred and eight as in the former trial these be choose to the chief magistracy in the Kingdom but so as after many other trial only twelve or fifteen of those twenty four be choose these doctor enjoy their proper vest cap. Bootes and other ensign of magistrate and be admit unto the best function so as they always exceed the licentiate and be sudden become the of the kingdom those licentiate which be reject from their doctorship if they have no further hope be admit and betake themselves to some place of government but if they intend to make and abide a new trial the study hard at home other three year some of they ten time adventure the same without desire success wear and weary out their life in private there be a book also publish of the doctor commencement or act as of the former and another yearly contain all the doctor name in the kingdom with their country parent office and place of residence they also which be fellow commencer and proceed either licentiate or doctor the same year together ever after affect each other as brethren and their examiner as parent or master although they sometime attain high preferment than these in some city they have exercise of learning every learned man of chief note have his day appoint whereon to lecture or discourse of some moral virtue and they have also a especial officer call Tauli which on certain day be to call a assembly he be a great magistrate and to exhort the people to virtue as it be by preach military degree military honour be confer in the same year place title unto the professor thereof the time be the moon follow the solemnity much less according to the chinian account of soldiery their first trial be on horseback and then in full career they shoot nine arrow in the second three at the same mark on foot and they which with four arrow mount and with two stand have hit the mark be admit to the three trial in which they be enjoin to write a oration or theme of some question propund and the judge declare in each province some fifty of these licentiate and when doctor be make at pequin a hundred of the best military licentiate in all the kingdom after a threefold examination be there declare doctor the doctor of this society soon than licentiate but not without bribe be admit to some military place of command and both philosophical and military be admit doctor write over their door in Cubital letter their degree and title the precedent and judge in all examination whether of military mathematical physic or Ethicke science be their philosopher without assistance of any of other professor so much do they account of this confutian philosophy as if it have make they able to judge of all thing @. 8 of the king his court issue revenue and majesty China be a monarchy not know the name of aristocraty or democraty or any other polycraty not so much as duke or great noble enjoy either title there or dominion whereof in ancient time be many these 1800. year past sometime it have be subject to civil broil and sometime divide into many petty kingdom but be never quite subject to foreign sovereignty till the tartarian conquest under one tiemor so the Chinois call that great Chan which so continue till the year 1368. when one of their chieftain who they call of the event Hum-vu that be a flood of weapon expel the tartar compel the Chinois to his subjection the kingdom pass by inheritance some ancient king be yet commend for commend the kingdom to the virtuous succession of some rare man than their kindred yield and sometime the people rebel have dispossess one and substitute another in this kingdom be no ancient law but the first of any family which obtain the sovereignty make new law at his pleasure which his successor in that family do not easy alter that Hum-vu the conqueror be the founder of their present law either enact new or confirm the old as he see good from ignorance of geography they esteem their king lord of the world and therefore call he Thiencu the son of heaven for they esteem heaven the great God yet common the people call he Hoamsi that be the great monarch Hum-vu be a great both warrior and politician he ordain that none of the king child shall deal in public function or affair of state yet he make they seem amends with assignation of most ample revenue and the title of guam a prince or petty king their revenue be pay out of the exchequer to prevent client and dependence of tenant much compliment of reverence be do they by the magistrate but no subjection their child and nephew be honour also but their title and revenue still decrease as they descend further from the royal stem till at last no more be allow they then may supply their necessity without trade or work like care be have of the royal daughter marriage and maintenance the commander which assist he in the conquest he vouchsafe honourable title military prefecture with other immunity and revenue still descend to their posterity who be subject nevertheless to the city magistrate one strange privilege of they be this the exploit of the head of their family under Hum-vu be grave in a iron plate this continue with the first bear of that family who thereby may challenge pardon for any man in any crime three sundry time if he offer the same to the king only treason be unpardonable which deprive the traitor and all his posterity for ever of all dignity like honour do the king son or father in law enjoy and some other who have well deserve of the State only the doctor and licentiate be admit to office of government not prefer by favour of other or the king himself but by the law and his merit all magistrate be call Quonfu that be precedent and as a honourable title b b some false Loytia or Lontes Lau you or Lau sie a lord or father the portugal style they mandarine and although these magistrate can finish nothing till by petition they obtain the king confirmation yet he enact nothing which they do not first solicit and if any private man prefer a petition to the king which seldom happen because there be a officer appoint to examine they before the king see they yet the king refer they to that tribunal whereto they belong this I have diligent search and find for certain that the king himself may not give a sum of money or office to any man unless he be first petition by some of the magistrate except in his own household for those gift be not take out of the public treasure but the privy purse his custom and tribute which exceed without controversy a hundred and fifty million yearly every house not privilege pay tribute be not bring into the treasury of the palace the king revenue nor may the king spend they after his pleasure but all the money and provision be bring into the public treasury and storehouse which be through the kingdom out of these a certain allowance be appoint by law and nothing more or less for the king expense his wife child eunuch and family thence the magistrate and soldier stipend and other officer through the kingdom be discharge thence also the public edifice of the palace of the king and his kinsman city wall fort and all provision of war be mention and some year it happen that this huge revenue will not serve for necessary expense but they be force to new imposition the ordinary census or poll-money be three maze or half ducat beside the profit of the earth and handicraft the rest be custom which in Canton one of the least province census vect gall be near eight million Vanlie that be now king have reign forty year a man of great wisdom but vicious and tyrannical Trigaut king Vanlie he use his son and apparent heir very hardly and have endeavour to make a second son which he have by a more belove wife his successor but be gainsay by all the magistrate in the kingdom those of the court resign their robe and hang they on the palace wall so that he be force to proclaim the elder who mother late lie on her deathbed the prince can hardly obtain his father licence to visit she and then attend with two eunuch the mother comfort her son say it never yet happen that the heir of the kingdom die of hunger for the king scarce allow he necessary none else dare for fear the king forbid mourn and public pomp unto her funeral the king respect beauty only in choice of his wife as do all of the royal blood nor do the great man care to prefer their daughter to the royal bed for it be little they can do and much they must suffer ever enclose in the palace never admit the sight of their friend who also be not thereby advance to further preferment the king have officer which make choice of woman for he one wife be chief and be as it be legitimate the king and heir apparent marry other nine a little inferior and after they six and thirty other all which enjoy the title of wife to which be add many more concubine not entitle wife or queen those which bring the king son prove most gracious especial the mother of the elder son howsoever it fare otherwise in this before mention this king be not the son of the first wife nor be his heir the Chinois be a deceitful and treacherous people and therefore the king in this age come not abroad in public and when in time past they do it they observe a thousand cautel for safety the palace and the street be all in arm for his guard nor be he scene when thus he be see nor the seat know in which he be carry many other be then carry to prevent intelligence and when he come into the tribunal he appear from a high window cover his face with a ivory table in his hand and have another table on his head a cubit long half so broad so behange with stone that they hide his face the king colour be yellow his garment be embroider with golden dragon these also be paint or carve in all the palace ricius plate and household furniture the tile also be yellow and set forth with dragon this have cause some to think they to be of gold or brass whereas they be of earth as I have often feel and yellow great than we and fasten on the roof with nail the head whereof be guild if any private man shall use the yellow colour or dragon in private use except of the king blood it be high treason in he these of royal posterity be now above 60000. all maintain at public charge and daily increase be a great burden to the commonwealth be idle and as occasion be offer licentious on who the king have continual spy none of they without the king leave may go out of the city appoint he under grievous punishment nor may any of they reside in the royal city pequin or Nanquin the king palace have four opposite gate by which whosoever pass they alight off their horse or seat in which they be carry and pass by on foot which be also observe at Nanquin the south side have three gate both within and without by the middle of which the king pass in or out and be never else open other at the right or left hand no man speak to the king but the eunuch and the rest of his family other of all sort speak to he only by petition and those so full of compliment that every learned man can make they beside peculiar magistrate be as it be master of request to examine all petition to be exhibit at the beginning of every year which be at the new moon which next go before or follow the Nones of February the beginning of their spring a legate be send out of every province to the king which be do with more formal solemnity every three year and in every city every new-moon-day all the magistrate assemble to a place in the city where be the king throne and his arm gild dragon and do worship on their knee before the same pray ten thousand year of life to the king the same be do yearly on the king birthday on which day the magistrate of Pequin and other legate out of the province and all his kindred come to the court with gratulation and present all other that have obtain preferment by the king nomination be to go before day and with appoint rite to do veneration to the king throne have on a vest of purple silver and gild head-tire for that purpose the kingdom adjacent be willing refuse of this king who predecessor sometime possess after free they as bring more burden than profit which of late appear in corea which the japonite invade the Chinois defend as a butt on the frontier but when the enemy leave invade the defender soon after voluntary relinquish these new subject yet these Couchin-China Sian and other adjoin pay a tribute rather voluntary for hope of protection or gain then require exact or by the Chinois regard five province chiansi Cechian Nanchin uquam and sciantum pay their tribute in Rice and wheat which be carry in the king vessel and ship thereto appoint which be before relate to be more than ten thousand belong to these five province beside those belong to magistrate and merchant insomuch that merchant that dwell southwards from it be forbid to enter those stream lest the multitude of vessel shall cloy up the passage or endamage the king and yet they be so many that sometime they be force to stay many day especial in dry season notwithstanding floodgate make against Bridges wherewith they stay and heighten the water which be full be open and sometime in the cataract vessel drown as they go out or in the king be at a million of gold yearly charge to make one stream call the yellow stream of the muddle colour navigable and safe for his ship which be draw against the stream by thousand of man neither dare they adventure passage by sea for fear both of pirate and of the sea itself which will be far more speedle and less costly the other ten province pay their tribute in silver his courtier be eunuch who their poor parent have geld in their youth in hope of this court-preferment where after they be admit by that Manderine appoint to this office they be train up under elder eunuch to be make serviceable of this dross of mankind be in the court ten thousand Pantogia suppose sixteen thousand this king be esteem more tyrannical than his predecessor neither do he ever come abroad as they be wont once in the year to sacrifice in the temple sacred to heaven and earth his palace be far more spacious but not equal in workmanship to those in Europe it be compass with a triple wall the first whereof may environ a large town herein beside the many lodging of the eunuch be hill grove stream and other thing of pleasure the jesuite c c Pantogia our author say that he pass eight huge palace before become to the lodging of those eunuch which be appoint to learn how to order their clock or watch wherewith they have present the king and there be as many beyond and ascend up a tower he see tree garden house exceed all that ever he have see in Europe who yet have be in many the most sumptuous building therein within the three wall be the king with his woman child and such servant as be thither admit when the heir apparent be proclaim all his other son be send away soon after and confine to certain city where they nothing participate in affair of state otherwise be honour as the king kindred live in pleasure in their palace prison unto the three and four generation neither be any mean of greatness leave to any the royal kindred not deal with affair of government the governor neither inherit their office nor leave either place or name of gentry to their family and those which have command of the soldier pay not their wage nor have their treasurer command of their person and their employment be out of their native in some remote province upon occasion of the war against the japonite in corea which much terrify this unwarlike nation the royal treasure be exhaust tyrannical mean be use to supply they there be report of many gold and silver mynes in China which the ancient king upon some policy shut up and this now command to be open he exact also a imposition of two in the hundred on all good that be sell in the kingdom which have be tolerable if the magistrate have be employ but he use his eunuch a proud shameless slavish and imperious nation which in stead of search for mine use their commission in wealthy city where every rich man house be a i and except they will have dig it up must be redeem some city and province compound at certain sum which be pay to the king as extract out of his mine some zealous and courageous magistrate make complaint by libel to the king but themselves therefore punish one fumocean of the province of uquam be cruel beat and cast in close prison who his province so honour even then that they publish his worthy act in book they make his picture to be sell through all the province that all man may private honour he as a saint and erect unto he some public temple with taper and odour continual burn but the eunuch to the extreme distaste of all the subject continue in their tyrannical exaction or robbery rather throughout the kingdom into one of who hand the jesuit fall with their present the magistrate hate they and they insult over the magistrate at Nanquin be also some thousand of these eunuch in the palace one be chief over the rest some of they be so arrogant that they look for appreciation of a thousand year life which be the custom to the queen and king child whereas to the king they say van Vande siu that be ten thousand year as Daniel to Nabuchodonosor o king live for ever beside the bend of the knee as to the chief magistrate the king will for light cause sometime cause his eunuch to be beat till they die under the blow when ricius be dead they coffin he after the China fashion till they can find some place for his burial which till that time be at Macao whither they send their dead Pantogis put up a petition to the king in behalf of ricius his corpse this story will be I hope acceptable as show the manner of obtain any thing at the king hand i JAMES PANTOGIA a stranger of a most remote kingdom move with the virtue and fame of your noble kingdom have in three year sail with much trouble pass hither above 6000. league in the twenty eight year of UANLIE for so these petition see verbatim Exped. Sinica l. 5. of the officer see the next @. as we they account their year by the king reign in the twelve moon I with MATTHEW RICIUS come into your court where we present some gift and have since be sustain at the king charge the nine and twenty year of UANLIE in the first moon we petition your majesty for a place of residence and have many year enjoy the royal bounty in the eight and thirty of UANLIE the eighteen day of the three moon RICIUS die I a client of the kingdom of the great west remain a fit subject of pity the return into our country be long etc. and I now after so many year stay suppose that we may be number to the people which follow your royal chariot that your clemency like that of yao a a he be a king of old account a saint may not contain itself in the kingdom of China alone etc. so proceed he to set forth the good part of ricius and with a long supplication to beg a place of burial some field or part of a temple and he with his fellow shall observe their wont prayer to the lord of heaven for thousand of year to he and his mother this libel be write with peculiar form character seal many rite herein necessary observe before any be offer to the king it must be view of some magistrate and they get this to be allow by one which be master of request which send it present to the king they must also have many copy thereof to show to those magistrate to who it appertain which they do one of they affirm that ricius deserve a temple also with his image to be there set up this message he send they by another for when they favour a cause they show great strangeness the king common answer the three day except he mislike for than he suppress and send it to the magistrate that have present it who show which of the six be the peculiar court which judge of these thing this be send to the ritual tribunal their answer be send to the king within a month which there be a short space and repeat the petition verbatim and the king command to the peculiar office answer what the law say in that case and conclude the petition to be agree to justice and earnest plead and sue for confirmation the king send this answer to the Colao which subscribe his approbation which be send again to the king he subscribe with his own hand 11 that be fiat or be it do which the three day after be deliver they @. 9 of the magistrate court and government that which the philosopher wish that king may be philosopher and philosopher king be in part fulfil in China where all the government be in their administration which have attain thereto not by birth favour wealth or other mediator but their philosophical proficience and degree of which we have speak of these there be two order one of the court which beside their office in that city moderate even all those of the second sort which be provincial magistrate abroad in the city or province every two month there be a new book print at Pequin of all their name 1. li court of magistrate place and degree first of the officer of Court there be six tribunal or chief court the first call li pu signify tribunal which be the court of magistrate who be hence nominate throughout the kingdom which nomination be guide by the excellency of their writing aforesaid and all beginning with inferior office come by degree prescribe by the law in order to the high except injustice cast they low or quite degrade they which make he past hope of regain his dignity the second tribunal be Hopu or the treasury 2. Hopu Court of treasury 3. Lypu which receive and pay out the king revenue the three be Lypu the court of rite whence be order matter of sacrifice temple priest school examination festival day gratulation to the king title physician mathematician embassage with their letter and present for they think unworthy the majesty of their king himself to write to any the four court be call Pimpu 4. Pimpu to which be subject all military matter and charge and examination the five be Cumpu 5. Cumpu that have the handle of public as the palace of the king of his kindred of the magistrate the navy bridge wall of city and the like the six be Himpu 6. Himpu of criminal case prison and imprisonment all the public affair depend of these court which have their officer and notary in every city and province which inform they of all thing one in every of these court be precedent call ciam who have his two Cilam or assistant one at his right hand the other at the left these be account the high Dignity in the kingdom next to these every court have their several office and over each many officer beside notary apparitor and other beside these court there be another the great in the whole court and kingdom call colaos Colaos which be three four or six councillor of state have no peculiar charge but look to the whole the king be wont to sit with they in counsel but now they do it without his presence every day admit into the palace and there remain in consultation send libel many and often unto he who approve disallow or alter at his pleasure beside these and other magistrate there be two sort one call choli the other Zauli choli and Zauli of each above threescore all choice philosopher which have before give approve testimony of their sufficiency these be employ in affair of moment extraordinary with the court or provincial officer with royal authority and their especial office be to admonish the king by libel if any thing be do contrary to law through the kingdom not dissemble the fault of the great magistrate nor of the king himself or any of his which they perform to the astonishment and wonder of other nation at their integrity and liberty never give over frown or threat notwithstanding their complaint and admonition till they procure redress this be also lawful to every magistrate yea to every private man but these be most respect because it be their peculiar function these libel and the king answer be print by many and so pass through the kingdom whence their historian may be furnish with intelligence this be late apparent in the case of the prince who the king will have disherited the king be so incense with number of libel or bill of complaint that he deprive or deject to inferior place above a hundred whereupon the rest abdicate themselves as be say he be force to surcease his attempt and late when the great of the calao take indirect course he be accuse by these officer in a hundred bill within two month space though in great grace with the king which as it be think kill he soon after with thought beside these magistrate in court there be diverse college institute to diverse purpose the noble of which be Han lin yven Han lin yven college consist of choice doctor which deal not in the government and yet be account of great dignity their office be to compose the king write to compile the public annal and to write out the law and statute of these be choose the schoolmaster of the king and prince they whole addict themselves to study have their degree of honour in the college which they attain by their writing and be prefer to the great dignity but in the court only none be choose to be of the colaos but these they gain much by compose write for their friend as epitaph and the like which for their very name be precious they be also precedent and judge in the examination of the licentiate and doctor all these magistrate except the Colai be as well at Nanquin as Pequin provincial government the city attribute to they both be govern as other city in other province the government of those thirteen province depend of one magistrate call Pucinsu and of another call Naganzasu the former judge civil case the late criminal their residence be in the chief city of the province with great pomp in both these court be diverse colleague call Tauli which be also principal magistrate and sometime reside without the Mother-city in some other where they have special charge the province be divide into diverse region which they call Furio and the proper governor of each region Cifu these be also subdivide into ceu and Hien that be noble or mean town as big yet as our european great not great city each of these have a provost call ciceu or 101 signify to govern these provost or governor have their four assistant to help they that which some think that they be only in repute of city which be entitle Furio and the rest and Hien but village be a tale for both the provincial city have her Cifu and Cihien and the lieutenant of the shire or region have no more power in the Shire-town then in other city of the shire that be the right of first appeal the second appeal be to the and nagaurasu governor of the province beside these in every province there be other two of more eminent place send from the court one of which be resident there call Tillam the other send yearly from the court call Cia yven the former have power over all both magistrate and subject and in military affair and may be compare to our Vice-joy or deputy the other be a commissioner or visitor who inquire into all officer and punish the faulty except the great who be accuse to the king only of all magistrate execute the sentence of death many other officer in city town and village many captain and military commander many which have charge of wall gate Bridges fort even as it be in time of war muster daily and wrestle may here be recite all the magistrate both philosophical and military be reduce to nine order and according to their several order they receive money or Rice monthly which in such majesty of magistrate be very small the stipend of the high not amount to a thousand ducat yearly and every one of the same order receive a like the chief in the military order receive the same stipend which the chief in the philosophical true it be that more acorue to they by industry gift or otherwise but this be the legal allowance all magistrate wear the like cap of black cloth with ear or wing on both side of Ouall form apt to fall off which be do purposely to make they walk grave without light move of their head they wear all like attire boot alike of peculiar fashion and substance of fine black leather they wear also a fair girdle about four finger broad large and loose of curious embroidery and on their breast and back they have square piece of cloth embroider by both these be discern their place and dignity they be also know by their umbrelas which be carry over their head some blue some yellow some two three and some one the mean on horseback the great on chair carry on four or eight man shoulder according to their dignity they have other ornament banner chain Censer multitude of sergeant or inferior officer go before they two and two in a rank with halberd mace battleax chain cane cry out to give way with such clamour and noise that even dog shrink away and not a man to be see in most populous street this more or less according to the degree of the magistrate thus have we see a philosophical empire all even the soldier be subject to they yea the captain beat by they as boy by their master neither be the sentence of military man in matter of war of authority with the king like they no nor their valour comparable these in maintenance of their loyalty be as you have see prodigal of preferment and life the soldier betake themselves to handicraft or service of great man make show of themselves on muster and pay-day their weapon as their courage ridiculous for offence or defence I have see many gun say Pantogia in their soldier hand but none who barrel be above a span a a this it be like be mistake by the translator or printer for captain Saris have see many and say they be as long as pistol but the cock such as make they of little service Botero jaric etc. long a little ordnance on their wall but little serviceable military man be little esteem in so long peace where they fear no enemy nor care for encroachment that which some say of their extend their dominion to the indies in former time be a fable and disagree with their chronicle which be studlous continue four thousand year to these time neither do they conceive the rest of the world worth the conquer marvelous also be the symmetry of all the magistrate the member of this great body both with the head and each other both in real obedience and complemental rite the inferior whether private man or magistrate seldom speak to their superior in the court or elsewhere but on their knee and with honourable term how mean soever know before their degree no man also enjoy any place above three year except he be a new confirm by the king but usual be prefer to a great but in another region to prevent acquaintance a occasion of unjustice or popular affection and all the naganzasu Cifu ciceu cihien and the like principal officer must every three year appear solemn at the court at Pequin at which time diligent inquisition be make of all officer in the kingdom with great rigour every one reward according to his desert I have observe that the king himself dare not alter any of those thing which in this inquisition be constitute in the year 1607. four thousand magistrate in this public disquisition be condemn as appear by their name publish in a book some for covetous corruption usurp public or private good these be whole deprive some for rigorous seventy be so serve a three sort be such as be old sickly or remiss these may use the ensign of magistrate but live a private life the four be rash and uadvised which be put into inferior office or send to place of easy government the last rank be of such as govern not themselves or their family in good order and such be also for ever deprive the like inquisition every five year be observe concern the officer of court and military the Jesuit be acquaint with one great magistrate which be thrust into a inferior office three year space only for be too often at feast and too much addict to chess-play no man may bear office except military in that province where he be bear thus the military man have spur of fidelity and the other want occasion of corruption for which cause also his household servant and child may not stir out of door while he execute his office but when he go out he seal up his door both private and public have all necessary service perform by such as be appoint thereto by the State none wear any weapon in the city not soldier or captain nor man of learning but then when they go to their master exercise or war only some attend the chief magistrate with weapon nor have any weapon at his house except some lusty blade for fear of thief when he travail and further than scratch or pull off the hair they manage no quarrel esteem no injury a mortal indignity and he the wise and most valiant that fly the furious and offer no wrong when the king die none of his blood but the heir only may stay in the city royal or remove out of the city where they be confine on pain of death and when any contention arise among they one of the chief of they which be their governor decide it if with other not of the blood royal the public magistrate when the king prefer any magistrate to some high dignity if they have very well deserve they be request to leave their boot behind which be keep in the public chest together with verse in their praise and be honour with gift if they be of supereminent worth a public marble pillar be erect with inscription of their desert yea there be two who temple be build at public charge and their image as like as the workman can make set on the altar with a yearly revenue and certain man appoint to keep perpetual odour and light there burn supplication except in manner as they do to their idol the city be all full of these temple sometime by favour more than merit to which at certain time they go and exhibit kneel with meat-offering and other thing in some province upon special occasion they alter their course as to prevent piracy and robbery some be constitute with commission extend into diverse province some border part of all those province obey he as viceroy as at canceu one superior to the viceroy of the province have part of Chiansi fuchien Canton and uquam subject have out of every province two region all adjoin together assign to he although they have no nobility employ in magistracy yet there be some descendant of those captain and great man which help hum-un in expel the tartar which be bear noble call as we have elsewhere show these be capable of military place one head of one of these family reside at Nanquin which live in great magnificence carry on eight man shoulder his garden palace household furniture royal ricius be entertain in his garden wherein beside other rarity he see a artificial mount make of unpolished marble which in the hollow place thereof contain chamber hall stair tree pond and other device this increase both delight and wonder that it be of labyrinthian form in a little space of ground detain the step two or three hour in pass the many maze thereof the coolness of this place be convenient both to their study and feast @. x. of their punishment divine and human and a catalogue of their king when the king prefer any to the dignity of a Manderine or to a high office their custom be to put up a libel or supplication infer their insufficiency with many modest refusal yet loath to be believe and that the king shall according refuse they as sometime against their will he do and certain will if this officious form of deprecation be omit by they notwithstanding all provision to the contrary they be covetous cruel and exceed addict to bribe and where they find not as it often happen they make law sometime contrary to other always for their own will and advantage none may execute the sentence of death but by special commission from the king and therefore the malefactor be consume in the prison but they have authority with certain cane to beat man on the leg thigh and ham in such terrible cruelty that a few blow may either lame or kill the party and therefore no king be more fear than these mandarine or magistrate in the midst of their city be palace of the king for these officer to reside in in Paquin and Nanquin the multitude of these magistrate be incredible one of these city contain more than two thousand and five hundred as many as somewhere be of citizen these all twice a day hear cause and execute justice these magistrate be no way comparable in wealth to the noble in Europe their sentence against guilty person be without solemn furniture of word as let he have twenty stroke more or less which by those canine cane-man be sudden execute the party lie grovel on the ground these cane be cleave in the midst three or four finger broad twenty or thirty blow will spoil the flesh fifty or threescore will ask long time to be heal a hundred be uncurable they use also the strappado hoist they up and down by the arm with a cord they be above measure patient in hear cause and their examination be public condemn person have a pillory-board fasten about their neck and hang down before they to the knee in which his felony or treason be express which board neither suffer they well to sit or lie to eat or sleep and in fine kill they there be in every metropolitan city four principal house for those chief officer before mention the four for the Taissu wherein be the principal gaol or prison wall about high and strong with a gate of no less force within the same be three other gate before you come where the prisoner lie in the mean space be such as watch and ward day and night the prison within be so great that in it be street and market-place and never void of seven or eight hundred man that go at liberty in Canton alone be say to be 15000. prisoner and in this and every other metropolitan city thirteen prison six of which be always possess or do possess rather those which be condemn to death in every of they be a hundred soldier with their captain to keep they the offender be allow to work in the daytime for their live for little alm be give in China and but a little rice allow they by the king such prisoner as be in for debt have a time appoint for payment at which if they fail they be whip and a new time assign and so they proceed till the debt be pay or the debtor dead if any man remove his dwell from one place to another the neighbour cause a crier to proclaim it with ring of a basin that his creditor if he have any may come to demand their debt which the neighbour if they neglect this duty be charge with execution of deadly sentence be seldom and that with many ceremony thus it come to pass that of whip and imprisonment there die thousand yearly thief be slight punish the first time the second they be burn with two character on the arm the three receive the same punishment on the face if he steal often he be whip more or less or condemn for a certain time to the galley this make pilfery common for they be never do to death for the every many extraordinary crime have new devise extraordinary punishment as after in this history follow one have so free libel against the king tyranny that many be cruel torment be thereof suspect and one by torment confess the fact and be therefore a diudge to have 1600. piece of his flesh cut from he his head untouched that his eye may see this mangle and last his head cut off which among they be a great abomination other accuse of treason at Nanquin be force to stand in those pillory board till they rot some continue fifteen day in torment those which overlive their beat must pass under the surgeon hand for cure which ordinary prove new tormentor except money make they propitious and this the jesuit report of their own favour among they in all difficulty money have be their best friend without which be no friendship in China no faith no love no hope of they but by follow Perera sometime a prisoner there into his prison and other I find myself almost imprison and therefore will flee hence into their temple and there take sanctuary here they deal as mad with their god as there with their man yet first let we take view of some rare work of divine providence in this country ludovicus georgius in his map of China b b maginus and Ortelius describe a huge lake in the province of Sancij make by inundation in the year of our lord 1557 wherein be swallow seven city beside town and village and innumerable multitude of people one only child in a hollow tree escape so great a destruction such as escape drown be as Boterus add destroy with fire from heaven Gasper de cruz recite a letter of the mandarine to the king 1556. contain news of a terrible earthquake in the province of Sanxi and Santon wherein the day wax darke the earth open the year before in many place under which be hear the noise as it be of bell there follow wind and rain the wind which they call Tufan be so violent that it drive ship on the land overthrow man and house it come almost every year once last four and twenty hour in which space it compass the compass in Vinyanfu the earthquake cause a fire to break out which consume all the city and innumerable people the like happen to another city near it where none escape it cause the river at leuchiman to increase and drown multitude at Hien the fall of the house slay eight thousand in Puchio the house of the king kinsman fall and slay all therein but a child Cochu with fire from above and water from beneath be leave desolate at Enchinoen almost a hundred thousand perish at Inchumen the river ebb and flow ten time in a day and night this perhaps be the same with that which georgius and Boterus mention Boterus ascribe unto China seventy million of people whereas he allow to Italy scarce nine and to Spain less to England three to all Germany with the swisser and low-countries but fifteen and as many to all France lamentable it be that the devil shall have so great a tribute in this one kingdom Gonsales in his discourse of China i. gon. de Mendoza translate by park reckon I know not how true almost seven million of soldier in continual pay Dalmeida number seventy million and two hundred and fifty thousand inhabitant beside soldier and reckon but the principal in each family oftentime not above three of ten as their book testify I think it not impertinent here to add the catalogue of the king of this country according m m history of China to their own story which although it be in part fabulous as what ancient profane story be not yet because I have do thus in other nation and have so worthy a pattern in this as the worthy of our age n n joseph Scalig. canon isagogic lib. 2. josephus Scaliger pardon i to trouble thou with this chronicle of their king the first be Vitey a giantlike man a great ginger and inventer of science he reign a hundred year they name after he a hundred and sixteen king who name our author omit all which reign two thousand two hundred fifty and seven year all these be of his lineage and so be Tzintzon the maker of that huge wall of China which kill many of the Chinois of who he take every three man to this work for which cause they slay he when he have reign forty year with his son Aguizi they ordain king in his stead Auchosau who reign twelve year his son futey succeed and reign seven year his wife eighteen his son three and twenty then follow Guntey four and fifty Guntey the second thirteen Ochantey five and twenty Coantey thirteen Tzentzey six and twenty and four month anthoy six pintatcy five tzintzumey three and seven month hue Hannon six Cuoum two and thirty Bemthey eighteen Unthey thirteen Othey seventeen Yanthey eight month Antey nineteen year Tantey three month Chitey one year Linthey two and twenty year Yanthey one and thirty year laupy one and forty year Cuythey five and twenty year Fontey seventeen year fifteen other king reign in all one hundred seventy and six year the last of which be quioutey who Tzobu depose who with seven of his lineage reign threescore and two year Cotey four and twenty year Diana six and fifty year Tim one and thirty year Tzuyn seven and thirty year Tauco with his lineage which be one and twenty reign two hundred ninety and four year bausa a nun wife of the last of they who she slay one and forty year Tautzon slay she and reign with his posterity which be seven king one hundred and thirty year Diana eighteen year Outon fifteen year Outzim nine year and three month Tozon four year auchin ten year Zaytzon and seventeen of his race three hundred and twenty year Tepyna the last be dispossess by Uzon the tartar under who and eight of his tartarian successor China endure subjection ninety and three year Gombu or Hum-vu expel Tzintzoum the last of they he with thirteen successor have reign about two hundred and forty year there computation o o scal. em. t. lib. 1. of time be more prodigious than that of the chaldaean after which this present year of our lord 1614 be in their account from the creation 884793. chap. 19 of the religion use in China @. i. of their god and idol in former time how much the great thing be report of this so large a country and mighty a kingdom so much the more compassion may it provoke in christian heart that among so many people there be scarce a Christian who among so ample revenue which that king possess pay either heart or name unto the king of heaven till that in so huge a vintage the jesuit of late have glean a few handful to this profession before we come to the narration of their god I think it fit to deliver what our ancient author have observe of their religion and then to come to the modern they be before the tartarian conquest a a m. polo give to astrology and observe nativity and give direction in all matter of weight these astrologer or magician tell farfur the king of China or Mangi that his kingdom shall never be take from he but by one which have a hundred eye and such in name be b b the name signify a hundred eye chinsanbaian the tartarian captain which dispossess he of his state and conquer it to the great can about 1269. this farfur live in great delicacy nor do ever fear to meet with such a Argus he bring up yearly two hundred thousand infant which their parent can not provide for and every year on certain of his Idol-holiday feast his principal magistrate and all the wealthy citizen of Quinsay ten thousand person at once ten or twelve day together there be then some few nestorian christian one church at Quinsay two at Cinghianfu and a few other they have many Idol-monastery they burn their dead the kinsman of the dead accompany the corpse clothe in canvas with music and hymn to their idol and when they come to the fire they cast therein many paper wherein they have paint slave horse camel etc. as of the cathayan be before report to serve he in the next world they return after their funeral rite be finish with like harmony of instrument and voice in honour of their idol which have receive the soul of the decease they have many hospital for the poor where idle person be compel to work and poor impotent relieve Odoricus c c Odoricus ep. Hak. affirm that at Kaitan or Zaiton he find two covent of Minorite-friar and many monastery of idolater in one whereof he be in which as it be tell he be three thousand votary and eleven thousand idol one of those idol less than some other be as big as the popish Christopher these idol they feed every day with the smoke of hot meat set before they but the meat they eat themselves at Quinsay a chinian convert lead he into a certain monastery where he call to a religious person and say this Raban Francus that be this religious Frenchman come from the sun-setting and be now go to cambale to pray for the life of the great can and therefore you must show he some strange sight then the say religious person take two great basket full of break relic and lead i into a little wall park and unlock the door we enter into a fair green wherein be a mount in form of a steeple replenish with herb and tree then do he ring with a bell at the sound whereof many creature like ape cat and monkey come down the mount and some have face like man to the number of some thousand and two hundred put themselves in good order before who he set a platter and give they those fragment which when they have eat he ring the second time and they all return to their former place I wonder at the sight and demand what creature they be they be quoth he the soul of nobleman which we here feed for the love of GOD who govern the World and as a man be honourable in his life so his soul enter after death into the body of some excellent beast but the soul of simple and rustical people possess the body of more vile and brutish creature neither can I dissuade he from the opinion or persuade he that any soul may remain without a body nic. di conti d d nic. di conti ap. Ramus say that when they rise in the morning they turn their face to the east and with their hand join say God in Trinity keep we in his Law @. 2 of their present god and idol their religion at this time be idolatrous and pagan wherein the common people be somewhat e e Gotax Arthus cap. 52. superstitious but the king himself and the mandarine or magistrate as see the vanity thereof and not able to see the truth be in manner irreligious and profane the first worship that which be nothing in the world and these find nothing in the world but the world and these momentany thing to worship report that the ancient Chinois worship one only great GOD which they call the king of heaven or otherwise heaven and earth whereby he gather that they think heaven and earth to be endue with life and the soul thereof to be the great god. beneath which they worship also diverse spirit preserver of the mountain of river and of the four part of the World they hold that reason be to be follow in all action which light they confess to receive from heaven they never conceive yet such monstrous absurdity of this god and these spirit as the egyptian grecian and roman have do whence the jesuite will have you think even in this idolatry many of they to be save by I know not what congruity which merit not the mention in succeed age this idolatry become more manifold in some while other become atheist of which their king and magistrate be blame and yet this king when some few year since his palace be fire with lightning be guilty of his own unworthiness he command his son to pray to heaven for reconciliation friar Gasper de la crux be in Canton enter a certain religious house where he see a chapel have therein beside many other thing of great curiosity the image of a woman with a child hang about her neck and a lamp burn before she the mystery hereof so like the popish mystery of iniquity none of the Chinois can declare the sun the moon star and especial heaven itself be god of the first form in their Idol-school they acknowledge Laocon Tzantey the governor of the great god so it signify to be eternal and a spirit of like nature they esteem Causay unto who they ascribe the low heaven and power of life and death they subject unto he three other spirit the first suppose to be author of rain the second of human nativity husbandry and war the three be their sea neptune to these they offer victual odour and alterclothe present they also with play and comedy they have image of the devil with serpentine lock and as deform look as here he be paint who they worship not to obtain any good at his hand but to detain and hold his hand from do they evil they have many he and She-saint in great veneration with long legend of their life among the chief of they be Sichia the first inventor of their religious votary of both sect Quannia a anchoress and Neoma a great sorceress friar Martin in one temple in Ucheo tell a hundred and twelve idol they tell f f ricius of one Huiunsin in the province of Cechian which do much good to the people both by alchemy make true silver of quicksilver and by free the metropolitan city from a huge dragon which he fasten to a iron pillar still show and then fly into heaven with all his house mice and all lie and all and there they have build he a temple the minister whereof be of the sect Thausu Trigautius write of certain god call foe which they say go a visit city and province and the jesuit in one city be take for these idol foe at sciauchin they in time of drought proclaim a fast every idol be solicit with taper and odour for rain a peculiar officer with the elder of the people observe peculitr rite to these purpose the priest go on procession all in vain when the City-god can do nothing they fetch a Country-idol call Locu which they carry about worship offer to but LOCV be now grow old thus they say of his deafness at last they go to a witch who tell they Quonin a goddess be angry that her back be burn mean the convert which burn their idol which incense they against the christian hoaquam be the name of a idol which have rule over the eye which they carry about in procession and beg in his name in time of trouble they have familiarity with the devil Pedro de Alfaro observe be in a ship with the Chinois in this sort they cause a man to lie on the ground grovel and then one read on a book the rest answer and some make a sound with bell and tabor the man in short space begin to make visage and gesture whereby they know the devil be enter and then do they propound their request to which he answer by word or letter and when they can extort a answer by word they spread a red mantle on the ground equal disperse all over the same a certain quantity of Rice then do they cause a man that can write to stand there themselves renew their former invocation and the devil enter into this man cause he to write upon the rice but his answer be often full of lie in the entry of their house they have a Idol-room where they incense their deity morning and evening they offer to they the sweet odour hen goose duck Rice wine a hogshead boil be a chief offering but little hereof fall to God share which be set in a dish apart as the tip of the Hogs-ear the byll and foot of the hen a few corn of rice three or four drop of wine their book tell much of hell their devotion little their temple be homely and filthy no oracle be in any of they they have fable of man turn into dog or snake and again metamorphose into man and they which believe the pain of hell yet believe after a certain space that those damn soul shall pass thence into the body of some beast but their idolatry and religious rite will better appear if we take view of their different religion and sect @. 3 of their three sect and first of that of CONFUTIUS ric. l. 1. c. 10. they reckon in the world and observe among themselves three sect the first of the learned the second sciequia the three Laucu one of these three every Chinois profess as do their neighbour also which use their character the Japander Corian lequians and cochin-chinois the sect of the learned be peculiar to the Chinois very ancient and famous which they drink in together with the study of learning all their student and magistrate profess the same observe Confutius the author thereof these worship not idol nor have any one God they worship as preserver of all thing certain spirit also in a inferior honour the chief of they neither acknowledge author time or manner of the world creation somewhat they discourse of reward of good and evil but such as be bestow in this life upon the doer or his posterity the ancient make no question of the soul immortality speak often of the dead as live in heaven but of the punishment of wicked man in hell not a word the late professor teach that the soul die with or soon after the body and therefore believe neither heaven nor hel. some of they hold that good man soul by the strength of virtue hold out some long time but of bad man to die with the body but the most common opinion take from the sect of idolater and bring in five hundred year since hold that the world consist of one substance and that the maker thereof together with heaven and earth man beast plant and the element do make up one body of which every creature be a distinct member thence observe what love ought to be among all thing and that man may come to become one with god. although the learned man acknowledge one supreme deity yet do they build he no temple nor depute any place to his worship no priest or minister of religion no solemn rite no precept or rule none that have power to ordain or explain their holy or to punish the transgressor they do he no private or public devotion or service yea they affirm that it belong to the king only to do sacrifice and worship to the king of heaven and that it be treason for other to usurp it for this cause the king have two temple very magnificent in both the royal city the one consecrate to heaven the other to earth in the which he be wont himself to sacrifice but it be now perform by some principal magistrate which slay there many sheep and ox and perform other rite many to heaven and earth in his stead to the other spirit of hill Rivers and the four region of the world only the chief magistrate do sacrifice nor be it lawful to private man the precept of this law be in their nine book before mention nothing in this sect be moee general from the king to the mean than their yearly obit to their parent and grandfather which they account obedience to parent though dead of which afterward the temple they have be that which in every city be by the law build to Confutius the temple of Confutius in that place where there school or commencement house be this be sumptuous and have adjoin the palace of that magistracy which be over the bachelor or graduate of the first degree in the chief place of this temple or chapel be place his image or else his name in golden Cupital letter on a fair table beside which stand other image of his disciple as inferior saint into this temple every new and full moon all the magistrate of the city assemble with the bachelor and adore he with kneel wax-light and incense they do also yearly on his birthday and other appoint time offer unto he meat-offering or dish with great provision yield he thanks for the learning they have find in his book as the cause of their degree and magistracy but they pray not to he for any thing no more then to the dead in their obit there be other chapel of the same sect unto the tutelar spirit of each city and proper to every magistrate of the Court therein they bind themselves by solemn oath to observe the law in their function and that at their first entrance here they offer meat and burn odour acknowledge divine justice in punish perjury the scope of this sect of the learned be the public peace and well order of the private and public state and frame themselves to moral virtue wherein they do not much disagree from the christian verity they have five concord in their morality in which as cardinal virtue they comprise all humanity the duty namely of father and child husband and wife master or superior and those under they brethren among themselves and last equal and companion they condemn single life and permit polygamy this precept of charity to do to other as one will be do to be well handle in their book and especial the piety and observance of child to their parent and inferior to their superior Longobardus say that every new and full moonday a little before sunrising nic. longobard in all the city of this kingdom and in all the street at one and the same hour they make publication of these six precept first obey thy father and mother second reverence thy elder and superior three keep peace with thy neighbour four teach thy child five fulfil thy call and Office the last prohibit crime murder adultery theft etc. many mix this first with other sect yea some hold not this a sect but a academy school or profession of policy and govern the private and public State @. 4 of the sect sciequia the second sect be call sciequia 2. sciequia or Omitose in japon pronounce Sciaccu and Amidabu the character to both be the same the japonite call it also the totoqui Law this be bring into China from the west out of a kingdom call Thiencio or scinto now Indostan between Indus and Ganges dom. 65. I have read that the king of China move by a dream send legate thither which bring thence book and interpreter which translate those book from hence it pass into japon and therefore the japonder be deceive which think that Sciaccu and Amidabu be siamite and come into japon themselves perhaps they then hear of the apostle preach in India and send for that have this false doctrine obtrude on they these hold that there be four element whereas the Chinois foolish affirm five fire water earth metal and wood not mention the air of which they compound this elementary world with the creature therein they multiply world with Democritus and with Pythagoras hold a metampsychosis or passage of soul out of one body into another they tell of a trinity of god which grow into one deity this sect promise reward to the good in heaven to the evil threaten punishment in hell extol single life seem to condemn marriage bid farewell to house and household and beg in pilgrimage to diverse place their rite do much agree it be the jesuit assertion with the popish their hymn and prayer with the gregorian fashion image in their temple priestly vestment like to their Pluutalia in their Mumsimus they often repeat a name which themselves understand not Tolome which some think may be derive from that of saint Thomas neither in heaven or hell do they ascribe eternity but after certain space of year they allow they another birth in some other earth there allow they penance for their pass sin the severe sort eat not flesh or any thing that have life but if any delinquish their penance be not hear the gift of some money or the mumble over their orison be they promise of power to free from Hell these thing make a fair show but their corruption make they distasteful and this also which the learned often object to these sectary that the king and prince which first give way hereto die violent and miserable and fall into public calamity yet have it even to these time in diverse vicissitude increase and decrease and many book have be thereof write which contain many difficulty inextricable to themselves their temple be many and sumptuous in which huge monstrous idol of brass marble wood and earth be to be see with steeple adjoin of stone or timber and therein exceed great bell and other ornament of great price their priest be call Osciami they continual shave their head and beard contrary to the country custom some of they go on pilgrimage other live a austere life on hill or in cave and the most of they which amount to two or three million live in cloister of their revenue and alm and somewhat also of their own industry these priest be account the most vile and vicious in the kingdom be of the base rascality sell when they be child by their parent to the elder priest of slave make disciple and succeed their master in sect and stipend few voluntary adjoin themselves to these cloisterer neither do they affect more liberal learning nor abstain but perforce from disavow luxury their monastery be divide into diverse station according to their greatness in every station be one perpetual administrator with his slave-disciple which succeed he therein superior in the monastery they acknowledge none but every one build as many cell or chamber as he be able which they let out to stranger for great gain that their monastery may be esteem public inn wherein man may quiet lodge or follow their business without any explication of their sect they be hire also by many to funeral solemnity and to other rite in which wild beast bird or fish be make free and let loose the severe sectary buy they to this meritorious purpose in our time this sect much flourish and have many temple erect and repair many eunuch woman and of the rude vulgar embrace the same there be some professor call ciaicum fast that be faster which live in their own house all their life abstain from fish and flesh and with certain set prayer worship a multitude of idol at home but not hard to be hire to these devotion at other man house in these monastery woman also do live separate from man which shave their head and reject marriage these nun be there call nicu. but these be but few in comparison of the man one of the learned sect famous in the court relinquish his place in the college and shave his hair write many book against the confutians but be complain of the king command he shall be punish which he punish further on himself with cut his own throat whereupon a libel or petition be put up to the king against the magistrate which relinquish Confutius and become of this sect the king notwithstanding all the queen eunuch and his kindred be of this sect make answer that such shall go into the desert and may be ashamed of their robe hence follow order that whosoever in his write mention a idol except by way of confutation shall be uncapable of degree in learning which cause much alteration in religion for many of this sect have prevail much in court and elsewhere among the rest one Thacon be so honour of the chief queen that she worship daily his garment because it be not lawful for himself to enter the palace but deal by eunuch one libel to the king against he but have no answer which be the king fashion when he deny or disallow it which make he more insolent but be suspect for a libel make against the king and some writing in zeal of his idol against the king be find he be beat to death howl in his torment which before have vaunt a stoical apathy the other sect-master be banish the Court @. v. of the three sect Lauzu their three sect be name Lauzu 3. Lauzu of a certain philosopher which live in the same age with Confutius they fable that he be fourscore year in his mother womb before his birth and therefore call he Lauzu that be old philosopher he leave no book write of his sect nor seem to have intend any such institution but his sectary call he after his death tausa and have father on he their opinion whereof they have write many elegant book these also live single in their monastery buy disciple live as vile and vicious as the former they shave not their hair but wear it like the layman save that they have a hat or cap of wood there be other marry which at their own house profess great austerity and recite over set prayer they affirm that among other idol they also worship the god of heaven but corporeal and to who their legend tell that many indignity have happen the king of heaven which now reign they call ciam he which reign before be Leu who on a time come ride to the earth on a white dragon he do ciam who be a give entertainment and while Leu be at his good cheer mount up his dragon which carry he to heaven and there seize on the heavenly royalty and shut out Leu who yet at last be admit to the lordship of a certain mountain in that kingdom thus they profess their god to be a coozener and usurper beside this king of heaven they feign another threefold deity one of which they say be the head of their Lauzu sect they promise to they paradise which they shall enjoy both in body and soul and in their temple have picture of such as have the Image of such saint to obtain this they prescribe certain exercise which consist in diverse posture of sit certain prayer and medicine by which they promise to the observer through their god favour a immortal life in heaven at least a long mortal in the body the priest of this sect have a peculiar office of cast out devil which they do by two mean one be to paint horrible shape of devil in yellow paper with ink to be fasten on the wall and then fill the house with such sauage clamour that themselves may be think to be devil the other be by certain prayer or conjuration they profess also a power of fair weather and soul and other private and public misfortune and some of they seem to be witch these priest reside in the king temple of heaven and earth and assist at the king sacrifice whether by himself perform or his deputy magistrate and thereby acquire great authority at these sacrifice they make music of all sort which China yield harsh european ear they be call likewise to funeral to which they come in precious vestment play on musical instrument they assist also at the consecration of new church and in pompous procession through the street which the chief inhabitant at certain time observe at the common cost of the neighbour all about this sect hath a prelate call which dignity these thousand year together have descend by inheritance and seem to have receive original from a soothsayer which live in a cave in the province of Quiamsi where his posterity still continue and with they his juggle sorcery this their prelate live for the most part at Paquin in estimation with the king be admit into the palace for hallow and chase away ill spirit he be carry through the city in a chair otherwise accomplish as the chief magistrate and receive a large salary of the king I have hear that in these time the Prelate be so ignorant that they know not their own devilish charm and rite this prelate have no jurisdiction over any but those of his profession many of these do work by alchemy to obtain the precept of long live of both which their saint they say leave certain rule there be the three sect of the Chinois which be since by their vain sectary so diversify that they may seem rather three hundred Hum-vu that raise his now reign family to the sceptre be himself profess religious in one of these sect and authorize all three sect admit only the first to the government hence it be that one seek not the ruin of the other sect and the king themselves foster all as they see occasion building and repair their temple the queen be more prone to the idol sect and bestow much alm on the priest maintain whole monastery to be help by their prayer the multitude of idol be see not only in the temple but in private house in a place appoint after the fashion of the country in the marketplace in street ship public palace and yet it be certain that few believe their legend but think if these thing do they no good they yet will do they no harm the wise in these time think that all these three sect may concur and be all observe together and esteem variety most acceptable from this hotchpotch unite and separate perhaps have rise those confuse and various report of these confusion and variety of rite wherein if any have like pleasure in variety and be weary of hear ricius and Trigautius the late spectator I will not defraud they of those thing which out of former author I have more confuse before gather they have if Mendoza be not mendar m m discourse of China lib. 2. many monastery of four differ order of religion distinguish by the several colour of their habit black yellow white and russet these four order be say to have their general who they call Tricon which reside in Paquin these ordain provincial who again have subordinate to they the prior of several house or college in those their house acknowledge chief the general be clothe with silk in his own colour and be carry on man shoulder in a ivory chair by four or six man of his habit they live partly of revenue give they by the king and partly by beg which when they do they carry in their hand a certain thing wherein be prayer write whereon the alm be lay and the giver thereby clear of his money I shall have say of his sin they be n n it seem that some romish friar have be there of old shave use bead eat together and have their cell assist at burial arise two hour before day to pray unto the heaven and Sinquian who they say be the inventor of that their manner of life and become a saint in which their devotion they continue until break of day sing and ring of bell they may not marry in the time of their monkish devotion but they may acquaint the general therewith at there pleasure relinquish their vow the elder son may not enter into religion because they be bind to sustain their age parent at the admittance of any be a great feast make by their friend at the launch of any ship they dedicate the same to the moon or some idol and beside there resort thither these monk to make sacrifice in the poop and reverence the devil who they paint in the forecastle that he may do they no harm else will she make a unfortunate voyage the people wear long hair in comb whereof they be womanish curious these hope by their lock to be carry into heaven the other profess a state of great perfection refuse any such help there be of their religious more austere o o jacob anton. 1603. adm. reg. Sinensis which live in desert and solitary place the life of hermit with great abstinence and austerity of life Nancan p p ricius l. 3. c. 9 anchoret be a city at the foot of mount liu on which be many anchoret which have each a house by himself and there exercise themselves in voluntary chastisement there be say to be as many of those house on this hill as be day in the year they observe it as a prodigy that when it be elsewhere clear sunshine there it be cloudy and misty always so that the hill can be see from a lake near it which lake also deserve mention be great and as far as the eye can discern crown with innumerable town castle and habitation they have hill consecrate to idol whither they resort in heap on pilgrimage hope hereby to merit pardon of their sin and that after their death they shall be bear again more noble and wealthy some of these will not kill any live creature especial such as be tame in regard of this their Pythagorean opinion of the q q (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) transanimation or passage of soul into beast the jesuit convert one man near unto Nanquin which have thirty year together observe a fast not strange among the Chinois never eat flesh or fish and on other thing feed temperate usurer be punish in China with the loss of that money so employ their fast be not a total abstinence but from flesh and fish of their priest be before show that they have both secular and regular r r Scalant ap. ortel the one wear long hair and black clothes and have private habitation the other live in covent and be shave neither may marry though both do and not here alone far worse they much commend in their book s s nic. Longobac the consideration and examination of a man self and therefore do esteem high of they which sequester themselves from human society to divine contemplation that as they say they may restore themselves to themselves and to that pristine state wherein the heaven create they and therefore have not only college of learned man who leave the affair of state and secular distraction do in private village live together observe these contemplation with mutual conference but even woman also have their nunnery and live a monastical life under their abbess after their manner although even such as be marry live close enough their foot to this end so straight swaddle in their infancy that they grow but little and to have little foot be with they great commendation whereby they can but lame walk abroad and if any widow refuse a second marriage she obtain hereby much praise and many privilege their bonzij be so little account of that the jesuit wear their habit be little set by and therefore take the Mandarin-habit be exceed honour of all sort as professor of learning @. 5 of their superstitious divination and curious art of their mechanical and liberal art we have already speak the same in this survey of their religion you may expect of those art which be curious and superstitious none of which be so general as their vain observation of lucky and unlucky day and hour by which they measure the opportunity of all their action to this end they have almanac or calendar yearly set forth by the king astrologer with public authority in such number that no house want they somewhat of these have be speak already pag. 159. and d. 1611. Trigautius write at large of their mystery in this kind compare the difference thereof with we in Europe they follow certain rule the first author whereof live 3970. year since in the reign of yao who they still observe as a saint who set two brethren on work to find out the celestial motion their name be he and Ho: these write certain rule which two thousand year after be burn by 11 Hoam and not a book leave that be know till some copy be again discover in the time of king vu ti above a hundred year after these rule have be five and fifty time examine and as it be new revise and allow the last of which be three hundred year since by co xeu kim while the tartar reign as for the theorical astrology they know it not and in the practical they be not so practise but their rule deceive they so it happen about five year since they foretell a eclipse false for which one libel against they to the king and they confess the error but blame their ground whereupon consultation be have and the jesuit employ by public commission to join with their mathematician in reform their calendar which they intend to do by bring in the european this and the king grant of a Idol-temple to they a little before 1610. for the burial of ricius win the jesuit great respect in this kingdom their year they reckon by the moon like the hebrew their day they account from midnight to midnight divide it into twelve equal space but that which I intend be not to show their want of art so much as their wanton art and artless trifle in superstition without ground as such a day be fit for sacrifice for banquet for a journey ric. l. 1. c. 9 a suit to the king build of a house or the like what be to be do or not wherein they be not more ridiculous prescriber than the people superstitious observer there be other also that get their live by this profession appoint day and hour many defer their necessary affair till the wizard find out a lucky hour for the beginning and then will he begin although the bluster wind lower sky and all the element forbid he and force he to a present retreat this have be a general folly in the east g g so Haman Est. 3.7 etc. and thence have infect the west also but China run mad thereof the like care they use in calculate nativity a art profess by many as be that also by the course of star or certain superstitious number to foretell thing physiognomy and palmistry and divination by dream by word in communication by casual gesture augury sunbeam and innumerable other fancy have conspire to this frenzy wherein it be hard to judge whether be more absurd the fraudulent impostor impudent promise without fear or wit what the impotent Consultor with a witless fear make credible by his credulity many of they sicken and sometime almost die upon mere conceit of sickness on such a day foretell many also consult with devil and familiar spirit of which before h h sup. @. 1. be mention and diverse way receive his oracle by the voice of infant of beast of man distract or otherwise beside these foolery they have one more peculiar namely in choose a plot of ground for private or public building which plot they compare with the head tail foot of certain imagine dragon which they think live under the earth from whence all adverse or prosperous fortune befall family city province and the whole kingdom and therefore many chief man spend their wit in this so profound a science and be employ especial in public structure as astrologer view the heaven so these the earth and by the mountain river site foretell the fate and make good or bad fortune to depend on the place of the door window or other part of the house on this or that side or site it be a world to see what a world of these impostor their be in this their world so they call the kingdom of China which gull the learned the magistrate and the king himself strange be their divination by idolatrous lot which some tell on this manner reg. Sinensis Maffaeus lib. 6. Mendoza they have their idol in their house with which they consult sometime pray and sometime beat they and then set they up again with renew incense and flattery and with as they see occasion redouble stripe be cruel or propitious as Tertullian object to the roman to their god and in a word the mandarine be the god or devil rather who the people must fear as dread blow from they which they themselves at pleasure can and do inflict on the other this god-beating they use with lot lot i i Maffaeus l. 6. disc of China for when any be to undertake a journey or any matter of weight as buy lend marry etc. they have two stick flat on the one side otherwise round as big as a walnut tie together with a small thread which after many sweet orison they hurl before the idol if one or both of they fall with the flat side upward they revile the image with the most opprobrious term and then have thus disgorge their choler they again crave pardon with many fawn promise but if at the second cast they find no better fortune they pass from word to blow the deaf God be hurl on the earth into the water or fire till at last with his vicissitude of sweet and sour handle and their importunate reiteration of their cast he must needs at last relent and be therefore feast with hen music and if it be of very great moment which they consult about with a hogshead boil dress with herb and flower and a pot of their wine they observe another kind of lot with stick put together in a pot and draw out the same consult with a certain book they have of their destiny amongst other their curious art there be two in chief request alchemy to bring silver out of other metal and the other to procure a long or endless life they fable that some of the ancient which they hold in estimation of saint divise these art and after ascend body and soul into heaven many volume be write in both these art and many print both seem to have like success the one lessen their silver for silver the other shorten their life to lengthen they the alchemist pass his day and evaporate his substance in smoke either advance by great labour and cost to beggary or if he attain to any silver siluer-science discourse now. the pope the best alchemist in his leaden bull it further he in deceive himself and other one only alchemist say a mad lad of this generation that have melt a fair house in these furnace have be in this kind happy that can turn so little lead into so much Gold but these Chinois want such sanctify fire howsoever herein also beside their exceed diligence many of they seek to better their attempt by many year fast no people more bewitch with this though universal foolery no harm fraud loss teach they more discretion and yet great madness may be ascribe to the other who have obtain some prosperous condition of life think nothing want to felicity but continuance few there be in this city Pequin say ricius of the magistrate eunuch and chief man which be not sick of this disease a pleasant history none be warn by the ordinary death of master and scholar in this kind I have read in the chinese chronicle of one of their ancient king who by these impostor help have procure a potion which he think will make he immortal a friend of his seek to dissuade he from this vanity but in vain whereupon watch opportunity he catch the cup and drink up the potion the king in his fury offer to kill he whereat the other how can thou kill i say he who this cup have make immortal and if thou can then have I free thou of this error the king rest satisfy but not so this people which though many write against both these profession do now more than ever practice they Trigautius write of one man which have obtain the second degree of learning which by this profession have get much wealth he have buy many child and kill they secret compose his Recipe of their blood as if he can add life to other which he have take from they this come to light by one of his concubine and he apprehend and thereof convict a new punishment be invent for this new invention that he shall be bind to a stake and three thousand piece of his flesh shall be cut from he with a razor the vital part be spare as much as may be this sentence be send to the king be by he confirm there be which fable themselves to be very old unto who be great recourse of disciple as to some heavenly prophet to learn lesson of long live they suppose the jesuit who they take to be of great learning do not true tell they their age but suspect that they have already live some age and know the mean of live ever and for that cause abstain from marriage the spaniard of the philippina be feast by the viceroy two captain appoint stward or feast-master before they sit down do take each of they a cup full of liquor in his hand and go together whereas they may discover the heaven and offer the same to the sun add many prayer that the come of their guest may be for good and then do fill out the wine make a great courtesy and then proceed they to their feast the Chinois k k Linschot c. 23. in the eclipse of the sun and moon be afraid that the prince of heaven will destroy they and pacify he with many sacrifice and prayer they hold the sun and moon man and wife @. 7 of the marriage concubine and other vice and error of the CHINOIS their marriage and espousal want not many ceremony both be do in their youth they like equality of age and state betwixt the party the parent make the contract not ask their child consent neither do they ever refuse as for their concubine every one keep according to his pleasure and ability respect in they especial their beauty and buy they for the most part the price be a hundred crown or less the common people also buy their wife and sell they at their pleasure the magistrate marry in their own rank their legitimate wife this chief wife only sit at table with her husband the rest except in the royal family be as servant which in the presence of either of the former may not sit but stand their child also call that wife their mother not their natural parent and for her funeral alone solemnize their three year mourn or leave their office not for their own mother in their marriage they be very scrupulous that the wife have not the same surname with her husband although there be no kindred betwixt they and the surname in all China be not a thousand as before be say neither may any devise new but must have one and that the same which their ancestor by the father side not the mother have except he be adopt into another family they heed not degree of affinity or consanguinity so this surname differ and therefore marry in the mother kindred be it almost never so near the bride bring no portion to her husband and yet the first day she come to his house she have to attend abundance of household-furniture even the street be therewith fill all at the husband cost who some month before send she a great sum of money to this purpose there be many which be poor do for lust make themselves slave to rich man that so they may be furnish with a wife among his women-slave whereby also the child become perpetual bond other buy their wife but see their increase family grow chargeable beyond their ability sell their young son and daughter at the same price they will sell a swine or beast or some two or three ducat more yea though they be not by dearth compel thereto thus this kingdom abound with servant not take in the war but homebred citizen the spaniard also and portugal carry many of they out of the country into everlasting servitude but this child-sale be the more tolerable because the estate of servant be there more easy then in other nation and the number of the poor which live hardly be exceed and they may redeem themselves at the same price if they be able to give it and last a great villiny in some province use make this seem the less which be to murder those their child especial of the female sex which they think they can bring up which fact also be with they the less heinous metempsy-chosis not by prevent that sale and transportation of their child a impious piety but by a pious impiety that opinion of transanimation or passage of soul into other body think that by this untimely and sudden murder they may have more timely and quick passage and be bear again in rich family and therefore they seek no corner but execute their bloody parricide public yea great abomination than these be here perpetrate upon as slight ground many lay violent hand upon themselves both in desperation and impatience and in malice also so to hurt their enemy thus they say many thousand both of man and woman every year drown themselves in river hang themselves sometime at their adversary door or poison themselves whereupon their kindred complain to the magistrate on those which give cause or occasion to these extremity which sometime be severe in these case to the accuse it may be reckon among their cruelty which in the northern province be practise the gelding of their male-infant so to make they capable of the king service none other be admit to attend or speak with he and the whole sway of the kingdom be in great part in these unman hand of ten thousand scarce any but plebeian illiterate servile in condition and condition impotent impudent of weak both conceit and performance neither be this a little cruelty that the magistrate be think to kill as many against the law as the law themselves by execution of judicial sentence by their custom of beat man with cane in manner at their own lust this make man that they be not master of their own but be in continual fear to be undo by calumny and tyranny the Choinois be also a fraudulent and treacherous people they contemn stranger scorn to learn any thing out of their book as be unlearned and rude yea all the character whereby they express the name of stranger be compound of such as signify beast have indeed a beastly and diabolical conceit of they when ambassador come to they from neighbour-country to pay their tribute or for other business they be very suspicious entreat entertain as captive all the time of their journey not permit they to see any thing they shut they up like beast in stable within their palace never admit they the king presence themselves deal with few of the magistrate and all their business be order by officer thereto assign nor may any native travel out of the kingdom without diverse cauteless Petreius the Portugal ambassador die in prison at Canton Osor lib. 1. they will not suffer stranger which have stay long in China in some place the custom be nine year to return from thence their soldier be base mere mercinary not regard honour where they be not reward with honour alike vile in estimation and action the most part slave thereto by their own or parent wickedness legal condemn except at time of employment be porter horse-keeper or of like servile drudgery their Captain and commander have some shadow of dignity but the substance we have before right attribute to they who can punish these as the mean long nail be some say account a gentlemanly sign as of hand not employ to labour pantogia their exceed pride in which they be not exceed of any appear in this that they think the jesuit must needs attain the popedom at their return into Europe as have so much better their learning by the Chinois author but these have since even by the opinion of learning obtain a better estimation it be tedious to tell of their opinion touch the creation all be a rude and unformed chaos Tayn say they frame and settle the heaven and earth this tayn create Pauzon and Pauzona Pauzon by power of tayn create Tanhom and his thirteen brethren Tanhom give name to all thing and know their virtue and with his say brethren multiply their generation which continue the space of ninety thousand year and then tayn destroy the world for their pride and create another man name Lotzitzam who have two horn of sweet savour out of which present do spring forth both man and woman the first of these be Alazan which live nine hundred year then do the heaven create another man Lotzitzam be now vanish name Atzion who mother lutim be with child with he only in see a lion head in the air this be do in Truchin in the province of Santon he live eight hundred year after this Usao and Hantzui and ocheutey with his son ezonlom and his nephew Vitei the first king of China they say be the inventor of their many art in the late l l mat. ri. epistle from China date 1606. and 1607. little be there to further this history as for their tale of miracle in those and the japonian epistle bear the same date wherein Ignatius loyola picture be make a miracle-worker I hold they not worth relation the Chinois believe as be there report that there be a certain spirit which have power of the life and death of child that be sick of the measell and therefore when their child be sick thereof they hang a glass before the door of the chamber where he lie that the spirit come to destroy the child see his image in that glass shall not dare to approach near their baptism cure the disease a new remedy for measles a new virtue of Baptism their order for the poor may be a pattern unto christian they suffer none to beg nor to be idle if any be blind yet he be set to some work as grind in a querne or such like of which sort after m m g. b. b. blind person in the city of Canton set to grind Rice Boterus account there be four thousand blind person that grind still in Canton alone if they be impotent that they can work their friend if they be able must-provide for they if not they be keep in hospital out of which they never pass and have all necessary provide they by officer appoint in every city to this business common woman be confine to certain place and may not go abroad nor dwell in the city for infect other and be accountable to a certain officer of their evil earning which when they be old be bestow on their maintenance their dwelling be in the suburb of city they be great sodomite although they have many wife and concubine which they buy of their parent or in the market in like manner as the turk they be not by law prescribe to observe this or that sect and therefore they have many sect some worship the sun some the moon some nothing and all what themselves best like as be in part before show they take their oath as here by kiss a book with thrice drink of a certain liquor Antony Dalmeida n n a. Dalmeida 1586. say that in say mass they be so throng with the people that they be almost tread under foot and of a chinian priest contrary to the zeal elsewhere in any religion they be invite to dinner and feast together with many other of their priest that use they kind @. 8 of their temple Trigautius it follow now that we speak of place religious among the Chinois of which their temple challenge the first place their sepulcher the next of their monastery we have already speak their temple as their other structure come short of the european magnificence yet be they many and that about Paquin itself for howsoever the king have little devotion to any religion at all yet his mother be very zealous repair and build temple in diverse place and in one monastery sustain above a thousand minister of her holy so that this kind elsewhere contemn be in the royal city better respect hence they have a proverb in the city royal ho-xam so they call their priest in the province the magistrate be worship we have mention the temple dedicate to man of merit and public benefactor such a one be in the confine of the province of Conton erect to the honour of one which for the benefit of traveler make a passage over a steep and unpassable hill divide the rock as annibal do the Alpes where be such precipice as can but strike horror to the passenger and yet they be safe carry Colaus signify the fortress of the kingdom a chief Office without descend from their chair bear on man shoulder on the top of this hill be a temple build to the Colaus that make this way with his image therein and odour burn perpetual the wall and floor thereof adorn with many poem and inscription to his praise cut in marble this mountain be one day journey stand between two great river whereby there be continual traffic betwixt this of Canton and the other province there be above three thousand porter or bearer of burden which carry those ware beside beast of carriage and that with great fidelity a rare virtue in other part of China when they have pass out of Canton over this mountain they come into the river which be call the son of the sea for the largeness but in winter which be their dry season full of shoald the cause of much shipwrack but lest my relation stay or be wrack in these shoald let we take view of that which the king bestow on the jesuit for their residence and for the Barial of matthaeus ricius to who our China relation be so much indebt it be above a quarter of a mile from one of the city gate build by a eunuch who now be condemn for some crime and lest his palace which he have here build place assign to the Jesuit spoiler spoil with the expense of above 14000. ducat which in China be a great sum in that cheapeness of all thing far beyond Europae a computation shall fall into the hand of spoiler the good of eunuch in this kingdom usual become he which first can catch they he consecrate his palace and make it a temple maintain therein one priest such palace many of the magistrate have near to the city as retire place and tusculan for their muse the portraiture of this whole house with the garden and other appurtenance Trigantius have set forth in picture be after the China building with the door southwards and so run a great length into the north with four great hall one beyond another in the middle part and on each side chamber and other room beyond all the garden the pillar of timber bear up the roof the wall and pavement of brick the outmost of these hall be convert into a temple or Idol-chapel in which be a great altar of stone and brick cunning fret paint red a colour forbid to private house and upon the midst thereof fate a huge monster of earth gild from top to toe of massy quantity the Chinois call it ti come the God as they fable of the earth and treasure chapel of ti come the china Plato his image or idol as Pluto in the poet in his hand be a sceptre on his head a crown not unlike those use by our king on each side stand four minister of the same matter on both side of the room two great table and on each of they five king or great officer of Hell on both the wall be paint the same officer or judge sit on their several tribunal give sentence on wicked man every one according to the condition of his Court before they stand many devil more terrible form then with we devil and Hell the pain of hell also be so decipher that can not but strike terror to the beholder some roast in iron bed some fry in scald oil some cut in piece or divide in the middle or tear of dog Minos Aeacus Rhadamanthus here have two other assessor (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) or otherwise torture the first of those judge examine the fault which they say he see in a certain glass those which he find guilty be send to the other judge according to the quality of the crime one of these be judge in case of transmigration which send the soul of cruel man into tiger of unclean person into swine and the like or if their crime be small into the poor sort there be a great balance in one of the scale balance like those in diverse legend as of s. Francis in m. Paris etc. Styx elysian field a man lade with sin in the other one of their hypocritical prayer-book which counterpoise the other scale and free the sinner there run through the midst of hell a discolour river which carry away many for over it be two bridge one of gold the other of silver by which those pass over which have be devout idolater carry in their hand ensign of the same these be guide by the priest which lead they through the midst of hell to fair and pleasant grove and garden in another part be paint the dungeon of hell with horrible serpent flame devil to the brazen gate thereof there come a idolatrous priest which in despite of all the devil deliver his mother from those flame there be no infernal punishment paint but have such a inscription he which shall pray to such a idol a thousand time shall be free from this punishment the jesuit beat the earthen idol to dust and burn those of wood wherein the chinese convert be the forward because the country custom be to fill the hollow belly of these image with devote money or jewel they demolish the altar and plastre over the picture and in place thereof erect the image of Christ no private man may erect a temple by law which yet the mighty eunuch transgress a little before this exchange of idol into image after their distinction and a o o the jesuit say that the Chinois maintain their idolatry say they worship not the idol but God thereby represent etc. silly one it be some take their last leave of ti come one kneel and bid it farewell another chase say thou mass of dung and earth if thou have no power to maintain the temple and thyself what help may I look for at thy hand neither be thou worthy of any honour at i other say that this have sometime bear the name of some other idol and therefore be avenge for that change at Xauceum be the temple of Nanhoa upon a goodly hill and nigh to it a monastery in which be maintain one thousand of their religious regulars the land adjoin be they they tell that about eight hundred year since live one in great austerity always gird with a chain next to his flesh which use to grind as much rice as may serve one thousand of they a day when the worm by reason of that chain breed in his flesh fall off he will place it there again and ask if it have nothing to gnaw his carcase be still keep there to which be pilgrimage out of all the kingdom and this temple build to his honour the regulars be divide into twelve station and each have a superior beside one supreme over all the rest they profess chastity but their house be both a stew for whoredom and a den of thief and robber here be many huge idol of brass and other metal and of wood gild in one station five hundred they have diverse steeple and bell in they one so great that they have never see so great a bell in Europe the corpse of lusu be show they which they worship but many doubt whether it be the true for can it escape the worm which have seize on it alive keep in the midst of the temple in a high place where hang fifty lamp which burn at appoint time the abbot of this monastery confess that in ancient time the Chinois have worship no idol but that they be political appoint by magistrate lest the vulgar shall be without all religion they have their chapel in great man house but we will take view only of the king temple at Nanquin and so end this be a royal one indeed for greatness and stateliness it be build in a grove of pine-tree near the city which be compass with a wall twelve mile in circuit the temple after the China manner of building be most of timber the wall of brick divide into five isle with row of pillar on both side which be of round timber as big as two man can fathom the roof be carve and guild very fair have lose nothing of the beauty though not use by the king for sacrifice in this their two hundred year absence in the midst be a eminent place of precious marble in which be two throne of marble one for the king to sacrifice in the other leave empty for he to who he do sacrifice the cloister without the temple be beautify with elegant turn and all the window net with iron to keep out bird which be use also in all the palace all the door of the temple be cover with plate of brass guild and rich carve without the temple be many altar of red marble which represent the sun moon star and China mountain whereby they infer that the god there worship create all thing which be therefore set without the temple as acknowledge not to be god no man under grievous penalty may cut a bough off any of the tree in that grove which make they great and old about the temple be many cell which be bath in which the king and minister wash before sacrifice there altar be of the dutch fashion that one may go round about they @. 9 of their funeral the Chinois be very superstitious conceit of death and be exceed loath to have any die in their house Linschoten Linschot l. 1. c. 23. write that when a man lie on his deathbed they present unto he the picture of the devil with the sun in his right hand and a poniard in his left bid the sick man look well on he that he may be his friend in the other world how ever the sick be visit let we now perform our last office to these Chinois and follow they to their grave pantogia many be the ceremony which they there observe in funeral as they honour their parent in their life time be otherwise liable to grievous punishment p p some be hereof by libel accuse to the king and deprive of all dignity yea some of their chief mandarine will sue for the king licence to leave their public function to give private and more diligent attendance to their parent so after their death they mourn three year in white hat and garment although they bear the high magistracy in the kingdom as the Colai etc. the military magistrate except the first month they gird unto they a rough vesture with a rope like the barefoot friar this be not only observe of the mean sort but the mighty mandarine after news of their father death leave their function and in their private house bewail their loss the wealthy sort keep they above ground two or three year q q they have a kind of pitch which close the coffin so that it stink not in a parlour fit for that purpose whither they daily resort unto they to salute they and to burn incense and set meat before they sometime also the bonzij or priest resort thither with their dirge and holy thing their wife child and neighbour come likewise to bewail they be admonish of the death by the son or near of the kindred in a solemn libel mournful compose the hall be spread with white clothes or mat in the midst thereof be a altar and thereon the coffin and image of the dead to that hall within four or five day all the kindred come in mourn attire one after another every hour of the day and burn odour and set two wax-light to the dead make four bow and kneel after their fashion before deliver the son mean while stand by and modest lament behind the coffin be the woman of the house hide behind a curtain in mourn weed and howl behaviour they burn paper and white silk so think to minister apparel to the dead they will not use their wont lodging diet and delight but lie on straw mattress on the bare ground near the coffin eat no flesh or dainty drink no wine Bathe not company not with their wife come not at feast nor for certain month space abroad always remit more of this austerity as the three year grow near a end they use not the same apparel household furniture salutation they colour part of the paper in which they write with another colour they observe not their wont proper name but call themselves otherwise as disobedient or such like music be banish their diet be hard when the corpse be to be bury all the kindred come together be re-invited with another libel in mourn habit the pomp be in manner of procession divers statue of man and woman elephant tiger and lion all of paper diverse-coloured and gild go before which at the grave be burn a long rank of priest also attend which perform many rite by the way patter their prayer and play on timbrel pipe cymbal bell and other instrument likewise huge censer of Bell-metal be carry on man shoulder then follow the coffin adorn sumptuous carry of forty or fifty bearer under a great canopy of silk the child come after on foot lean on their staff as faint then than the woman unseen under a white curtain and then other woman further in blood carry in mourn chair they assemble as many priest as they can which on musical instrument and with their voice tune their mournful ditty the place whither the corpse be carry be adorn with diverse image the coffin be very large the provide of which they commit not to their heir but themselves in their life take order for the same bestow great care and cost for the best wood and workmanship which they be able to procure therein spend sometime seventy eighty or a hundred ducat they hold it unfortunate to die before they have provide the same they be no less curious for the place of their burial think that hereon depend the fortune of their posterity and therefore sometime spend a whole year in consultation whether it shall be towards the north or some other region their sepulcher be in the field on some hillock near the city each family by themselves where they fortify they and ofttimes resort thither to perform their obsequy to be bury within the wall be a thing most miserable never to be forget at these sepulcher they have their yearly meeting where their kindred burn odour and make a funeral banquet their sepulcher be very great of marble with the image of diverse beast and man stand by their epitaph also in marble magnificent with elegant inscription of their exploit for some time after they will eat no flesh in regard of that passage of soul before speak of this opinion be of more authority and credit with they than that of hell or heaven although as be say their book and picture depaint horrible thing in that kind other r r maff. and discourse of China escala^ta ca. 15. add that as soon as one be dead they wash he and clothe he in his best apparel all perfume set he in his best chair and there all his near kindred kneel before he take their leave with tear they coffin he as before and place he in a room rich furnish and cover he with a sheet in which they paint his portraiture a table stand by full of viand with candle on it thus do they keep he fifteen day every night the priest execute their superstitious exequies burn and shake certain paper before he by the sepulchre they plant a pine tree which be sacred and may not be cut down nor convert to any use if the weather overthrow it their funeral pomp be in manner of procession with candle carry in their hand they burn upon the grave many paper paint with man cattle and provision for his use in the next world it be now time to leave they quiet rest in their grave only a word of their time repute holy the time religious be the new moon and full moon as you have hear in which they make great banquet and then also they muster their soldier who alone may wear weapon be China they solemnize s s Perera also their birthday whereunto their kindred do resort of custom with present and receive good cheer the king birthday be a great festival but t t discourse of China newyear day be their principal feast this be solemnize of all sect alike the first new moon and then again the first full moon in the begin of the year this be their Candlemas u u it agree in time and light feast every man devise artificial lantern of paper glass cloth the hall seem to be on fire with the multitude of light some carry in the night with great revel light and twist lantern serpentine fashion and many device be practise of firework with gunpowder then they send New-years-gift to each other as Mendoza write they have no sabbath nor weekly solemnity @. x. of stranger and foreign religion in China of the jew in China we have speak already with their ethnic rite we have toil and tire you it may haply be some refresh to look upon Saracenical or christian object if it be but for variety how inhospital the Chinois be to stranger we have in part hear neither permit egress to the native Trigaut nor ingress to alien except in three respect the first such as come to pay 10 10 even these that be of the next and tributary country be asmuch as unknown people forbid intercourse as those of corea this by custom more than law ric. their annual tribute the second such as pretend honour and tribute come as we have hear from the west with seem tribute a colour to their gain by merchandise the three such as in admiration of the chinian virtue and learning come thither as the queen of sheba to Solomon to learn the same which be the jesuit pretence but these must here fix their habitation nor may be suffer to return such be their jealousy of discover their mystery to other and this make the jesuit after so long stay free from fear of expulsion which yet since complain of y y Trigautius have publish one large book of epistle and since another large with picture of the persecution of jesuit see also captain Saris and captain Cock in my pilgrim lib. 4. c. 1. and 3. and extract of pinto to. 2. lib. 2. cap. 2. in which at large be contain many particular here omit persecution but it may not be know that they have any intelligence or commerce with stranger and therefore the jesuit which have obtain two so great privilege the eunuch palace for their residence and the employment in correct the china calendar both by royal approbation yet can not obtain leave to go into the province of Canton though with mathematical pretext for that calendar-business to observe longitude and latitude of place because they be say to be countryman to those of Macao yea a Colao or counsellor of state be deprive for send a message to a border king a tempest of libel complaint thunder and shower against he therefore in the border province they set narrow watch at Custom-house bridge and in the very river by ship of war thereto appoint but if they be once get into the inner part of the kingdom there be no such officer not searcher neither may any stranger pass out of the kingdom after once enter without the king licence the jesuit steal their ingress and egress by mean of the portugal which have the town of Macao assign they by the Chinois for traffic these come usual twice a year to the chief city of the province of Canton which be not call quantum or Canton the name of the province but quam ceu all the z z this be also testify by Mons de Monfart many Mahometan in China day time they have free entrance into the city about their merchandise but must lie on shipboard at night in the midst of the river there be a little island and therein a temple in which they be allow their catholic devotion there by boat do they provide to steal in or out of the country the mahometans that come in by land if they stay nine year as be observe may never return home again of these there be now many thousand family in China disperse into most of the province and chief city they have there their temple very sumptuous and their circumcision but as far as I can ever learn they neither teach nor care to teach other their devotion but be unskilful of the saracen tenet and be contemn of the Chinois it seem that there come in be in the time that the tartar reign here which since have increase and after so long continuance be not hold in suspicion as other stranger some say after the four generation they be repute as native yea they be admit to the study of learning degree and magistracy as well as the Chinois but most of these thus dignify relinquish their former superstition retain nothing thereof but abstinence from swine flesh which rather by Naturne then for religion they abhor they differ in countenance from the Chinois Perera say he see at Fuquien certain moor who can say little of their religion but Mahomet be a Moor my father be a Moor and I be a Moor with some other word of their Alcoran wherewithal in abstinence from swine flesh they live say he until the devil take they all he reason with they because he have in many chinish city see the relic of Mahomet keep and they answer that they come in great ship fraught with merchandise from paquin-ward to a port appoint to they by the king where they convert to their religion the chief Mandarine or Loytia whereupon the people begin to turn mahometan they now wax bold prohibit the eat of swine flesh the people chief food who hereby provoke complain of a conspiracy betwixt these moor and the Loytia against their king hereupon he and the chief of they be execute and the rest disperse into certain city where they remain slave to the king touch christian christian in China there be not so great certainty certain Mogores tell ricius of some in the xensian province in the north part of China at a place call Xucheo which be white beard use bell worship isa that be jesus and Mary and honour the crucifix their priest marry which cure disease without medicine a jew at Paquin give more full intelligence that at Caifumfu and at Lincin in the province of Sciantum and in the province of Sciansi there live certain stranger who ancestor have come out of foreign part which worship the cross which the Chinois express by the character of ten and make the sign thereof with the finger on their meat and drink they also make the same sign with ink on the forehead of their child to preserve they from misfortune a jesuite also see in the hand of a antiquary a bell with a church and cross thereon grave circumscribe with greek letter the jew also report that those Cross-worshipper have the same doctrine in their prayer which the jew hold this the jesuit interpret of the psalter common to they both he affirm that there be many of they in the northern province which so flourish in letter and arm that they grow suspicious to the Chinois which he think be cause by the saracen some sixty year before the magistrate be so incense hereby that they for fear be disperse some turn jew some saracen other idolater and their temple be also convert into idolatrous temple one of which he mention in his country ever since they hide their profession and when the jesuit send one of their convert to make inquiry he can learn of none which they think proceed from their fear take he for a spy send from the magistrate all these sect the Chinois call Hoei the jew distinguish by their refuse to eat the sinew or leg the saracen swine flesh the christian by refuse to feed on round-hosed beast ass horse mule which all both Chinois Saracen and jew do there feed on the saracen call the christian also Isai as before and Terzai which be a name give in Persia to the armenian christian as a armenian affirm to ricius whence he conjecture that these christian come out of Armenia and by the report of Haithon the armenian a a see sup. c. 9 which say their king come to the great Chan of cathay which we have before observe at least the best part thereof to be the north part of China to persuade he and he to become christian which in great part also he affect beside other christian there report to be by Paulus and those of sarnau subject to the great Chan mention by Vertomannus which seem to be near these in China the malabar b b Vid. Christ Exped. ap. sin. l. 1. in fine christian have Chaldee memorial of China convert by s. Thomas and their metropolitan have his style of all India and China now for the late christianity there preach by the jesuit their own commentary and annual epistle be full Xaverius c c xaverij l. 5. c. 8. and d. attempt it often and earnest but can never obtain entrance which by other of that society be after affect and with much trouble effect when the portugal come first into those part the Chinois be suspicious of they their ordnance and great ship seem dreadful the saracen tell they they be call frank so they call all the europaean since the expedition of Godfrey of Bullen which name the Chinois in Canton still give they call they and their ordnance falank pronounce l for r as the for do p for b and by relate the conquest of malacca and other place in India bring they into great jealousy yet covetousness of gain open they a way first to merchandise in a desert island call Sancian seventy mile off in the sea and after to a habitation assign they in a Peninsula part of a great island near to China call of a idol ama there honour Amacao or amas harbour short Mocao Macao which since that time have be inhabit by people of diverse nation together with the portugal and have become a city with a bishop see and a college of jesuit and a famous mart of european and indian commodity after that they admit they traffic in the chief city of Canton two day sail from Macao whereby they find mean by degree to bring in first ruggerus and after ricius with other jesuit which insinuate by gift and obsequiousness into the magistrate affection further the same by reputation of sanctity and especial of learning many year they spend to little purpose till ricius by his mathematics and the art of memory in both which the Chinois admire he then by change his habit into that of the learned man in China profess also a maintenance of the sect of Confusius which they profess and confutation of the idol sect and last by present to the king he make way into the king palace and favour who also bestow a idol temple for his burial and the residence of his society an. dom. 1610. many trouble they encounter mean while to get or to keep their residence that inhospitall people sometime accuse they to the magistrate with devise calumny sometime tumultuous stone their house sometime charge they to be the cause of dearth or that their idol send they not rain call they devil stranger father on they curious art not only of alchemy and long life which they honour but other as that they know by man countenance that they have a precious stone in their head to I know not what purpose that they plot device against the state and the crucifix be accuse also as devise by enchantment to destroy the king the hollander likewise among other their infestation of the portugal in all the part of India bring these of Macao into such fear that they go about to compass some part of their town with a wall which the Chinois there dwell think to be do against they cause such a uproar that they fall together by the ear and another quarrel happen between a religious and a secular priest the Chinois give out that Cataneus the jesuite go about to make himself king of China as one that know the country and have be in both the royal city with the help of the jesuit there reside Japander and other this make the Chinois to fly from Macao and to divulge such rumour in canton that there be a sudden muster of soldier through the province and one thousand house of the chief city without the wall pull down one of the jesuit society apprehend and beat with cane to death ep. 1611. and with much ado this little ado be after pacify and now the jesuit think themselves in better case than ever and have as they say convert five thousand to their faith in this kingdom after thirty year labour have four or five place of residence and will God as I profess myself indebt to they for this light of history so they may have just cause of thankfulness to God and they for the christian light and that it be not confuse with such heathenish exchange of one image for another and rather the name than substance of devotion alter bead taper single votary procession monastery altar image he and she saint 1. cor. 2.5 Heb. 11.1 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) with other rite be there already and the very art of their image cause a ethnic adoration as they tell of a viceroy that will not look upon one of they but in a chapel in the high part of his house set on a altar with taper and odour daily burn thereto and their manner of preach being not by word so much as by write and that not by authority of scripture but by argument of reason further by their own philosophy and commend by mathematical science strange groundwork to faith and Theologie of the eastindies and of the sea and island about Asia with their religion the five book chap. i. of India in general and of the ancient rite there observe @. i. the limit and the ancient people and invasion of India the name of India be now apply to all far-distant country not in the extreme limit of Asia alone but even to whole America through the error of Columbus and his fellow who at their first arrival in the western world think that they had meet with Ophir and the indian region of the east but the ancient also comprehend under this name a huge tract of land no less in the judgement of Alexander follower in his eastern invasion than the three part of the earth Ctosias account it one half of Asia yea a great part of Africa also be comprehend under that name so Turnebus a a tur. ad. l. 27. cap. 9 higin fab. 275. in his not only find the barbarian and parthian call by that name in Virgil but Thebes in the high Egypt and Ammone temple in Higinus and Aethiopia also as in our discourse b b vid. l. 7. c. 3. thereof will further appear but take India more proper Dionysius c c Dion afer bound it between Caucasus and the red-sea Indus and Ganges Ovid likewise in that verse India gange but Ptolemy d d ptol. lib. 7. and other geographer do usual divide India by the river Ganges into two part one on this side Ganges and the other beyond although here we find no less difficulty concern Ganges which the most with myself account the same with Guenga that fall into the gulf of Bengala which they also imagine to be that which of the ancient be call sinus gangeticus other e e Mercat. tab. univers magin Geog. g. Arthus hist ind. or. esteem the river Canton whereon stand the suppose canton chief city of one of the chinian province whereof we have so late take our leave to be that Ganges of which mind be mercator maginus Gotardus Arthus and their disciple m. Paulus f f m. Paulus lib. 3. divide India into three part the less the great which he call malabar and Abassia betwixt they both dom. Niger reckon g g nig. com. as x. the same number the name of India h h Steph Byzant (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) etc. flow from the river Indus Semiramis be report to invade India with three million of footman and 500000. horse beside counterfeit elephant make of the hide of 300000. ox stuff with hay yet Staurobates at that time the indian monarch break her force and chase she out of the field megasthenes reckon one hundred twenty two indian nation arrianus in his eight book make a large description of this indian world say that they live like the scythian without house city temple in a wander course with their tent on the bark of the tree tala and wild venison the skin where of be there garment in all India be no servant but all freeman these thing be alter by Bacchus or Dionystus who make a expedition hither not so much with arm as with art he teach they the use of wine oil and sacrifice in memory whereof posterity honour he for a god of this the poet and history of Alexander and other make much mention so do suidas tell of one Brachman that prescribe the rite and law of the Brahmin Solinus of Hydaspes and other of Ganges Hercules and the rest with much uncertainty postellus i i post originib c. 13. and 15. strange conceit himself that Abraham posterity by Keturah seat themselves in India and be there know by the name of Jew before the jew in Palestina that they observe circumcision and disperse it into Syria Egypt Armenia Colchis Iberia Paphlagonia Chaldea and India before Moses lead the israelite out of Egypt and that the Brahmin be so call Abrahmanes as follow the instruction of Abraham Abraham we believe the father of the faithful but can father on he such unfaithful and degenerate generation no more then with the same postellus we acknowledge the turk the posterity of the ten tribe and the tartar k k this word signify a remnant and Otho Heurnius with like cabal-conceit imagine the gift of abra. to the son of Ketura to be magic and astrology to be the remainder of those turk follow cabalistical conjecture but that which he speak of the name jew and Abrachmanes in India may perhaps arise from a testimony cite out of megasthenes his by clem. l l clem. Stromat lib 1. alex. that all thing observe by natural philosopher in Greece bid be handle before partly by the Brahmin among the indian partly of those which in Syria be call jew in which testimony he join Jew and Brahmin in profession of the same learned science of natural philosophy Apuleius m m apul. florid. lib. 1. make the brachman first founder of the Pythagorean learning and report further that at dinnertime the table be make ready and the youth from diverse place and service resort thither at which time the master question with they what good they have do that day one answer he have be a peacemaker to reduce such and such which be at odds to amity another have do this or that for his parent another have study or meditate on such a point once he which can not give good account of his morning work may not be admit to receive any dinner-wage Strabo in his fifteen book be large in this indian subject he report out of Aristobulus that the river Indus by force of a earthquake change his channel thereby a great part of the neighbour region be turn into a desert for in this Indus be like unto Nilus in that without it the country will be a wilderness and therefore be also worship of the inhabitant it receive fifteen other river into it he mention the Cathei not far from thence which after happy give name unto cathay the indian be of seven sort n n plin. l. 6. c. 19 ar. lib. 8. the first in estimation and sew in number be their philosopher these kept-public act once a year before the king and he which in his observation be find three time false be condemn to perpetual silence the second sort be husbandman which pay the king the only owner of all the land a four part of the increase the three be of shepherd and huntsman which wander in tent the four artificer the five soldier the six magistrate the seven courtier and those of his privy council if any woman kill the king in his drunkenness she be reward with the marriage of his son and heir if any deprive another of a member beside like for like he lose his hand and if he be a artificer his life they strangle their sacrifice that it may be so offer whole to their idol @. 2 of their philosophical or religious sect of their philosopher or man learned and religious the o o Brahmin Vid. Strab. 150 etc. Brahmin obtain the first place as be near in sect to the greek these be after their manner nazarite from the womb so soon as their mother be conceive of they there be learned man appoint which come to the mother with song contain precept of chastity as they grow in year they change their master they have their place of exercise in a grove nigh to the city where they be busy in grave conference they ear no live creature nor have use of woman live frugal and lie upon skin they will instruct such as will hear they but their hearer must neither sneese nor spit nor speak when they have in this strict course spend seven and thirty year they may live more at pleasure and liberty in diet habit proper habitation and the use of gold and marriage they conceal their mystery from their wife lest they shall blab they abroad they esteem this life as man conception but his death day to be his birthday unto that true and happy life to he which have be right religious they hold the world to be create corruptible round rule by the high god. water they imagine to have be the beginning of make the world and that beside the four element there be a five nature whereof the heaven and star consist they entreat of the immortality of the soul and of the torment in hell and many such like matter the p p the indian German german another order of religious or learned man be honour among they especial such of they as live in the wood and of the wood both for their diet of those wild fruit and their habit of the bark of tree not acquaint with Bacchus or Venus any more than with Ceres they speak not to the king when they ask counsel of they but by messenger and do pacify the angry god as be suppose by their holiness next in honour to these be certain mendicant which live of rice and barley which any man at the first ask give they together with entertainment into their house these profess skill in physic and to remedy disease wound and sterility very constant in labour and hardship other there be enchanter and diviner master of ceremony about the dead which wander through town and city some there be more civil and secular in their life profess like piety and holiness woman also be admit unto the fellowship of their study in this philosophy not to their bed Aristobulus write that he see two of these Brahmin the one a old man shave the other young with long hair which sometime resort to the marketplace and be honour as counsellor and free take what they please of any thing there to be sell for their sustenance they be anoint with Sesumine oil wherewith and with honey they temper there bread they be admit to Alexander table where they give lesson of patience q q practise of prescribe patience and after go to a place not far off the old man lie down with his face upward sustain the sun and shower terrible violence the young stand on one foot hold in both his hand a piece of wood of three cubit lift up and shift foot as the other be weary and so they continue every day the young man return home afterward but the old man follow the king with who he change his habit and life for which when as he be by some reprove he answer that he have fulfil the forty year exercise which he have vow onesicritus say that Alexander hear of some religious observant which go naked and exercise themselves to much hardship and will r r the like st stubbornness be yet in their jogines not come to other but will bid man if they will have any thing with they to come to they send he unto they who find fifteen of they twenty furlong from the city each of they observe his own gesture of sit stand or lie naked and not stir till sunset in that unsupportable heat at which time they return into the city calanus be one of they he afterward follow Alexander into Persia where beginning to be sick he cause a great pile or frame of wood to be make wherein he place himself in a golden chair and cause fire to be put to in which he be voluntary consume tell if they tell true that he will meet Alexander at Babylon the place fatal to Alexander death Aelianus s s Aelian Var. ab l. 5 c. 6. say that this be do in a suburb of Babylon and that the fire be of cedar cypress myrtle laurel and other sweet wood and after he have perform his daily exercise of run he place himself in the midst crown with the leaf of reed the sun shine on he which he worship this adoration be the sign which he give to the macedonian to kindle the fire in which he abide without any stir till he be dead Alexander himself admire and prefer this victory of calanus before all his own this calanus tell onesicritus of a golden world where meal be as plentiful as dust and fountain stream milk honey wine and oil which country by man turn into wantonness jupiter alter and detain impose a life of hardness and labour which while man follow they enjoy abundance but now that man begin to furfet and grow disobedient there be danger of universal destruction when he have thus speak he bid he if he will hear further strip himself and lie naked upon these stone but mandanis t t Art. call he Dandanis lib. 7. another of they reprove calanus for his harshness and commend Alexander for his love to learning say that they enure their body to labour for the confirmation of their mind against passion for his nakedness he allege that that be the best house which need lest furniture of household he add that they search the secret of nature and that return into the city if they meet with any carry fig or grape they receive of he gratis if oil they pour it on they and all man house and good be open to they even to the parlour of their wife when they be enter they impart the wisdom of their sentence as the other communicate his meat if they fear any disease they prevent the same with fire as u u quique pyra etc. luc. l. 3. be now say of calanus megasthenes reprove this calanus as Alexander Trencher-chaplain and commend mandanis say that when Alexander messenger tell he that he must come to the son of jupiter with promise of reward if he come otherwise menace torture he answer that neither be he Jupiter son nor do possess any great part of the earth as for himself he neither respect his gift nor fear his threaten for while he live India yield he sufficient if he die he shall be free from age and exchange for a better and pure life whereupon he say Alexander both pardon and praise he Clitarchus report also that to the Brahmin be oppose another sect call Pramnae man full of subtlety and contention which deride the study of other in physiology and astronomy he divide the Brahmin into those of the mountain clothe in dear skin which carry scrip full of root and medicine which they apply with certain charm to cure disease and the second sort he call gymnetae those naked one before mention whereof it seem they be call Gymnosophistae which have woman among they but not in carnal knowledge the three he call civil which live in city and village wear fine linen and apparel in skin Clemens 10 10 clem. al. Strom. l. 3. alexandrinus speak of their fast and other austere course out of alex. Polyhistor de rebus indicis the Brahmin say he neither eat any quick thing nor drink wine but some of they eat every day as we do some only every three day they contemn death nor much esteem of life believe to be bear again some worship Pan and Hercules but those indian which be call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) for their gravity and austerity live altogether naked these practice truth and foretell thing to come and worship a certain pyramid under which they think be lay the bone of some god neither the gymnosophist nor these (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) use woman but think it unlawful and against nature and therefore observe chastity likewise there be virgin which be call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) of the female sex they seem to observe the heavenly body and by their signification to foretell future event thus far Clemens nicolaus Damascenus say y y nic. Damasc Suetonius mention this in augusti cap. 21. that at Antiochia he see the indian ambassador send to Augustus from Porus the king as his letter contain of six hundred king with present among which be a female-viper of sixteen cubit one of the like bigness Strabo say he see send out of Egypt and a crayfish of three cubit and a partridge big than a vulture Zarmanochagas one of these indian philosopher be one of the ambassador who at Athens burn himself not move thereto by adversity but by prosperity which have in all thing follow his desire lest in his succeed age it may alter and therefore enter the fire anoint naked laugh his epitaph be here lie Zarmanochagas the indian of Bargosa which according to his country-custom make himself immortal but it be not such marvel that their philosopher thus contemn death whereas their woman the weak and more fearful sex wherein outgo their sex and weakness for their custom admit many wife the dear of which be burn with the decease husband they be z z hier. adverse jovin lib. 1. Hieromes word they ambitious contend among themselves to obtain this fatal testimony of their husband love and their own chastity and the conqueress in her former habit lie down by the carcase embrace and kiss the same contemn the fire which thus marry they again in despite of death divorce a thing to this day observe in many part of India as we shall see anon arrianus a a arr. Perip mar. eryth report of a place call Comar it seem the cape comori over-against Zeilan wherein be a haven to which use to resort certain votary which have devote themselves to a single life to wash themselves in those holy-water the like be do by their nunlike woman they have a tradition of a certain goddess which use to wash herself there every month suidas tell of a nation call Brahmin inhabit a island in the sea where Alexander erect a pillar with inscription that he have pass so far they live a hundred and fifty year and have neither bread wine flesh nor metal nor house but live of the fruit and clear water and be very religious their wife live apart on the other side Ganges to who they pass in july and August and after forty day return home again when the wife have have two child she neither know her husband after nor any other man which be observe also when in five year he can raise no issue of she he after abstain these b b io. Boem. slay no beast in sacrifice but affirm that GOD better accept unbloody sacrifice of prayer and more delight in man his own image in the hill c c laur. Coruin call Hemodi Bacchus be say to have erect pillar to witness his conquest as far in that eastern ocean as Hercules do in the west he build the city nysa where he leave his sick and age soldier which Alexander spare d d Arrian lib. 5. and suffer to their own liberty for Dionysius or Bacchus his sake and as Bacchus erect pillar so do Alexander altar to the twelve chief god as high as tower monument of his far travel where he observe solemn game and sacrifice he e e Arrian lib. 6. sacrifice also not to his country god alone but to Hydaspis Acesine and Indus indian river and to other god with other rite and sacrifice than he have before use drown a golden bowl in Indus and another in the ocean in his ethnic superstition to he do the indian magi so do arrianus f f Arrian lib. 7. call their Brahmin say that he be but as other man save that he have less rest and be more troublesome and be dead shall enjoy no more land than will serve to cover his body and every man say they stamp with their foot on the ground have so much as he tread on Eusebius g g euseb Praep. Euang. lib. 6. cap. 8. recite out of bardesanes Cyrus that among the indian and bactrian be many thousand Brahmin which as well by tradition as law worship no image nor eat any quick creature drink no wine nor beer only attend on divine thing whereas the other indian be very vicious yea some hunt man sacrifice and devour they and be as idolater Pliny beside his relation of monster in these part tell of their philosopher call gymnosophist like thing to that which be before mention of their behold the sun from the rise to the set with fix eye stand on the hot sand all day long on one foot by course toothache with other disease of the head and eye spit and other sickness be either exile or stranger to the indian Tully say h h Tusc. quaest. lib. 5. that in this naked plight these philosopher endure the cold of winter and snow of Caucasus while they live and the burn fire at their end without any plain the indian woman also strive which shall be marry to her husband corpse in a fiery chariot ride with he into another World hystaspes i i am. Marcel lib. 23. the father of Darius be report to have learn of the indian philosopher or Brahmin both astronomy and rite of religion with which he after instruct the persian magi. none k k Arrian lib. 1. may sacrifice without one of these to direct he who only among the indian have skill of divination and authority to sacrifice and be free from other service @. 3 many doubtful and fabulous report of the indian the indian be say to worship jupiter Ganges and other hero of their country some of the indian nation account it dishonourable as they do also at this day for the wife not to be burn with their decease husband Thomas l l Dorothaeus in Barthol and thom. the apostle preach the gospel to the indian and so do Bartholomew also and destroy their idol which wrought great wonder among they Astaroth beirith and Waldath as abdias m m Pseudo-Abdias bab. Episc. report who even in this history may easy be convince to be counterfeit in ascribe the name and religion of the grecian juno Neptune Berecinthia to the indian beside those unchristian revenge in kill so many of their adversary and old heathenish new popish ceremony father on those apostle to let pass that abdias a fit bishop of that mystical Babylon n n gen. di lib. 6. cap. 26. Alexander ab Alexandro reckon among their god the great tree to cut which be with they a capital crime and a dragon in honour of they honour in a giantlike statue who daughter Pandaea the pandeans say be their first queen these affirm that in the hill Meros which they account sacred to jupiter be a cave wherein Liber or Bacchus be nourish from whence the fable grow that he be bear of Jupiter thigh for so (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) signify some of the indian say o o Solin cap. 55. Solinus kill no beast nor eat flesh some live only on fish some kill their parent and kinsfolk before age or sickness wither they and devour their flesh a argument not of villainy but piety among they their gymnosophist p p plin. l. 7. c. 2. from the sunrising to the set fix their eye on the bright orb of the sun thence observe certain secret hereunto he add the tale of man with dogshead of other with one leg and yet very swift of foot of pygmy of such as live only by scent of hoary infant of some like Polyphemus with one eye in their forehead of other with ear to the ground wherein many of the old writer be poet and the modern painter as in many other monster of man and beast we seek credit with the wise and not admiration of fool ctesias in his indica which photius q q phot. 72. have preserve rather as a monument of ctesias his lie then of indian truth have tell the like incredible tale that it never rain in India that there be a fountain of liquid gold receive into pitcher of earth that the sea in the top be boil hot with the monstrous Martichora a manlike beast and other more horrible beastlike man with tail and head of dog without speech the little truth in his little pygmy both beast and man his great lie of great griffin lyon-eagle keeper of golden mountain with other like fable scarce in one thing agree with our modern and more certain observation and such as if of purpose he have in challenge of the world cast down the gauntlet for the whetstone which for my part I think he best deserve this have the liar get by lie that in his persian story which he have better mean to know he be the more doubt and such relation have make indian report r r Hydaspes horat. account fabulous the s s alex. alex. lib. 4. cap. 17. Aelian Var. hist lib. 4. cap. 1. indian never sacrifice or salute their idol without dance they be never reward with military honour or spoil except they bring into the camp a enemy head in their hand they punish perjury with the loss of finger and toe and such as deceive their client with perpetual silence and beside they be disable unto any Office their law be not write their contract without seal or witness they use no pledge nor may borrow or lend upon usury Philostratus in his large legend of the life of Apollonius tyanaeus their philosophical saint relate t t phil. l. 2. c. 4. his pilgrimage into India to the Brahmin in which he come to nysa where be a temple of Bacchus build by himself plant about with bay vine and ivy who shady roof cover the same in the midst be a image all instrument belong to the vintage be there some of gold other of silver hang up sacred to Dionysius he after u u cap. 9 come to Taxilla the city royal where he find the temple of the sun and in it the ivory image of Aiax with golden statue of Alexander and over-against the same the brazen image of Porus the wall of red marble shine like fire interlay with gold resemble lightning the Mosaical floor powder with pearl the king here offer sacrifice to the Sun for the 10 10 lib. 3. cap. 1. peppertree which he say be great and abound with ape who gather the pepper for the indian gratis bring thereunto by a wile of the indian who first gather some and lay it on heap and then go away at their return find many the like heap make by the emulous ape I leave it to the author authority and reader credulity as that also which follow of the inhabitant of Paraca in these part who by eat a dragon heart and liver attain to understand the language if so I may term it of beast and if you marvel at this y y Cap. 3. that which follow will amaze you of man which do not as the former communicate with the nature of beast but of spirit make themselves at their pleasure invisible here in a holy hill be a pit whereof no man drink by which the indian bind their faith as by the most solemn and inviolable oath in this pit be a fiery receptacle where man be purge from their offence and two tub of whetstone I shall say of rain and wind the one be open yield rain and the other wind in this place be many indian grecian and egyptian statue with their rite observe according this hill be report the middle of India and every noontide they sing hymn to the sun for that fire borrow they say from his beam the Brahmin sleep on the ground on herb strew two cubit thick that by this elevation they may more signify their devotion to the sun who they laud night and day he find z z cap. 4. jarchas their principal with seven associate sit on throne of brass jarchas can tell Apollonius his name nation and adventure which have befall he all his life they anoint themselves then wash in a fountain and after this be crown enter the temple in solemn procession with dance smite the ground with rod wherewith the earth like unto wave do move and raise itself jarchas be ask by Apollonius what he think of himself and his company answer that they be god because they be good man that he himself have sometime be Ganges and Apollonius before have be a egyptian mariner a attendant which there wait on they have be Palamedes who misfortune we read of in the war of Troy thus in new body present themselves to the world the world he say be a live creature compound of five element with diverse other thing of pigmy which live under the earth of griffin etc. thus much I think to add of Apollonius because some vain philosopher have impudent compare he to our saviour that the reader may parallel this legend with the gospel out of this darkness the more to admire that more than admirable Light and thus much out of Philostratus of the Brahmin the gymnosophist be by he place and by that name know in Egypt and Aethiopia whither also Apollonius go to visit they and we in due place will follow he chap. 2 of late Indian discovery and a apology for the english trade in the east indies @. i. of the portugal and Dutch after this glut of fable which common attend whatsoever be far distant in time or place the indian truth will be more welcome saturni fab. Veritas temp. as the sun after a storm and time her father which be say before to devour she have now bring she out of her obscure prison and by Neptune help ship she into Europe in this expedition the portugal be first in commission the hollander and english since annex these be the triumvir which of all the european nation have subdue those sea happy three if they envy not each other happiness a threefoldcord by no human power to be break the portugal in the year 1498. have about eleven month before pass from Lisbon the cape of good hope happy compass first enter the indian ocean and come to Calicut vasco di Gamma be general of that fleet which king Emanuel set forth their exploit by sea and land as well on the western coast of Africa ever since Henry the infant have begin this discovery until this time as on the eastern beyond the cape their conquest by Gamma albuquerque and other which subdue to the Portugal sceptre so many territory people so many island erect so many fort both on the african and asian shore make tributary so many petty kingdom their own writer barrius Osorius maffaus and other have sufficient record beside what they hold in Barbary they reckon they the acore madera the island of cabo verde the fortress of Arguin in Guinea and of mina the island del principe s. Thomas Atubon with some place in congo and angola and Brasile also on the american shore beyond the cape Soffala Mosambique Bombassa the island of Ormuz in the persian gulf in India the castle and town of Diu daman Bacayn shall goa honour Barcela mangalor Cananor Cranganor cochin and Coulan in Seylan Columbo Negapatan and s. Thomas on Choromandel coast Porto pequene Porto grande serapure in Bengala Serone malacca Molucca island malao and nangasacke in japan with other their conquest which beside their empire over these sea and riches by merchandise make Portugal the least part of the Portugal crown and worthy of praise they be that be so small and poor a nation have thus enlarge their state and sovereignty which they have brave defend against all the power of the saracen in those part and the mighty king of Cambaya Deccan and the great Turk force in strong sieges but while they seek a monopoly of indian merchandise and as Neptune minion will engross all Sea-favour to themselves not only I know not with what right forbid the indian to trade their own sea but those european courage which glory in as good Neptunian blood as themselves the Hollander step forth and borrow his word and rage together challenge the Portugal cornel. Houtman general and for proof allege cannon law and steel argument make prize of all he can get from they and so have they prevail within these twenty year for in the year 1595. be their first ship send from Amsterdam that now beside many mischief execute on the portugal in Africa and India by land and sea they have thirty seven factory and twenty port and castle in the east indies long since mention in Nicolas bangam journal and since have further b b see my pilgrim to. 1. l. 2. 3. 4. 5. especial pag. 86. and 706. and seq and general the five book be of action of or with the duchess prevail in jacatra Banda and other place and scarce can brook the english their old friend that new indian neighbourhood @. 2 of the english trade there many argument in defence of it now if that this collateral line of that Sea-sovereign may promise thus much of his favour to themselves how much more may the english he but kiss they in pass by but ever embrace in never-unclasped arm this british nymph and long since offer all his shore in dowry yea let this be add to the english glory that prince Henry first founder of the Portugal discovery be of english blood son to Philip the daughter of John of Gaunt and for the hollander I say not their free navigation but that they be a free nation I will they do not forget this in the indies may be ascribe to english protection and assistance about the begin of this c c an. dom. 1600. secular account as in the ocean jubilee with large indulgence begin the english society their indian navigation and commerce sir james Lancaster be thither send with the dragon Hector ascention and Susan which their endeavour have since so well succeed that they have set and send forth twenty several Fleet or voyage plant their Factory and place a trade in surrat and other place of the great mogul in Messulopatan Bantam Patane siam Sagadan macassar and as far as Firando in japan endeavour a mutual good both to themselves and the indian without spoil Portugal or Fleming true it be that many open their mouth wide in traduce this trade and detract out traffic this way nor be I entertain or once invite to plead their case against calumnious adversary nay they need not such a defender nor fear such quarreller but because even honest mind be possess with scruple and doubt raise by ignorance or malignant imputation of busy brain for their sake if I say somewhat I shall not err from my geographical history this study receive principal supportation by the adven ur soldier and merchant honour and gain break through all obstacle and open all part of the world to every part as oblige therefore to the journal which borrow of that society have lead i alongst the indies gratitude thrust i forth a orator and patron not so much for their person or personal action which I know not and can we know any either man or society free from personal evil or be it so rare that in merchant of all sort covetousness and private end shall have place yet herein I do not I can accuse no more then excuse they but for the society and just ground of this indian adventure which some affirm gainful to the adventurer but with public detriment to the state I have adventure on this stage and oppose and expose myself to imputation for d d the indian society commend by the 1. equity the general equity thereof it be consonant to all kind of law to the law of GOD who have give the earth to the son of man each man be by natural inheritance (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) have a e e Seneca Benefic l. 7. c. 4. universal tenure in the universe of nature which by mutual office insinuate a general good of nation which flourish most in communicate their superfluity by exchange for necessary and concur with the law of this kingdom which be place in the bosom of the ocean have enact many provision for the maintenance of navigation which yield we wooden wall and movable fortress in defend ourselves or offend the enemy 2. founder 1. q. Elizabeth and particular let it be no disparagement unto this action that it be noble bear the daughter of a famous mother in Israel renown ELIZABETH who by her letter patent for the honour of her realm of England for the increase of her navigation for the advancement of the trade of merchandise and for other important cause and reason first conceive and give first breath to this society blush Englishman if thou have true english blood in thou that dare on rash surmise censure I have almost say examine the constitution of that Cyrus arsaces Augustus I want a name that more than they all if not in sound yet in ground establish adorn the english nation happy ELIZABETH the virgin-mother of thy country peace religion art arm mother to thy distress neighbour mother to so many famous expedition in and about the world and the same the mother of the indian traffic happy ELIZABETH in thy glorious successor that when our sun be set 2. k. Iames no night ensue succeed if not with masculine excellence exceed in fatherly care as well as in the royal throne in his day our peace before subject to the infirmity of conception birth infancy have grow to her mature and flourish age religion have not since Salomon day find so royal and learned a defender of the faith art elsewhere diffuse combine in that heroic centre have proclaim he king of a large extent of learning than the muse profess admirable almost miraculous be his arm who without army poise and balance the western world in a even counterpoise like herein to that omnipotent majesty which be unmoveable move all thing but alas why do I eclipse so brightshine praise with my intercede intercept praysing obscure candle before this sun long may he shine in our or that other descend shall I say to the low no exalt to the high hemisphere pardon reader if when I look up to the author of this attempt two so bright light have dazzle my weak eye and make i almost lose myself in this maze of more than human Worth yet this thou see two proposition beyond Castor and Pollux be the badge of our indian ship and the glory of our nation be the glory of this action queen ELIZABETH f f 3. justice and long and far may he flourish the majesty of king JAMES neither can the english be charge with annoy either Christian or heathen except in necessary defence or just revenge neither a do they shut up the sea to the inhabitant they plant factory not fortress on the land 4. comparison with other whereby other over-awe the native prove unfriendly to their friend seek to eat out other adventure nation and make prey of christian and Ethnic unprovoked and be it not g g 5. profit to ourselves a profit to our nation to vent clothes iron lead and other commodity to set on work so many of all trade and profession to employ so many mariner to build so many so able so capable ship to enrich the king coffer and public treasury in custom impost and other duty yea that by enrich the private adventurer the state have so many more serviceable member for the good of the whole body and be it not for the honour of our nation that the english name have pierce the remote country and fill the indian with admiration of the english 6. honour to the nation that Asia clothes we with her silk feed we with her spice cure we with her drug adorn we with her jewel and almost adore the english valour that Turkey be make so near while our indian ocean make our way to the persian the mogul the japan monarch awful name of greatness not hear of by our ancestor now delight in our new amity these and other mighty eastern potentate entertain commerce of letter and embassy with great Britain great sovereign and be it not for the honour of our nation that the mariner merchant and soldier here together conspire the english glory every one in this action as it be train in all three function and become at once a mariner in so long navigation a merchant where a little stock promise great gain and in necessary defence by sea and land a exercise soldier oh how do my soul honour those glorious exploit in the indian ocean by those two worthy general best and downton in the year 1612. and 1614 the sea become a amphitheatre where the eastern world may be spectator of the western worth the asian shore fill with troop to behold the tragical event of those terrible fight which all with all the number gallantry malignity subtlety iniquity indignation resolution preparation and strength of the country serve to increase the english victory and glory the h h see the story in their due place story be fit in another place but the honour which there be gain by our nation have fill the mogul huge dominion with admiration pierce to the persian court where our nation have since procure privilege and extend beyond the large extent of India yea the persian gulf have be awe and the Arabic or red sea tame in requital of the turk and buluch treachery not by invade violence but christian justice GOD i i 7. fortunate success himself have honour this action also with prosperous success reward the english with honour and profit their adversary with loss and confusion beside far few casualty by shipwreck or other disaster then other adventure nation have sustain neither k k 8. strength add to the navy royal see the Catalogne of their ship in sir dud. diggs his book be we able only with these nautic long arm to reach the world remote part but at home also be more dreadful to all dare attempter where to the navy royal such be adjoin the ship of the society continual increase and be able to furnish a puissant armada of themselves which but few if a few foreign of ship royal can equal I add that in the present estate of thing l l 9 defect of other trade necessity may be allege for a virtue for do we not see want of trade the merchant want traffic and consequent the mariner employment while Barbary be many year together tread under foot by barbarous civil uncivil war the strait bring into strait by looseness and abundance of turkish robber and christian unchristian rover the Spaniard and Portugal forbid trade to both the indies the russian war bereave we of russian ware shall I add division of our merchant at home or shall I not rather m m 10. other prevent fix my eye on other near our home which can preoccupate our mariner by cheap service have follow our trade into Turkey and other place by we frequent take more liberty in remote sea make prize and spoil of portugal and other by their trade into the indies have weaken our turkey and waken this Indie trade sell their spice at cheap rate than the Turkey merchant can afford yea have haunt we even into greene-land and follow english example round about the world let none traduce i as a depraver of their action who noble attempt I honour but I speak in defence of the indian traffic without which our needy mariner must have sue to serve they at sea no less than our needy voluntary soldier have do on land which without the profit now reap will have procure the inconvenience so much quarrel @. 3 answer to objection make against the indian trade and society with other argument for it for must not our mariner n n 11. evil else to mariner either die at Wapping or other dismal place of justice for injustice or else live to the death or loss of honest man thrive in unthriftiness and piracy or else most of they want employment or be force to serve foreigner better a death at Bantam then in other place more infamous fatal and better this bad adventure there for England wealth than foreigner and yet with due sobriety and temperance not wrack themselves on their o o a wine make of Rice distil as hot as aquavitae which they drink and cold water after to cool they rack a very rock or on their quicksand filthy disease woman extreme both dear and vile how many of those die many may escape better that our man shall carry foreign p p bring out of Spain etc. silver q q the main objection of man and Mony into those part to bring money and ware for the public benefit than all this money to be intercept by stranger for it grow not in England Europe no less disfurnish and we to buy those ware with more expense of money at a worse hand say Tully r r cic. offic. l. 3. of Attilius Regulus his return upon oath to the punic torture I may answer touch these loss of man and money which in dutch or other employment and transport will happen though England hold no commerce with India and yet if our mynt lack work let we examine our store of plate increase with our pride our clothes of silver gold tissue and rich-metalled stuff our lace and embroidery from the hatband to the shoestring exhaust so much silver and gold in the material that I speak not of the communicate it to other now happy unite unto we which all can but divert work from the mint especial find our man of war have have so little out of american spoil and for man how prosperous have captain Newport make two return from the indies if mariner be lose be not mariner make and breed in this employment must we not disarm ourselves s s 12. evil to the State 1. sam. 13.22 sir tho. smith the present governor of the east indiae company 1617. to who alderman holiday have since succeed and now happily govern that society of ship and leave our island watery wall destitute of their move bulwark if our sea-trade fail which without gain and glory must fail and fall too Saul and Jonathan only may be arm the king royal navy royal furnish but for merchant ship wont assistance not a sword nor a spear find in the hand of any of the people they may sharpen their mattock weed hook and axe among the philistinis but a smith in Israel do far far better that can fit we with weapon of war that we shall not need borrow of stranger and long so and not on other condition but Israel flourish may our smith flourish in our Israel if any think these fear fantastical let he but look on the face of thing before this trade be well settle how many in little space of the best merchant-ship be alienate into Spain and Italy the alceder the Bevis the royal merchant the may-flower the prosperous the Susan Parnell the gold noble the consent the concord I know not with what consent nay discord rather to our sea-concent and harmony if flux and disease pursue we in the indies have they not so do I name not kentish and Essex marsh and other unwholesome english habitation in Ireland o Ireland the land of ire indeed in the death of so many commander and soldier by war and disease in the late rebellion yea even still neither nor like our own home which yet how many be glad to leave there to cry their fortune there where not prodigal t t 13. compare with other foreign employment more dangerous less profitable of their best blood in dutch danish Sweden Poland russian war for small stipend voluntary adventure more certain death then in this indian adventure no less perhaps more than some of the former justifiable to a scrupulous conscience what shall I speak u u 14. propagation of religion of the high work of conscience in propagate christian religion and war upon the region and legion of infernal power captivate silly soul in ethnic darkness and o that our merchant will mind this merchandise the gain of soul settle learned minister in their factory to be factor for Christ then may we look for a blessing yea now we have great 10 10 15. hope of better bodily estate hope that japan may yield silver and if man prove better in soul their body may less miscarry how ever my prayer shall be to GOD almighty see sir dud. Diggs his defence of trade against the increase of trade a book tax the indian company where the reader may far better certify himself of the state and satisfy himself in the objection against it since which also m. munne have publish a treatise of that argument which I have add to my pilgrim tom. 1. lib. 5. cap. ult. prou. 26.4 for his blessing upon their endeavour for myself I have be bold to say this in their defence as a most indifferent looker on less than other more able more interest have or can and not more than reason and religion may admit which I will have interpret with the same equity with which for which it be write not impute to itch busy finger sick of the scribble disease nor to base insinuate flattery of we nor to malicious intimation and bark against foreigner who worthy exploit I honour but let themselves the provoke Portugal and not-provoked Fleming be judge that I call not the admire ethnic to honour the english worth if our trade have not be the far from first offering from suspicion of injury and therefore near to innocence and justice the true cause of that which they need not this rude but just and true apology as for other objection they be frivolous and either ridiculous or mere accidental and it be Puritanisme in polity to conceit any great good without some evil attendant in any enterprise whatsoever where the heaven great light be subject to eclipse the long day have a night the summer yield vicissitude to winter all body be mix and compound and in the great lustre make a apparent shadow apparent shadow be the object expense of victual as if these mouth will not exceed far more in quantity and quality at home of timber as if this be not the most honourable use thereof though Ireland yield supply in this kind of eclipse or sink other trade will they be angry that so few star appear when Aurora be prepare the sun chariot they add oppression and deal cruel I know not whether this be a cruel lie and many other allege against these indian navigation be but english knavigation this I know that the wise have forbid to answer a fool according to his foolishness lest thou also be like he Esay it be for fool to move scruple in the action of the wise and not hard for evil mind to make that which they find not evil but christian be to imitate he rather which command the light to shine out of darkness with a candid mind the true image of GOD alway construe doubtful thing to the best which the best will do to who and for who this be intend as for caviller they have their do here according to Salomon prescipt answer a fool according to his foolishness lest he be wise in his own conceit @. 4 the conclusion with commendation of the mariner etc. now that I have after my ability answer the objection 16 increase of art and knowledge by far discovery higini fab. 151. and produce so many argument the most of which be storehouse and head of many let this be the last argument which to i be not the least and here be place first the increase of learning and knowledge by these worthy discovery of marine worthy how little have we know of the world and the wonder of God in the world have not the sea open we a passage into all land Pegasus the wing horse which the poet feign with the stroke of his foot first make Helicon the muse well to spring be the issue of Neptune and that snaky-headed monster Medusa the mariner seem rough-hewn and rude according to the ocean that breed he but he that can play with those danger which will transform other into stone and dare dwell within so few inch of death that call the most tempestuous element his parent he I say be the true Pegasus that with his wing-like sail fly over the world which have help to deliver Andromeda geography before chain to the rock and ready to be devour of that monster ignorance and out of who salt water wise distil Clio Urania and the best of the muse drink their sweet and fresh liquor howsoever other myself must confess and this book will witness that my Helicon have in great part fly from the foot of this Pegasus and let it be the honour of our k k sir Thomas Smith governor of the east Indie company at who house be hold the consultation for they and honourable smith that his hand have fit this foot of Pegasus to this indian journey whither he be now carry you at who forge and anvil have be hammer so many iron for Neptune not like Xerxes his arrogance which proud cast fetters into the hellespont but with true effect of conquest i think I here see the stern that with little local stir stier so many ship to so l l for Virginia Summers island Muscovia north-west discovery etc. I must also acknowledge his favour to i as of sir Dudley diggs m. abbot deputy of the east Indie company for communicate to i their journal many port visit by your pilgrim HONDIUS his map of the east-india INDIA orientalis chap. 3 of the indian province next adjoin to China @. i. of cauchin China Camboia and the Laos CAuchin-China a a maginus be a Indian kingdom situate between the province of canton on the North and Camboia on the south in the bottom of a great bay divide into three province and as many king but one of they be Paramount it b b discourse of China p. 381. abound with gold silver aloe porcelain and silk they be idolater and pagan and c c gi. bot. ben. have have some devotion to the popish Christianity move thereto by certain picture of our lady of the last judgement and hell a new kind of preach and have erect many cross among they of which the friar report after their fashion some miracle their religion seem little to differ from that of the Chinois to who they be also tributary and use their character one Richard Cock Richard Cock Englishman in a letter date December the ten 1614 from Firando in japan where he be leave in factory by captain Saris write of a unhappy accident which befall master tempest peacocke who with Walter Caerwarden arrive not long before with our king letter in Cauchin-China with a present also and good to the value of seven hundred and thirty pound but while he with some principal hollander who be there likewise entertain be pass by water they be set upon and slay with harp iron together with their interpreter and follower Japander neither have they hear further what become of the rest of the company the cause be report to be a quarrel against the hollander for fraud and violence deceive they with false money and burn a town here be much of the wood call Palo Daguilla Linschot c. 22 and of the most sweet wood Calamba with other merchandise of China between this and the i will Aynao ten mile from the land be a fish for pearl to the south of this kingdom be Champa the name of a kingdom and chief city thereof of great traffic especial of aloe which grow there in the mountain prize at the weight in silver which they use in bath and in the funeral of great prince in religion they be as the former this tract bear also the name of Camboia Camboia on the north abut on cauchin China on the south the kingdom of siam on the east the sea it be a great and populous country full of elephant and abada this beast be the rhinoceros here also they begin to honour the cross as friar Silvester a man as they say much reverence by the king and honour of the people have teach they when the king die d d pop. orientali his woman be burn and his noble do voluntary sacrifice themselves in the same fire the woman be general burn with their husband at their death the camboyans deal treacherous e e jac. cornel. Nicolai with the hollander 1602. who they invite to the shore with promise of certain Buffolos and then cruel slay they they detain the admiral on shore to be redeem with some of their ordnance when they intend a journey they use divination with the foot of a hen to know whether it will be lucky or no and as the wizard shall answer they dispose of themselves either to go or stay this land have much of the sweet wood Calamba which be good be weigh against silver and gold through this kingdom run the river mecon into the sea Linschot which the indian name captain of all the river for it have so much water in the summer their winter that it drown the country as Nilus do the people of Camboia believe that all creature both man and beast of all sort do here receive reward for their work whether it be good or bad upward in the land be the Laos a great and mighty people the anas and Bramas also which dwell further up by the hill and the gueo upon the hill which live like wild man eat man flesh mark all their body with a hot iron in gallant bravery Gaspar de cruz Gasp Cruz. mention that people call Laos northwards from Camboia which come thither down f f this seem to be mecon the river before mention a river which have his beginning in China and be of eight fifteen and twenty fathom depth it pass through desert where be elephant and Bados or rhinocerote the male of which beast have a horn arise out of their snout account good for the pile this river come to cudurmuch twelve league from the principal city of Camboia make a passage to another river which descend from a great lake in the midst of which one can see land when the great water come down from the Laos river they enter that other river with such violence that it reverse and turn back the stream with a swift current and overflow all Camboia leave no passage for traveller but by boat their house also be in the low room overflow themselves remain in the high room with their household this river run upward from july to September the portugal show our author a great hill over which a ship have sail be of sufficient burden to have pass from India to Portugal these Laos bring musk from Camsi be the flesh and blood as he say of a certain beast they go naked from the waste upward truss up their hair like a cap their priest wear yellow clothes and yellow cope with certain fold and seam their religion be as in siam jarric write of these Laos or Laios that they live about the spring of mecon in cottage of timber and in open boat near the bank and lake of the river p. Jarric thes. rerum Indic l. 2. tom. 1. c. 25. which be say to extend four hundred league within the land near the tartarian and China confine these Laios about the year 1578. descend the river in great multitude with a army of two hundred thousand which all be slay drown or captive in fight with the camboyans in this battle the king of Camboia be slay also he leave behind he a young son which become vassal to the king of siam this kingdom have great town and many temple which have bonzij priest or religious man after the manner of japan and China but less superstitious than the japonian as for the Laios they be rude and barbarous but rich in Gold the king of Camboia in the year 1598. send to the jesuit for some of their society to live and preach among his people and bestow upon james Veloso a Portugal which have serve he in the war against the siamite a Peninsula stretch three league into the sea which he offer to the Portugal subjection upon condition of convert the inhabitant there be not as in other maritime part of the indies any saracen among they they be courteous and mild people and have trade with the japonian @. 2 of the kingdom of siam on this side of Camboia be g g maginus g. bot. ben. siam Zion or Silon mother-city of a kingdom bear the same name in which be reckon thirty thousand family of moor beside the natural in these part be huge wood harbour of lion tiger ounce and they tell also marich which have maiden face and scorpion tail here run Menan out of that huge lake Chiamay which yield this and other river of like nature to Nilus in Egypt Gas b. cap. 35. for this cause Balbi affirm that they build their house in Silon so he term it very high and every house have a boat belong thereto for passage and transportation of the family in that their wintertime or annual deluge and some poor porson have slight house of reed or timber set upon plank tie together or liter which they can remove whither they please as movable shop to buy and sell which be there do most by the woman this name of Zion Silon or siam may worthy move a to geographer whether this be not the sinae mention by Ptolemey marcianus and other ancient the rather because China be a name unknown to the Chinois and their country abutt on the sea e stward and the city thereof have more northerly situation than those by they ascribe to the sinae which name be here little alter and in other thing this seem rather to agree thereunto but let the curious inquire and the learned judge they have among they many religious h h discourse of China p. 390. man which lead a austere life and therefore have in great reputation of holiness these live in common they may not marry nor speak to a woman which fault be punish with death they go always barefoot in poor array eat nothing but rice and green herb which they beg from door to door they crave it not nor take it with their hand but go with a wallet at their back always with their eye modest fix on the ground and call or knock stand still till they receive answer or some thing be put in their wallet many time they set themselves naked in the heat of the sun notwithstanding that himself with such direct beam together with his fry whole army of gnat do their utmost malice on they they rise at midnight to pray unto their idol which they do in quire as the friar do they may not buy sell or take any rent which if they shall do will bring on they the imputation of heretic some merchant of siam be at Canton and hear that friar Martin Ignacio and his companion be there imprison for enter that Chinian kingdom without licence they visit they and see their poor friar weed they beside other alm offer to pay their ransom if money will do it the siamite i i g. bot. ben. lib. 2. part. 3. common hold that God create all thing reward the good punish the bad that man have two spirit one good to keep and the other evil to tempt continual attend he they build many and fair temple and place in they many image of saint which sometime live virtuous and now be in heaven they have one statue fifty pace long which be sacred to the father of man for they think that he be send from above and that of he be bear certain person that suffer martyrdom for the love of God their priest be clothe in yellow long garment this colour be esteem holy and every yellow thing for the resemblance which it have with gold and with the sun be hallow to God beside that which be before say of their strict order they may not nourish hen because of their female sex to drink wine be punish in their Priest with stone they have many fast in the year but one especial in which the people frequent the temple and their sermon they have their canonical hour by day and night for their holy thing they hold that the world shall last eight thousand year whereof six thousand be pass and then it shall be consume with fire at which time shall be open in heaven seven eye of the sun which shall dry up the water and burn up the earth in the ash shall remain two egg whence shall come forth one man and one woman which shall renew the World but there shall be no more salt but fresh river and lake which shall cause the earth without man labour to abound in plenty of good thing the siamite be the sink of the eastern superstition which they derive to many nation Gasper de cruz k k g. de Cruz. see my pilgrim to. 1. l. 1. c. 10. testify that the Bramenes in siam be witch and be the king principal servant they worship one god call Probar Missur which say they make heaven and earth and another call Pralocussur who obtain of a three name Praissur that power unto Probar Missur another call Prasur metry he think the three part of the land to be priest or religious person these religious be proud the inferior worship their superior as god with prayer and prostrate they be reverence much of the people none dare to contradict they so that when our friar Gasper preach if one of those religious come and say this be good but we be better all his auditor will forsake he they number in their opinion seven and twenty heaven hold that some of they be like Mahomet paradise fraught with fair woman with meat also and drink and that all live thing which have soul go thither even flea and louse and these lousy heaven be allot to all secular person which enter not into their rule and habit of religion they have high heaven for their priest which live in wilderness ascribe only this felicity to they there to sit and refresh themselves with wind and according to the high merit they assign other high heaven among their god which have round body like bowl and so have these that go thither they hold also that there be thirteen hell according to the differ demerit of man sin of their religious man some be supreme and sit above the king call massauchache a second order they entitle nascendeche which sit with the king and be as bishop a three and low rank sit beneath the king name mitire which be as priest and have the chapuze and saze two inferior degree under they all reverence according to their place except the priest and religious all be slave to the king and when they die their whole state devolve to he how hardly soever the wife and child shift which be cause through a rebellion against the brother of the king which then reign when the friar write this in the year 1606. balthasar Sequerius a jesuite land at tanassary balth. sequer pass from thence partly by goodly river partly over cragged and rough hill and forest store with rhinocerot elephant and tiger one of which tear in piece one of their company before his eye unto odia confer with the talipoy or religious man he learn their conceit that there be now no god in the world to govern it three have be before now dead and a four be expect which defer his come in the mean while lest this huge frame shall want a ruler it be order by a certain l l bulla bubble or brooch which some of the former god have leave the vulgar people hear these bubble babble and fable with great reverence and silence hold up their join hand they observe their festival according to the course of the moon and then open their temple whither the people resort to do their devotion these be build strong and stately with art and beauty have their porch cloister quire and low isle great chapel be annex on both side and large churchyard in one of these he see a statue of eighteen cubit length dedicate to the great God they be of marvelous abstinence and think it a great sin to taste wine in their quire they have sing man which after the european fashion sing there especial in the shut in of the evening and about midnight very early in the morning warning be give for they to go to beg from door to door they have their funeral holy and obit for the dead the carcase be burn be put into paint coffin with great solemnity if they be great man with music and dance and great store of victual to be bestow on the Talipoys thus far Sequerius the inhabitant of this kingdom be much give to pleasure and riot they refuse the use of manual art but addict themselves to husbandry they have m m Maginus g. bot. ben. public school where they teach law and religion in the vulgar language other science they learn in a more learned tongue they worship innumerable idol but especial the four element according to which his sect each man make choice of his burial they which worship the earth be therein bury the fire burn the dead carcase of they which observe it in the air be hang to feast the airy-winged people with their flesh those which adore the air be alive the water drown those which have alive be drown in that watery religion every king at his first entrance to the crown erect a temple which he adorn with high steeple and innumerable idol in the city of Socotay be one of mettle fourscore span high the kingdom of siam comprehend that of Ptolemey by arrianus in his periplus the map whereof Ortelius set forth 1597. call aurea continens nigh to which be place that aurea chersonesus than it seem by a neck of land join to the continent since n n treatise of the circumference of the earth Osor Maffaeus barrius suppose to be by force of the sea separate from the same and to be the same which be now call sumatra which tremellius and junius judge to be Salomon Ophir the land trend long and narrow and contain five hundred league of sea-coast compass from Champa to tavay but of this space the arabian or moor have usurp two hundred with the town of Patane Pahan jor and malacca now in possession of the portugal and the kingdom of avarice Chencran Caipumo and Brema have share also therein odia c c joan. bar. lib. 9 cap. 2. be the chief city thereof contain four hundred thousand household and serve the king with fifty thousand soldier and to the river Caipumo on which it stand belong two hundred thousand vessel this king have nine kingdom subject to he and thirty thousand elephant whereof three thousand be train to the war his noble hold their land in a kind of Knights-service like the turkish timar yet only for term of life without the king pay serve he whensoever he appoint with twenty thousand horse and two hundred and fifty thousand Foot the country be compass with the high hill of jangoma brema or Brama and avarice and be itself plain in situation and fertility cause by inundation like to Egypt the Lai be tributary to siam for fear of the Gueoni cannibal and man-eater live in the mountain adjacent against who the siamite defend they and invade those Gueoni one time with twenty thousand horse two hundred and fifty thousand footman and ten thousand elephant for carriage and war Caesar d d Caes Frid. Fredrick report that in the year 1567. the king of Pegu besiege the king of siam his chief city with a army of one million and four hundred thousand man and lay before it one and twenty month and have five hundred thousand fresh soldier send he in supply end yet have not prevail if treason have not more further his design then force the gate be one night set open and the Peguan enter which when the siamite perceive he poison himself leave his child and kingdom a prey to the conqueror who triumphal return Frederick then in Pegu behold since that time the king of siam have be tributary to Pegu after this peguan have reign seven and thirty year jesuit Epist. he leave his kingdom but not his fortune to his son who take displeasure against the siamite his vassal send for he to come to he which he refuse and thereupon he enter into his country with nine hundred thousand man and besiege he in his chief city which he seek politic delay make semblance still to deliver until in the three month after which be march the river overflow the country six score mile about after his yearly custom and partly drown partly commit to the siamite attend in boat for this booty to be slaughter that huge army of which scarce threescore and ten thousand return to Martavan and those without elephant and horse and when the king of Pegu proceed in his attempt with like success the siamite at last besiege he in Pegu his royal city ann. 1596. but hear a rumour of the portugal come to help he he raise his siege these be the report of Franciscus Fernandes a jesuite of the Peguan we shall speak more in the next chapter pet. w. Floris m. s. you have his journal in my pilgrim to. 1. li. 3. c. 14. Peter williamson Floris a Dutchman which live long in the east indies employ first by his countryman afterward by the english have give we the late intelligence of these part when siam say he be tributary to Pegu the two brother son to the king of siam bring up in the court of Pegu make a escape home where the elder call in the Malaya tongue Raia Api that be fiery king by other the black king have such success against Pegu as you have hear and Pegu fall raise himself to high fortune subject the kingdom of Camboia Laniangh Lugor Patane tenesary and diverse other this victorious king decease ann. 1605. and die without issue leave the throne to his brother which be term the white king of peaceable and mild disposition he lie on his deathbed 1610. by the instigation of jockrommeway one of his principal lord who seek to derive the succession upon himself cause his elder son to be slay be a young man of great hope yet his brother the second son succeed and give jockrommeway his desert this man have beside other slave two hundred and eighty Japander which to revenge their master death run in joint fury to the court and possess themselves of the young king who they compel to commit unto their massacre hand four chief man as the author of their master death and after many other abuse force he to subscribe to a composition of their own make and to give they some of the chief Palapos or priest for hostage and so depart with a great treasure use much violence at their departure the siamite as mere spectator dare nothing to the contrary the king of siam send to the japanian emperor to complain of this insolence who promise to send these japanians to he there to receive their due punishment general Saris then in japan see the man go to the court as he come from thence upon this news the kingdom of Camboya and Laniangh rebel and also one Banga de laa a Peguer who in the year 1613. revolt to the king of avarice and come to he with fifty thousand of his countryman before subject to the king of siam the king of Laniangh make also a expedition into siam within three day journey of Oudija hope to find the country still entangle with the japonian slave but be meet by the king of siam and force to retire but the report be say he that the two king have combine in league against the siamite to dispossess he be then of two and twenty year which yet without intestine rebellion they be not able to effect on August the four 1612. the english arrive at siam the town be thirty league up the river septemb seventeen they have audience of the king who grant they free trade and a fair house the country at this time of rain be cover with water October the twenty six they have such a storm that old folk have not see the like which beside other harm blow down the king father fair monument their ship be near a wrack but by great care and pain be save five of the company be drown of which they suppose one to be devour of a whale the king in the indies be all merchant none at siam may buy any commodity till the king have first serve his own turn @. 3 of the kingdom of malacca MAlacca be now subject to the portugal if not since our last intelligence take from they by the king of Achin and jor who hold it in siege as the same go conquer by Alphonsus albuquerke or f f see albiecher so king Emanuel in his letter to pope Leo contain all this exploit term he who be their great conqueror in the indies subdue more to that sceptre then all before he or since John de Barros relate at large the sound and proceed of this city bar. dec. 2. l. 6. c. 1. who write that some two hundred and fifty year before the portugal arrival in the indies it be first found ancient Cingapura be the chief place of trade and habitation in all that coast which lie in the most southerly point of all Asia about half a degree north from the aequinoctial then resort to by the merchant of China Camboia and the rest of the continent and many island to the east and west which they call dibananguin and atazanguin that be Levant and ponent or under the wind west and beyond the wind east all the navigation in those part be by the monsoon or certain wind which observe their set season of the year in those time reign in Cingapura one Sangesinga and in the neighbour part of java one Paraerisae who die leave to the care of his brother his two son which slay the elder and make himself king by his tyranny cause diverse of the javan nobility to forsake their country among the rest Paramisora flee to Cingapura who with his many follower be entertain kind by Sangesinga who not long after he ungrateful slay and by the help of his javan possess himself of the state the king of siam who tributary and son-in-law Sangesinga have be force he to leave his ill get throne and to seek new habitation one hundred and forty mile thence where he settle himself at the river Muar with two thousand follower some of which be call Cellati man that live on the sea by fish and piracy these he will not receive into his new fortress of Pago as not well trust they though before they had make he lord of Cingapura these therefore seat themselves fifteen mile from Muar in the place near which malaca now stand join with the native half savage who language be call Malayan the place grow straight they remove three mile up the river where be a hill call Beitan with a large plain the commodiousness whereof invite Paramisora to leave Pago and to join with they in this new foundation which be after call malaca signify a banish man in remembrance of this javan exile in succeed time the merchandise and merchant too remove from Cingapura to malaca saquem darsa then succeed his father Paramisora who subject himself as vassal to the king of siam which assign to his obedience all the country from Cingapura on the east to pulo Zambilan which be to the west of malaca one hundred and twenty mile all which space of coast be two hundred seventy mile by sea the monsoon the Monsonsi or wind in these part continue west and northwest from the end of August to the end of October November begin northerly wind and northeasterly which blow till the beginning of April from May till the end of August the south and Southwest bear sway according to which the mariner must direct his course and take his proper season the situation of malaca be unwholesome by reason of the marsh and nearness to the line little above two degree to the north else it will have be the most populous city in the indies the successor of Saquen darsa by little and little ease their shoulder of the siam subjection especial after the moor persian and guzurat have convert they to Mahomet sect and at last usurp absolute sovereignty but the king of siam nine year before the Portugal conquest send a fleet of two hundred sail and therein six thousand man against Mahumet king of malaca the general of which fleet be poioan his viceroy of Lugor to who the governor of Patane calantan pan and other coast-city be to pay their tribute for the king of siam from Lugor to malaca be six hundred mile sail alongst the coast much subject to tempestuous weather which divide this fleet some of which fall into Mahomet hand by treachery to the overthrow of the rest the siamite in revenge prepare a great army by land and armada by sea four hundred elephant and thirty thousand man but without expect event by the insolency of some of his soldier in rape and robbery which raise the country against they while Poioan be in the siege of pan or Pam another city in rebellion the king of siam further enrage send two armada one by the way of calantan the other by the way of tenaz-zary one on the east side the other on the west of this long tract of land but before Mahumet can be punish by the siamite the Portugal have prevail against he king Emanuel have send Diego Lopes de Sequeira from Lisbon 1508. who come the next year to malaca and there under fair colour of traffic himself and his whole fleet be in danger of betray and murder see this history in Moffaeus hist. ind. l. 4. Osorius l. 6. and 7. Barros as 2. l. 4. c. 4. and l. 6. c. 4. and seq. by this perfidious king and his Bendara or chief justice this rule all case civil the Lacsamava or admiral all marine and the Tamungo or treasurer all the revenue and these three the whole government which treachery in the year 1511. be requite by albuquerke who by his proper valour and wont fortune with secret intelligence among the malayan conquer the city expel the king who in few day vomit his soul after this pill and build there a fortress and a church establish the Portugal law but so as both the Ethnic and the moor have their own magistrate appeal reserve to the high the most remarkable thing in this exploit be the chain which one Naodobeguea one of the principal conspirer against Sequeira now encounter in a sea-fight by albuquerke in his voyage to malaca wear on his arm with a bone of a javan beast call cabal the bone of he cabal therein by virtue whereof notwithstanding many and wide wound he lose not one drop of blood till that chain be take off his vein sudden and at once empty themselves of blood and life the store of artillery of which they take three thousand piece of eight thousand which the portugal affirm have be there their venom arrow and calthrop strew in the way the poison whereof once touch the blood make they mad with other symptom as in the bite of a mad dog which they learn after to heal by chew the leaf of a certain herb grow in the country the undermine the street of the city to blow it up together with the portugal the disadvantage of the fight with elephant which be here enrage with wound will not be rule but break the rank of their own side the treachery of this people first to the portugal then to their king after that to the portugal again the prey and spolle beside all that the king and they which flee carry away and all the gold silver provision of war and concealment except amount to two hundred thousand ducat for the king due which be the five part Alodinus the son of king Mahomet busy bestir himself but in vain to recover his lose patrimony neither the i will Bintam which he fortify as he do also pagus nor force nor fraud be able to defend he from his father fate and fortune the moor have envy this success to the portugal and often have attempt to deprive they of malaca the hollander also under 1608. lay siege thereto while the Portugal be seek new conquest at Achen who in their return may easy have defeat they have they not be unadvised in too long advise when the portugal go to malaca the king of Pan marriage with the daughter of Mahomet be to be solemnize a banquet house of timber cover with silk sumptuous prepare to this purpose on thirty wheel to be draw with elephant the principal of the city be therein but this king affection be soon cool by these disaster from Cingapura to pulo Cambilan there be no other habitation of any reckon but a few put where fisherman dwell and a few village within land this be the centre of the eastern traffic Linschot r. fitch they be proud of their language which some say be devise by the founder wherein they devise many sonnet and amorous poesy the Malayos of countrypeople go naked with a cloth about their middle and a little roll of cloth about their head Lodovico barthema who be there before the portugal know it suppose that here arrive more ship then in any city in the world the river Gaza near thereunto be more after his reckon then fifteen mile over the people in the country lodge in tree for fear of tiger it be strange that g g bar. dec. 2. l. 6. cap. 1. Barros write of these tiger that in the height of eight yard they will reach and devour man their chief preservative against they be their night fire the multitude be such that many enter by night into the city for prey of which he tell that after the portugal have take it that a tiger leap over a high wall and carry away three slave tie to a piece of timber together with the wood leap again upon the wall with admirable lightness the country be barren the city abound nevertheless with plenty of necessary exceed those place whence they be bring after that f f joan. bar. l. 9 Alphonsus albuquerke have conquer malacca the moor dispossess there seat themselves in diverse place along the coast and some of they usurp the title of king @. 4 of Patane and the neighbour petty kingdom PAtane g g g. Arthus Dantisc hist. ind. orient pag. 333. be a city southwards from siam chief of that kingdom whereto it give name in the height of seven degree the building be of wood and reed but artificial wrought the mesquit for many of they be Mahometan be of brick the Chinois be more than the native inhabitant they be of a ash-colour they use h h Navig jacob neccij three language the malayan which to they be natural the sian and Chinan the first be write like the Hebrew from the right hand the second like the latin from the left and almost in like character the three from the right to the left with a descent from the top to the bottom the Chinois have idolatrous temple and so have the sians wherein be many golden statue the priest which attend they be clothe in yellow they have sacred youth which be their oracle the people when they inquire of they sit a convenient distance from the image and observe the young man gesture who with his hair dishevel lie prostrate before the idol sing and play on instrument until he arise and stand up for then as possess of the devil he run up and down with a terrible countenance and make a stir as if he will kill himself and they that stand by with a sword which he have in his hand then the people prostrate themselves request he to declare the devil oracle and he answer as please he his lie be account oracle adultery be here a capital offence the father of the malefactor be the executioner or his next kinsman if he be dead yet be this vice common notwithstanding this rigour by reason of the woman unbridled lust the kingdom have be govern many year by a queen who give good entertainment to the hollander james neccij and his fellow an. 1602. after their double misfortune and madness which have befall they the one in jest the other in earnest this at Macao in China where they be and know it not and set twenty man on i i the hollander see many man and woman of China in their boat which be fisher and dwell in they but see not a Portugal nor can procure any of the other at any sum to deliver they a letter on shore after 1603. the hollander take a rich ship of the portugal at Macao lade for japan cornel. de vena shore never see they again but hear that the portugal have cause fifteen of they to be hang the other at Auarella Falca in 11. degree and a half where they find the tract of cart and footing of beast but can not see a man nor shoot a beast they guess that the people live as the tartar wander in cart and tent without any settle dwelling the place be by they call Sotternym by reason that many of their company have lose the use of reason and become mad with eat a certain fruit there grow like to plum with a tender stone which continue till they have sleep have they know then the easiness of the cure it have be better than any comedy to have tickle their spleen and provoke k k a merry madness of every one in his humour laughter to see one fight against the enemy which assault he at his cabin to hear another with piteous shriek cry out on the multitude of devil and hobgoblin which affright he a three see strange sight and cry out the ship be full of stranger and while one in more please distraction enjoy and joy in that distract pleasure the sight of God and his angel another transport by this humour Charon with dreadful and ghastly look and tremble at his suppose sight of the devil and his hellish associate it be a madness to relate how exceed this their madness be diversify and how many act this tragical comedy have till sleep have disperse those fume wherewith that fruit have distract their brain from thence as be say they come to Patane where the queen entertain they in good sort and to their contentment as the difference of their writing in such nearness of dwell be very much so no less be find in their religion the pataneans be Mahometan the Chinois and siamite be ethniks in that diversity of rite which you have hear while the hollander be there one of those youth in that prophetical dictraction before mention warn they to depart from thence for a great fire will otherwise consume they whereupon many forsake their habitation and yet no fire happen they also see the execution of their severe law against adultery on two noble personage who lewd familiarity be detect she choose to be strangle and he to be stab the law permit they their choice of the kind of death which by the father of the party be execute on they in single person it be account no crime and if a foreign merchant come to trade there they use to ask he if he need not a woman yea many young woman offer their service and the price and time be agree on she who he please to choose go with he to his house and in the day perform the office of a servant in the night of a concubine but then neither of they may seek change of pleasure without great peril the siamite that live here wear two or three l l orbell ball of gold or silver as big as a tennis-ball in their yard as we shall after observe in Pegu the mahometans wear they not the queen keep herself close at home among her woman of which some may not marry but yet may do worse other may have first obtain the queen licence it be seldom that she be see yet sometime she ride on a elephant in progress for her recreation and for elephant they have a device to take they in this sort some ride into the m m see the next chapter of another way to take they wood on a tame elephant and when they espy a wild one they provoke he to fight while these be fasten in the encounter by the tooth or tusk each strive to overthrow the other some come behind the wild elephant and fasten his hinder foot and so either kill he for his tooth or by famine tame he Peter williamson Floris 1612. june the two and twenty some of the english come to Patane with a letter from his majesty to the queen accompany with a present from the merchant of six hundred rial of eight this letter be deliver in great pomp be lay in a basin of gold carry on a elephant furnish with many little flag lance and minstrel the queen court also be sumptuous prepare to this business they obtain grant of a trade on like condition to the hollander who have their factory their ten year before that time and their house in that space twice burn the japonite have twice destroy Patane by fire in five or six year space the country adjoin be also full of war the king of jor overrun and burn in September that year all the suburb of Paan those of Camboya and jagoman join their force against the king of siam on the one and thirty of December the queen of Pantanie go to sport herself accompany with six hundred prawe where we say Floris salute she be a comely old woman about sixty tall and full of majesty such as they have see few in the indies she have in company her sister which be heir apparent common call the young queen unmarried and about forty six year of age the queen have not be forth of her house in seven year before and now intend to hunt wild bull and buff of which there be great abundance the water this year be extraordinary high carry away many house the queen young sister be marry to the king of n n Pan or Pam or pane. this king promise much favour to the english if they will resort to his city which be in a little island Pahan who she have not see in twenty eight year notwithstanding her often embassy to that purpose at last provoke with the king dally and delay to send she she send out a fleet of seventy sail with four thousand man to Pahan to bring her sister by force in April 1613. he be distress by war which the king of jor have make on he burn his house barn and provision and the queen of Patanie make stay of all junk of Rice lade for Pahan arrive there july the twelve with the queen sister and her two son and all the dog be for his sake kill because he can endure none August the second he be entertain with a feast at which the english be invite guest where they see a comedy play all by woman after the manner of java with antique apparel very pleasant to behold once before in the queen presence they have see twelve woman and child dance very well after they the gentleman and last of all the hollander and the english be request to do it this queen be well moneyed both the english and dutch take up money of she at use this and merchandise be in the indies the practice of king on the first of October there happen a lamentable fire on a strange occasion two great man datoe bezoar and Datoe Laxmanna dwell near together both rich in slave it fall out that bezoar hear that his javan slave have treatn to kill he with Laxmanna and other cause two of his most suspect slave to be bind which the o o governor or chief over they Ponyonla of the slave will not suffer and thereupon be stab by he with his Creese his javan slave see this will have take he but by rescue of his other slave he escape they nevertheless slay all that come in their way and present set the house on fire laxmanna javan slave can not by any threat be detain from join with they and set all on fire as they go so that the whole town except the queen court the meskit and some few house be burn the javan take such bondwoman as they best like away with they and flee into the country few of they can be take johor or jor in this year 1613. be take by the force of the king of Achen after twenty nine day siege the hope a holland ship of six hundred tun which set sail from Bantam in March with eighty man twenty four piece and seventy thousand rial of eight in silver and the worth of ten or twelve thousand in cloth have the ill hap to come to this river of johor and some go up to the town but before they can return the Achin armada come to this siege so that twenty three of their man be take the rest come October the one and twenty to Patanie master Copland then at Achin with general best write that the king armada return arrive july the three galley and frigate a hundred and twenty or more with which laxaman the general have subdue the kingdom of joar and Siak bring with he both the king and two of their brethren which he say be honourable send back and remain tributary to Achin the p p i. Hermannus hist. nau. 1602. 1604. hollander have have much trade at Patane and the king of johar or jor move with their good success against the portugal join his navy to they to chase they out of those part yea they have brave the portugal even before goa the seat of their viceroy and in November 1604. at Calcutta q q step. ab hagen enter into solemn league with the Samaryn at least offer it jarric deny the acceptation against they and the next year they win from the portugal the castle of Amboyne and Tidore not to mention many other prize take from they by the hollander at Macao one ship worth a million at Sincapura etc. at sundry time in the year 1605. Cornelius matelivius be send to the indies with twelve ship and the next year after Paulus a Caerden with twelve more and matelive r r cornel. Mateliu Navig and pug amsteldam hist io. isacij pontavi besiege malaca as before be say but in this attempt they have not success answerable to their desire and yet not so ill as be likely for the s s relot gen. Saris. portugal upon this news return from Achin upon espial of a flemish sail call a counsel and make it the next day before they come up in which space the Hollander have leisure to bring all his ordnance then on shore for battery aboard his ship and to prepare himself for fight which he hold two day with the Portugal with two ship loss on each side the Portugal give way so little counsel be sometime in consultation and easy be opportunity lose in the very seek jarric write that the hollander have take the fortress of amboin and Tidor enter league with ten neighbour king enemy to the portugal and with eleven ship seven t t their shipboat bark come before malaca in the end of April 1606. the king confederate have of all sort of ship three hundred twenty seven with four thousand man the Japander which be then in malaca upon affair of merchandise do perform good service for the distress Portugal the siege continue almost four month in which the city endure fifty thousand great shot before the viceroy Alphonsus Castrius free the same he leave the charge of goa to the care of Menesius the archbishop with a great armada set forth in the begin of May ignorant of this siege and set upon the achener by the way where he get blow and shame six league from malaca the hollander fight with he August the eleven the first day be little difference the next day one Holland ship be burn and the admiral fire two Portugal ship burn one of they the admiral on the three and four the Portugal have the better but so as neither part be absolute conqueror he that will not only read but in manner see the most of these exploit of the hollander with other rarity of the indies may resort to Theodoricke u u indiae orientalis part 8. t. and be de bry. and Israel de bry who have in lively stamp express these navigation with the observation of Linschoten and other Floris their countryman complain that they suffer and assist moor and ethnic in this indian trade which they forbid to their servant countryman and brethren upon pain of death and loss of good they have in the eastern island do much harm to the portugal and spaniard captain Schot take the castle and island of solor with a great quantity of Sandelwood and send the portugal to malacca he mention one fleet of they in the molucco of two and twenty sail and that they expect the next year 1614 fourteen sail more nic. bang itinerat Bangam name seven and thirty factory and twenty fort and castle of they all beyond the cape comori in some place where they have castle he say they threaten to carry such as prisoner to their fort that shall sell their commodity to the english in some place where the people be poor and have nothing but their clove to live on the hollander buy it at a cheap rate as fifty rial of eight the Bahar which they seldom give in money but in Rice clothes and commodity so that eight rial of eight well employ on the coast of coromandel may here yield a Bahar which be six hundred twenty five pound of clove he add that they will not suffer the malayan and javan to have clove but of they at sixty six rial ready money Richard cock from japan write that the spaniard fear the loss of the philippina by their force which be sufficient to do in those sea what they listen the spaniard succeed the portugal in the molucco which the hollander take from they and the viceroy of Mexico with the governor of manilla have join in their endeavour against they the country people also better affect the Spaniard as more liberal and bountiful the spaniard have in these eastern part beside manilla the castle of Gamalamma in ternate of Tidore Gelola battachina as Bangam observe thus much have I think to speak here of the hollander who have worthy seek and find much honour especial by their marine exploit round about the world which if it be attend with some unneighbourly quarrel with we and other soil of covetousness in this human frailty and their proper thriftiness be no great wonder Balbi mention a island on this coast call Carnalcubar the inhabitant whereof go from one island to another as the caribe be wont to hunt man for their cruel diet for the most part they live on fish go naked without law and have almost seize on he and his company David Middleton 10 10 d. mid. voyage 1609. m.s. affirm the like of another island call Seran which provoke by wrong from the portugal eat all christian they can get roast they alive without regard of any ransom chap. 4 of the kingdom of Pegu or Brama and the subject and neighbour kingdom @. i. of the greatness of the king of Pegu of the kingdom Brema or Brama the city royal be a a g. bot. ben. Pegu the nation where begin the greatness of the late king these braman inhabit near the lake Chiamay among who the king of Pegu have his lieutenant or viceroy one whereof the deputy of tangu about threescore and ten year since rebel against he and surprise the kingdom of prom melintay calam Bacam Mirandu avarice all people with the braman trend northwards a hundred and fifty league he after attempt siam with a army of three hundred thousand and spend three month in make way through the huge wood and inaccessible place but achieve not his purpose after his return he assail Pegu and conquer it and then return the second time 1567. as in the former chapter be mention b b n. Pimenta f. fernandez he subject to his signory twelve kingdom which Fernandes thus rehearse the kingdom of Cavelan where be the best ruby and saphire second that of avarice the bowel whereof be fill with mine of copper lead and silver the three Bacan enrich with mine of gold Tungran the four abound with c c a kind of gum wrought by pismire as bee make wax whereof be make our hard wax colour etc. Lac and lead such be prom the five the six be jangoma store with copper musk pepper silk silver gold Lauran the seven have bejoin enough to ladeship the eight and nine be the kingdom of Trucon staple of china-merchandize the ten and eleven be the diadem of Cublan between avarice and China powder with precious stone siam whence we last come be the last of the twelve in the invasion whereof he arm a million and threescore thousand man which number be short of d d Frederick say he have 26 crown king at command and that no king in the world be of great power Caes fred. frederick reckon except we ascribe that surplusage to victualler voluntary and servant and attendant on the baggage which army say Fernandes he tithe out of his people take one only of ten Frederick then in Pegu say he have five hundred thousand send he in supply of those which be slay and lose of the first army which consist of e e Balbi say 1500000. fourteen hundred thousand man after one and twenty month siege he prevail by treason of the siamite which open one of their gate in the night and receive his force into the city whereupon the king of siam poison himself leave a rich booty to the conqueror he see at the king return the elephant order in a triumphal square lade with gold silver jewel and with the great prisoner of siam this king say the same author have no power by sea but in the land for people dominion gold and silver he far exceed the great Turk he have diverse magason full of treasure which be every day increase without diminish beside that he be lord of the mine of ruby and other jewel the king in his feast use to ride on a triumphal chariot all guild draw by sixteen horse it be high with a goodly canopy over it twenty lord attend the same hold in their hand a rope fasten to this chariot to keep it upright the king sit in the middle and about he stand four of his chief favourite before march the army in the midst all the nobility and round about the chariot exceed pompous and orderly the king have one principal wife three hundred concubine the voyage from saint Thomee use by the portugal be by Negrais where on the left hand stand a Varella all guild serve for a sea mark the sun shine thereon cause it to be see far off near thereto be the island of fly so call of the store of fly g. balby cap. 34. r. fitch city in the way from Negrais to Pegu cause by the multitude of fish there salt thence balby pass to Cosmi the territory whereof be full of wood and these full of tiger wild swine parrot ape and other creature Cosmi be in sixteen degree one three part the house be of cane cover with thatch much annoy with tiger which enter often into the town and devour man or beast from hence they pass in paros or bark by diverse village alongst the river to jaccubel a great city and a little beyond to another call tegiatden Diana be a great town a little further where they make bark or vessel as big as galleass have on both side quite through room for merchandise and in the midst a kind of dwellinghouse where they trade they pass further by Bedagiamana Lagapala Purdabin Gungiebin where they anchor in the midst of the stream for fear of the tiger which in the water sometime assault man Coilan a city four square each square three mile Twagnedan another city full of Varellas or temple and image levagon a pleasant city full of palmtree Siluanpedi where many victual bark be make and serve for dwelling and victual down to the sea Dala where the king stable for his elephant be Dogon the most religious Meccao where they unlade their good to pass by land to Pegu all this way be by fresh river with swift tide the house on both side many build upon timber ascend by ladder to prevent tiger for which cause also some keep buffal in their house the send of who the tiger can endure all this way they use Manini in stead of money make of glass the varella or temple in this way be innumerable of diverse fashion this king hold himself the great king in the world and cause himself to be entitle the live god upon earth which the live GOD in heaven avenge on he as you shall hear Caplan be the place where they find ruby spinel and saphire dig out of high hill to which none may have access but by leave it be six day journey beyond aua. the buffal in these part be of ash-colour so great that they be like elephant in any great solemnity the four white elephant go before the king with furniture all of gold their tooth also in a iewelled sheath he have much artillery but want man to manage they much material for ship but want shipwright and mariner his jewel be inestimable balby see he wear two ruby each as big as two date but not so long of admirable lustre he so abound with wealth that a hundred ship fraught with rice seem to diminish nothing of the plenty the field be say to yield three harvest in a year and of gem the store be beyond estimation and almost make they there short of the estimation of gem but this wealth then want no store have when Fernandes write this 1598. a contrary vicissitude of no store but of want even of those thing which nature exact as necessary prop of life scarce of so many million be leave seven thousand person man woman and child to participate in the king imprisonment or siege in his tower and those feed on man flesh the parent require of the child that life which before they have give to sustain their own and now lay they not in their bosom but in their bowel the child become live sepulcher of their scarce-dead parent the strong prey upon the weak and if their flesh be eat up before by their own hunger leave nothing but skin and bone to the hungry assault of these ravener they rip the belly and devour their inward part and break the skull suck out the brain raw yea the weak sex be by the strength of famine arm with no less butcherly despite against whosoever they can meet in the street of the city with their knife which they carry about they as harbinger to their tooth in these inhospitall inhuman-human banquet and thus do the besiege citizen while the king endure in his tower no small part of like misery beside the indignity so to be by his own vassal straighten and after slaughter but such be the just hand of the king of king who regard not person but as he show mercy to the merciful so do he reserve vengeance for cruelty and tyranny pardon i reader if on this spectacle I cause thou with myself to stay a while and wonder the sun in his daily journey round about this vast globe see few equal that I say no more to this peguan greatness and yet in a small space he that be high than the high have abate and abase this magnificence low than the low of his prince @. 2 of the destruction and desolation of Pegu after the death of that braman conqueror his son in the second month of his succeed reign hear that the king of avarice his tributary and uncle be plot some conspiracy commit to prison forty of his noble partner in that new project and bring they all with their parent wife child friend and acquaintance into a wood set y y there be destroy by this flame and execution 4000 person Arthus pag. 326. and Gasper balby c. 37. have the same number say that all the citizen of Pegu be enjoin to be present at the execution he call the place not a wood but a prison he be then at Pegu fire thereon command to cut they in piece whosoever escape out of the flame this kindle another fire in the heart of his discontent subject which be not quench but with his overthrow he war on his uncle the king of avarice with no great advantage till they both agree to try it by single combat on elephant Pegu obtain the conquest their fight be first with harquebuse after with dart last with sword by the help of his elephant Pegu prevail yet so as their perish above two hundred thousand of the three hundred thousand he lead forth in this expedition and almost as many of the auan side of his elephant tooth which die in this battle be make little image or idol in the mean time the siamite with a army march to the border of Pegu divulge rumour that he come to succour his lord against the auan rebel the king enrage hereat send present part of his force to take he and present he captive but the soldier refuse to follow the general in this enterprise and return to their own house the king after his return send to siam by fair speech to persuade he to come to he he refuse his presence but deny not his wont tribute hereupon the king after two year provision for the war make that unhappy expedition in the former chapter mention and there the water take part with the siamite he try once and again the like fortune of war he send his brother the king of jangoma and his own son twice which do much harm to the siamite and receive no little themselves never return without loss of half their army and of his own son in the last invasion slay with a shot relentless he inflame rather with his loss determine another expedition in his own person and therefore lay up store of provision in Barnes at Martavan Murmulan Tavay and Tanassarin three year together purpose then to employ all the Peguan in this enterprise but they weary of foreign calamity hide themselves in wood and wilderness and some turn talopoye so they call their religious person many sell themselves slave the king persist in his person give order to his uncle Ximibogus to take a muster of all the people and to entertain half of they for the war but he miss so many which have by those new course prevent this service acquaint the king therewith who enjoin the late profess talopoye to resign their habit the youngman to be compel to warfare the old man to be exile to the braman where after he cause they to be exchange for horse he cause all the Peguan also to be brand in the right hand that they may be know this make they entertain thought of rebellion which be first practise by the cosmians who set a new king over they the peguan send a army against they with charge to burn or bring away all they can find among they which they do together with many of the people of both sex which he after his manner set wood about they burn and when the rest not able to war against their king and famine at once submit themselves with exquisite z z the cruel tyranny of the king of Pegu torment he ssue they all he then send to his son the king of avarice to transplant those people of every age and sex to people these forlorn desolation of Pegu they unacquainted with this air break forth in disease wherewith they infect also the natural inhabitant which plague make such havoc that many in impatience cast themselves into the river the murmulans with help of the siamite seize on their castle who the king besiege a year together and then be force from thence by the siamite sudden irruption with loss of the most of his people the horse elephant and country itself remain their recompense and the peguan captain also fear their master tyranny become subject to the siamite who whole family this tyrant with fire and water destroy so that all the tract from Pegu to martava and Murmulan be make a wilderness these thing do he send for his young son the king of prom and command he to the siege of Murmulan who utter mislike the attempt convey himself in the night homeward with purpose of rebellion the king of siam not ignorant of this peguan estate invade the country in harvest-time and therefore that which they can they convey into Barnes the rest be fire he proceed and lay siege to Pegu in which at that time be a hundred and fifty thousand man and three thousand piece of ordnance a thousand whereof be brass but as be say for fear of the portugal which be report to have enter into siam by the way of Camboia he depart leave famine behind as lieutenant of his war which cause the foreigner then in Pegu for the defence thereof to get they to their own home those few which remain live with provision from tangu the king send to his deputy in tangu to come to he with all the inhabitant of the country and their store leave his wife and some few to guard the city he answer that he will send half and to demand all be unreasonable the king send four nobleman with soldier to force he hereunto but he slay the leader and seize on their follower thus the famine increase and the people eat one another the king number the citizen among who he find seven thousand siamite who he command to be slay not leave above thirty thousand of all sort in the city his son the king of prom which have now stand out three year begin to relent and sue for pardon with promise to bring the promans to the number of fifty thousand to the city whereat his father rejoice and seal his pardon which he send he with many gift judas can be secure till he hang himself but his chief counsellor author of this rebellion fear all the blame will be lay on he poison the prince himself aspire to the kingdom be within one week destroy and the noble every man seek to seize the state to himself cause that of those fifty thousand within two month space while every week they have a new prince scarce remain fifty man fit for war which depart to Pegu three or four in a ship leave their country to the habitation of wild beast the native of Pegu be not quite extinct but many of they be flee into other kingdom of who and of the braman jangoma number a hundred and twenty thousand Oracan twenty thousand siam a hundred thousand and the king of jangoma be able they say to arm a million of men. the talapoye persuade the jangoman to depose his brother of Pegu he allege his oath unto his father while he live they reply that no oath may prohibit if he place his brother in a or golden throne to be adore for a god and partly with this I may not call it reason and partly as Xerxes allege for himself because that his elder brother be bear before his father be king and because his mother be the former king of pegu daughter he persuade himself that it be lawful and thus be the state of this mighty kingdom in the year 1598. bring to one city which also be now become a wither carcase and well-near the sepulchre of itself and as mischief come not alone besiege by Mogus king of Orracan Andrea a a and. bovet boves in his letter the eight and twenty of march 1600. thus finish this tragedy when the king of Pegu see himself in such strait besiege by the king of Orracan or Arracan and tangu in his castle of Macao in decemb. 1599 he yield himself to the king of Tangu who deal treacherous with he and cut off his head as he do to the queen likewise and the prince he then haste to the tower of Pegu where he find as much gold and jewel as lade b b jarric have 700. elephant and 700. horse six hundred elephant and as many horse beside silver and other metal of small price which he leave behind the king of Arracan then absent and angry that the king of tangu contrary to promise have seize all the treasure to himself purpose to invade his kingdom and to that intent have the aid of many portugal among who this jesuite be one who see the way and field late so fertile now full strew with dead man bone and skull and in the river all passage of ship hinder by the carcase of men. the king of Arracan find in the town aforesaid three million of silver with two and thirty hundred piece of ordnance and then remain lord of Pegu but the king of siam and jangoma prevent his enterprise for tangu which they invade to deprive he of his treasure the king of siam twice assail Martavan with repulse whereupon he cause two of his cowardly captain c c a cruel punishment of coward to be cast into cauldron of scald oil and the three time conquer that kingdom Peter williamson Floris have give we late relation he report that the king of Pegu have in his flourish greatness twenty king subject to he which fall to the siamite Raia Api before mention he besiege Unxa or Pegu two month without effect dearth and death make Pegu resign himself to the king of tangu that so he may also prevent the king of Arracan who come with his power take the city and the country the king of tangu agree with he to restore certain treasure the white elephant and the king daughter both which I see say Floris in Arracan 1608. and the king of Pegu or else that he himself will kill he which he afterward do with a pilon wherewith they stamp their rice as be free I know not by what art against any stab thus come this empire after the destruction of many million of Peguan to desolation that at this day there be no remembrance of it the king of Arracan give the town or fort of Siriangh on the river of Pegu to the portugal in keep especial to Philip de britto de Nicote who he style Xenga that be honest who scarce so prove for three or four year after take this king son prisoner sirian he make he ransom he at 110000. Tangan and ten Galeas of Rice after that grow insolent and care for no body but in march 1613. the king of avarice take Siriangh and slay all the portugal and spit or otherwise torture as the fame go this Philip de Britto this king give order for the building up again of the old town and call together the peguer make they many fair promise and so go forward to Tenesseryn where Banya come to he with fifty thousand Peguan before subject to siam thus far Floris jarric thes. Indic part. 1. l. 2. cap. 24. equus Sejanus elephas Peguanus some tell of this white elephant for so they speak as if there be but one whereas Fitz Balbi and Fredrick see four but it seem one be of principal estimation that it be observe with no less honour than the king and come not abroad without great pomp it have be a dismal and disastrous beast to five or six king which have the possession thereof all have tragical end the king of Arracan 1599 return home in triumph this white elephant rich adorn go before the brother and two son of the king of Pegu follow p. jar. thes. rer. ind. l. 6. c. 31. jarric write that the king of Pegu yield himself his wife and thirteen child three other the king of Arracan have two son in hostage and a daughter in marriage to his sister husband the king of tangu trust the rather to his fidelity because when his elder son have forsake he jar. fernand. and go to tangu in hope of the queen his aunt favour she cause his loss of loyalty to be punish with the loss of his head tangu kill all this royal family Martavan Martavan before mention be a goodly peguan kingdom but by war be bring into like misery the region be so fertile that it yield three harvest in a year and send yearly fifteen ship to malaca as many to cochin lade with Rice the wood abound with excellent fruit the herb and shrub be general odoriferous or medicinal diverse kind there grow of rice not like to we store of pine and Tecam a wood not subject to rottenness a country rich in mine of iron lead steele brass silver gold and ruby spring and river indian palm and sugarcane the forest have Buffolos hart boar wild the haven open at all time of the year and not choke with sand as usual in the indian winter the city stand in 16. degree of great trade a temperate air the megrim be unknown nor physician the king Bannalaius ninety nine year of age who with his heir apparent be chase out of the kingdom and hide themselves in the forest as before that time above two hundred thousand of their subject have do only three thousand stay with the king thus have you hear of the power and subversion of this great monarchy so much the more lamentable because their fall be from such a height the country be so fertile that at what time soever corn be put into the ground the payment be good with increase I have see with my eye say Caesar Frederick that they have eat serpent scorpion all manner of herb and grass such fertility and such stomach as they make credible the report of their huge army so do they make more terrible the report of their desolation this that I speak of their diet I understand not of their extremity and famine but ordinary master fitch say the same that they eat root herb leave dog cat rat and snake they refuse almost nothing @. 3 of the peguan rite and custom it be above a hundred year since Vertomannus be there who in company of a persian merchant go to visit the king who then have war in aua. they go in a boat all of one piece of wood fifteen or sixteen pace long the oar be cane and the mast be one cane as big as a herring barrel the king wear as many jewel as be worth a great city which make he in the night time to shine as the sun he have a sacrifice to do to the devil and the next day the persian present he with rich coral which he take in so good worth that he give he as many ruby as be worth a hundred thousand ducat some year d d 1496. before Hieronymo de Sancto Stephano find he in the same war with avarice and say of he that he have ten thousand elephant and breed or bring up every year five hundred the king that live when m. fitch e e 1588. M.R. fitch Caes fred. balby be there son to the conqueror have one wife and three hundred concubine of who he be say to have fourscore and ten child he sit in judgement almost every day they use no speech in their suit but give up their supplication write in the leaf of a tree with the point of a iron big than a bodkin these leaf be of a ell long and two inch broad they be also double he which give in his supplication stand a little off with a present which if the king grant his request he accept if not he return with his present they kneel down thrice lift up their hand and kiss the ground thrice this they do four time before they come where the king sit who speak by a interpreter and not immediate to the suppliant who with these rombee so they call these kneel present their gift over their head his guard lie prostrate to the earth Pegu be or at least in a more unhappy tense when they be there be a city great strong and very fair with wall of stone and great ditch round about it with many crocodile in they there be two town the old in which the merchant abide and the house be make of cane call Bambos and the new for the king and his nobility the city be so subject to fire that every day proclamation be make to take heed to their fire the city be square with fair wall have in each square five gate beside many turret for sentinel to watch make of wood and gild very fair the street be straight as a line from one gate to another and so broad that ten or twelve man may ride a-front through they on both side at every man door be set a coco-tree yield a fair show and comfortable shadow that a man may walk in the shade all day the house be make of wood and cover with tile the king house be in the midst wall and ditch about and the house within of wood sumptuous wrought and guild and the house wherein his pagode or idol stand be cover with tile of silver and all the wall be guild with Gold within the first gate of the king house be a large room on both side whereof be house make for the king elephant among the rest he have four white elephant a thing rare in nature but more precious in his estimation for this be part of his royal title the king of the white elephant and if any other have any he will seek by favour or force to have the same which some c c Linschot say be the cause of the quarrel betwixt he and the king of siam great service be do unto they every one of these white elephant stand in a house guild with gold and be feed in vessel of silver gilt one of they as he go every day to the river to be wash pass under a canopy of cloth of gold or silk carry by six or eight man as many go before play on drum or other instrument at his come out of the river a gentleman wash his foot in a silver Bason there be of black elephant nine cubit high the king be say to have above five thousand elephant of war there be about a mile from Pegu a place build with a fair court in it r. fitch 28. Gas balby c. 38. Arist. hist a l. 9 tell of take the wild with fight on the tame and weary they to take wild elephant in a grove which they do by the female elephant train to this purpose and anoint with a certain oil which cause the wild elephant to follow she when the huntsman have bring the elephant near to the city they send word thereof and many horseman and footman come out and cause the female to take a straight way which lead to the place where she enter and he after she for it be like a wood when they be in the gate be shut and they get out the female the wild one see himself alone weep and run against the wall which be make of strong tree some of they break their tooth therewith then they prick he with sharp cane and cause he to go into a strait house and there fasten he with a rope and let he fast three or four day and then bring a female to he with meat and drink within few day tame he when they go into the war they set a frame of wood upon their back bind with great cordes wherein sit four or six man which fight with gun dart arrow and other weapon all author agree that no beast come so near the reason of a man as the elephant yea they seem to go before some man in conceit haughtiness desire of glory thankfulness etc. the Peguan be beardless and carry pincer about they to pluck out the hair if any grow they black their tooth for they say a dog have white tooth the man of Pegu avarice jangoma and Brama wear ball in their yard which they put in the skin be cut and wear for every child one till they have three and may take they out at pleasure the least as big as any walnut the big as big as a little hen egg they be invent to prevent sodomy which they use more than any people in the world abuse the Male-sex cause the woman also to wear scant clothes that as they go their thigh be see bare to provoke man to lust both these be ordain by a certain queen for those cause and be still observe if the king give any one of his ball it be a great jewel account they heal the place in six or eight day the braman that be of the king blood prick some part of their skin and put therein a black colour which last always if any merchant resort thither he shall have many maid say d d Lins c. 17. Linschoten offer he by their parent to take his choice and have agree with their parent he may for the time of his abode use she as his slave or his concubine without any discredit to she yea if he come again after she be marry he may for the time he stay there demand she in like sort to his use and when a man marry he will request some of his friend to lie the first night with his bride there be also among they that sow up the privy part of their daughter leave only passage for urine which when they marry pass under the surgeon hand for remedy Gasper balby and got. Arthus Arthus tell of another custom of their virgin if that name may be give they for say he e e hist indiae orient p. 313. and balby c. 37. their money be call Ganza and be make of copper and lead which every man may stamp that will gold and silver be merchandise and not money the tide of the sea between Martavan and Pegu by f f Caes fred. so balby also Caesor Fredricke be repute the great wonder which he see in his travel be so violent that the air be fill with noise and the earth quake at the approach of this watery element shoot the boat that pass therewith as arrow which at a high water they suffer not to anchor in the channel which will betray they to the devour jaw of the return tide but draw they towards some bank where they rest in the ebb on dry land as high upon the channel bottom as any house top and if they arrive not at their certain station they must back again whence they come no place else be able to secure they and when it increase again it give they their call or salutation the first wave wash over the bark from stem to stern the second be not so furious the three raise the anchor in Negrais in Pegu g g r. fitch diverse people dwell in boat which they call paroe the country being full of river in which they go to and fro with their family as strange be the dwell here on the land their house be set on high post and their go up on ladder for fear of tiger from hence to Pegu be ten as be say before or eleven day journey by the river as before be express where their Market be as their dwelling upon the water in boat with a great Sombrero like a cartwheel g. balby to keep off the sun make of cocoa-leaf they use in ride to carry bit in their mouth which make they swell and puff cheek the husband buy their wife and if they mislike put they away and if the wife parent will take away their daughter they must restore that which be give in price for she if a man die without child the king be his heir and if he have child the king have a three they the rest they use to carry man somewhat after the fashion of congo in a kind of coverlet of Cotton call Delingo of diverse colour make commodious to keep off the sun and rain and easy to lie on as a bed carry by four man which always run from morning to night rest only once in the day the wife child and slave of the debtor be bind to the creditor who may carry the debtor to his house and shut he up or else sell the wife child and slave the noble and ignoble observe one fashion of attire differ in the fineness of the matter which common be bombast one piece for a shirt another large and paint tie up between the leg on their head a kind of mitre of the same and some like a hive they go barefoot but the noble usual be carry in delingo or on horseback the woman wear a smock to the girdle from thence a strait cloth of purpose to show that they be woman in sort before relate they go barefoot their arm lade with hoop of gold and jewel and their finger full of precious ring with their hair roll up about their head many wear a cloth about their shoulder in stead of a cloak in Pegu they use much opium Aracan be midway between Bengala and Pegu on the coast he be able say Frederick to arm many au by sea and by land have certain sluice with the which if the king of Pegu his great enemy assault his country he can at pleasure cover a great part with water in Pegu they have a custom of buy and sell by broker which undertake for the performance on both side also that other stand by may know what be bid for commodity they have their hand under a cloth and by touch the finger and nip the joint each finger and joint have his proper signification they make up their bargain chap. v. of the religion in Pegu and the country sometime subject thereto their varellae or idol-temple in the kingdom of Pegu be many a a r. fitch Caes Fredrick they be make round like a sugarloaf or a bell some be as high as a church or a reasonable steeple very broad beneath some a quarter of a mile in compass in the make of they they consume many sugarcane with which they cover they from the top to the bottom within they be all earth do about with stone they spend thereon much gold for they be all gild aloft and many of they from the top to the bottom and every ten or twelve year they must be new gild because the rain consume off the gold for they stand open abroad be it not for this vain custom gold will there be good cheap about two day journey from Pegu there be a Varelle b b Gas balby say that many of these varelle be burn together with four thousand house in Pegu by negligence of a Portugal mariner or pagode which be the pilgrimage of the pegues it be call dogonne and be of wonderful bigness and all gild from the foot to the top this house be fifty five pace in length and have in it three isle or walk and forty great pillar gild which stand between they it be gild with gold within and without these be house very fair round about for the pilgrim to lie in and many goodly house for the Tallipoys to preach in which be full of image both of man and woman all over gild I suppose it the fair place in the world it stand very high and there be four way to it which all along be set with tree of fruit in such wise that a man may go in the shade above two mile in length and when their feast-day be a man can hardly pass by water or by land for the great press of people which resort thither from all place of the kingdom there be on the shore of Dogon two statue which from the head downward represent young man but have the face of devil and two wing on their back in Pegu there be Varelle or temple like to this which the king frequent to do his holy therein mount up stair at the foot whereof be two tiger gape wide seem as if they have be alive beside the many magazine or treasury full of treasure which the late braman king have he have near unto the palace a court wall with stone the gate whereof be open every day within this court be four gild house cover with lead and in every of they certain idol of great value in the first house be a great statue of gold and on his head a crown of gold beset with rare ruby and saphire and about he four little child of Gold in the second house be another of silver as high as a house set as it be sit on heap of money crown his foot be as long as a man in the three house there be the like idol of brass and in the four of Ganza which be their money-metal temper of lead and copper in another court not far from this stand four other colossus or huge image of copper in house gild fair as they be themselves save the head balby c c balby c. 38. tell of five make of Ganza so monstrous that the toe of their foot be as big as a man and sit crosslegged be yet as high as one can hurl a stone and be all gild Fernandes d d Fernandes Epist. relate of threescore and seven image of gold rich adorn with jewel and three hundred threescore and six Combalengas or gourd of gold melt by the king father each weigh a hundred and fourscore pound beside his other treasure to conceal which he slay two hundred eunuch his attendant their Tallipoys e e r fitch before they take order go to school till they be twenty year old or more then they come before a tallipoy appoint for that purpose who they call Rowli he as chief and most learned examine they many time whether they will leave their friend and the company of all woman and take upon they the habit of a tallipoy if he be content than he ride upon a horse about the street very rich apparel with drum and pipe to show that he leave the riches of the world to be a tallipoy in few day after he be carry upon a thing like a horselitter which they call a serion upon ten or twelve man shoulder in apparel of a tallipoy with pipe and drum and many Tallipoys with he and all his friend which accompany he to his house stand without the town and there leave he every one of they have his house which be very little set upon six or eight post to which they ascend on a ladder of twelve or fourteen step these house be common by the highway side and among the tree and in the wood they go strange apparel with one Camboline or thin cloth next to their body of a brown colour another of yellow double many time upon their shoulder these two be gird to they with a broad girdle and they have a skin of leather hang on a string about their neck whereon they sit bare-headed and barefooted with their right arm bare and a broad Sombrero or shadow in their hand to defend they in summer from the sun and in winter from the rain they be shave on their head beard f f balby c. 37. and all their body they observe perpetual chastity and be modest in their go when one of they die his body be keep many day with feast and after be set on a high scaffold many Tallapoys feast about it thus it be carry to the place of burn by a great number of people where it be consume with sweet wood to the bone these bury near their house and the ash cast into the water balby resemble they in habit and ceremony to their friar they go with a great pot make of wood or fine earth and cover tie with a broad girdle upon their shoulder which come under their arm wherewith they go to beg their victual which they eat which be Rice fish and herb they demand nothing but come to the door and the people present do give they one thing or other which they put together in their pot. they keep their feast by the moon and at a new moon be their most solemn feast and then the people send Rice and other thing to that kiack or church of which they be and there all the Tallipoys of that church meet and eat that which be send they they preach against all abuse and many resort unto they when they enter into their kiack at the door their be a great jar of water with a cock or a ladle in it and there they wash their foot and then enter in lift up their hand to their head first to their preacher and then to the sun and so sit down when the Tallipoys preach many of the people carry they gift unto the pulpit where they sit and preach and there be one that sit by they to take that which the people bring which be divide among they they have none other ceremony nor service that I can see but only preach g. B.B. l. part 3. Arthus p. 319. bomferrus a franciscan and after he Boterus say that they hold a innumerable multitude of world from all eternity succeed one after another and also a innumerable number of god but not all at once they imagine that five have govern this present world whereof four be pass above 2090. year ago now they be without a god and expect the five many age hereafter after who death they conceive that the world shall perish by fire and then another world shall follow and other god to rule it they reckon likewise in the number of their god certain man which yet have first pass into fish beast and bird of all sort after death they believe three place one of pleasure scuum like the Mahometan paradise another of torment Naxac the three of annihilation which they call Niba the soul after their fantasy abide in the two former place whence they return so often into this life till at last they be hold worthy that Niba he add that they have covent or college of priest which live three hundred together or more in one place have no use of woman be harbourer of stranger and live some of alm some of rent they have like nunnery also for the woman there be suppose to be in one idol-sanctuary whereof they have many 120000. idol they fast thirty day in the year in which they eat nothing till night they be of opinion that he which in this world rob another man shall in the next world be his servant for recompense they hold it a sin also to kill a live creature although this be not strict observe among they some jew be of opinion that this people descend of those israelite which Solomon send to Ophir which they place in this kingdom g g part. 1. l. 26 but the Peguan themselves ascribe their religion to a dog and a China woman which escape shipwreck the devil be high worship of these pegusian h h Gaspar balby got. Arthus hist ind. p. 321. to who they erect a stately altar and adorn it with variety of flower and meat of all sort so to fee and feed he that he shall not hurt they this be principal do when they be sick for than they make vow and build altar which they cover with clothes and flower they entertain he also with diversity of music and appoint he a priest who they call the devil father which procure his rite and music some as soon as they rise from their bed bring a basket of rice and meat and a burn torch in their hand run up and down in the street open profess to feed the devil to prevent harm from they that day and if dog follow they they hold they to be send of the devil to devour those meat in his name some will not eat till they have first cast something behind their back to the devil and in the country village some of the rich inhabitant leave their house furnish with store of food three month space to be inhabit of he keep mean while in the field that so the other nine month they may be out of his danger and howsoever the Tallipoys preach against this devilish devotion yet they can reclaim the people the Tallipoys every Monday arise early and by the ring of a basin call together the people to their sermon which be of justice to man but nothing of religion to God they wash themselves once a year i i g. balby c. 37. and the water wherewith they be wash the people account holy and reserve it for their drink as a holy potion they hold that all which do well of whatsoever religion shall be save and therefore care not as balby affirm if any of their nation turn Christian they have many feast very solemn observe k k Sapan Giachie one feast call Sapan Giachie be keep twelve league from the city whither the king ride in a triumphal chariot with his queen in exceed pomp so adorn with jewel that the eye can endure their shine his noble attend another l l Sapan Catena be keep in Pegu against which day all the courtier provide they certain pillar or image of diverse form keep close that none may see what other have provide till the day these be make of indian reed carve and gild and on the festival present to the king who praise the most artificial of they all that night huge light of wax be burn in honour of their idol who feast it be that all may see to have access to he to which end the city gate be lest open but none may approach unto he empty-handed they have m m Sapan Daich a feast of water celebrate in the old city where the king queen and his child with rose-water sprinkle one another and all the captain likewise besprinkle each other that they seem as wet as if they come out of a river it be say of the last king father that when the people be thus wash he will send among they a elephant which slay many of they whereat he laugh the people lament another feast n n Sapan donan they have wherein they have a trial of their ship which can sail best this feast last a month a five feast o o Sapan Giaimosegienon be call Giaitnosegienon in honour of a certain idol they have many other feast but these the most solemn Antony correa a Portugal conclude a league with the king of Pegu the king deputy cause the article of accord write in Portugal and pegu-language with golden letter to be read aloud and then rend the scroll and with a few leaf of a odoriferous tree cause the same to be burn to ash upon which he lay both hand of the priest who in the name of the king swear to those article these thing be do with great attention and silence correa loath in a superstitious fancy to defile holy writ with confirmation of a oath to a gentile swear on a book of amorous sonnet to keep inviolable the say article in the year of our lord 1585. the king of avarice rebel as be before show the king of Pegu by single combat slay the traitor the fight be on elephant in which the pegusian elephant and the auan prince die the live elephant be prefer to the place of the former but in fifteen day space let the beastliness of man imitate the humanity of a beast he sorrow so p p Gasper balby be there with other merchant which see he weep for his master that nothing may comfort he and although he have continual two servant attend he and tell he of his amend estate under a mighty master yet will he scarce cease to weep or begin to eat till his fifteen day exequies be finish bomferrus a franciscan spend three year in learning the pegu language and mystery that he may preach the christian religion among they but be soon force to give over and return into India for they can not endure to hear any better knowledge than they have this be 1557. crocodile and ape q q g. balby be account holy and sacred creature for which cause ape multiply exceed none take they except for the use of their varelle or temple where they tie they and keep they with diligent respect and though the crocodile in the town-ditch devour man daily yet in a blind zeal they will drink no other water account this holy and account their soul certain save who body be thus certain lose and devour of those beast which sometime be thirty foot in length one of which balby see draw in a woman and not a day but some be say to be devour till the king cause one of those which be observe to be most manslaying to be slay the king subject to the king of Pegu do their homage and present themselves before he kneel yea they not only kneel to he but to his white elephant also when the king die they make two ship with golden cover and betwixt they erect a golden theatre in which they place the corpse apply thereto musk and the most sweet wood with other thing and so set forth the same to sea set that theatre or pageant on fire in one of the ship or tallapois which sing till they think the body to be consume to ash then do they make a mass or lump of these ash and milk and commit the same to sea in the haven of sirian at a ebb water the bone which remain they carry to another place and there erect a chapel do bury the same therein after this they return to the palace and according to the accustom rite inaugurate the new king the father of that king who tragedy you have hear have his bone bury in Dogon in jamahey or jangoma five and twenty day journey from Pegu when the people be sick they make a vow to offer meat unto the devil if they escape and when they be recover they make a banquet with many pipe and drum and many other instrument and dance all the night their friend bring they present fig arreove and other fruit and with great dance and rejoice they offer to the devil and say they give the devil to eat and drive he out and to this end in their dance they cry and hallow very loud likewise when they be sick a tallipoy or two every night do sit by they and sing to please the devil that he shall not hurt they when one be dead he be carry upon a great frame as be say before of the Tallipoys make like a tower with a cover all gild make of cane carry by fourteen or sixteen man with great minstrelsy to a place out of the town and there be burn he be accompany with all his friend and neighbour all man and they give to the Tallipoys or priest many mat and cloth and then return to the house where they feast it two day which be expire the woman accompany the wife to the place where he be burn and there spend a while in mourn then do they gather the piece of bone which be leave unburned and bury they and then return to their house the near of kindred do also shave their head both man and woman chap. 5 of Bengala and the part adjoin and of the holy river Ganges @. i. of Bengala the kingdom of Bengala a a magin gio. bot. ben. got. Arthus hist ind. orient pag. 282. be very large and have of coast one hundred and twenty league and as much within land Francis Fernandes measure it from the confine of the kingdom of Ramu or Porto grandee to Palmerine ninety mile beyond Porto pequene in all six hundred mile long the river Chaberis which some call Guenga and think to be the ancient Ganges water it it be plentiful in rice wheat Sugar ginger long-pepper Cotton and silk and enjoy a very wholesome air the inhabitant near the shore be for the most part mahumetan and so also be the king before the great Magore one likewise of his own sect conquer he Gouro the seat royal and Bengala be fair city of this the gulf sometime call gangeticus now bear name Golfo di Bengala Chatigan be also reckon among their city they be b b Linschot c. 16 a most subtle and wicked people and be esteem the worst slave of all India for that they be all thief and the woman whore although this fault be common through all India no place except they have a custom never to dress or seethe meat twice in one pot but have every time a new one whensoever they be find in adultery they have their c c adultery punish nose cut off and be thence forward narrow look to that they keep not each other company the portugal have here Porto grande and Porto Pequino but without fort and government every man live after his own lust and for the most part they be such as dare not stay in their place of better government for some wickedness by they commit in Bengala be find great number of Abdas or rhinocerote who horn grow up from his snout tooth flesh blood claw and whatsoever he have without and within his body be good against poison and be much account of throughout all India the skin upon d d Linschot c. 47 the upper part of this beast be all wrinkle as if he be arm with shield it be a great enemy of the elephant some think that this be the right unicorn because as yet there be no other by late traveller find but only by hearsay only Lodovicus Vertomannus e e lud. vert. lib. 1. cap. 19 say he see a couple of those other unicorn at Mecca one whereof have a horn of three cubit be of the bigness of a colt of two year and a half old the other be much less gesnerus de quadrup scal. Exerc. 205. both send to the sultan of Mecca for a rare present out of Aethiopia Gesner in his book of fourfooted beast cite this testimony and some other whereby he persuade that there be diverse sort of these unicorn but it can seem otherwise then strange that in this last hundred of year wherein the world have unveyled her face more than ever before none of credit that I have hear have affirm himself to have see this unicorn but in picture and in picture they have late abuse M.T. Coryate who write that he see unicorn at the mogor or mogul court which as some that be there tell i be rhinocerote they have publish the same with picture of the painter unicorn with a long horn out of his forehead whereas this grow out of the middle of the nose and be but short the length of a man hand be a large horn measure that which be report of their virtue against poison proceed from the herb which Bengala yield for in other place they be not near the price of these there be here also certain wild goat who horn be in account against venom as I myself say Linschoten have prove the king f f g. bot. ben. of Bengala in time past be choose of the abassine or aethiopian slave as the sultan of cairo be sometime of the circassian mameluke northward from Bengala lie the kingdom of Arracan before mention the great can subdue these part and the kingdom of mien about the year 1272. while Marcus Paulus live there Arracan Chandican and siripur be by fernandez place in Bengala as so many kingdom Patane or Patenau by Frederick and fitch reckon to another Bengalau kingdom which our countryman master fitch call the kingdom of Gouren so that under this name Bengala be comprehend many signory all or the most part now subject to the Mogor @. 2 of Ganges and the superstition there observe our map seem not to describe the river Ganges so will we here term it with Ortelius Castaldus barrius and all our late traveller both merchant and jesuit according to the due course thereof for Chaberis they bring from the north incline to the east Guenga from the west but master fitch which continue five month in pass down first in jamena from agra which fall into Ganges and then in Ganges itself to Bengala although he confess it may be do in short time say it come from the northwest and run east into the sea some call Chaberis Ganges and some hold Guenga to be Ganges and some make but one river of they both and hence may happy arise in part that seek of Ganges so far off both Ganga and Ganges be in sacred account say g g bar. dec. 1. l. 9 c. 1. Barros and therefore the mahometan king will not suffer the superstitious wash of the Ethnic therein without a custom or imposition there be in Ganges h h balby cap. 42. a place call Gongasagie that be the entry of the sea in which be many fish call seadog they which be weary of this world and desire to have a quick passage to paradise cast in themselves here to be devour of these fish persuade themselves that the next and ready way thither be by their jaw Ganges i i r. fitch overflow his bank in time past drown many village which so remain and have change his wont channel the cause that tanda a city of traffic where the people go naked to the waste stand now a league from the river it water a fruitful country and populous and as the ocean high collector receive into he many river by the way some no less than itself so that in the time of rain you can see from the one side of Ganges to the other the superstitious opinion conceive in those part of this river appear by the report of all k k hier. Xau Eman. pin. Emanuel pinner at Cambaia observe many to resort thither on pilgrimage sometime out of that city four thousand and be tell by the governor of Bengala under the Mogor then at Lahor that there come thither sometime three hundred thousand or four hundred thousand pilgrim and add that not long before his come to Cambaia there assemble there to this devout journey fifty thousand people happy they esteem that man which wash himself therein and secure of salvation if at the point of death he may drink of this water he confer with one Gedacham a great man which have be on this holy voyage and have there weigh his mother three time first by her weight in silver second in gold three in pearl all which he give to the poor a brother of he call rau be to go to the great Mogor offer one hundred and fifty thousand l l Pardaw be three teston Portugal pardaw that his m m n. Pimentae pagoda or idol shall send he good success they make a image also to this river whereunto they do divine honour the king of Calcutta and the other king of malabar keep a solemn feast every twelve year in honour of this river because that long since a certain Brachmane false accuse flee unto Ganges and there lead a austere life twelve year worship that stream and his idol to who when he purpose to return home after those twelve year expire that image of Ganges appear and say that on the last day of February he will appear in a river of his own country and cause the water thereof to arise and run backward in witness of his innocence and bid he assemble all the lord of malabar to the sight which according come to pass and the memory thereof be by this feast solemnize Bannaras n n r. fitch be a great town on Ganges to which the gentile out of far country come on pilgrimage the man be shave all but the crown along the waterside be many fair house in which stand image of evil favour make of stone and wood like leopard lion monkey man woman peacock and devil with four arm and hand sit close-legged and hold somewhat in their hand there be diverse old man which on place of earth make for that purpose sit pray and they give the people which by break of day and before come out of the town to wash themselves in Ganges three or four straw which they take and hold they between their finger where they wash themselves and some sit to mark they in the forehead and they have in a cloth a little rice barley or money which they give to these old man after that they go to diverse of their image and give they of their sacrifice those old man in the mean while pray which make all holy they have one idol call ada with four hand and claw on certain great carve stone also they pour water Rice wheat etc. they have a great place like a well with step to go down wherein the water stand foul and stink by reason of those many flower which they continual throw there into many people be always therein with imagination of pardon for their sin because GOD as they blaspheme wash himself therein they gather up the sand in the bottom as a holy relic they pray not but in the water and wash themselves overhead lade up water with both their hand and turn themselves about and then drink a little of the water three time after which they go to their god in their house some of they will wash a place which be their length and then pray upon the earth with their arm and leg at length out and will rise up and lie down and kiss the ground twenty or thirty time but will not stir their right foot some use fifteen or sixteen pot little and great ring a bell while they make their mixture ten or twelve time and make a circle of water about their pot and pray other sit by one of which reach they their pot they say over these pot diverse thing many time which do they go to their god and strew their sacrifice which they think be very holy and mark many of they which sit by in their forehead esteem as a great gift there come fifty and sometime an hundred together to this well and to these idol about their idol in some house sit one in warm weather to blow the wind with a fan upon they and when they see any company come they ring a little bell and many give they their alm none of these idol have a good face some be black and have claw of brass and some ride on peacock or other fowl one there be always attend with his fan to make wind which they say give they all thing both food and raiment here some be burn to ash some scorch in the fire and throw into the water when they be dead the fox present eat they the wife do burn with their husband when they die if they will not their head be shave and never any account be make of they after if a man or woman be sick and like to die they will lay he before their idol all night and that shall mend or end he and if he do not mend that night his friend will come and sit a little with he and cry and after will carry he to the water side and set he upon a little raft make of reed and so let he go down the river the chief idol be very evil-favoured their mouth monstrous their ear gild and full of jewel their tooth and eye of gold silver glass colour black with lamp continual burn before they into their house or temple you may not enter with your shoe on when the scorch indian be throw into Ganges the man swim with their face downward the woman with their face upward which I have think they have by some mean cause but they deny it the people go all naked with a little cloth about their middle their woman be exceed on their neck arm and ear deck with ring of silver copper tin and ivory hoop they be mark with a great spot of red in their forehead and a stroke of red up to the crown and so it run three way their marriage be in this sort the manner of their marriage the man and the woman come to the waterside where stand a Brahmin or priest with a cow and a calf or a cow with calf these all go into the water together the Brahmin hold a white cloth of four yard long and a basket cross bind with diverse thing in it this cloth he lay upon the back of the Cow and then he take the cow by the tail and say certain word she have a copper or a brass potful of water the man hold his hand by the braman hand and the wife hand by her husband and all have the cow by the tail then they pour water out of the pot upon the cow tail which run through all their hand and they lade up water with their hand and then the brahmin tie their clothes together after this they go round about the cow and calf and give some what to the poor there attend leave the cow and calf for the braman use and offer to diverse of their idol money then lie down upon the ground they kiss it diverse time and go their way between this and Patanaw be diverse thief like the arabian without certain abode @. 3 of Patane couch Orixa botant Candecan PAtane or Patanaw be a great town and long with large street simple house of earth cover with thatch the people tall and slender many old sometime a kingdom now subject to the Mogor they have gold which as in America they dig out of the pit and wash the earth in great Bolls the woman here be so deck with silver and copper that it be strange to see and by reason of such ring upon their toe they can wear no shoe here I see a dissemble prophet which sit upon a horse in the marketplace and make as though he sleep and many of the people come and touch his foot with their hand and then kiss their hand they take he for a great man but I see he be a lazy lubber and there I leave he sleep the people here be great prater and dissembler as I come from agra down the river jemena I see also many naked beggar of which the people make great account they call they Schesche here I see one which be a monster among the rest wear nothing on he with a long beard the hair of his head cover his privity the nail of some of his finger be two inch long for he will cut nothing from he o o a right niggard neither will he speak but be accompany with eight or ten which speak for he when any man speak to he he will lay his hand upon his breast and bow himself but speak he will not to the king the king of Patanaw be lord of the great part of Bengala until the mogul slay their last king after which twelve of they join in a kind of aristocraty and vanquish the mogoll it seem this be in the time of Emmaupaxda and still notwithstanding the mogoll greatness be great lord special he of siripur and of Ciandecan and above all Maafudalim nine of they be mahumetan thus Fernandes these pataneans seem by the jesuit report to come of the tartar in those part they have many strange ceremony their Braman or priest come to the water and have a string about their neck make with great ceremony and lade up water with both their hand and turn the string first with their arm within and then one arm after the other out here also about jemena the gentile will eat no flesh nor kill any thing they pray in the water naked and dress their meat and eat it naked and for their penance they lie flat upon the earth and rise up and turn themselves about thirty or forty time and use to heave up their hand to the sun and to kiss the earth with their arm and leg stretch out along their right leg be always before the left every time they lie down they score it with their finger to know when their stint be end the braman mark themselves in their forehead ear and throat with a kind of yellow gear which they grind every morning they do it and they have some old man which go in the street with a box of yellow powder and mark they which they meet on their head and neck and their wife do come ten twenty and thirty together to the waterside sing and there do wash themselves and use their ceremony and mark themselves on the forehead and face and carry some with they and so depart sing their daughter be marry at or before the age of ten year the man may have seven wife they be a crafty people worse than the jew the way from Bannaras to Patanaw be a fair and fertile country beautify with many fair town I go p p r. fitch from Bengala into the country of couch which lie five and twenty day journey northwards from tanda the king be a gentile name Suckel counsel his country be great and lie not far from Cauchin-China all the country be set with cane make sharp at both end and drive into the earth and they can let in the water and drown the country knee-deep in time of war they poison all the water the people have ear which be marvelous great of a span long which they draw out in length by device when they be young they be all gentile and will kill nothing they have hospital for sheep dog goat cat bird and all other live creature when they be old and lame they keep they till they die if a man catch or buy any quick thing in other place and bring it thither they will give he money for it or other victual and keep it in their hospital or let it go they will give meat to the ant their small money be almond which oftentimes they eat we pass through the country of Gouren where we find but few village and almost all wilderness for we choose this desert way for fear of thief and see many buff swine and dear grass long than a man and very many tiger Orixa be the next country which have be a kingdom but conquer by the king of Patanaw and both since by Echebar Orixa stand six day south-west from Satagan there be much rice cloth of Cotton and cloth make of grass call like silk they speak of the like in Virginia through this kingdom Frederick write a man may have go with gold in his hand without danger while the old king reign who so befriend merchant that he take no custom of they and there be lade in the port of Orisa yearly five and twenty or thirty ship with rice Lacca long pepper ginger mirabolin and the aforesaid make of a herb grow in the wood wild then gather when the bowl be grow round as big as a orange in the haven of angeli be yearly many ship lade with many kind of commodity Satagam be a fair city for a city of moor and very plentiful sometime subject to Patanaw in Bengala such be the estimation of Ganges that they will fetch of it a great way off though they have good water near and if they have not sufficient to drink they will sprinkle a little on they and then they be well from Satagam I travel by the country of the king of Tippara with who the Mogor have continual war the Mogores which be of the kingdom of recon and rame be strong than this king of Tippara four day journey from couch be botant and the city Bottia the king be call dermaine the people be tall and strong the country great three month journey and have in it high mountain one of which a man may see six day journey off upon these mountain be people with ear of a span long otherwise they account they ape hither resort many merchant out of China and Tartary from Chatigan in Bengala I go to Bacola the king whereof be a gentile thence to senepare and after to Simergan where they will eat no flesh nor kill no beast and thence to Negrais in Pegu and Cosmin thus far have our countryman lead we in the view of so many superstition of these bengalans and their northerly neighbour in that part of botant which be next to Lahor and the Mogor the people p p histor Mogor be white and gentile their garment be close gird to they that a wrinkle or pleit be not to be see which they never put off no not when they sleep as long as they be able to hang on their head attire be like a sugarloaf sharp at the top they never wash their hand lest say they so pure a creature as the water shall be defile they have but one wife and when they have two or three child they live as brother and sister widower and widow may not marry a second time they have no idol nor town nor king in those part of Batanter they have their soothsayer which they ask counsel of when any be dead they resort unto these wizard to know what be to be do with their dead they search their book and as they say the word they burn they or bury they or eat they although they usual feed not on man flesh they also use dead man skull in stead of dish as in Thebet we have observe the like custom they be liberal alms-giver they live on weave and make clothes which they sell at calamur and negariot in summer for in their winter they can pass for snowes they be like in colour and hair to man of these part the bengalans q q Linschot have a tradition or fable among they that this river come out of paradise which be prove by one of their king who send man up the stream till they come to a pleasant air still water and fragrant earth and can row no further hence happy grow this conceit that this water shall wash away sin and that without it they can be save this river have in it crocodile which by water be no less dangerous than the tiger by land and both will assault man in their ship there be also a little small beast which by his bark make the tiger to run away the king of Candecan which lie at the mouth of Ganges r r n. Pimenta cause a jesuite to rehearse the decalogue who when he reprove the indian for their polytheisme worship so many pagode he say that they observe they but as among they their saint be worship to who how savoury the jesuit distinction of (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) be for his satisfaction I leave to the reader judgement this king and the other of Bacala and Arracan have admit the jesuit into their country and most of these indian nation @. 4 of Arracan and the war betwixt they and the portugal betwixt the king of Arracan and the portugal have be late war not unworthy relation because they serve for better knowledge of all the country adjacent the king of Arracan or Rachim so Frederick call it have give to Philip de Britto the keep of syrian as before be express which he fortify become suspicious to the king this be one cause of war and another the portugal surprisal of the i will sundiva sundiva six league distant from the continent of Bengala over-against siripur this island Frederick admire for the cheapness and plenty of necessary where he buy two salt kine for a Caes Fredrick which be twelve shilling and six penny very good and fat four wild hog ready dress at the same price a fat hen for a penny and yet the people say they pay twice the worth and other commodity at like price Porto grande it belong to the kingdom of Bengala distant a hundred and twenty mile from Chatigan the people moores it be thirty league in compass so strong by nature that they may hinder any from land two hundred ship be yearly lade from hence with salt the mogul with the conquest of Bengala have possess sundiva cada-ragi still continue his title under colour whereof carualius and Matus two portugal conquer it an. 1602. hereat the king of Arachan be angry that without his leave they have make themselves lord of that which he challenge to belong to his protection fear that by this mean and the fortification of sirian he shall find the portugal un-neighbour neighbour he send therefore a fleet of a hundred and fifty frigate or little p p galley with fifteen oar on a side and other q q Catures great furnish with ordnance and Cadaray which they say be true lord of it send a hundred cossi from siripur to help he the portugal prevail and become master of a hundred and nine and forty of the enemy vessel in this time Britto have build his fort at sirian and found a town for the disperse Peguan which have here assemble to the number of 15000. the saracen envy proffer the king of Arracan a great revenue to commit this haven to they Britto object that so the mogul will swallow all Manasingua the governor of Bengala have promise to king achebar to bring he the white elephant in Arracan add great gift to the king and his councillor at the same time a peguan Bagna that be a great man or ruler by the king command and letter commendatory to Britto keep in Pegu but Britto fear the Peguan will cleave to their countryman an. 1603. besiege and take his fortress slay three hundred of his company captive nine hundred whereupon the Peguan which have follow he revolt to Britto viz. two hundred ship r r indian ship be general small and of no great force for war especial with such soldier you may call they boat twenty horse and great store of provision with the harvest which the Bagua have sow then on the ground he with fifteen of his company escape perhaps the same which before out of Floris we have s s sup. c. 3. @. 2. mention Britto now grow great and in the Portugal name make league with the king of tangu jangoma siam and prom for their joint aid against Arracan if he shall be besiege he go also to goa to acknowledge fealty to the crown of Portugal for the kingdom of Pegu whence he bring with he sixteen galley and three hundred portugal to the defence of sirian with which and a hundred other of the portugal threescore at sundiva thirty at Arracan and ten at Chatigan he easy think to become master of those sea a matter of great consequence where they may have all matter for ship which cause the great Turk once to provide here at a easy charge carry from hence to t t sue in the bottom of the red sea sue then from Alexandria and here they may both build their fleet and be furnish of sustenance may send at any time to all place in the south which from goa can be do but with the monsoon and may cause that no ship of moor shall lade pepper cinnamon or other commodity at Martavan Reitau juncalao Tanassarin and Queda for surat or Mecca but with custom to they and pass from they the king of Arracan foresee such astorme provide a navy of a thousand sail jaleae jarric l. 6. c. 33 the most frigate some great cature and coss and assail the Portugal fleet at sundiva carualius who have but sixteen of diverse sort of ship which stay by he and yet get the victory near two thousand of the enemy be slay a hundred and thirty of their vessel burn with the loss but of six portugal which so vex the king of Arracan that he put many of the captain in woman habit upbraid their effeminate courage which have not bring one Portugal with they alive or dead yet be the Portugal ship so tear that they be force for fear of another tempest to forsake the island and to transport that which there they have to siripur Bacala and Chandecan in the continent and thus sundiva become subject to Arracan carualius staid at Suripur where he have thirty fust or frigate with cadary lord of the place where he be sudden assault with one hundred coss send by Manasinga governor under the mogul who have subject that tract to his master send forth this navy against Cadaray Mandaray a man famous in those part be admiral where after a bloody fight Mandaray be slay and carualius carry away the honour from thence recover of a wound in the late fight he go to Golin or gullum a Portugal colony up the stream from Porto Pequino where he win a castle of the mogor keep by four hundred man one of that company only escape these exploit make carualius he name terrible to the bengalans insomuch that one of the arracans commander of fifty arracan ship dream in the night that he be assault by carualius terrify his fellow and make they fly into the river which when the king hear cost he his head but this day have a end and this sun be set in a cloud for while the king of Arracan have late achieve so great matter in Pegu and add sundiva and the kingdom of Baccala intend to annexe Chandecan to the rest of his conquest the king of Chandecan think to purchase his peace with carualius his head which he treacherous accomplish send for he that they may join together against Arracan and watch his opportunity take he in his palace with other of his company after that invade and spoil his ship Britto remain in his fort at sirian against who in the year 1604. the king of Arracan send a fleet of five hundred frigate and forty catur under the conduct of his elder son with fifteen thousand man the portugal have eight ship well provide and one hundred and eighty soldier in the fort. near to Negrais the armada meet the Portugal obtain the victory slay and drown almost one thousand of the enemy this at sea and wait a better opportunity in the river they leave not one vessel to carry news thereof to Arracan the prince with his soldier seek to return by land but penury pursue he separate his company and betray he to two hundred and fifty portugal and Peguan which to these straits have add the local straits of a certain passage where the prince with some of the chief yield redeem at a great sum sup. cap. 3. @ 2. as before be mention and covenant of peace on both side ratify by oath one of the article be the delivery of sundiva for the performance of which Britto send his son mark with two captain to take possession which all be treacherous dispossess of their life and three thousand portugal captive he prepare for a new siege but in the midst of these design that part of his palace where the white elephant stand and his chief oratory be fire with lightning which some talipois interpret of divine vengeance for breach of oath go to the king and tell he these thing presage further disaster it so presage indeed to they who for this presage be present to the number of thirty of the chief of they slay twelve hundred ship so we call they all by a general name though not comparable for the most part to our european the king of Arracan set forth in this new expedition of which seventy five be of great burden each have twelve piece of ordnance and well furnish the rest fu or frigate in this fleet be thirty thousand soldier and seaman pataneans persian and malabar of they eight thousand with handgunne and three thousand five hundred great piece of diverse sort the king himself his son and best soldier be therein accompany with the king of Chocor Britto send forth that navy which he have but twelve ship in all under the command of Paulus Regius a famous sea-captain which meet they at the cape of Negrais the admiral of Arracan Marucha be with his Fust take and slay and the night part the fight or rather renew the fight many of the arracan ship mistake and war upon their fellow to the loss of diverse ship and in the whole fight of almost two thousand man 1607. four day after the four of April they encounter the second time and the Portugal admiral run herself upon pile under the water whence she can not be free and when another Portugal ship come to relieve they Rhogius will not be persuade to stir till fire enter the gunner room blow up he and his company and the other captain which move he to remove the Portugal ship betake they to their fort whither the king of tangu have send his son with six hundred horse eighteen elephant and sixteen thousand man to besiege it but both these and the arracan force do their utmost in May follow be force to depart without effect leave the town and fort in a deform case and most of the people wound yet great be arracans loss only twelve great and two hundred and fifty lesser of those twelve hundred ship remain the rest drown forsake or burn partly by the portugal partly by themselves want man to guide they most of the ordnance they bury in the sand ten thousand man they lose in the siege the portugal lose of their nation beside help eighty six ten captain and the admiral the next year their fort be fire and their dwell house temple household and provision 1608. Britto himself escape hardly with his wife his courage yet remain and resolve to build it in a high and strong place easy have Arracan with this advantage effect his design have not the portugal elsewhere molest he and take Dianga and thus far have we follow the jesuite jarric in these arracan affair if with jar from truth in any place I have name my author nor can accuse or excuse he further he can guide we 1613. Britto empale and cruel slay but where his intelligence fail Floris help the last act of this tragedy be reserve to the king of avarice who take sirian as before master Floris have tell we slay all the portugal and be report to spit this Philip de Britto he settle the affair of Pegu and seek what he can to reduce they from their dispersion to their native habitation but you be weary of war and blood in which you see all these king imbrue it be time to entertain you elsewhere and though as tragical yet with differ object please at the least with variety chap. 7 of the great Mogor or Mogoll @. i. of the mogor country and MELABDIM echebar the great Mogor according to Boterus have under his subjection seven and forty kingdom which lie between Indus and Ganges on the east and west and betwixt a a or Cumaus on which dwell gentile call Cumai this mountain separate the mogul and tartar imaus and the ocean contain all that which the ancient call or India Citenor he be call of the people the great Mogor for the same cause that the Ottoman-turk be call great the style of he that be king b b 1495. and 1599 when the jesuit impart to we these relation be mahume Zelabdim echebar king Mogor or Mogoll for so they call he in the country and not Mogor as the jesuit this mogul seem to argue their tartarian original from the moai Tartar of which see our tartarian relation the true mogor or mogul live on the hither side of Indus in the kingdom of Quabul or Cabul which be under the brother of Echebar against who 1582. he lead a strong army in which the jesuit say be five thousand elephant arm these wear plate of iron on their forehead carry four archer or else four gunner with great piece and go not before the army lest they shall hinder their sight or be hurt disturb the rank and therefore be set in the rear a sword bind to their trunk and dagger fasten to their great tooth king Echebar be bear in the province of Chaquata which have Indostan on the south Persia on the west the tartar east their language be turkish but the courtier to this day speak persian Baburxa his grandfather chase the parthian unto Bengala before possessor of the region of the mogor after who death the parthian or as they be now call pataneans of Patanau before mention recover themselves and war on his son their descent be from c c vid. sup. c. 8. @. 2. Tamerlan who three son be Miromcha grandfather to abusayd who slay Abdula successor to abdelatife which have slay Oleghbek the son and successor of Mirzah Charrok the four son and first successor of Tamerlan sultan Hamed son of abusayd obtain Maurenahar and after he babor his son which in the year 1500. be dispossess by the usbech yet still possess Gaznehen and some part of India succeed by his son homayen the father of this Achabar thus mirkand the jesuit say they be parthian descend of Cingis therefore rather to be call tartar achabar grandfather they call Baburxa which by his sword enter Industan and chase those tartar into Bengala but they again prevail after his death insomuch that achabar father Emmaupaxda as the jesuit report be drive to great straits by the parthian tartar or pataneans be drive to ask aid of the sophi or persian king which he obtain with condition of submit himself to the persian religion the mogor speak the turkish language the empire of this Mogor be exceed great contain the country of Bengala Cambaya Mendao and other comprehend by some under the name of Industan this Mendao be say to be ten league in circuit and that it d d r. fitch cost the Mogor twelve year siege agra and Fatipore be two city in his dominion great and full of people much exceed London and the whole space between be as a continual populous market many king he have conquer and many have submit themselves and their state voluntary to his subjection twenty gentile king be number e e Relat. reg. mog in his court which attend he equal the king of Calcutta in power many other pay he tribute in his country be many spice pepper ginger Cassia and other many precious stone pearl metal of all sort silk Cotton horse and other commodity which yield he many million yearly beyond his expense about the year 1582. the jesuit first enter there after who report his dominion be then as follow since much more enlarge eleven great river run through his dominion taphi Haruada Chambel jamena Ganges the other six be Indus or schind as they call it and catamul Cebcha Ray Chenao Rebeth tributary to Indus the whole monarchy environ nine hundred league king Echebar have many lord each of which be to maintain eight ten twelve or fourteen thousand horse in readiness for the war beside elephant of which in the whole kingdom be say to be fifty thousand himself can further bring of his own into the field fifty thousand horse and footman innumerable to those lord he allow certain province for such military service for he be lord of all nor have any else possession of any thing but at the will of the king once a year they appear before the king where they present a view of those their enjoin force many million of revenue do beside accrue unto his coffer yet his port and magnificence be not so great as of many other prince either for apparel diet or the majesty of his Court-service he can write or read but hear often the disputation of other and history read before he be of deep judgement pierce wit and wise forecast in execution of justice he be very diligent insomuch that in the city where he reside he hear all cause himself neither be any malefactor punish without his knowledge himself give public audience twice every day for which purpose he have two wide hall or rather open court and in they royal throne where he be attend with eight councillor beside notary yet do he stand and not sit and at other time sit on carpet after the turkish manner notwithstanding his chair of estate stand by he have twelve learned man always about he which ordinary reason and dispute in his presence or relate history he be a curious discourser of all sect he be both affable and majestical merciful and severe delight himself in diverse game as fight of buffal cock heart ram elephant wrestler fencer dance comedy and in the dance of elephant and camel thereto instruct in the midst of these spectacle he dispatch serious affair he delight in hunt use the panther to take wild beast hunt dog he have none they use tame heart to take the wild with net fasten to their horn wherewith they entangle the other when he go to war he will cause a whole wood to be round beset with man hand in hand send other in which raise the beast and drive they into the other arm which if they let they go be punish to make sport that way he be skilful in diverse mechanical trade as make of gun cast of ordnance have his workhouse in the palace for that purpose but we have observe that this be common to all mahometan priest and prince the great Turk yea the great challfa himself as Tudelensis write of his time practise some mechanical mystery thief and pirate he punish with loss of the hand murderer adulterer robber by the high way with impale hang or other doath not execute till the sentence have be thrice pronounce love and fear of his own terrible to his enemy affable to the vulgar seem to grace they and their present with more respective ceremony than the of spare diet scarce eat flesh above four time in the year but feed by rice whitmeat and electuary sleep but three hour in the night curious industrious this king detest the mahometan sect which as you hear his father embrace for his advantage and therefore have overthrow their mosque in his kingdom raze the steeple and convert the rest to stable and more trust and employ the gentile in his affair then the moor whereupon many of they rebel against he and stir up the prince of Quabul his brother to take arm against who Echebar oppose himself as be say and cause he to retire into his own country it be uncertain d d the uncertainty of his religion balby tell of report among the portugal of the conversion of this king and of the kingdom of China also to christianity both with like truth and fit popish reporter what religion he be of some affirm he to be a Moor some a gentile some a christian some of a four sect and of none of the former indeed it appear that he waver uncertain which way of many to take able to see the absurdity of the arabian and gentile profession and not able to believe the high mystery of the christian faith especial the trinity and incarnation he have addmit the jesuit there to preach and will have have they by miracle to have prove those thing to he which they elsewhere so much boast of miracle wise refuse for he demand that the mulla or priest of the Mogores and they shall by pass through the fire make trial of their Faith he have many book and image which the christian there do use and seem to have great like to they use the same with great reverence but his religion be the same it seem with that of Tamerlane his predecessor to acknowledge one god who variety of sect and worship shall best content he cause c c joan. Oranus thirty infant to be keep like that which be say of Psammetichus king of Egypt set certain to watch and observe that neither their nurse nor any else shall speak unto they purpose to addict himself to that religion which they shall embrace who language these infant shall speak which according come to pass for as they speak no certain language so be not he settle in any certain religion he have diverse idol sometime bring before he among which be one of the sun which early every morning and three other time a day at noon evening and in the night he worship he worship also the image of CHRIST and our lady which he set on the crown of his head and wear relic about he he be addict to a new sect as be say wherein he have his follower which hold he for a prophet the profit which they have by his gold addict they to this new prophet c c hier. xavier he profess to work miracle by the water of his foot cure disease many woman make vow unto he either to obtain child or to recover the health of their child which if they attain they bring he their vow devotion willing of he receive yea every morning as he worship the sun so he delight to be worship himself of the people to who he make show of himself at a window and they kneel perform like ceremony to he as to their idol and he be think to entertain man skilful in diverse sect and religion that of every one he may take somewhat to the constitution of a new one he have three son Sciec the elder which be honour with the title Gio and call Sciecigio that be the soul or person of Sciec he much favour the jesuit the second Pahari dan or Daniel be the young some call the second son sultan Horat: some Morad the first Selim etc. some call they by other name his present be exceed beside his tribute and custom d d Eman. pinner he mention one which in their presence offer his vassalage and withal a present value at two hundred thousand crown and more a horse with furniture of gold and jewel two sword and the girdle of like work camel carpet etc. take himself dignify in the acceptation of his present himself after often bow and touch the ground with his head come near be search whether he have any weapon and then be admit to touch his foot Echebar lay his hand on his neck and allow he to stand with his other noble the king son sultan Morad at the same time offer a present of fifty elephant worth a hundred and fifty thousand ducat one chariot of gold another of silver other of mother of pearl with other thing of great value the viceroy or governor of Bengala follow with another present esteem worth eight hundred thousand ducat viz. three hundred elephant almost daily he receive such present especial at a certain feast call nerosa in which one great man be think to present he with near the worth of one million of Gold @. 2 of the conquest and death of ECHEBAR and of his son and successor Selim now reign our relation of Echebar or achebar his rite human and divine jarric thes. rer. l. 4. and 5. as also of his possession and greatness we have already seem long yet can be so satisfy without further satisfaction to the reader if he be such as he of who we write curious and desirous to know remote affair and far distant occurrence great Echebar add unto that greatness which his father leave he the kingdom of Caxemir of sinda of guzzarat of Xischandadan and a great part of Decan with all the tract of Bengala such be his felicity that it grow into a proverb as happy as echebar seldom attempt any thing without prosperous success I speak of worldly happiness even in nature treasure he be rich both wit and memory this so happy that of many thousand of elephant which he have he know the name yea of his horse to each of which he give name of his wild beast and heart that he keep in a place appoint and even of his pigeon which he keep for sport yet be not this happiness so perpetual but that he have some especial domestic cross his second son sultan Morad be send into Guzzarat against melic king of Decan sometime lord of shall be slay with many other commander which news be then bring to echebar when he be celebrate their newyear festival the day that the sun enter into Aries whereupon he send thither another of his son another time when he be solemnize the sun festival on easter day 1597. about which time the king of China sustain the like casualty fire fall from heaven upon his tent rich adorn with gold and jewel and consume it to ash with all the tent adjoin together with his throne of solid gold value at 100000. ducat consume or melt from whence it proceed to the palace which be of timber be for the most part bring into ash some million of treasure there reserve can not be there preserve from this flame which make a stream of gold and silver mix with other metal run alongst the street for this cause he forsake Lahor where he have build the jesuit a church and where he keep his court as he do before at fatepore and sometime at agra and go to Caximir Caximir or Cascimir a kingdom which a little before he have subdue this yield not to any indian region in goodliness and wholesomeness be encompass with very high mountain cover most part of the year with snow the rest a delicate plain diversify with pasture field wood garden park spring Rivers even to admiration it be cool and more temperate than the kingdom of Rebat which adjoin to it on the east three league from Caximir be a lake deep and beset round with tree in the midst thereof a island and thereon he build a palace the country have store of rice wheat and vine which they plant at the foot of the Mulburie the same tree seem to bear two fruit have they not be at contention among themselves he can never have conquer so strong a kingdom in time past they be all gentile but three hundred year before this the most of they become Mahometan elephant trunk as a staff to they I have observe of this young elephant now in London send out of Spain to his Majesty that in rise up when he be lay on the ground he raise himself on his two great tooth this country he leave when summer be past and return to Lahor lose many elephant and horse in the way both by famine then oppress the country and the difficulty of the passage the elephant sometime in the ascent of hill help themselves with their trunk lean and stay themselves be burden thereon as on a staff the prince which be now king be assault by a fierce lioness as he ride on a female elephant which yet he wound first with a dart then with a shot and last smite she with the hand-gun itself wherewith be overthrow a soldier come in and slay she but with loss of his own life the next year 1598. Echebar go to agra chief city of a kingdom which he have also conquer a hundred league from Lahor towards the south pass that way to Decan he have eight hundred elephant and seven thousand camel to carry his tent and provision yea his secretary have at the same time seven hundred camel and seventy elephant for his own furniture and therefore it be less marvel of the king the king conduct in this expedition above a thousand elephant instruct to fight and a hundred thousand soldier he pass the mountain of gate by almost impassable passage spend sometime a whole day in pass the space of a musket-shot one of his captain go before with fifty thousand who take one of the decans strong hold and make easy way to the conquest of the rest of melic dominion which he leave in the government of his son brampore brampore fall into his hand be destitute of defence this be 1600. miram the king thereof have forsake it and betake himself to syra syra a admirable fortress a strong hold both by nature and Art it be seat on the top of a hill which reach five league environ with a triple wall so build that one may be defend from the next within be a well of run water and all necessary provision for threescore thousand person for many year it have three thousand great piece of ordnance in this castle according to the country custom the next of the blood royal be keep with their family nor may depart except the throne empty the next heir be hence deliver much after that which be write of amara in the Abassens country and it seem borrow from thence so many slave of those part be here entertain and some in the high employment at this time beside king miram there be seven of these prince the governor be a abassine with seven other undercommander all renegado Mahometan the mogul lay siege thereto with almost two hundred thousand man but more prevail as before in Melic country with bribe and promise than force thus invite miram to a conference swear by the king head account a inviolable oath as be that by their father head that he shall be permit safe return some of his counsellor persuade he to go he go with a kind of steal on his neck hang to his knee in token of subjection and come before the mogul bow himself but be cast to the ground by some of his captain and forcible detain the abassine governor send his son to demand performance of achebar his promise who be question of his father the Abassen and the hope to obtain the castle free answer for his father fidelity and that if miram be not restore they shall not want a successor with which liberty he provoke the mogul to cause he to be slay which his father hear strangle himself and the wall be soon after batter at least enter and a breach make through the open gate by golden shot none of these seven for fear of treason dare to take the royal sovereignty these with the king be disperse into diverse part of his kingdom and maintenance allow they thus remain echebar lord of these part and long to add the rest of India whatsoever be betwixt Indus and Ganges o o goa idalcan country malabar etc. even to the cape comori to his dominion he write a letter about this time to the viceroy of goa begin thus I mention it to show you his title which he arrogate the great and mighty lord of the law of MAHOMET the renown and great king vanquisher of the king his enemy observe and honour of great man exalt above other king in ample honour and dignity the only man for government among all the prince of the world his ambassage to ARIAS de SALDAGNA etc. the nine day of fravard the first month of the year beginning at the aequinoctial vernal in the forty six year viz. of his reign at this time die the governor or viceroy of Lahor which leave to the king who be heir general and successor of every man wealth three million of gold coin beside other gold silver jewel horse elephant furniture and good almost invaluable this also for a taste of the mean accrue to this king treasure echebar return to agra give liberty to the jesuit to convert as many as will to Christianity the king of Candacar or Candahar not able to defend himself against Abduxa king of the p p usbech near the persian usbech surrender himself and his kingdom to echebar the particular of his other conquest I can relate his last victory I know not whether to impute to his happiness or not it be against his son in which the grief to have such a enemy can not but be more than the glory of the exploit this happen 1602. echebar be force to give over his Decan conquest by his son untimely challenge of the sceptre who weary of his father long life style himself king and his father the great king army be gather on both side on both side be send letter and messenger the mother of Echebar be ninety year old labour a peace but not prevail fall sick which cause he to return from this expedition against his son but her body not able to overcome the disease yield to death her son shave his head beard and eyebrow and mourn after the country fashion in blue his noble do the like three day blue a mourn colour her huge treasure which she have bequeath to her child and nephew the king seize on the prince be persuade to come to his father without a army which he do and after some rebuke be reconcile and remain content with the kingdom of Cambaia or Guzzerat he seem much addict to the jesuit and obtain his father licence for a temple at agra to the building whereof he give a thousand piece of Gold on the twenty seven of October 1605. Echebar die in the climacterical year 63. of his age and fifty of his reign in his sickness Selim poison Bajazet Selim the prince who some suspect of deal as the turkish Selim have do with his father Bajazet come not into the presence and much consultation be among the great one to confer the succession upon Cussero his son but the issue be that upon his oath to maintain the law of Mahomet and of full pardon to his son and all his partaker he be bring into his father presence Echebar be past speech but make sign that he shall take the royal diadem and gird himself with the sword hang at his bed head the prince perform the solemn jordam or rite of adoration with the head bow to the earth and his father sign with his hand that he shall depart do so as do his father present after out of the world his body be carry on the shoulder of his son and nephew out of the tower where he lay the wall be break after the fashion for passage and a new gate there erect and be bring into his garden a league from thence be inter with small attendance neither the king nor his noble except Cossero and a few other wear mourn habit so little be he in his west a little before the great terror of the east eight day after Echebars death the prince enter the palace and seat himself in the throne the people cry pad iausa or Padasha lamat GOD save the king his first endeavour be to give contentment to the mahometans cause their mosque to be purge and their rite to be establish yea he take a new name NURDIN MOHAMAD JAHANVIR that be the splendour of Mahomet law subduer of the World and by this name JAHANVIR or as our countryman m. clerk and m. withington late come from thence pronounce it jahangere he be usual call and not by his ancient name Selim in April after his son rebel and take the title of sultan ia that be sultan the king bring into his party two great man and so go to Lahor which not be admit entrance he besiege eight day or as other say present himself with his force about twelve thousand before it without any great hostility offer he his father in person pursue he which be rumour so dismay the son that he flee have even then put some of the king man to rout for by a notable stratagem he lose the day the adverse general send many with fly tale into the prince army buzz the nearness and greatness of the king power and second the same like gideon policy with multitude of trumpet and drum scar they and notwithstanding the prince gainsay he be by his own almost compel to flight he take his way towards Cabul and be to pass a river the captain of the place cause all boat to be take away and command the rower that if the prince come they shall fasten the boat as by mischance on a shelf or island of sand in the middle of the river which be do they shall seem to call for help and so give notice this be do and the governor come and after due reverence promise all fidelity and security wherein he be unfaithful faithful bring he into the castle and send the king word thereof who send present and bring he in fetters together with his company the king bitter check he commit he to prison some add that he seal up his eye other say that his eye be put out but their eye be not put in only care put on that say so for he have late be free and have the use also of his eye as I have be tell from the eye of diverse his two great captain have a strange punishment the one sow up close in a Ox-skin the other in a Ass-skin both new flay that dry they may withal straight pinch in their prisoner in a close and narrow little-ease the next day they be carry through the city on ass their face to the taile-ward the one conspicuous with his Ox-horn the other with his Asses-ear the shame and ignominy so pierce one of they that he fall down dead his head be cut off and the piece of his dismember body be set up in diverse place the other by way of favour be permit to have water pour on his hide which bring a worse evil by the heat of so near a sun cause a filthy stink and multiplication of vermin till at last his pardon be procure two hundred of the prince soldier be set on both side the way as he shall pass to be execute he cause his second son to be proclaim prince as his father have before transfer the title from he to this his Son there be a famous prophet of the ethnic name Goru esteem there of his sectary as the romish pope be of the popish romanist with he as a man famous for sanctimony do the prince consult who in adulation adorn his head with a diadem which in a ethnic to a mahometan be strange but he colour it with the gentilism of the prince mother upon this Goru be commit but upon promise by a ethnic of 100000. piece of gold to be pay to the king he be pardon he that undertake this hope on the king pardon or that Goru will procure this sum which fail he seize on all he have not spare his wife and child add torture also to extort money from he and take away his meat think he rather a miser then a beggar thus in variety of misery the flatter prophet lose his life and his surety also think to escape by flight be take and slay his good all confiscate this king at first make great show of zeal to Mahomet which since be cool and his religion seem to be the same with Echebars contrary to the mahometan practice he delight much in image as of CHRIST the virgin and other saint with which his chamber and public room be store and to all his letter and Charter beside the king seal add the image of CHRIST and the holy virgin engrave in a pair of tong as it be of emerald with which he seal his letter on both side the pendent wax they say he present the king with the worth of 25000 crown one jewel be worth 20000. the last news that we have from the jesuit of who we have borrow almost all the former relation be of captain Hawkins come to the court and kind entertainment of the king who make he say they a gentleman of four hundred horse and assign he thirty thousand rupy stipend add other report of his pride obstinate heresy and supplantation by the portugal with other thing of he and those of the ascension be wrack partly true partly false I have think good to set before you in the next service some of captain Hawkins observation while he stay there and after of other our countryman which now have a settle trade in these vast dominion observe by the way that the jesuit to the last do accuse captain Hawkins of his obdurate heresy contrary to the calumny of some that say he become devout popish at their persuasion @. 3 the relation of captain Hawkins ambassador there master William Hawkins a a his book or large journal write by himself be communicate to i by the right worshipful sir tho. Smith be captain in the ship call the Hector after a long and tedious voyage from march 1607. to the four and twenty of August 1608. arrive at surat subject to the Mogor or Mogol so he call he and after much kindness offer and indignity suffer by reason and treason of the portugal who have by bribe and slander wrought the viceroy or deputy call Mocreb Chan against he pass thence to agra to the court as ambassador with a letter from the king of England Peniero a jesuite before in this book mention observe the conversion and conversation of that society in those part like a wothy factor for his nation b b Emmanuel Pinnerus have proffer to Mocreb-Chan forty thousand rial of eight to send they to daman that so he may become their prisoner and the english negotiation may be hinder and now when the name of a ambassador have protect he from such course plot with he to overthrow his journey both by detraction of necessary force to assist he in a way so full of outlaw and rebel and suborn his trudge-man and coachman to poison or murder he by the way which be not far from effect the portugal have also deal with the lord of cru to be ready with two hundred horseman to assault he in the way so that he be force to hire a strong convoy for the security of his person be come to agra he be bring with great state to the king who kind entertain he and swear by God and by his father soul to perform the king majesty request in the letter contain notwithstanding the depravation thereof by the jesuite to who the king have give it to read he promise also to allow he three thousand and two hundred pound a year or four hundred horse for so they reckon all their fee much like the turkish Timariot and cause he to take a wife of the country the daughter of a armenian Christian call Mubarikesha sometime a commander in the war of Ekbar Padasha c c Padasha be a persian word and signify king father to this present Mogor or mogul who name be selim. this king be so fickle and inconstant that what he have solemn promise for a english factory be by the portugal mean reverse and again promise and again suspend and a three time both grant and disannul so that the second of November 1611. captain Hawkins depart from agra and the last of December come to Cambaya where he hear of english ship in which he pass first to the red sea after to sumatra and Bantam d d dec. 21. 1612. and die on the irish shore in his return homeward while he keep at agra his live assign he by the king be much impair by the officer who appoint to he such place where outlaw and rebel live so that he never receive above three hundred pound his attendance while he be in favour be honourable and near the king so that the mahometans envy a Christian such dignity become his privy enemy and assistant to the portugal which be increase by a present the king send he public be a wild boar kill in his hunting-progress and by he and his eat the insolence of the guzarate if they may be suffer and as much baseness of their deject cowardly courage be keep in awe which be also the disposition of all the indian ethnic both white and black the portugal pride and treachery the fit place for our indian traffic whether we follow the colour of Mars or Mercury and other his diligent observation I omit but so I can the rarity of the mogul court custom puissance wealth and government notwithstanding our former discourse have meet with so rare a guide for the greatness of his state he report that his empire be divide into e e Other say that his proper title be king of del all Indostan be his patrimony and his country divide by three famous high way Porrab Pachan dekan w. Clarke five great kingdom the first name Pengab the chief city whereof be Lahor the second Bengala and Sonargham the mother city the three malua the chief seat vagain the four Deckan in which Bramport be principal and so be amadave in the five kingdom which be Cambaya he have six principal castle for the keep of his treasure at agra which be in the heart of all his kingdom Guallier Neruir Ratamboore Hassier Boughtaz there be three archrebel which with his force he can call in amber f f Allahoban Chapu in Deckan in guzerat the son of muzafer sometime their king call Bahador and Raga Rahana in malua he have five son sultan Cussero sultan peruis sultan chorem sultan Sharier sultan bath two young daughter and three hundred wife of which four be principal none have the title of sultan but his son Mirza be also ascribe to his brother and child Chan as a duke their degree and title be according to their proportion of horse allow they four be of the fame of twelve thousand the king his mother elder g g sultan peruis son and one of the blood royal call cham Azam of the fame of nine thousand horse be three these be as duke marquess of five thousand of which be eighteen earl of three thousand viscount so may we parallel they with our title of honour two thousand baron of one thousand horse knight four hundred other few to twenty all which be call mansibdar man of live or lordship of which be three thousand of haddy which receive monthly pay from six horse to one be h h m. Clarke which diverse year serve the mogul in his war and be one of these haddy say 30000. five thousand officer of court and camp six and thirty thousand as gunner porter watermen cook gardiner keeper of horse elephant etc. who wage be pay they monthly from ten to three Rupias a Rupia be two shilling i i other say 2. s. 6. d. other 2. s. 3. d. of our coin his captain or mansibdar be to maintain upon their allowance and have in readiness at a seven night warn three hundred thousand horse the king revenue of his crown-land be fifty Crou of Rupias every Crou be one hundred leek and every lecke a hundred thousand Rupias all which in our money be fifty million of pound a sum incredible and exceed that which be say of k k 150. million of crown China his daily expense be fifty thousand Rupias for his own person as apparel victual and other household expense with the feed of sundry sort of beast and of some few elephant his expense on his woman by the day amount to thirty thousand in his treasury of l l m. withington which live a factor diverse year in the country receive of the jesuit which reside there this same story of the mogul treasure agra be in gold of seraffin which be ten Rupias a piece threescore leek of another sort which be one thousand Rupias each twenty thousand piece and ten thousand of another sort half the value of toll every tole be a Rupia of silver and ten of those toll be the value of one of gold thirty thousand of another sort of ten toll five and twenty thousand of another sort of five toll fifty thousand in silver of thirteen Crou of a kind of coin worth a hundred toll a piece fifty thousand of another half as much one Lecke of thirty toll a piece forty thousand piece of twenty toll a piece thirty thousand piece of ten toll a piece twenty thousand piece of five toll a piece five and twenty thousand of Savoys each of which be a tole and a quarter two leek of jagary whereof five make six toll one lecke in jewel of diamond one batman and a half a batman be five and fifty pound weight english these be rough and of all sort and size but none less than two carrot and a half of Ballase ruby two thousand of pearl twelve batman of ruby of all sort two batman of emerald of all sort five batman of eshime which stone come from Cataya one batman of stone of eman a kind of red stone five thousand of all other sort as coral topaz etc. the number be innumerable of jewel wrought in gold two thousand and two hundred sword the hilt and scabbard set with rich stone two thousand poniard of saddle drum of gold set with stone use in hawk five hundred of rich brooch for their head in which their feather be set two thousand of saddle of gold and silver set with stone one thousand of tuike five and twenty this be a great lance cover with gold and the fluke set with stone and be carry when the king go to war in stead of colour of kitta-sole of state to shadow he twenty none else in his empire may have any of any sort carry for his shadow of chair of state five and of other sort which be of silver and gold one hundred of rich glass two hundred of vase for wine set with jewel one hundred of drink cup five hundred of which be fifty very rich as of one stone etc. of chain of pearl and other chain of ring with jewel etc. be infinite which the keeper only know of all sort of plate wrought as dish cup basin etc. two thousand batman of gold wrought a thousand batman of beast twelve thousand horse as many elephant five thousand with tooth the rest female and young camel twenty thousand of ox for service ten thousand of moil a thousand of deer for game three thousand ounce for game four hundred hunting-dog four hundred lion tame a hundred buffle five hundred hawk four thousand pigeon for sport ten thousand singing-bird four thousand he have also armour to arm five and twenty thousand man at a hour warning all this concern his treasure expense and monthly pay be in his court or castle of agra and every one of the castle above name have a several treasure and so have Lahor also which be not mention and if any censure this story for want of truth and i for want of judgement in relate such fullness so full for it I must leave it to the author credit for myself I be induce by the rarity of the subject not easy in this distance to be know nor by traveller except such as this author who embassage and exceed grace with the king for the great part of his residence may further his intelligence herein beside the rareness of the copy whereof I know but one and that write by himself time may make further trial nor may any measure those part of the indies for wealth in these kind with our Europaean or any other and that which so many king and state have in many age store together by the event of war become ecbar the father of this Selim of which you have hear of the incredible wealth of the king of Cambaia m m see chap. 7. alone beside if you observe his custom it make it so much near credit for when any nobleman die all devolve to he and well be it with the wife and child if he bestow the land and what he please on they and the father title on the elder son one die in my time say our author name Raga Gaginat on who good the king seize which beside jewel and other treasure amount to threescore maune in gold every Maune be five and fifty pound weight none likewise may come before the king with any petition empty-handed and on certain festival day they bring he rich present as before be say India beside mine must needs be rich in money for all nation bring it and carry commodity for it so that once in twenty year it come to the king all land in his monarchy be his give and take at his pleasure escheat be many by reason of his severity and of those land which he give in fee the three part still remain to the king and of the crown land two three the rest to the occupier for present and mortuary we have before give diverse instance and my jealousy have make i very inquisitive of such as have live there in the ministry factory all which affirm that captain Hawkins have write with the least of all sort of his wealth except coin be bring daily a certain quantity before he for which purpose his beast and all thing of value be divide into three hundred and threescore part so that the same thing come but once in the year to his view he have three hundred elephant royal for himself to ride on which be bring with pomp rich cover twenty or thirty man go before with streamer his female with her youngling or youngling follow beside four or five other young one attend as page these be disperse among the great one to oversee they the king allow they for it but scarce sufficient and they dare not make show of they in evil plight one of they eat ten ropia every day in butter graine Sugar sugarcane etc. they be very tame I see one take up the king own son by his appointment be a child of seven year there be think to be in this empire forty thousand elephant n n m. Clarke say 50000. of his and his noble of which twenty thousand be train for war when the king ride in progress his tent be in compass about as large as London two hundred thousand people usual follow his camp this king be esteem the great emperor in the east he have many dromedary who swiftness avail his father much in his sudden expedition of war those valiant captain which Ecbar have Selim have by tyranny much diminish five time a week he command his elephant to fight before he which often in their come in or go out kill many and if any be but wound and may escape yet he command he to be cast into the river say he will curse he as long as he live and therefore best to dispatch he he delight to see man execute and tear with elephant of these tyranny he reckon many particular which he see and some for no fault but for his lust set to fight with the lion and one valiant man to buffet with a very fierce lion without any weapon offensive or defensive if any of his subject have any precious stone of value and make not he the offer of it it be death to he he must have the refusal of all and yet give not the worth by a three part that jewel he wear this day be not wear again till that day twelvemonth all his jewel be proportion to such a course all his severity and tyranny can clear perhaps this cause they his country of outlaw there be one between agra and Amadavar which command as much land as a good kingdom he be strong twenty thousand horse and fifty thousand foot and keep on the mountain man can scarce travel for outlaw the often shift of man from their land make they exact more cruel in the time they hold they grind the face of their poor tenant in rueful manner if they continue but six year they raise a great state sometime they hold not half a year if any be employ in war or business in another place he must forgo his land here and be assign it there the king allowance otherwise be exceed as for every horse twenty ropia a month for the war and for so many more which he have of fame he be allow two ropia a month for the maintenance of his table concern the king religion and behaviour it be thus Selim religion and custom in the morning about break of day he be at his bead his face to the westward in a private fair room upon a fair jet-stone have only a persian Lambe-skin under he he have eight chain of bead every of which contain four hundred they be of pearl diamond ruby emerald aloe Eshen and coral at the upper end of this jet-stone be place the image of Christ and our lady grave in stone he turn over his bead and say so many word to wit three thousand and two hundred and then present himself to the people to receive their salame or good morrow for which purpose multitude resort thither every morning this do he sleep two hour more then dine and pass his time with his woman at noon he show himself again to the people sit till three or four a clock to view his pastime by man and beast every day sundry kind at three all the noble in agra who sickness detain not resort to the court and the king come forth in open audience sit in his seat-royal every man stand in his degree before he the chief within a red rail which be allow to our author have but five before he the rest without this red rail be three step high than the place where the rest stand man be place by officer there be other to keep man in order in the midst right before the king stand a officer with his master hangman accompany with forty other of the same profession with hatch on their shoulder and other with whip here the king hear cause some hour o o the king of India sit daily in justice themselves and on the tuesday do execution every day and then depart to his house of prayer which end four or five sort of well dress meat be bring he whereof he eat what he like to stay his stomach drink once of his strong drink after this he come forth into a private room where none may come but such as himself nominate two year together our author be one of the attendant in this place he drink other five cup which be the portion that the physician allow he after which he eat opium and then lay he down to sleep every man depart home when he have sleep two hour they awake he and bring his supper to he thrust it in his mouth not be able to feed himself this be about one of the clock at night and so he sleep the rest of the night in this cup-space he do many idle thing but nothing without writing be he drunken or sober for he have writer by course which write all not omit his go to the stool or how ought he lie with his woman and with who to the end that when he die those writing may be bring forth and thence what be think fit may be insert in their chronicle when any poor man come to demand justice of the king they go to a certain rope fasten to two pillar near where the king sit this rope be full of bell plate with gold and with shake the rope the king hear the sound send to know the cause and do justice according while our author be with he he make his brother child christian not for zeal as the jesuit think but in policy to disappoint a prophecy of certain learned gentile which foretold their succession in the kingdom to make they odious to the moor God take the wise in his craftiness and convert this perverse policy to their true conversion one of his son sultan Sharier of seven year can not by diverse cruelty purposely inflict on he by his father be force to cry pretend his nurse instruction to the contrary he keep many feast feast in the year but some principal one call nourous or newyear day then have he a rich tent pitch curious and costly wrought two acre of ground in compass so rich spread with silk and gold carpet and precious hang as be more admirable than credible there be room also for his queen to see unseen round about so that in all it may be five acre every nobleman make his room each strive to excel other in cost the king will come to which of they he effect and be sumptuous feast and present but because he will not receive any thing as a present he allow as much as the treasurer value it which be half the worth thus all provide and present at this feast common every man state be augment it begin at the begin of the moon in March some four month after be the feast of his birthday which every one strive to honour with his rich apparel and jewel after many palace-pastime he go with the great pomp to his mother to who every nobleman present a jewel after banquet end he weigh in a balance of gold against himself in one scale other thing of diverse sort to the worth of ten thousand pound which be give to the poor mogul sepulchre covert say the matter be fine marble the form nine square the compass two english mile about and nine story high and that the king protest he will bestow thereon one hundred million but his rich subject present he that day ten time as much on his father Funeral-day be solemnize a feast at his sepulchre where himself mean to be bury with all his posterity at which time much meat and money be give to the poor it have be fourteen year in building and be think will not be finish in seven year more notwithstanding three thousand at least be daily at work thereon but one of our workman will dispatch more than three of they it be by his description three quarter of a mile about make square have seven height each narrow than other till the top where his hearse be at the utmost gate before you come to the sepulchre be a stately palace in building the compass of the wall join to the gate etc. may be at least three mile it be four mile from agra the king custom be every year to make a hunt progress of two month but when he come forth of his palace if he mount on a horse it be a sign of his go to the war if on a elephant or Palamkin it be but a hunt journey @. 4 of the settle of the english trade in these part and of the two sea-fight betwixt we and the portugal jarric thes. rer. Indic l. 5. c. 23. we have hear how by the portugal work the english trade be disannul in the mogul dominion captain Hawkins despair of any good that way and leave the country the jesuit have close wrought mocrab Chan against he with other great man and one of they Pinnerus be employ in public embassage betwixt the viceroy of goa and the mogul to the same effect the portugal allege the league be break because the english be entertain neither can the mogul easy lose their friendship because they be then master at sea and can have hinder he and he from all marine trade Andrea Hurtadus de Mendosa the viceroy have forbid the merchant their cambayan trade and already hostility have begin on both side both cease with the departure of the english sir Henry Middleton come to surrat after his red-sea-disaster in expectation of trade but find nothing but dissemble so that after much loss of time he be drive with his ship to seek new adventure to repair the loss which by turkish treachery and the mogul inconstancy and falsehood he have sustain hereupon he return to the straight of aden an. 1612. and intercept the ship that come from the mogul country to this turkish trade easy stop the mouth of the Turk and cut off the mogul Nautic hand in hinder the mutual traffic of their subject so weak in those sea be these two just call great the great indeed and most puissant prince all thing consider in the universe yet do not the english make prize of they only they set price to they of their english commodity and exchange they at their price for such indian good as they have bring thither both estimate as they be worth in India n n Nic Bangam they have money of these Ship some 32000. rial of eight whereof the Rehemee pay 15000. m. downton say they have good for good to a halfpenny nic. withington make they further allowance of two in the hundred one ship of this company call the Rehemee have one thousand five hundred person in she many have cavil this force trade not consider that they have first find both fraud and force at the turk hand and at the mogul much expense and loss of time and good contrary to covenant which I see not how the law of nature and nation may not warrant they to make good the king himself be wrong and they arm with the king commission and their own power and perhaps other will have take all without any good give in exchange certain it be that the event which those mahometans make the rule of equity be good the cambayan merchant so terrify that when gen. best ignorant of these passage not long after come to surrat with the dragon he be promise good deal mill jeffee one of the chief merchant of surrat affirm that they must else burn all their ship and give over their trade by sea so true be that observation of captain Hawkins a actor perhaps author in this business of these people insolent if suffer and base if curb on the three of October 1612. Sheke suff governor of Amadavaz m t. best m. Patrick Copland m. Nathaniel Salmon m. withington chief city of the guzzurat come to surrat and thence to Swally and on the one and twenty conclude upon certain article with the english general which I have read in his own relation too tedious to be here insert not so the famous fight betwixt he and the portugal who have already in their insult insolent hope swallow the english but dragon be harsh morsel and of ill digestion master Canning a english merchant have be prisoner with the portugal but in a confident bravery the viceroy command to set he on shore at surrat that he may go help his countryman fight and then we will take their ship and the rest of they altogether but not altogether nay not at all can he perform this with all his great fleet of four huge galleon with five or six and twenty frigate the dragon be assist only with the Osiander a little ship scarce a ship I have almost call she a little pinnace but of great performance in this fight Nunno Ancuna Nunno Ancuna be admiral of the portugal who by the Sabandore or treasurer under the mogul in those part a experience man who have a little before come aboard the english to spy out their strength be counsel not to adventure present fight with such present courage but to keep betwixt they and the shore to hinder they from water and so like another cunctator to weary the english and force they from thence but Ancunas high pride disdain stratagem and scorn forsooth to spend a week provision on his man in hinder we who he can force in a hour thus on the nine and twenty of November come he in sight with his fleet with red colour display where he receive a unwelcome welcome by the dragon which after the general encourage speech go to meet they and when he come between the admiral and vice-admiral open his fiery mouth and in a thunder dialect give they the first salutation the other two be not yet come up nor can the Osiander get clear of her anchor but the next morning the fight be renew and three of the galleon drive on ground not a man of they dare to look above hatch and have be their leave but for the frigate m. withington the Osiander dance the hay say one about they or play like a salmon my friend Mr. Nathaniel salmon be master and commander in she swim frisk light but not with light effect leap about these huge whale carcase which in the afternoon get afloat and continue the fight till night in the night they o o m. Copland man a frigate with six or sevenscore of their best man think to have fire the english but find both fire and water conspire against themselves to their destruction the Osiander keep diligent watch and with a shot sink they there be eighty four of they take up drown the shallowness of the bay give occasion to the dragon which draw much water to remove to the other side near unto Mendofrobag or Medhafrabadh sometime a fair city and wall ruin by the mogul war here be a castle of the razbooche some call they Reisbuti which have be the native lord of that country now as it be outlaw spoil and rob besiege by sarder Chan a great man of the mogul who have many thousand in his camp which all become witness of the english valour spectator of the portugal confusion sarde Chan tent be stately and spacious cover above with cloth of gold on the floor with Turkey carpet he send a horse and two vest wrought with silk and gold to the general and four vest for four other of his company himself will not stir out of his tent till he have take the castle but give they licence to take view thereof but the portugal approach with their force the mogul by many argument dehort the english from the fight which yet they present make good before many thousand gaze admire astonish eye the portugal be force to cut their cable and to escape by flight be swift of sail then the english thus the portugal want a Hercules for this dragon more watchful than the Hesperidan more terrible than the lernaean or a Medea to charm this as sometime the colchian these three dragon the poet fain monster beget of Typhon and echidna but none of they breathe fire nor roar thunder like this fell indian dragon here speak of in these fight after master Salmon reckon the dragon spend six hundred thirty nine and the Osiander three hundred eighty seven great shot beside three thousand small the great mogul which before think none comparable to the Portugal at sea much wonder at the english resolution relate to he by Sardar cham. the portugal lose by their own confession one hundred and sixty by other report five hundred man the sabandar reckon three hundred and fifty in these fight the english three man and the arm of another shot off the article agree on before by the governor be confirm by the king which they receive january the eleven captain best return to Swally December one and twenty and send letter of this success for England by land but the messenger p p ant. Starky with his indian be both poison by two friar in the way homeward another letter send by a mariner come to the company hand in very good season and they send forth four ship hither beside three to other place under the command of general downton viz. the new year gift the Hector the merchant hope and the Solomon Relat. m.s. gen. nic. downton Martin bring Benjamin day John leman William Masham etc. master downton both bury his son and die himself in this voyage which since we have publish with other our pilgrim continue by m. Elkington and m. Dodsworth his successive successor these leave England in march on October the fifteen follow 1614 anchor at south Swally not far from surrat where they find the country in arm against the portugal which have a little before take a ship of the mogul in which be say to be three million of treasure and two woman buy for the great mogul they also take a q q n. withington guzzarate ship worth one hundred thousand pound with seven hundred person therein at the bar of surat notwithstanding their own pass grant they and send they to goa the decanim lay siege to shall and Mocrob Chan be to do his utmost for his master the mogul the moor on all hand seek their destruction and they be drive to send away many hundred of the banyan out of their town to free themselves of unprofitable mouth three bark of which come to surat other to Cambaya Mocrob Chan labour very earnest with the general to engage himself in that war against the Portugal which because he can not do except in a defensive quarrel by his commission the Nabab so they call this Mocrob Chan than viceroy or governor of the country about surat the jesuit interpret Nabab supreme judge be strange to the english and offer the merchant some hard measure yea the jesuit which be with Mocrob Chan take occasion from this refusal to counterfeit a letter from the viceroy threaten that except they yield to peace he and his friend the english will join against surat which suspicion master aldworth one of our merchant further ignorant of the former but threaten that their abuse will cause the english to join with the Portugal thus ticklish be the term on which they stand December the sixteen the general receive a letter that the portugal have burn r r Goga be a rich town on the other side of the Bay some say that there be not so much harm do Goga with many village thereabouts and ten great ship one of which be the Rehemee with one hundred and twenty small vessel he read the letter of a jesuite in which the king of Spain command the viceroy to burn surat if they receive the english on December the seven and twenty two and twenty Portugal frigate seek to lay the hope aboard but by force of shot be put off the viceroy send offer of friendship to Mocrob Chan on condition that he will turn the english out of surat and suffer he to build a fort at Swally otherwise threaten bloody war and so on january the fourteen come two fleet of frigate and on the eighteen six great galleon with three lesser ship two galley be yet behind the frigate be threescore some add fifteen more this great force make Mocrob Chan to fear whereupon he send a present to the viceroy with some treaty of peace whereof the viceroy make light account think first to overcome we a thing not hard in his conceit and then to treat of peace on his own term much policy be use on both part the Nabab complement and send ptesent to the viceroy and out general also the viceroy promise much to himself but reckon without his host and therefore when after the fight he will have conclude upon the condition that Mocrob have offer he be then refuse with a scoff that he will not make peace with so weak a enemy that can not prevail against four merchant ship on the twenty of january their three small ship have think to have stem the hope then ride at a anchor near the bar of Swally some distance from the rest these lay she aboard on the starboard side and one galley and five and forty sail of frigate on their larboard Masham the galleon follow as far as the sand will permit the admiral make to their help and for the better speed cut their cable but the enemy have already enter with great show of resolution without fear or wit say one of the hope man thirty or forty be enter on the forecastle but the gift in this fatal month answer her name and give they for a New-years-gift such oration roaration you may call they that they be easy persuade to leave the hope and all hopeless to cool their hot blood with leap into the sea cold water where many for want of a boat make use of Charon those that be of most hope and courage hold still their possession of the enter hope but with inter hope and dispossession of their life I know not what salmoneus olympi and or what Prometheus have teach these late age to steal Jupiter fire invention of ordnance first use by the venetian against the genuous an. dom. 1378. who besiege Fossa-Clodia a town of they invent by a german alchemist a monk call Bertholdus swartus other say constantinus Anklitzen print be also first invent by a german the first print book be Tully office at Mentz by one John fust which some think to be the same with Gutemberg who have make trial of this art before without any perfection this book be still at augsburg print 1466. ram. p. verg. Pancirol Salmuth etc. and instruct so many cyclopean artificer to imitate those heavenly in hellish thunder and sulphurous lightning these metal-devil as angel of death with brazen side and iron mouth proclaim destruction and desolation to the World these bullet be the true fire-breathing bull such the poet feign at Colchos and this ordnance the fire-foaming horse of Diomedes feed on the flesh of man which yet I know not whether very cruelty have make spare while the terror have make man spare in the use of it this age for this cause yield few pitch battle and in they few slay number than the former which never hear of this cruel-merciful engine but let we leave this parenthesis the portugal whether themselves by casualty or industry set fire on their ship or that the fire which master Mullineux the master of the hope cast into one of they after that by help of freshman send in the pinnace they be get clear of they certain it be that all three drive away upon the ebb the english have enter before and kill all they find fall on fire and run on the sand there offer up themselves at once to all the element the sail still stand embrace the air the keel kiss her mother earth till their more churlish brethren the fire and water put they out of possession and share all betwixt they one of the galley lose her nose with a shot and be content after that with their other to look on the galleon ride beyond the sand the frigate can not but participate in their fellow disadventure many of they say leman be sink and tear in piece Masham another d d so do another nameless copy which I have see of the hope company number five and twenty thus perish the hope lose three man and have fourteen wound the Hector lose two one shot of stone which the hope receive be measure seven and twenty inch about but the hurt be by fire in her top by one of she own man there slay while he seek to fire the enemy the portugal loss be uncertain three hundred and fifty man be say to be carry to daman to be bury beside all that the sea and fire have share betwixt they which be think to make up five hundred some report of eight hundred and yet themselves give out not above forty or fifty whereas the tide cast up at one place eighteen drown carcase after this they try experiment first by poison and this be the jesuit jesuitisme I can call it christianity who send to the muccadan of Swally to entice he to poison the water of the well whence the english fetch for their use but the ethnic have more honesty and put in quick tortoise that it may appear by their death if any venomous hand have be there but when virtus and want be add and the viceroy have two ship send he for supply two junk eight or ten boat these or the most of they be employ with great secrecy and subtlety to fire our ship by night two full of fiery entrails on the nine of February the next night two other chain together and tow with frigate and after that in the same night four other chain together one of which be fire with a english shot burn herself and her fellow they put fire to all the rest which devour they all without harm to the english they take some of these fireworker and one of which be examine confess after m. Pring relation thus I omit the name of the captain the admiral call todo los santos a ship of eight hundred tun have six hundred man eight and twenty piece most brass the saint benito vice-admiral of seven hundred tun three hundred and threescore man twenty piece saint Lorenzo a ship of six hundred tun three hundred man twenty piece the saint Christopher likewise the saint jeronimo of five hundred tun three hundred man and twenty three piece saint Antonio four hundred two hundred man and fifteen piece saint Pedro two hundred a hundred and twenty man and eight piece saint Paulo as many a flyboat of a hundred and fifty tun fourscore man and four piece the two galley have five and twenty oar on a side and in both a hundred soldier threescore frigate with eighteen and twenty oar on a side in each fifteen soldier so great their force and bless be God so little their force the e e Ben day another have Sanedo viceroy name be don jeronimo de sanecko sometime captain of mosambike after that of Zeilan eighteen year and now viceroy by the king strait command and other importunity draw into this action every day be he brave with the english ordnance but never adventure any other trial by fight the english ride near his great fleet and dispatch all their other affair of merchandise and mend the hope which they send home with this news when they depart from thence they seem to stay for they in the way yet let they pass without any blow this win they much glory among the country people Mocrob Chan give stately entertainment to the general in his tent on shore which one say be a quarter of a mile about in the midst his own of crimson satin rich embroider with gold and pearl and cover with cloth of gold he have many elephant he give the general his sword make say he in his own house the hilt of massy gold this be their custom to deserve captain and he give he his girdle sword and dagger and hanger of as fair show but less worth nic. withington because I have mention the jesuit art in these part let this also be add that master Canning chief merchant and agent for the company write to surat for some other to assist he be in great fear of poison by the jesuit at the court and before any can be send he be dead may the nine and twenty 1613. one Englishman die a little before be bury in their churchyard who they take up and bury in the highway but be compel by the king to lay he in his former place threaten to turn they out of his country and their bury body out of that churchyard but this late war bring they into further misery be deny their stipend and therefore forsake of their new convert who bring they their bead do upbraid they the want of their pay one of the best argument though no great miracle wherewith they have persuade they to their religion a french jesuit at Amadabar beg relief of the english want necessary sustenance before the king allow the superior seven Rupias a day and the rest three but now this and their fair church also be deny they and they say their holy in their chamber John Mildnall a english Papist have learn it be report the art of poison by which he make away three other englishman in Persia to make himself master of the whole stock but I know not by what mean himself taste of the same cup and be exceed swell but continue his life many month with antidote which yet here leave he at agra where he leave the value of twenty thousand dollar after through the king justice recover by the english many other sea-fight have since happen in diverse part of the indies betwixt our man and the portugal as that by captain ben. f f see m. terris book and child journal and sir tho. roe in my voyage joseph in which he be slay and captain Pepwel succeed in the place and quarrel with Manuel de Meneses who carack be consume with fire by themselves as be think rather than so great treasure shall be make english spoil also in the persian gulf g g see swan journal and letter of blithe Browne etc. by captain shilling slay therein captain Blithe and other which chase the assail portugal Ruy Frere de Andrada their commander call the pride of Portugal get a fall and since that Ormus h h let. of t. Wilson and also of Robert smith itself take by the persian diverse other Portugal prize and that especial of the i i one Philips in the Richard be principal cause of that victory by his manhood Richard a small pinnace of about twenty tun which take a Portugal ship suppose of two hundred and fifty that have about fourteen man and boy this two hundred and fifty these and other fight with they and more unfortunate with the dutch in k k of dutch and english unkind quarrel see relation of m. Cock tho. Spurway captain Courthop rob. Haies captain bring John hatch William hord letter of cas David George jackeson ja. lane g. Ball m. wiles kelum throgmorton ric. nash s. t. dale io. jordan a. Spaldwin g. Muschamp w. anthon. h. Fitzherbert th. Knollos b. churchman g. Pettys etc. those part I have deliver at large in my pilgrim or book of voyage which now together with this come to the public view of the World @. v. of the travel of diverse englishman in the mogul dominion of the travel of master fitch in these part we have already speak rob. covert and of captain Hawkins in the year 1609. the ascension by wilfulness of the master as be report founder in the sea twenty league from shore which yet they attain be five and fifty person in the river of Gandevee from whence they travel twelve course or eighteen mile to Sabay and twelve course more to surrat from thence to Daytaotote which city he say can not be conquer by the mogul and yield upon composition have still a Banyan king six and twenty course further be Netherbery a great Basar or market of brazen ware armour and beast eight and twenty course beyond be the town saddisee on the river tyndee which run to surrat and divide the bannian and guzurat thence they travel twelve course to a monastery and the next day come to Bramport where the great general call can cannawe live who on the twelve of October return from the war with fifteen hundred elephant thirty thousand horse ten thousand camel three thousand dromedary this city be far big than London of great trade and fair from hence they go fifteen course to caddor fourteen to Sawbon and thence with the caravan many day leave which they join with a can of the country bind for agra travel six day through a desert wherein be store of wild elephant lion tiger cat of mountain porpentine and other wild beast innumerable but these they see and be force to make fire in the night about their tent to guard they these desert be a hundred course long each course be a mile and half they have in their way after they be past this desert the city Handee where the king have a castle and house cut out of the main rock and wrought with carve work round about in it fifty piece of ordnance a fort impregnable and make a prison for great men. here be also two hospital for captain maim in the war the next day they come to Tamlico which run into Indus and two day after to agra he tell of elephant fight before the mogul part with racket of wild fire agra make round like hoop which they run in their face some fight with wild horse six horse to a elephant which he kill with clasp his trunk about their neck and pull they to he break their neck with his tooth he have also dear ram Veruathoes or bezor lion leopard wolf that fight before he condemn person may crave the combat with the lion one he see that at the first encounter fell the lion with his fist but be soon tear in piece before the king he see also alligator or crocodile keep in pond for like purpose one of which kill two stone horse at one time there be four great market every day where thing be very cheap a hen for two penny a sheep for two shilling a good hog sell by the bannian for two shilling and other thing proportionable they crave the king pass for England who grant it under his hand and seal the secretary go with they to the three queen of which he be say to have ten and a thousand concubine and two hundred eunuch which be keeper of the great seal hence they pass five in number to fetterbarre a a fatipore a city as big as London Ios. Salbank indigo twelve course and twelve more to biany which be the chief place for indigo in all the indies where be twelve indigo mill indigo grow on small bush like goose-berry bush and bear a seed like a cabbage-seed and be cut down lie on heap for half a year to rot and then bring into a vault to be tread with ox from the stalk and so be ground fine at the mill and last boil in fornace refine and sort the best there worth eight penny a pound thence they pass to Hendown five and twenty course a ancient fair city to mogul a small market town fourteen to Halstot twelve to Chatsoe twelve to Ladanna twelve to Mosabad eight to bandason twelve thence to Paddar a river that run into the persian gulf and part the indostan and hendowne twenty course beyond Roree Buckar and Suckar in the river of Damiadee which run into the same sea at Buckar lie Allee can viceroy of the bulloche a stubborn people this town stand like a island in the river sucker be a clothing town the first of the bulloche and Roree the last of the moltans which be mahumetan here they stay four and twenty day for a Califa or Caravan a great company of merchant travel together because the country be full of thief seventeen course from sucker be Gorra a town of the bullochee which he say worship the sun and be man-eater of giantlike proportion notry ten course the last town of the bullochee the next puttan here for their entertainment April the first 1610. they be beset with thief twelve fiddler first meeting they but their music cost dear by bribe and composition the mogul pass hinder further outrage seventeen course they travel to daddor four and thirty over the mountain to Vachesto from thence seven and fifty over the mountain to Candahar a great city of the puttan where Sauder can reside as viceroy where be continual seven or eight thousand camel occupy in trade to and fro the governor have b b 12000. or 15000. within the city still r. still or stell and i. crowther forty thousand horse in readiness for war richard still and John crowther be late send from Azmere Asimere or Agimere where the mogul now reside to Spahan in Persia to obtain trade for the english by sir Robert Sherly mean which be effect they pass by the way of lahore and therefore I will desire you to bear they company for better knowledge of the country their way be first towards agra March 17. and fetipore which be a fair city and have in it a goodly house of the king build by Echebar with many spacious garden now it go to ruin much of the stone carry to agra much ground sow within the wall April the nine 1614 they come to dillee a very great and ancient city where many king lie bury and as some say the rite of coronation be still solemnize many noble and captain have their house of pleasure and their sepulcher the vulgar sort beggarly most banian on the seventeen they come to Sinan a ancient city on the one and twenty to the old city sultan poare six course from it they pass a river as broad as the Thames call Viau which run west into sinda or Indus here be pitchte can his tent pitch like a little city t. cor. his letter to m. l. w. he be ambassador into Persia on the four and twenty they come to lahore their report of this agree with master coryat who relation thereof be late publish they say it be the best of India plentiful of all thing or in master coryat word such a delicate and even tract of ground as I never see before and he have see a great deal beside his european sight at Venice and since at Constantinople have add more asian title to his before c c verse Hosk admire name than the ancient Roman Scipio or caesar dream of yea more than justinian in the prooeme of his d d Flavius justinianus Alemanicus Gothicus francicus Germanicus anticus Alanicus Vandalicus Africanus for that which follow I hope his friend in the verse before his book have give he more prodigious and himself before he come home must needs multiply further have such huge bundle of paper abree in so many place at Aleppo Spahan Asmere etc. imperial institution have marshal and muster together the further foot english-traveller that our day have have and the long english stile which our ear have hear with many rest for your weary breath by the way a stile indeed so high you can hardly get over HIEROSOLYMITAN syrian MESOPOTAMIAN armenian median-parthian-persian Indian legge stretcher of ODCOMB even this our Odcombian Foot-pilgrim which make your Pen-pilgrim in I know not what like or likeness at the very mention of his name to sympathize and his brain to fall in travel as learned mad scarce able to contain wont word and wit in this ecstatical gaze and maze of that propatetike foot ready to admire adore and kiss and yet o brain no brain to envy that his low part for who be able to know his better part he doubt whether the like be to be find within the whole circumference of the habitable World a row of tree extend itself on both side the way from the town end of lahore twenty day journey to the town end of agra most of they bear say e e r. still lahore still a kind of mulberry the way be dangerous by night for thief by day secure every five or six course there be fair sera of the king or noble for beautify the way memory of their name and entertainment of traveller where you may have a chamber and a place to set your horse with store of horse-meat but in many of they little provision for man by reason of the banian superstition when a man have take up his lodging in one of these no other man may dispossess he about daybreak all make ready to depart together and then the gate be open till then shut for fear of thief after the sun have be up two hour the heat make travel irksome lahore be one of the fair and ancient city in India stand on Indus it contain at the least m. Coryat tell you sixteen mile in compass twelve day before he come there he pass Indus there as broad as the Thames at London in the midway betwixt Lahor and agra ten mile out of the way on the left hand a mountainous people be say to have but one wife to all the brethren of one family as we have elsewhere speak of the arabian merchant resort to this city out of all part of India embark their good here in great boat for Tutta the chief city in sinda a trade of much importance in time of peace to the portugal which by this way trade to Ormus and Persia and this way also furnish India with pepper twelve or fourteen thousand camel lade yearly pass from hence to Persia by Candahar before the war with the portugal but three thousand this mountainous way be in winter cold in summer hot the caravans spend six or seven month betwixt Lahor and Spahan spice be dear in Persia by reason of the long land-carriage from Mesulapatan this way still and crowther depart from Lahor may the thirteen and on the two and twenty come to multan a great and ancient city within three course of Indus but poor for which cause they detain the caravans there diverse day eight ten or twelve to benefit the city they enter the mountain the second of june where they have brackish water the three and four day they travel all night climb high mountain and follow watercourse and so continue till they come to Chatcha on the ten in all these eight day travel Chatcha 3 fort. be no sustenance for man or beast except in some place a little grass and therefore at Lacca in the begin of this way they hire a ox to carry barley for their horse on the nineteenth they come to Duckee another fort of the mogul and the seven and twenty pass the Durwas or strait of the hill dangerous narrow way on both side menace by high rock from whence a few with stone may stop great multitude and diverse caravans be thus cut off for the agwan or puttan the mountain inhabitant be a thievish people the second of july they come to Pesimga another fort and pass thence over a mighty mountain on the seven come to Candahar the agwan be white stout strong rob Caravans sell all straggler but now with fear and the gain they get by sell their cattle to the caravans they be more tractable covert say they wear their beard long be not mahumetan their priest wear sackcloth with great chain about their middle fall down and pray in sackcloth and ash at Candahar they hire camel for India or Persia hence into Persia the country be barren and therefore they go in small company sometime in two or three day travel not see a green thing at their lodging-place water but often brackish and stink hence they depart july the three and twenty and on the five and twenty come to Cushecunna the utmost garrison in the mogul frontier thirty course from Candahar on the seven and twenty they come to grease a castle of the sophy a course from the river sabba which separate the persian and Mogoll confine the people of grease be thief and the captain little better than a rebel from hence they reckon their way by farsang five of which make two course they travel m m still covert travel be extant in his book August the six to Farra a town wall with Sun-dried Brick and store with water without which here be no store and therefore they carry it in some place if there be good ground three or four mile under ground here they use man kind as they go into Persia for fear of complaint but in their return to India very hardly search they to the skin for gold which to carry out or any silver coin but the king be death on the twelve day they be fain to dig for water on the two and twenty they come to deuzayde where they pretend all to be religious people on September the fifteen I still follow still they come to Spahan where they find sir Robert Shirley then dispatch in embassage for Spain from the king of Persia n n he say that he have put to death his own son and do 1000 other tyranny John crowther w. Nichols John Mildnall by the way or Ormus for goa and thence to Lisbon he procure the king great seal to all his governor of seaport kind to entertain the english at jasques etc. date Sertember the thirty 1615. the same day that sir Robert and his lady depart with great pomp to sirrah John crowther return October the twenty towards Lahor and he on December the second towards Bagdat and thence by Aleppo for England William Nicols one of the ascension company travel the mogul country eastward to Mesulopatan where the hollander have then a factory John Mildnall in his letter date from Casbin in Persia 1606. October the three testify that he have be at Lahor and at agra where he present the king with nine and twenty great horse at fifty or threescore pound a horse with diverse jewel and ring and obtain article of trade of his come since into those part be before mention from master withington mic. withington relation and his travel be the next travel of our pen first from surrat to Amadabar by Periano Cosumbay Barocho a city wall on a high hill a river run by as broad as the Thames where be the best calico in the kingdom Saringa carron Boldra a city fair but less than Barocho where Mussaf Chan have three thousand horse Niriand a great town where they make indigo these be in the way from surat to Amadabar 88 course chief city of guzerat near as great as London strong wall situate in a plain by the river side much frequent by merchant christian moor and Ethnic the governor be Abdala Chan of five thousand horse pay from thence he go to Cambaya at Serkeffe three course from Amadabar he see the sepulcher of the king of guzerat very fair and well keep much visit from all part of the kingdom their temple be very fair a course from hence be a goodly house by the river side and a garden a mile in compass it be build by Chon Chonnaw the chief of the mogul nobility in memorial of a great victory there obtain on the last king of guzerat there captive and his kingdom subdue the battle be fight in this place they lodge one night in this house where none dwell only poor man be appoint to look to the garden have news of three english ship arrive at Lowribander the port town of gutu negar Tutta common call Tutta chief city of sinda 1601. he be send thither and December the thirteen come to Cassumpauo and thence with a Caphilo travel on the fourteen to callitalowny a fair castle and the fifteen to Calwalla Calwalla a town of filthy woman a pretty village which Echebar give to a company of woman and their posterity for ever to bring up their child in dance etc. they practise this in the caravan every man give they money and then impudent ask if any man want a bedfellow the next day they come to Carrya a well-manned fortress and stay a day for more company because of thief come the next to Deceanaura lose one camel steal from they and a man slay thence to Bollodo a fort keep by newlock Abram cabrath which that day come with a hundred and threescore and nine head of the caely a rob nation the next day to Sariandgo another fort and on the one and twenty to radempoore a great town with a fort where they stay to make provision of water and other necessary for their journey through the desert desert on the three and twenty they go seven course lay in the field and meet a Caravan which come from Tutta rob of all their good on the four and twenty twelve on the five and twenty fourteen lodge by a well of water so salt that their cattle can not drink it the six and twenty ten course to such another well and their give their camel drink not have drink before in three day the seven and twenty fourteen course the eight and twenty ten and come to a village call negar Parkar in this desert they see great store of wild ass red deer fox and other wild beast at Parkar they meet another rob caravan this town pay tribute to the mogul from hence till you come within half a day journey of Tutta they acknowledge no king but rob and spare who they please when the mogul send any army against they they fire their house which be make of straw and mortar in form of bee-hive soon rebuild and fly into the mountain they take for custom what they please and then guard passenger and merchant loathe any shall rob they but themselves from hence they go six course and lay by a Tanke or pond of freshwater and on the last of December eight course and lodge by a brackish well january the first they tsavel ten course to Burdiano the water be brackish and many be sick of it yet they be force to make provision thereof for four day the space of forty course and on the five they come seven other course to three well of which two be salt the three not perfect fresh the next day ten course to Nauraquemire a pretty town where their Cafila forsake they he and two other indian merchant with their nine servant ten camel and five camel-man remain to go for Tutta whither they have now three day journey from this paradise so it seem after so tedious a desert they depart january the eight have hire one of the ragi or governor his kindred for twenty lary which make about twenty shilling to conduct and convoy they and go ten course to Gundayaw where they have be rob but for their Guard the next day be twice assault and force each time to pay five lary come to Sarruna a great town of the razbootche with a castle reisbuti whence it be fourteen course to Tutta ragi Bouma the governor be elder son to sultan Bulbull who have be late captive by the mogul and spoil of his eye and two month before our come have make a escape to these mountain animate his kindred to revenge that loss of his sight this ragi be kind to our author as a stranger and make he sup with he the occasion that they hire he for forty lary with fifty horseman to conduct they to the gate of Tutta hereunto they be the rather persuade by advice of a banian which have then come from Tutta who also tell master Withinton S.R. Shirley that sir Robert Shirley have be much abuse by the portugal and the governor at Lowribander his house fire and his man hurt in the night and arrive at Tutta thirteen day after be there unkind use by the governor this ragi lead they five course where they lie by a river side and at two of the clock in the morning they depart but be lead a contrary way and about break of day bring into a thicket m. withington rob where he make they unlade take away their weapon and bind they sudden with their camel rope draw close with a truncheon hang the two merchant and their five man strip and bury they i as a far countryman not know the language he spare with my pion or servant but take my horse give i a jade and fourscore Rupias from i send i twenty course with my man up to the mountain to a brother of he where I continue two and twenty day a close prisoner and then order be send to convey i to Parker but in the way be rob of my clothes and all that I have so that I and my man be force to live upon the charity of people by beg only my horse as not worth take be leave i for which I can get but four mamoodee four shilling but chance on a Banian who I have know at Amadabar I be relieve and sell not my horse we come to radingpoore may the nineteenth and April the second to Amadabar thence to Cambaya and pass the river seven course broad yearly drown many to Saurau a town and castle of the razbootche and five and twenty course further to Borocho and pass that river to Cassimba and thence to surat in all this country of sinda sinda no city of great trade than Tutta the chief port thereto be Lowribander three day journey from thence where be a fair road without the river mouth clear of worm which about surat worm dangerous to ship and other place of the indies infest the ship so that after three or four month ride if it be not for sheathe they be not able to return the port and road of sinda be free of they in two month they pass from Tutta to Lahor and return down the stream in one and from agra good may be convey on camel in twenty day which be on sinda river and thence in fifteen or sixteen day aboard the ship at Lowribander as soon as to surat if thief do not make it less secure may the four 1614 master withington go from surat to brampore where sultan Paruise lie it be situate in a plain by a great river have a large castle and thence to agra all which way be seven hundred course from surat to brampore be a pleasant and champagne country full of river brook and spring from brampore to agra very mountainous hardly passable for camel by Mando the near way there be many high hill and strong castle in the way town and city in every day journey well inhabit the country peaceable and clear of thief between Agimere or Azmere and agra be a hundred and twenty course at every course end a great pillar erect and at every ten Couse a seraglio or place of lodging for man and horse with hostess to dress your victual if you please three penny will pay for your horse and meat-dressing there be also at every ten course fair house erect by Echebar for his woman and none else may lie in they the reason hereof be report that Echebar want child go on pilgrimage on foot to Asmere for that purpose at every course end say his prayer and lodging at the ten agra be a huge town situate by the great river geminy or jamena the castle be the fair thing in it compass with the fair and high wall that I have see two mile about well replenish with ordnance the rest except nobleman house which be fair and seat by the river ruinous fatipore be decay but have a very stately temple build by geometry as echebar sepulchre the fair thing that ever I see I go to Ganges two day journey from agra the water whereof be carry a hundred mile by the banian for devotion which say it will never stink how long soever it be keep from agra master fitch go to Satagam in Bengala by water so that if you observe all these travel of o o fitch to the southeast and to the east from agra Nicols S.E. by land go n. e. to China covert n. and s. quite through still to Lahor n. e. and to Persia N.N.W. withington the Westerle part to sinda etc. fitch covert still withington and the rest of our countryman and add thereto the journey of go from thence to China with other relation of the jesuit before express you shall have a better corography of this country than any of our map have yet deliver and their want have make i thus full and tedious I may add the travel of p p w. Clarke William Clerke one of the ascension company which serve the mogul in his war diverse year and return in the last ship while these thing be publish against the rasboot and decans have two horse pay which be near six pound a month and have some month pay allow he beforehand that so he may furnish himself for they must buy and maintain their horse master Walter q q w. payton payton be master in the exepedition and carry sir Robert Shirley who they have think to have land at Gauder or guader in Masqueranno in five and twenty degree and six and twenty minute but the people be then in rebellion against the persian and by damnable treachery have possess themselves of the ship and all the good have not one Hodge comal a surgeon among they reveal this mystery of their iniquity they have thus betray three ship before by this villainy of the bulloche they be force to go further to the mouth of sinde which be east and by north in four and twenty degree and four and thirty minute they land the ambassador September the nine and twenty 1613. at diul in the moll dominion fifteen mile from the ship the portugal report they to be thief according to their custom and when they seek for trade in sinda the governor have yield but for the portugal which threaten to depart if the english be admit who custom he be loath to lose be worth he say a leck of Rupias ten thousand pound english and more which show the exceed trade of sinda by the year but this country and the disposition of their king be most ample describe to we together with the remarkable rarity of those part by the hon industry of sir Thomas roe ambassador for his majesty with the mogul who map of those part we here present you as likewise by his learned chaplain master Edward terry both who observation we have present in our first tome of voyages to they I refer the industrious reader for more ample relation of these part then in this work be convenient to insert among other thing the reader shall see the true course of Indus which all modern geographer have exceed falsify and of Ganges William Finch have also write of those part I think good here to add that which master steel and his wife tell i of the woman of those part master steele have a project of water-work to bring the water of Ganges by pipe etc. carry five man with he to the mogul who give they entertainment with large wage by the day and give to each a arabian horse one of these be a painter who the mogul will have to take his picture and because he can not speak the language master steel who can speak the language of the court which be persian be admit a thing not permit to man into the mogul lodging where he do sit for the say limner at his entrance the chief eunuch put a cloth over his head that he shall not see the woman which he may hear as he pass and once also see they the eunuch purposely put on a thin cloth over his head there be of they some hundred his wife have more access at Chan channa court who daughter sometime wife to the elder brother of this mogul and live still a widow have a desire to see the englishwoman and Chan-Channa entreat her husband to permit it she be fetch in a close chariot draw by white ox attend by eunuch and be first bring into a open court in midst of which be a Tanke or well of water where sit many woman slave to chan-channas daughter of diverse nation and complexion some black exceed lovely and comely of person notwithstanding who hair before do stand up with right tuft as if it have grow upward nor will ruffle disorder they some brown of indian complexion other very white but pale and not ruddy many of they seem goodly and lovely all sit in their slight but rich garment on the floor cover with carpet the lady come forth in mean attire whereat they all arise and do her reverence with their face to the ground mistress steel make she three curtsy after the english fashion be also in english attire and deliver she a present without which there be no visitation of great person and the lady cause she to sit by she and after discourse entertain she with a banquet and begin familiarity with she continue and increase with often visitation and reward with many gift as of woman vestment of of those part some of which I see the upper garment like a smock of thin calico under which they wear a pair of breech close above the neither part very long and slender loose ruffle about their leg of thin stuff also the man garment differ from the woman by the fasten on the side under the arm whereas the woman be fasten before both tie with ribbon Chan Channa cause his tailor to take view of master steel and without other measure he make he a cloak of cloth of gold after the english fashion very comely which I also see @. 5 of the rasboot and other people subject to the mogul and of their country religion and rite thus have we delineate this huge giantly body of the mogul empire the soul or religion thereof be more invisible what lurk place and labyrinth the breast of the king have have in their unknown curious uncertain faith you have hear and may there by guess at the rest as the people be manifold so be their rite some of which about Ganges and in other part have already be touch and some hereafter as the people and their rite be diffuse and disperse in diverse tract of India we shall elsewhere mention beside christian foreigner the principal religion be ethnic though that of the prince be mahometan the reisbuti Rasbootes or rasbooche the ancient inhabitant of the country of sinda be gentile how strong r r 20000. horse 50000. foot and a mountainous country hardly invade and conquer one of they be you have hear captain Hawkins report his name as I have since learned of Mr. Rogers Mr. Clarke and Mr. withington be Ranna some of they affirm that he be late come in and have send his son a pledge to the mogul court who for this cause and his sake have be so long resident at Azmere but Mr. Clarke employ in these war say that it be not a subjection but voluntary friendship and neighbourhood with acknowledgement of himself the inferior a rebel or outlaw he can be call because he be never subject account the mogul superior in power but not his lord there be of these many cast or tribe each of which have supreme and independent lord nature build they with little help of art impregnable fortress m. clerk or inaccessible hill one of which call Dewras be say to have very many population able on the hill top to gather sufficient provision for themselves and the neighbour-market impossible without corruption to be conquer when any of these cast or tribe disagree the mogul interpose himself profess to take part with the right their country lie in the direct way from surat to agra the way by Amadavar or by brampore both much about yet frequent by merchant for fear of they the country people b b m. withington be rude naked from the waste upward with turban differ from the mogul fashion their arm be sword buckler and lance their buckler be great in fashion of a beehive in which they will give their camel drink and horse provender their horse be good swift and strong which they ride unshod and back at a year old a resolute people which the mogul say know as well to die as any in the world they eat no beef nor Buffolo but have they in superstitious respect the rasbutche husband die the wife be burn the manner be this the wise accompany the dead body of her husband in her best array pompous attend with her friend and kindred and with music the fire be make she compass the same twice or thrice first bewail her husband death and then rejoice that she shall now live with he again and then embrace her friend sit down on the top of the pile take her husband head in her lap and bid they kindle the fire this do her friend throw oil and other sweet perfume on she she endure the fire with admirable patience loose and not bind I have see many it be m. withington report the first at surat the woman be but ten year old and not yet a woman have not know her husband who be slay in the war and his clothes bring home yet will she needs burn with his clothes and the governor not permit because she be a virgin her friend entreat and bribe he thereto she seem impatient of that delay and say her husband be a great way before she with much blind joy enter into endless sorrow the kindred of the decease husband do not force this unkind kindness but the wife own kindred hold it a disgrace to their family if she refuse which she have power to do but few will and then she must shave her hair and break her jewel and be not suffer to eat drink sleep or company with any body till her death if after purpose to burn impatient of the flame she leap out her father and mother will bind and burn she perforce but such weakness seldom happen in some place they observe it with rite a little differ carry the woman in great pomp on a pageant and bind she to a stake all her kindred kneel round about she r. covert and pray to the sun and their other idol she have betwixt her leg and under each arm a bag of gunpowder the fire make all of sweet wood we shall mention other rite in other place the hendowne possess the country north from Asmere towards the multan r. covert degenerate gentile and refuse no manner of flesh or fish they pray naked dress and eat their meat naked and where they dress and eat their meat make a circle within which none must enter during that time their woman be bring up from their childhood with shackle some of silver some of brass and some of iron on their leg and ring in their ear all which increase with themselves be make big as they grow so that in time a man may thrust his hand through the hole of their ear also they wear bracelet of elephant tooth about their arm from the wrist to the elbow we have already speak of the bulloche their northerly neighbour sun-worshipping giantly bigness and inhuman humanity in eat mans-flesh and likewise of the puttan or agwan the bulloche in sinda and upon the persian gulf it seem of this generation be mahumetan robber by land and pirate by sea whereto they add the murder of those they rob their treachery to sir r. Shirley and the expedition be before mention m. payton which have it have expedition according to their plot they have murder all but the surgeon the musician the boy and the woman when I be in sinda say m. withington m. withington they take a boat with seven italian and one Portugal Friar this rip up by they to seek gold in his entrails the rest slay in the fight yet there be very honest man of they in guzerat and about agra touch other superstition of this kingdom thus wrire joannes Oranus in the narration of this kingdom c c narratio reg. Mogor Lahor be 300 mile from agra not far from the city Lahor be a idol resemble a woman which they call Nazar Coto frame with two head and six or seven arm and twelve or fourteen hand one of which brandish a spear another a club. hereunto resort many pilgrim to worship and hereof they tell many miracle as that many cut off their tongue which be again restore whole unto they but remain mute some think our breath to be our soul some affirm that all thing be the same thing some that God only have a be other thing be shadow and appearance some think all thing and some the round circle of the world and some themselves to be God almost all do hold the commigration of soul into the body of beast they say the world shall last four age or world whereof three be past the first last seventeen laches every laches contain a hundred thousand year and eight and twenty thousand year man in that world live ten thousand year be of great stature of body and great sincerity of mind thrice in this space do God visible appear on the earth first in form of a fish that he may bring out the book of the law of Brama which one causacar have hurl into the sea the second time in form of a snail that he may make the earth dry and solid last like a hog to destroy one that say he be God or as other of they as true say to recover the earth from the sea which have swallow it the second world last ten laches and ninety two thousand and six year in which man be as tall as before and live a thousand year God do appear four time first in a monstrous form the upper part a lion the low a woman to repress the pride of one which give out himself for God second like a poor Brahmin to punish a proud king that will by a new-devised be fly into heaven the three time to be revenge of another king which have slay a poor religious man he come in the likeness of a man name Parcaram and last like one ram the son of Giocorat which have slay Parcaram the three world continue eight laches and four thousand year wherein man live five hundred year and God appear twice in human likeness the four age shall endure four laches whereof be already pass four thousand six hundred fourscore and twelve year they say God will also appear in this Age other imagine that he have already appear and that Echebar be he some hold that those ten appearance be but creature which have receive divine power they themselves easy perceive the vanity of these chimaera and monstrous opinion but will not leave they lest they shall at the same cast lose their wealth and superstition together in the country of the Mogor they have s s r. fitch many fine cart carve and gild with two wheel draw with two little bull about the bigness of our great dog in England and they will run with any horse and carry two or three man in one of those cart they be cover with silk or fine cloth and be in use as our coach in England but we will shut up this too great discourse of the great mogul greatness in the word of the world great foot-post t. Coryat he tell we from the very mogul court that this present prince be a man of three and fifty year of age of complexion middle betwixt white and black in a more expressive olive of a feemely composition of body of stature little unequal to i but much more corpulent he never travel so much on foot nor ten month together with fifty shilling expense his dominion be little less than four thousand english mile which if it come short of the Turk in geometrical dimension of ground it be with a great pleonasme supply by the fertility of his soil and in the union of all his territory again he exceed he in revenue a great deal more then m. coryat reckon he present himself thrice every day at the rise of the sun which he adore by the elevation of his hand at noon and at five of the clock in the evening but he stand in a room aloft alone by himself and look from a window that have a embroider sumptuous coverture support with two silver pilaster to yield shadow unto he in feed of his beast he spend at the least ten thousand pound sterling a day and keep a thousand woman for his own body whereof the chief be normal I have be in a city in this country call Detee where Alexander join battle with Porus and in token of his victory erect a brass pillar which remain there to this day there arrive four english ship at surat and in the same sir Thomas Rowe the english ambassador to the mogul the news whereof come to Asmere octob. 8. 1615. and do much resocillate m. coryat spirit as do m. browne verse from amadavar and so I hope will you chap. 8 of Cambaya Decan and the neighbour nation @. i. of the cambayan although we may seem to have speak sufficient of the cambayan already in our former mogol-relation yet both as better know and because such be our order in the former edition we have allow they a chapter here by themselves Cambaya be also call guzarat a a maginus contain in length from the river bate to Circam a persian region five hundred mile of sea-coast be on other part environ b b maff. lib. 40 with the kingdom of Dulcinda and Sanga on the north Mandao on the east on the west nautaco or the gedrosian the sea and the confine of Decan be the southerly bound it have in it by estimation threescore thousand population or inhabit place water with many stream the chief whereof be Indus which divide it in the middle run from Caucasus or naugrocot and after nine hundred mile journey with two navigable mouth disemboque itself into the ocean this country be very fertile not yield to any other in India in the fruit which the earth and tree bring forth beside their store of elephant gem silk Cotton and such like the people be of a olive-colour and go naked except about their privy part they eat no flesh but rice milk barley and other lifeless creature the inhabitant be for the most part gentile and so be their king until the mahometan superstition prevail there be c c joseph ind. Linsch l. 1. c. 270 up within the land people call Reisbuti which be the natural noble of this kingdom chase by the moor to the mountain whence they make often excursion and spoil in the country and the cambayan pay they tribute that they may live in peace of these be speak already their chief Sea-town be daman Bandora surate Ravellum bazuinum and within land Cambaya Madabar campanel Tanaa etc. surat now a english factory have a castle of d d pat. Copland stone with good ordnance the house be fair of stone and Brick square with flat roof they have goodly garden with pomegranate pome-citrons melon lemon fig all the year long curious spring of fresh water the people neat tall love grave judicious clothe in long white calico or silk Cambaya have bestow the name on the whole kingdom which they call the indian cairo for the excellency thereof it stand three mile from Indus the tide here e e l. vertom l. 4 increase not as with we at the full but in the decrease of the moon they be at the high of this river Indus Ptolomey and arrianus in his periplus of the erythraean sea reckon seven mouth or entrance into the sea and Thevet I know not with what friar-like and liar-like boldness name seven at this day but arrianus say in those time six of the seven be overgrow and but one navigable but Dionysius pomponius Strabo and the other arrianus which write the life of Alexander ascribe but two unto it which be confirm by the portugal arrianus have in his eight book large describe the voyage of Nearchus and onesicritus from this river about the coast into the persian gulf employ by Alexander the great it be not 160. year since machamut a Moor expel the guzarat king this machamut deserve mention for one thing wherein the sun have scarce behold his like he so accustom himself to poison that no day pass wherein he take not some for else he himself have die say Barbosa as it fare with amfian or opium the use whereof kill such as never take it and the disuse such as have and beyond that which we read of Mithridates in the like practice his nature be transform into so venomous a habit that if he do mean to put any of his noble to death he will cause they to be set naked before he and chew certain fruit in his mouth which they call Chofolos and with lime make of shell by spit upon he in one half hour deprive he of life if a fly sit upon his hand it will present fall off dead neither be his f f od. Barbosa love to be prefer to his hatred or with woman be his deal less deadly for he have three or four thousand concubine of who none live to see a second sun after he have carnal know they His moustache or hair of his upper lip be so long that he bind it upon his head as woman do with a hairlace and his beard be white reach to his waste every day when he arise and when he dine fifty elephant be bring into the palace to do he reverence on their knee accompany with trumpet and other music coelius rhodiginus g g Coel. Rhodig lib. 11. cap. 13. mention the like of a maid thus nourish with poison her spittle and other humour come from she be deadly such also as lay with she carnal present die Auicenna have also a like example of a man who nature infect with a strong venom poison other venomous creature if any do bite he and when a great serpent be bring for trial he have by the bite thereof a two-day fever but the serpent die the other do not harm he Mamudius the successor of king machamut be a great enemy to the portugal Badurius succeed in state and affection and exceed in greatness and ambition he invade h h maff. lib. 11. Mandao and Sanga where he besiege citor then govern by a warlike woman which not able to hold out long against he flee and leave the people in forlorn plight who in a desperate resolution like Sardanapalus heap up their treasure set fire thereto and then cast themselves therein this fire continue three day and consume threescore and ten thousand person hence Badurius triumphant march against the Mogor who Maffaeus call miramudius with a army of a hundred and fifty thousand horse whereof thirty thousand be barded and five hundred thousand footman of great brazen ordnance a thousand whereof four basilisk be draw such be their weight by so many hundred yoke of ox with shot and powder he lade five hundred wane and as many with gold and silver to pay his soldier these force with this provision may rend the air with thunder may make the earth to shake with terror may dry and drink up river of water may frame another fiery element of art invention but can not either terrify the Mogor or save Badurius from a double overthrow first at doceri next at Mandoa where he lose his tent and treasure and shave his beard fly disguise to Diu in which that the portugal may be engage in the same war he give they leave to erect a fortress a thing of such moment unto they that John Botelius confine before unto India for crime object think by be the first messenger thereof in Portugal to purchase his liberty whereof he may well be repute worthy who in a little vessel scarce eighteen foot long and six wide with undaunted courage contemn that wide long and tempestuous ocean arrive with his small company great news and great admiration at Lisbon Badurius after alter his mind and therein entertain a treacherous project against the portugal colour the same with kindness and he which fear all i i cic. offic. man no less than he be fear as guilty to his own tyranny which sometime make Dionysius of a king a barber and now this a king of other and his own cook trust no man to dress his meat adventure to visit the Portugal viceroy in his ship profess great friendship with great dissimulation and by a mean mariner at his return be slay whereupon the whole island submit itself to the Portugal yoke and because we have in this chapter mention so many wonder let this also have place among if not above the rest which present happen k k maff. histor ind. lib. 11. while the portugal be busy in their building a certain l l this same man appear before Solyman the turkish general at the siege of diu. viag Venetiano nic. di conti say he see a Brahmin three hundred year old Bengalan come to the governor which have live as he affirm three hundred thirty five year the old man of the country testify that they have hear their ancestor speak of his great age and himself have a son fourscore and tend year old and not at all Book-learned yet be a speak chronicle of those pass time his tooth have sometime fall out m m morison part. 3. c. 3. say the same of the irish countess of Desmond mention also by s. w. ral. and that she live 140. year other grow in their place and his beard after it have be very hoary by degree return into his former blackness about a hundred year before this time he have alter his pagan religion into the arabian or moorish for this his miraculous age the sultan of Cambaya have allow he a stipend to live on the continuance of which he now seek and do obtain of the portugal friar joano do santos n n io. santos l. 4. deuan. hist de India orientali cell a long story of one yet alive ann. 1605. of who the bishop of cochin have send man to inquire who by diligent search find that he be then three hundred eighty year old and have marry eight time the father of many generation they say his tooth have thrice fall out and thrice renew his hair thrice hoary and as oft black again he can tell of nineteen successive king which reign in horan his country in Bengala he be also bear a gentile and after turn Moor and hope he say to die a Christian rejoice to see a picture of saint Francis say such a man when he be twenty five year old have foretell he this long life but to return Mamudius successor to Badurius seek with all his force to drive these new lord out of Diu as Solyman have do before by a navy and army send thither but both in vain of which war Damianus go o o dam. a go op. di. and bell. camb. have write diverse commentary but this whole country be now subject to the Mogor it be in Alexander time people by the massani sodrae or sabracae Praestae and Sangadae as Ortelius have place they where Alexander as in diverse other place he have do erect a city of his own name call Alexandria daman another key of this bay and entrance of the river Indus into the sea fall to the portugal share the land of Cambaya p p Linschot be the fruitful in all India which cause great traffic of indian portugal persian arabian armenian etc. the guzarate or cambayan be the subtle merchant in all those part they have q q od. barbo among they many history of Darius and Alexander which sometime be lord of this indian province the portugal r r Gotardus Arthus Hist. ind. Orient cap 23. baly cap. 18. have at diverse time conquer diverse of the chief town in this kingdom some whereof they keep still the woman in Diu by art die their tooth black esteem themselves so much the more beautiful and therefore go with their lip open to show the blackness of their tooth draw away the cover of their lip as if they be lip-less give the prize of beauty to a double deformity blackness and a mouth o hellish wide when a cambayan die they burn his body and distribute the ash unto the four element of which man consist part to the fire part to the air to the water also and earth their due portion as balby have observe m. Patrick Copland minister in the dragon with captain best write that he ride in this country from Medhaphrabadh to surat in a coach draw with ox which be the most ordinary though they have goodly horse he see at once the goodly spring and harvest that ever he have see field join together whereof one be green as a meadow the other yellow as gold ready to be cut of wheat and Rice all along goodly village full of tree yield taddy the palm of which after a new sweet wine strengthen and fatten a smith which love his liquor say he can wish no other wage but a pot of this taddy always at his girdle @. 2 of the kingdom of Decan of the decans we have speak before in the mogul conquest Decan be the name of a city six league from which be a hill out of which the diamond be take this hill be keep with a garrison and wall about of the Decan kingdom Barros have report that about the year 1300. sa Nosaradin reign in del or Delin and invade the kingdom of Canara which reach from the river bate north of shall unto the cape comori and win much from the ancestor of the king now term of Bisnaga at his return he leave Habedsa his lieutenant who add to the former conquest gather a band of all mixture gentile moor christian his son be confirm in the government therefore call Decan and the people Decanins because of this confusion of so many nation of which his father and his force consist for Decanins signify bastard he shake off allegiance to his lord and acknowledge none superior he also much increase his dominion his name be Mamudsa he appoint eighteen captain or commander allot to each several province these captain he make be but slave that so he may the easy hold they in subjection he command that each of they shall build a palace at Bedir his chief city and there reside certain month in the year his son remain there in perpetual hostage these in process of time grow few and therefore great the king hold nothing but his royal city all the empire be in the hand of these slave which when the portugal come thither be no more but Sabay nizamalucco madre Malucco melic Verida coge Mecadam the Abessine eunuch and Cota Malucco the mighty of they be Sabay lord of goa his son be Hidalcam thus barrius Garcias ab horto write that the mogor have possess the kingdom of del but a certain Bengalan rebel against his master slay he usurp his state and by force of war add this of Canara also to his dominion he be call k k Xaholam that be lord of the world a title and not a proper name Xaholam this king make his sister son l l daquem his successor who be much addict to foreigner he divide his kingdom into twelve part or province over which he set so many captain Idalcam from Angidava to Cifarda from thence to Negatona Nizamaluco over balaguate or the up-hill country for bala in the persian language signify the top and guate a hill Imadmaluco and Catalmaluco and Verido etc. these all rebel and captive Daquem their king at Beder the chief city of Decan and share his kingdom among themselves and some gentile partner in the conspiracy they be all foreigner but Nizamaluco this and the other name before mention be title of honour give they with their office by the king corrupt by the vulgar in pronounce Idalcam be adelham adel in the persian language signify justice Ham be the tartarian appellation signify a prince or king which name may well be the relic of the tartarian conquest in those part so Adelham be king of justice Neza in the persian which Scaliger m m Ios. scal. de Emana temp lib. 7. say be of like extent in the east as latin in the west be a lance Maluco signify the kingdom Neza or Nizamaluco the spear or lance of the kingdom so Cotamaluco the tower of the kingdom Imadmaluco the throne of the kingdom etc Nizamaluco be also call Nizamoxa which Xa or Scha be a persian title signify n n Ios. scal. can. Isag. lib. 7. as Monsieur in France don in Spain and give by Ishmael the sophi and Tamas his son to all those king that will communicate in their sect which Nizamoxa only yield to other of they make show but soon recant thus far Garcias the Decan o o Clarke king be now ten or twelve make joint war against the mogul have one lieutenant general which be amber Chapu a abassen slave before mention out of captain Hawkins who have many lecks of Rupias in ready money and be protector of the kingdom of Amdanagar the titular king be a child one Robert johnson a Englishman turn Moor and be entertain with much respect of one of the Decan king but die eight day after his circumcision so be Robert Claxon and Robert Trally voluntary rob of that which they never have faith and religion and turn moor the decans dominian reach from the west sea to that of Choromandel or very near thereto the chief reason of their mahometan religion be that conquest by Nosaradin and his successor moores that there be so many kingdom proceed from that division before mention @. 3 of the banian and cambayan superstition the religion in Cambaya be partly moorish partly heathenish the banian banian m. withington be many in sinda and other country of the mogul there be some thirty cast of they in sinda this be the country which Indus last forsake inhabit by boloche and rasbooche and banian the great town and city govern by mogul these be of thirty different sect which may not eat with each other they must also marry in their own cast tribe and sect and which be more in the same trade as the son of a barber with a barber daughter these marriage be make when they be young sometime almost before they be for when two woman be pregnant the parent will make a match between their child marriage solemnize betwixt infant if death or the sex disappoint not when they be three or four year old the parent which have agree on a match between their child make a great feast and set this young couple on horseback a man behind each of they to hold they in their best clothes accompany with the Bramenes or priest and many other according to their state and so lead they up and down the city where they dwell and then to the pagode or temple after ceremony there do they come home and make festival cheer certain day as they be able at ten year of age they lie together the burn their dead be common to all their sect they be of the Pythagorean or he be rather of their fancy which he learn of the indian when the husband die the wife shave her head and wear her jewel no more so continue till death thus far master withington m. covert r. covert relate that they have God in picture of stone hang their bead on the head of the picture and then with their face towards the sun do worship it say all their comfort proceed from it I see a kow adorn with jewel and a vest of gold her head bedeck with garland and flower and then be bring to a burial place where they use to make sermon they kiss her foot and teat and worship she I ask why they do so they answer that she be the mother of beast and bring they milk butter cheese and the ox to till the ground and last her hide do make leather to make they shoe moreover they say she be bless by the mother of God to be honour above all beast anominus another write that these banian be the wise merchant in the east exceed the jew very rich some worth 2. or 300000li. he add that they pay a great sum to the mogul to prevent kill of ox and when our man have shoot a turtledove through the wing they will give a rial of eight to redeem and preserve it p p n. downton general downton in his last journal write that when they will have obtain a Bazar or market by the shore answer be make that they may but not for bullock for the mogul have grant his to the banian for a mighty sum yearly to save their life for soldiery these be but shadow of man all their fortitude smoke out in these superstitious speculation and therefore a easy prey to any inuader so true a (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) have they sustain be metamorphose and transanimate from man to block and live statue or to ghost Benjamin day ben. day name one of their sect call ash-man who body be most part naked be cover with ash whereby they look like ghost or dead man they live idle on relief not so much as beg one of these be in great account with hair hang to his foot plait together his nail five or six inch long Vertomannus q q l. verb. lib. 4. be author that they worship not idol or Pagodes other report that this way and other they be exceed religious devote they observe a strict kind of r r Eman. pinner balby say at other time they eat but one meal a day cap. 10. fast which last with some eight day with other fifteen twenty or thirty day in all which space they eat not a bit only when they thirst drink water one can not see when to make a end of this his penance till his left eye fall out of his head as both have do before out of his heart in Cambaia they have one Brahmin in such reputation of holiness and honour that they will salute he before they meddle with their worldly affair one affirm to this jesuite that if his Brahmin shall command he to distribute all his good to the poor he will do it s s an. dom. 1595. yea he will lay down his life at his command on the eight day of January i in that city be give in alm twenty thousand pardawe which be in value about a flemish dollar one man have give five thousand thereof another three thousand another fifteen hundred the cause be because that day as their Bramenes affirm the sun depart from sur to horte of their pilgrimage be speak before some eastward to Ganges some westward to Mecca to wit the moor not man alone but woman also and because Mahomet have forbid all unmarried woman this holy journey they will marry before they set forth and dissolve the same marriage again after their return hereby they think to purchase merit with God I go one day say Pinnerus to the public hospital which the citizen of Cambaia have found for all kind of bird to cure they in their sickness some peacock be there incurable and therefore may have be expel the hospital but alack for pity of so rueful a accident a hawk have be admit thither for the cure of his lame leg which be whole he inhospital slay many of these co-hospital weak fowl and be therefore expel this Bird-college by the master thereof for man they have not a hospital that be thus hospital to fowl they have certain religious person call Verteas k k the religious in Cambaia pinner which live in a college together and when I go to their house they be about fifty in number they wear white cloth be bareheaded and shave if that word may be apply to they who pull off their hair on their head and face leave only a little on their crown they live on alm nor receive they but the surplusage of the daily food of he that give they they be wifeless the order of their sect be write in a book of the guzarate write they drink their water hot not for physic but devotion suppose that the water have a soul which they shall slay if they drink the same unsodden for the same cause they bear in their hand certain little brush with which they sweep the floor before they sit down or walk lest they shall kill the soul of some worm or other small creature I see their prior thus do the general of this order be say to have a hundred thousand man under his canonical obedience and be new choose every year I see among they little boy of eight or nine year old resemble the countenance of Europe rather than of India by their parent consecrate to this order they have all in their mouth a cloth four finger broad let through both their ear in a hole and bring back again through their care they will not show i the cause but I perceive it be lest some gnat or fly shall enter thither and so be slay they teach that the world be make many hundred thousand year ago and that God do then send three and twenty apostle and how have send the four and twenty in this three age two thousand year since from which time they have have write which before they have not the same l l em. pinner banian author in another epistle say that the most of the inhabitant of Cambaia be banian they eat no flesh nor kill any thing yea they redeem the beast and bird maim or sick and carry they to their hospital to be cure in guzarat he have see many gioghi a religious order of monk which yield to none in penance and poverty they go naked in cold weather they sleep on the dunghill upon a heap of ash with which they cover their head and face I see the place where one of these gioghi keep in the midst of the city Amadeba to who in conceit of holiness resort more number of people then to the shore of Lisbon at the return of the indian Fleet. this gioghi be send for by the prince sultan Morad son of the Mogor and refuse to come m m onesicritus report the like of the gymnosophist bid that the prince shall come to he it be enough that I be holy or a saint to this end whereupon the prince cause he to be apprehend and be sound whip to be banish this people kill not their kine but nourish they as their mother I see at Amadeba when a kow be ready to die they offer her fresh grass and drive he fly from she and some of they give this attendance two or three day after till she be dead a league and a half from this city I see a certain or burying-place than which I have never see a fair sight wherein have be bury one Cazis the master of a king of Guzarat who have erect this fabric and three other be bury in another chapel the whole work and pavement be of marble contain three isle in one whereof I tell four hundred and forty pillar with their chapiter and base of corinthian work very royal and admirable on one side be a lake great than the Rozzio at Lisbon and that building be curious frame with fair window to look into the lake Balbi tell of a certain temple at cape Bombain not far from shall which be cut out of a rock over the say temple grow many tamarind and vnder it be a spring of run water whereof they can find no bottom it be call Alefante be adorn with many image a receptacle of bat and suppose the work of Alexander the great as the period of his peregrination and hereto agree the report of arrianus in his n n Arrian Perip mar. Eryth periplus of many memorial and monument of Alexander expedition to these part as old chapel altar camping-place and great pit these he mention about minnagara which Ortelius in his map place here-away Linschoten u u Linsch c. 37. Andrea Corsuli affirm the same thing of their Pythagorean error and add that they sometime buy fowl or other beast of the portugal which mean to have dress they and let they fly or run away in the highway also and wood they set pot with water and cast corn or other grain upon the ground to feed the bird and beast and to omit their charitable hospital before mention if they take a flea or a louse they will not kill it but put it in some hole or corner in the wall and so let it go and you can do they no great injury then to kill it in their presence which with all entreaty they will resist as be a heinous sin to take away the life of that to which God have impart both soul and body and where word will not prevail they will offer money they eat no radish onion garlic or any kind of herb that have red colour in it nor egg for they think there be blood in they they drink not wine nor use vinegar but only water they will rather starve then eat with any but their countryman as it happen when I sail from goa to cochin with they in a Portugal ship when they have spend all their store the timefalling out long than they make account of they will not once touch our meat they wash themselves every time they eat or ease themselves or make water under their hair they have a star upon their forehead which they rub every morning with a little white Sanders temper with water and three or four grain of rice among it which the Bramenes also do as a superstitious ceremony of their law they sit on the ground in their house upon mat or carpet and so they eat leave their shoe which be pike and hook at the door for the which cause the heel of their shoe be seldom pull up to save labour of undo they the moor 10 10 od. Barbosa among they will sometime abuse the superstition of these cambayan to their own covetousness bring some worm rat or sparrow and threaten to kill the same so to provoke they to redeem the life thereof at some high price and likewise if a malefactor be condemn to death they will purchase his life of the magistrate and sell he for a slave the moor will sometime make semblance as if they will kill themselves that these foolish guzzarate may see they in like sort they will go out of the path if they light on a anthill lest they may happy tread on some of they they sup by daylight lest their candlelight shall occasion the death of some gnat or Fly and when they must needs use a candle they keep it in a lantern for that cause if louse do much annoy they they call to they certain religious and holy man after their account and these observant y y the like lousy trick be report in the Legend of s. Francis and in the life of Ignatius of one of the first jesuitical pillar by Maffaeus will take upon they all those louse which the other can find and put they on their head there to nourish they but yet for all this lousy scruple they stick not at cozenage by false weight measure and coin nor at usury and lie some be say z z n. di cont. to be so zealous in their Idol-service as to sacrifice their life in their honour whereunto they be persuade by the preach of their priest as the most acceptable devotion many offer themselves which be bring upon a scaffold after certain ceremony put about his neck a iron collar round without but within very sharp from which hang a chain down his breast into which sit down he put his foot and while the priest mutter certain word the party before the people with all his force stretch out his foot and cut off his head their reward be that they be account saint chap. 9 of the indian nation betwixt Cambaia and malabar and their religion @. i. of the season of the year and of the part next to Cambaya the mighty river of Indus and Ganges pay their fine to the lord of water the ocean almost under the very Tropic of cancer do as it be betwixt their watery arm present into that their mother bosom this large chersonesus a country full of kingdom riches people and our dew task superstitious custom as Italy be divide by the apennine and bound by the Alpes so be this by the hill which they call gate which go from east to west but not direct and quite thorough to the cape comori which not only have enter league with many in-lets of the sea to divide the soil into many signiory and kingdom but with the air and nature high officer to dispense with the ordinary order and establish statue of nature a a gi. bot. ben. maff. lib. 1. Linschot lib. 1. cap. 34. jarric l. 3. c. 1. at the same time under the same elevation of the sun divide to summer and winter their season and possession for whereas cold be banish out of these country except on the top of some hill and altogether prohibit to approach so near the court and presence of the sun and therefore their winter and summer be not reckon by heat and cold but by the fairness and foulness of weather which in those part divide the year by equal proportion at the same time when on the west-part of this Peninsula between that ridge of mountain and the sea it be after their appellation summer which be from September till April in which time it be always clear sky without once or very little rain on the other side the hill which they call the coast of Choromandell it be their winter every day and night yield abundance of rain beside those terrible thunder which both begin and end their winter and from April till September in a contrary vicissitude on the western part be winter and on the eastern summer insomuch that in little more than twenty league journey in some place as where they cross the hill to saint Thomas on the one side of the hill you ascend with a fair summer on the other you descend attendant with a stormy winter the like say Linschoten happen at the cape Rosalgate in Arabia and in many other place of the east their winter also be more fierce than we every man provide against the same as if he have a voyage of so many month to pass by sea their ship be bring into harbour their house can scarce harbour the inhabitant against the violent storm which choke the river with Sands and make the sea unnavigable I leave the cause of these thing to the further scan of philosopher the effect and affect thereof be strange the sea roar with a dreadful noise the wind blow with a certain course from thence the people have a melancholic season which they pass away with play in the summer the wind blow from the land begin at midnight and continue till noon never blow above ten league into the sea and present after one of the clock until midnight the contrary wind blow keep their set-time whereby they make the land temperate the heat otherwise will be unmeasurable but this change common cause disease flux fever vomit in dangerous and to very many in deadly manner as appeareth at goa where in the king hospital which be only for white man there die five hundred in a year here you may see both the north and south star and little difference or none be find in the length of day and night throughout the year de be the next kingdom to Camboia now not the next but the same the mountain which before divide it not prohibit the mogor force to annex it to his crown of it be speak before in the chapter of Cambaya as also of Decan which lie along the coast betwixt the river bate and Aliga two hundred and fifty mile here b b gio. bot. ben. Garcias l. 2. c. 28. Linschot etc. be as be say sometime a Moor king who lead a voluptuous and idle life by his captain be dispossess of his state the one of these be call Idalcan who Seat-royal be Visapore who in the year 1572. encamp before goa which the portugal have take from he with a army of seventy thousand foot and five and thirty thousand horse two thousand elephant and two hundred and fifty of artillery the other be Nizzamalucco which reside in danager and besiege shall now belong to the portugal with not much less force against a captain of the venazarie which be a people that live on spoil as the resbuti in Cambaia the Belemi in del Canara or Concam seem to have be a part of Decan but be possess by the king of Narsinga who state be on the east side of the mountain it have in it the Coast-town of onor Batticalla Mayander and mangalor c c Lins l. 1. c. 27. famous for traffic but eclipse by the portugal neighbourhood the religion of these part be partly mahometan partly heathenish jarric thes. rerum Indic l. 3. These have their proper jolatry as we have before note peculiar idol and sect to peculiar tribe and trade they have also more common rite worship the image of diverse beast elephant kine ape and the like to which they dedicate Pagodes or temple they have other common devotion and have appropriate to war to seed to fortune to life to death no exact order can be use in relate so confuse rite several deity the devil they worship in horrible form as we shall after see for in this confusion the reader must pardon if we do not keep exact order always beside that in several place the rite somewhat differ in these which be account of one Sect they paint he black because to that colour they ascribe beauty and in more solemn festival with oil suet and fat grease and make they as loathsome to the send as to the eye so senseless be their religion and yet addict the sense and sensible image as they do their temple they call these pagode and sacrifice there to goat sheep and other beast but not kine which they do account sacred and worship the same esteem that man most happy that die in the presence of that beast or touch the same persuade themselves that the depart soul pass into one of these creature they will perform more piety let piety pardon such abuse of the name to a cow die then to their decease parent and will account it a heinous crime at unaware to have kill such a beast seek by sacrifice and offering to turn away divine vengeance after so human and accidental error @. 2 of goa the heathen and christian live therein and the country about goa o o of goa read Arthus hist. ind. c. 15. Linschot al. Valignan be the seat of the viceroy and of the archbishop and of the king council for the indies and the staple of all indian commodity it stand in a little island in nineteen degree call Tizzuarin p p Tizzuarin signify thirty village for so many it seem be then there nine mile long and three broad in circuit one and twenty bard on the north and Salzette be both in like subjection to the portugal the king let they to farm and employ the rent to the payment of the archbishop gloyster priest viceroy and other his officer Salsette be nine mile from goa be a Peninsula twenty mile about contain sixty six village or town and about fourscore thousand inhabitant Antonius Norogna the viceroy destroy therein two hundred temple some of they sumptuous 1567. and many pagode which cause they to rebel and afterward they slay some of the jesuit and their company Barros q q dec. 1. l. 8. c. ult. and dec. 2. l. 5. c. 1. relate that the king of Bisnaga have war with the moor of Decan and be then lord of the port of Batecala and onor where he have store of horse out of Arabia and Persia bring thither by merchant serviceable for his war the moor in those part forestall the market and sell the horse to the decans his enemy whereupon he command the king of onor his vassal to kill all the moor in the country which be effect to the death of ten thousand moor the rest that escape gate they to the island of Tizuarin and first people this city of goa translate the mart from onor thither but the king of onor by a power at sea force the trade to be keep still at onor till the portugal come into those part this murder of the moor be do an. 1479. the founder name be mellique Hocen this be to be understand of this new town for of the ancient there be no memory it seem by a cross there find that it have be inhabit by christian it stand in that part which be reckon to the kingdom of Canara Sabaius one of those decanine captain which share their master state as before be deliver when he die leave his son Idalcan very young whereupon his subject rebel and the king of Narsinga war upon he to dispossess he of his dominion Abulquerke take that opportunity besiege and upon composition take goa with the island which be soon after recover by Idalcan come with a strong army thither the portugal fly away by night but when the king of Narsinga again invade Idalcan he be force to resist the more dangerous enemy leave a strong garrison at goa which yet Albuquerk overcome and sack the city ever since as stand in the midst of that tract of land from Cambaia to comori it have be think the fit staple for merchandise and seat for the viceroy the chief of the four chief city in the indies the three other Ormus Diu and malaca there dwell in goa of all nation and religion the government be as in Portugal only public use of foreign religion be forbid they but in their house private or on the main land they may practice the same the portugal many of they be marry with indian woman and their posterity be call mestico and in the three degree differ nothing in colour and fashion from natural indian of the portugal they reckon two sort marry man and soldier which be a general name to all bachelor although they be at their own command of these be many knight and be call Cavalhiero Fidalgo for if a man do any thing worth reckon present his captain impart this honour to he whereof they much boast themselves albeit that this knighthood have descend to cook boy many of the portugal live only by their slave they use great ceremony or pride whether you will call it in their behaviour the particular whereof let r r Lins l. 1. c. 28.29 30 31 32. Linschoten that there live among they teach you beside both abassine and armenian christian jew and moor here be many heathen the moor eat all thing but swine flesh and die be bury like the jew the heathen as Decanijus guzarate and canarijn be burn to ash and some woman alive be bury with the gentleman or Bramenes their husband some will eat nothing that have life some all but the flesh of kine or buffle most of they pray to the sun and moon yet all acknowledge a god that make all thing and rule they after this life render to all according to their work as for the idol or pagode they worship they say balby Balb c. 23. even as we adore in the image that which they represent unto we a good argument for image-worship but they have pagode which be image cut and frame most ugly and like monstrous devil to who they pray and offer and to saint which here have live holy and be now intercessor for they the devil often answer they out of those image balb. c. 22. to who also they offer that he shall not hurt they they present their pagode when a marriage be to be solemnize with the bride maidenhead two of her near kins-woman force she upon the ivory pin or member of stone leave the blood there for a monument of that devilish idol the husband herein applaud his happiness not much unlike the beastly custom of the roman dame s s lact. l. 1. c. 20. aug. de c. d l. 6. c. 9 Rosianus antiq. 1. 2. which be new marry be cause to sit on Priapus he but who can honest name that which they dishonest do they have for the most part a custom to pray unto the first thing they meet withal in the morning and all that day they pray unto it be it hog or any other thing but if they first meet with a crow whereof there be great store they will not for any thing stir out again that day after so unlucky a sign they pray likewise to the new moon salute her first appearance on their knee they have jogos or hermit repute very holy many juggler also and witch which show devilish trick they never go forth without pray every hill cliff hole or den have his pagode in it with their furnace hard by they and their cistern always full of water with which every one that pass by wash his foot and then worship and offer Rice egg or what else their devotion will afford which the Brahmin eat when they be to go to sea they will feast their pagode with trumpet fire and hang fourteen day before they set forth to obtain a good voyage and as long after their return which they use to do in all their feast marriage childbirth and their harvest and seed-season the indian woman in goa when they go forth have but one cloth about their body which cover their head and hang down to the knee otherwise naked they have ring through their nose about their leg toe neck and arm and seven or eight bracelet upon their hand according to their ability of glass or other metal when the woman be seven year old and the man nine they marry but come not together till the woman be able to bear child Mr. fitch mention t t r. fitch the solemnity of these marriage and the cause to be the burn of the mother when the father be dead that they may have a father-in-law to bring they up to leave goa with this island the Canaras and Decanijn wear their beard and hair long without cut as the Bramenes they except from food kine hog and buffle they account the ox cow or buffle to be holy which they have common in the house with they and they belmeere stroke and handle they with all friendship in the world feed they with the same meat they eat themselves and when the beast ease themselves they hold under their hand and throw the dung away they sleep with they in their house hereby think to do God service in other thing they be as the Bramenes for those be the laity these be the spiritualty when they take their oath they be set within a circle of ash on the pavement and lay a few ash on their head the other on their breast swear by their pagode to tell the truth the canarijn and the corumbijn be the rustic and country-husbandman the most miserable people of all India their religion be much as the other they cover only their privity and eat all thing except kine ox buffle hog and hen flesh their woman bind a cloth about their navel which reach half way the thigh they be deliver alone by themselves without other help their child be bring up naked till they be seven or eight year old without any trouble about they except wash they in a little cold water and live to be a hundred year old without headache or loss of tooth they nourish a cuff of hair on their crown cut the rest when the man be dead the wife break her glass-jewel and cut off her hair his body be burn they eat so little as if they live by the air and for a penny will endure whip in Salsette be two temple or hole rather of pagode renown in all India one of which be cut from under a hill of hard stone and be of compass within about the bigness of village of four hundred house with many gallery or chamber of these deform shape one high than another cut out of the hard rock there be in all three hundred of these gallery the other be in another place of like matter and form it will make a man hair stand upright to enter among they in a little island call pory there stand a high hill on the top whereof be a hole that go down on the hill dig and carve out of the hard rock within as large as a great cloister round beset with shape of elephant tiger amazon and other like work workmanly cut suppose to be the Chinois handiwork but the portugal have now overthrow these idol-temple will God they have not set new idol in the room with like practice of offering and pilgrimage as do these to their pagode I once u u Linschot go into a temple of stone in a village and find nothing in it but a great table that hang in the middle of the church with the image of a pagode thereon paint hellish disfigure with many horn long tooth out of the mouth down to the knee and and beneath his navel with such another tusked (@) horn face upon the head stand a triple crown not much unlike the pope it hang before a wall which make a partition from another chamber like a choir close without any light in the middle whereof be a little door and on each side of it a furnace within the wall with certain hole thereby to let the smoke or savour of the fire to enter into that place when any offering shall be make whereof we find there some rice corn fruit hen and such like there issue thence such a filthy smoke and stink that it make the place black and almost choke such as enter we desire the Brahmin to open the door which with much entreaty he do offer first to throw ash on our forehead which we refuse so that before he will open we the door we be force to promise he not to enter beyond the door it show within like a lime-kil be close vault without hole or window neither have the church itself any light but the door within the the say cell hang a hundred burn lamp and in the middle stand a little altar cover with Cotton cloth and over that with gold under which as the Brahmin tell we sit the pagode all of gold of the bigness of a puppet hard by the church without the great door stand within the earth a great foursquare cistern hew out of freestone with stair on each side to go down into it full of green filthy and stink water wherein they wash themselves when they mean to enter into the church to pray in the evening they carry their pagode on procession first ring a bell wherewith the people assemble and take the pagode out of his cell with great reverence and set it in a Palamkin which be bear by the chief man of the town the rest follow with great devotion with their usual noise and sound of trumpet and other instrument and have carry he a pretty circuit bring he to the stone cistern wash he and place he again in his cell make a foul smoke and stink and every man leave his offering behind he intend to the pagode but consume by the Brahmin and his family as we go along by the way we find many such shape under certain coverture with a small cistern of water hard by and half a indian nut hang thereby to take up water withal for the traveller to wash and pray by the say pagode do stand common a calf of stone and two little furnace before which they present their offering my fellow leap on one of those calf in the church the Brahmin call out and the people come run but we stay their fury by gentle persuasion of the Brahmin before and thus much of these deform form and misshapen shape with their woshipping and worshipper suitable like lip like lettuce vain rite stink sink and smoke ugly idol conspire with internal darkness of the mind and Externall darkness of their temple to bring a eternal darkness to the follower that all may shut up as they be begin in a hellish period don Duart de menezes he sum the public ordinary expense of the port in India at 134 199. li. 5. sh 11. d. ob. I have see in Mr. hakluite hand a large treatise write by don Duart de menezes of the custom court officer expense and other remarkable observation for knowledge of the Portugal state and affair in the east indies he say that the island tisoare so he write it in which goa stand have thirty two town and village therein the jesuit college in Salsete enjoy 10 10 in sal be five church s. f. the rent before belong to the pagode be two hundred and fifty pound yearly beside their glebe-land of Rice ground and other commodity also the parish subject to they be worth two hundred ninety eight pound and sixteen shilling in goa they receive seven hundred and fifteen pound twelve shilling and six penny and their yearly present amount to three hundred seventy five pound in cochin also they have three hundred thirty seven pound the monastery of saint Francis in goa have rent six hundred and thirteen pound and ten shilling and one hundred forty three pound twelve shilling and six penny in other duty the dominican receive five hundred pound and fourscore and ten pound in other right the friar of saint Augustine fourscore pound twelve shilling and six penny the inquisition one hundred three pound and ten shilling beside the rent of the hospital one thousand eight hundred seventy five pound and a almshouse for widow and orphan two hundred and fifty pound these thing I think worthy relation not so much to satisfy the curious as to answer the ordinary brag of that world-wandring generation pretend mortification to the world strictness of their vow love to religion and compassion to the poor pagan when as they have such golden chain to draw they thither whereunto if we add the bounty of christian in those part unto these pretend holy father their gain from the pearl-fishings the vow y y see Linschot in the story of i. Newberry etc. l. 1. c. 92. of such as become of their society and many other way accrue to their coffer together with those novelty and rarity wherewith every sense in variety be here present we may see the world a sufficient argument to lead they about the world whatsoever other pretence notwithstanding but this have be learned handle against they by other already among other and before other our most reverend and learned metropolitan arch. Abbo' against Hill reason 4. and 5. in unmask the reason of hill for popery have show both this our hill to be a ignorant mountebank and our jesuit in India rather enricher of their own society in Europe with gold pearl spice and other indian ware then of those asian proselyte with sound european christianity beside that they seem necessary to their nation for the establish of their trade and civil affair under colour of religion win estimation with the pagan and remain there as well for intelligencer and as it be leaguer ambassador with their king as for conversion of the heathen for i what I can show against this their allegation belong to another task @. 3 Linschot of the indian Bramenes both secular and religious the indian wiseman may be divide into two sect the banianes of who be already speak and the Bramenes these observe the indian heathen custom that no man may change his father trade but must succeed in the same and marry a wife also of the same tribe the Brachmanni or as they be at this day call the Bramenes who have their shop as well as other merchant throughout the city be the chief tribe and of best reputation and wear in sign of their profession from the shoulder cross under the arm upon their naked body down to the girdle three string like seal thread which for their life they will not nor may by their vow put off they be naked save that about their middle they have a cloth bind to hide their privity and sometime when they go abroad they cast a thin gown over they upon their head they be a white cloth wound twice or thrice about therewith to hide their hair which they never cut off but wear it long and turn up as the woman do they have common hang at their ear goldring they be very subtle in writing and account make other simple indian believe what they will whatsoever they meet first with in the street they pray to all day after when the Bramenes die z z ceremony at the death of a Brahmin all their friend assemble together and make a hole in the ground in which they throw much sweet wood spice Rice corn and oil then lay therein the dead body his wife follow with music and many of her near friend sing praise in commendation of her husband life encourage she to follow he which according she do for part her jewel among her friend with a cheerful countenance she leap into the fire and be present cover with wood and oil whereby she be quick dead and with her husband body burn to ash and if it chance which be seldom that any woman refuse this fiery conjunction they cut the hair clean off from her head neither may she after that wear a jewel but be account a dishonest woman this custom be as may appear very ancient and suppose to have be ordain because of the libidinous disposition of the indian woman which for their lust will poison their husband the Bramenes observe fasting-day with so great abstinence that they eat nothing that day and sometime not in three or four day together they tell many miracle of their pagode they hold the immortality of the soul both of beast and man and that so often mention Pythagorean succession and renew of man soul in beast and contrariwise they by the direction of the devil the author of their miracle frame such deform statue to their idol Botero say the Bramenes also worship a a gi. bot. ben. 2. part 3. maff. l. 1. one parabramma and his three son and in honour of they wear those three thread aforesaid he affirm that the joghi wander up and down through India abstain from all carnal pleasure but a certain time which be expire they be past possibility of further sin and be then call Abduti as the illuminate elder of the familist pollute themselves in all filthiness od. Barbosa the Bramenes b have image of the trinity and have in religious estimation the number of three they acknowledge and pray to the trinity in unity but affirm many demigod which be his deputy in govern the World they honour the portugal image also as approach to their own superstition they marry but one wife and admit no second succeed marriage the Bramenes must descend of the Brahmin tribe and other can aspire to that priesthood but some be of high account than other for some serve for messenger which in time of war and among thief may pass safe and be call father they will not put a Brahmin to death for any crime Indic c. 3. Heurnius report that they have book and prophet which they allege for confirmation of their opinion that they think God to be of black colour that they worship the herb or marjoram with many superstitious ceremony that they have in their writing the decalogue with the explanation thereof that they adjure all of their society unto silence touch their mystery that they have a peculiar language as latin in these part wherein they teach the same in their school that their doctor hallow the sunday in divine worship adore the god which create heaven and earth often repeat the sentence I adore thou o God with thy grace and aid for ever to take food from the hand of a christian they account as sacrilege when they be seven year old d d od. Barbosa they put about their neck a string two finger broad make of the skin of a beast call Cressuamengan like a wild ass together with the hair which he wear till he be fourteen year old all which time he may not eat Betelle e e Betelle a leaf that time expire the say string be take away and another of three thread put on in sign that he be become a Brahmin which he wear all his life they have a principal among they which be their bishop which correct they if they do amiss they marry but once as be say and that not all but only the elder of the brethren to continue the succession who be also heir of the father substance and keep his wife straight kill she if he find she adulterous with poison the young brethren lie with other man wife which account the same as a singular honour do unto they have liberty balb. voyag c. 26. as balby affirm to enter into any man house yea of the king no less then of the subject of that religion the husband leave the wife and the brethren their sister unto their pleasure and therefore depart out of the house when they come in and hence it be that no man son inherit his father good and I know not whether they may inherit that name of father or son but the sister son succeed as be most certain of the blood f f Nicolas withington they eat but once a day and wash before and after meat as also when they make water and go to stool they have great cournu^s belong to their church beside offering and at set hour of the day resort thither to sing and do other their holy rite twice in the day and as often in the night their pagode be take out of the altar and set on the Bramenes head look backward and be carry in procession three time about the church the Bramenes wife carry light burn every time they come to the principal door of the church which be on the west side thereof some church have two door on a side they set it down on their offering-stone and worship it twice a day they bring it to eat of their sod rice as often it seem as the Brahmin be hungry when they wash they which be often they lie a little ash on their head forehead and breast say that they shall return into ash when the Bramenes wife be with child as soon as he know it he cleanse his tooth and abstain from Betelle and observe fast till she be deliver Sumario di pop. orient the king of malabar will scarce eat meat but of their dress they be of such estimation that if merchant travel among thief and robber one Brahmin in the company secure they all which Brahmin will eat nothing of another man dress and will not become a Moor for a kingdom nic. di conti say g g nic. di conti. he see a Brahmin three hundred year old he add that they be studious in astrology geomancy and philosophy to be short they be the master of ceremony and the indian religion in who precept the king be train up jarric l. 3. thes. Indic the Bramenes have it seem much familiarity with the devil so strange do they foretell thing to come though they be contingent they also interpret prodigy lot augury and thereby grow into great credit the people depend on they and the king become of their order they persuade the people that their pagode do often feast together and therefore will have such dainty offer which they and they devour threaten if they be spare and niggardly plenty of plague and divine wrath beside these secular there be other religious or monastical Bramenes which be call jogue ancient call by the greek gymnosophist because they go naked and so they still do profess much austerity of life at least for a time with long pilgrimage 1. tim. 4.8 and much bodily exercise little profit the soul possess nothing but want and beggary seek thereby to win credit to themselves and their Sect the Verteas I take to be another sect the religious votary of the banian or pythagorean both those and these be kind of ethnic monk which profess by strict penance and regular observation to expiate h h seb. Ferdinandus their sin and procure salvation to their soul there be also some that live as hermit in desert some in college some wander from place to place beg some a unlearned kind be call Sanasses i i nic. Pimenta jarric l. 6. c. 22. some contrary to the rest nothing esteem idol observe chastity twenty or five and twenty year and feed daily on the pith of a fruit call Caruza to preserve in they that cold humour neither do they abstain from flesh fish or wine and when they pass along the way one go before they cry poo poo that be way way that woman especial may avoid for their vow will not permit the sight of a woman these wear not the three thread which the other Bramenes wear neither be their body burn after death as of the rest yea the king himself honour they and not they the king some live enclose in iron cage all filthy with ash which they strew on their head and garment some burn some part of their body voluntary all be vainglorious and seek rather the shell than the kernel the show than the substance of holiness Xaverius once in conference with the braman l. 2. c. 9 jarric l. 3. c. 8. demand of they what their God command to those that will come to heaven be answer two precept one to abstain from kill of kine in who shape the god be worship and the other to observe the Bramenes the minister of their god but they have more mystical learning which one of they secret disclose to the jesuite this be of a famous school college or university of those Bramenes all the student whereof at their first admission he say be swear by solemn oath unto their doctor never to reveal any of their secret first that there be one God maker of heaven and earth who alone and not the pagode aught to be worship after that they be instruct in precept necessary to salvation Xaverius ask what the decalogue he repeat the ten commandment in order as we do and that in a mystical language know to few which their doctor observe in their holy thing but the Brahmin pronounce and explain they in the vulgar further that the eight day or Sunday be to be keep holy and then often to repeat the prayer oncery naraiva Noma the same which before be relate and interpret out of Heurnius this to be speak with a low voice that they break not their oath likewise that their old book foretell of a time when all shall be of one religion Fenicius another jesuite learn of one of their doctor jacob Fenicius other their mystery contain in their book that God produce all this world out of a egg out of one part thereof the land sea and inferior creature out of the other the heaven for habitation to the god that this world be found on the end of a buffal horn and because this beast lean on one side ready to fall a huge rock be place under he to support he but as before so here also follow some notice of better thing for there be a malabar poet which write 900. epigram against their pagode each consist of eight verse wherein he speak many thing elegant of the divine providence of heaven and the torment of hell and other thing agree to the christian faith that God be present every everywhere and give to every one according to his estate that celestial blessedness consist in the vision of God that the damn in hell shall be torment 400. million of year in flame and shall never die Thebramenes he call fool and block by this book and by mathematical doctrine of the sphere which they have scarce ever hear of he make way for convert the people I have think good to say thus much together of they as in one view represent the Bramenes a name so ancient so universal communicate to the indian priest although some particular before have be or hereafter may be say touch some of they in other place according to the singularity of each nation in this so manifold a profession which they all demonstrate in their singular superstition chap. x. of the region and religion of malabar @. i. of the kingdom of Calicut MAlabar extend itself from the river Congeraco to the cape comori which some take to be the promontory Cory in a a ptol. l. 7. c. 1. Ptolomey maginus doubt whether it be that which he call Commaria extrema in the length it contain little less than three hundred mile in breadth from that ridge of gate to the sea in some place fifty from cangerecora to Puripatan be b b bar. dec. 1. l. 9 c. 1. 60. mile of coast therein Cota colan Nilichilan Marabia Bolepatan Cananor where the portugal have a fort in 12. degree Tramapatan Chomba main and Perepatan from thence to chatua be the kingdom of Calicut fourscore mile 11 coast therein pandarane colete capocate Calcutta in 11. 15. chale a Portugal Fortress Patangale Tanor a city royal Pananc baleancor and chatua then follow the kingdom of Cranganor next to that the kingdom of cochin then that of porca without a good port in her four and forty mile coast Coulan be next and then that of travancor which the portugal call the great king as be great in state then the former subject to the king of Narsinga it be full of people divide into many state by variety of river which cause horse to be unserviceable in their war and nourish many crocodile every the soil and yield easy transportation of commodity which be spice of diverse kind they have bat in shape resemble fox in bigness kite the chief kingdom in this tract be kanonor Calicut Cranganor cochin Carcolam and travancor about c c Lop Castaneda lib. 1. od. Barbosa g. bot. ben. Linschot g. Arthus hist c. 26. 27. and seq seven hundred year since it be one kingdom govern by Soma or Sarama Perimal who by persuasion of the arabian merchant become of their sect in which he prove so devout that he will end his day at Mecca but before his departure he divide his estate into these petty signiory among his principal noble and kindred leave unto Coulam the spiritual pre-eminence and the imperial title unto his nephew of Calicut who only enjoy the title of or emperor and have prerogative of stamp coin some exempt from this Zamorin empire and allegiance both Coulam the papal see of the high Brahmin and Cananor and some have since by their own force exempt themselves this perimal die in his holy voyage and the indian of malabar reckon from this division their computation of year as we do from the bless nativity of our lord he leave say Castaneda to himself but twelve league of his country which lie near to the shore where he mean to embark himself never before inhabit this he give to a cousin of his then his page command that in memory of his embark there it shall be inhabit and the rest to take he for their emperor except the king of Coulan and Cananor who yet with the rest he command not to coin money but only the king of Calicut for Calicut be therefore here build and the moor for the embark take such devotion to the place that they will no more frequent the port of Coulan as before which therefore grow to ruin but make Calicut the staple of their merchandise Calicut the first in order with they shall be so with we the city be not wall nor fair build the ground not yield firm foundation by reason of the water which issue if it be dig this kingdom have not above five and twenty league of sea-coast yet rich both by the fertility of the soil which yield corn spice jacero and many other fruit and by the situation as the staple especial before the portugal unfriendly neighbourhood of indian merchandise and therefore in her variety of merchant be a map as it be of all that eastern World the d d josephus Indus egyptian persian syrian arabian indian yea even from Catay the space of six thousand mile journey here have their trade and traffic the palace also contain four hall of audience according to their religion for the indian moor jew christian of their Bramenes or priest we have already say they yield divine honour to diverse of their decease saint and build temple unto beast one of which dedicate to a ape have a large porch for cattle to the use of sacrifice in which be say e e maff. lib. 1. Maffaeus seven hundred marble pillar not inferior to those of Agrippa in the roman Pantheon it seem that the ground in that place be not of so queasy and watery a stomach but that it can digest deep foundation to elephant they attribute like divinity but most of all to kine suppose that the soul of man depart do most of all enter into these beast they have many book of their superstition near the Augural discipline of the etrurians and fond fable of the grecian and diligent conceal the same from vulgar knowledge except some Brahmin proselyte do detect those mystery lud. vert. lib. 5. cap. 2. they believe one God maker of heaven and earth but add that he can have no pleasure in so weighty a charge of govern the world and therefore have delegate the same to the devil to reward every man according to his work he they call Deumo they name GOD tamerani the king have in his palace the chapel of Deumo carve full of devil and in the midst sit this image of metal in a throne of the same matter with a triple crown like the pope and four horn with tooth eye and mouth wide and terrible hook hand and foot like a cock in each corner of this square chapel be a devil set in a fiery throne wherein be many soul the devil put one with his right hand into his mouth and take another from under he with his left hand this idol be wash by the Bramenes with sweet water incense and worship every morning sometime in the week they sacrifice on this manner they have a altar strew with flower on which they put the blood of a cock and coal of fire in a silver chafing-dish with much perfume incense about the altar and often ring with a little bell of silver they hold in their hand a silver knife with which the cock be kill which they dip in the blood and put into the fire with many apish gesture all the blood be thus burn many Wax-candle burn meanwhile the priest have on his wrist and leg as it be morris-bell which make a great noise a certain table hang at his neck and when he have end his sacrifice he take his hand full of wheat go backward from the altar on which he always fix his eye to a certain tree and then hurl the corn up over his head as high as he can after which he return and unfurnish the altar the king of Calicut eat no meat before four principal Bramenes have first offer thereof to the devil which they do lift both their hand over their head and shut their fist draw back the same with their thumb present of that meat to the idol and then carry it to the king on a great leaf in a treene platter the king sit on the ground at his meat without any thing under he attend with Bramenes stand four pace off with their hand before their mouth in great reverence and after the king have eat those priest carry the relic into the court where they clap thrice with their hand whereat present certain crow resort thither to eat the king leave which crow be hereunto accustom and may not be hurt of any when the king marry a wife * * Castaneda and Barbosa say that she be not marry but as his concubine one of the principal Bramenes have the first night lodging with he for which he have assign he by the king four hundred or five hundred ducat the king and his gentleman or Nayros eat not flesh without licence of the Bramenes the king commit the custody of his wife to the Bramenes when he travel any whither and take in too honest part their dishonest familiarity but for this cause the king son succeed not in the crown but his sister son as be certain of his blood these sister of the king choose what gentleman they please on who to bestow their virginity and if they prove not in a certain time to be with child they betake they go these bramene-stallion the gentleman and merchant have a custom to exchange wife in token of great friendship some woman among they have six a a h. de sancto Stephano or seven husband father her child on which of they she best please the man when they marry get other to use they if they be virgin fifteen or twenty day before they themselves will bed they this author affirm that there be a thousand family of christian in Calicut at the time of his be there a hundred and twenty year since if a debtor break day with his creditor and often disappoint he he go to the principal of the Bramenes and receive of he a rod with which he approach to the debtor and make a circle about he charge he in the name of the king and the say Brahmin not to depart thence till he have satisfy the debt which if he do not he must starve in the place for if he depart the king will cause he to be execute Od. Barbosa the new king for one year space eat neither fish nor flesh nor cut his hair or nail use certain prayer daily eat but one meal and that after he have wash neither may he look on any man till he have end his repast at the year end he make a great feast to which resort above ten thousand person to confirm the prince and his officer and then much alm be give he entertain ten thousand woman in diverse office in his palace these make to the king after his fast year be out a Candlemas feast each of they carry diverse light from the temple where they first observe many idol idle ceremony unto the palace with great music and other jollity @. 2 of the king of Calicut of the election and erection of the Zamoryn we have speak in the begin of the chapter let we here add out of Castaneda b b hervan lop. de Castaneda l. 1 c. 14. concern his devotion he say that this king of Calicut be a Brahmin as his predecessor also and for that it be a custom that all the king die in one pagode or idol temple he be elect for that cause for always there be and must be in that house a king to serve those idol and when he that serve there die then must the king that than reign leave his empire and go serve in that place as the other do another be elect to succeed he in the kingdom and if any refuse to forsake his court for the pagode they enforce he thereunto the king of malabar be brown man and go naked from the girdle upward and from thence downward they be cover with cloth of silk and of Cotton adorn with jewel for their child the son inherit not but the brother or if there be none the sister son when their daughter be ten year old they send out of the kingdom for a Nayro and present he with gift request he to take her virginity which have do he toe a jewel about her neck which she wear during her life as a token that from thenceforth she have free power of her body to do what she will which before she may not after their death c c funeral rite these king be carry forth into a plain field and their burn with sweet wood very costly their kindred and all the nobility of the country be present which do and the ash bury they shave themselves without leave any hair except on the brow and eyelid even on the least child and for the space of thirteen day cease to eat d d a leaf of which see c. 13. botel his lip be out that do it and all that time be a wherein they observe if any will come in to object any thing against the new future king after this e e inauguration of the new king he be swear to the law of his predecessor to pay his debt to recover whatsoever belong to his kingdom be lose which oath he take have his sword in his left hand and in the right a candle burn which have a ring of gold upon it which he touch with two of his finger and take his oath this be do they throw or pour upon he a few grain of rice with many other ceremony and prayer and he worship the sun three time after which all the caymaile or principal noble swear their fealty to he handle also the same candle the thirteen day end they eat their betele again and flesh and fish as before the king except who then take think for his predecessor and for the space of one whole year as be before observe in part out of Barbosa eat no betele nor shave his beard nor cut his nail eat but once a day and before he do it wash all his body and observe certain hour of prayer daily the year be end he observe a kind of for his predecessor soul whereat be assemble 100000. person at which time he give great alm and then it confirm all these malabar king have one special man which be the chief administrator of justice who in matter of government be obey no less than the king himself the soldier be Nayros none of which can be imprison or put to death by ordinary justice but if one of they kill another or else kill a cow or sleep with a countriewoman or speak evil of the king the king after information give his warrant to another Nayro who with his associate kill he wheresoever they find he hew he with their sword and then hang on he his warrant to testify the cause of his death these Nayros may not wear their weapon nor enter into combat till they be arm knight although that from the age of seven year they be train up in feat and practice of arm he be f f the dub of the Nayros bar. dec. 1. l. 9 dub or create by the king who command to gird he with a sword and lay his right hand upon his head mutter certain word soft and afterward dub he say g g Paguego Bramena Bisquera have a regard to keep these Bramenes and their kine these be the two great commandment of the Brahmin Law the king sometime commit this ceremony to their Panical or master in the feat of arm who they ever honour as their father and next to the king most reverence they teach they to run leap fence and manage of weapon and anoint they with oil of Gergelin to make their sinew pliant for all wind and tumble gesture they begin to go to school at seven year old in fight they be valorous and account it no shame to flee but will do it in policy and yet when they yield themselves to any man service they bind themselves to die with he and for he which they faithful perform fight till they be kill they be great soothsayer have their good and bad day worship the sun the moon the fire and the kine and the first they meet in the morning the devil be often in they they say it be one of their pagode which cause they to utter terrible word and then he go before the king with a naked sword quake and cut his flesh say with great cry I be such a god and I be come to tell thou such a thing and if the king doubt he roar loud and cut himself deep till he be credit the fortugal have much eclipse the greatness of the king of Calicut and cause many other alteration in all the east in this last age of the World of who exploit Castaneda barrius Maffaeus oserius and other have write at large our english-indian society have settle a factory at Calicut touch the condition and condition whereof you may read at large in Roger hawes his journal deliver among other our pilgrim * * my pilgrim or voyage tom. 1. l. 5. c. 1. he tell of the perfidiousness of this people how hardly they can get in debt they choose rather to spend much in bribe then to pay debt we make use of their superstition to justice for understand that they will neither eat nor wash while the english be in their house they will threaten not to depart till they be pay have mean while Nayros for their Guard thus injustice make they just and uncharitableness charitable for rather than be long trouble with their company most of they will pay part of their debt so that they get fifty fano kind of coin of one 100 of another but one notwithstanding their three day abode will pay nothing it seem equal profane superstitious and unjust @. 3 of their differ sect BArbosa reckon eighteen sect that have no mutual conversation nor may marry but in their own rank or order next to the king and Bramenes * * Maffaeus reckon four order the caymale or noble the Bramenes or priest the Nayros or soldier the vulgar the Nayros he place the Nayros which be gentleman and soldier and be not profess Nayros notwithstanding their blood till they be by their lord or by the king make knight or soldier and then he must never from that time go without his weapon which common be a rapier and a target and sometime piece or bow they never marry but lie with such of the Nayros woman or daughter as like they leave his weapon mean while at the door which forbid any man else although it be the goodman himself to enter till he have end his business and be go and if one of the common people once touch a Nayro it be lawful for the Nayro to kill he and he be also unclean and must be purify by certain wash and for this cause they cry as they go in the street Po Po that the base raskality may give place they have a pit of stand water at their door hallow by the Bramenes wherein every morning they wash themselves although it be green slimy and stink imagine thus to be cleanse of their sin they be bring up altogether to feat of arm and activity from their childhood admirable able to wind and turn themselves and be very resolute and desperate bind themselves by oath to live and die with their king or Lord no nayro woman may enter into Calicut but one night in the year when the city be full of light and then they go with the Nayros to behold and gaze their fill they intend nothing but their lust and think that if they die virgin they shall never enter into paradise the Biabari the Biabari be another sort and be merchant gentile and enjoy great privilege the king can put they to death but by sentence of the principal of themselves they be the only merchant before the moor trade there and still enjoy many possession these marry one wife and their child inherit and they may touch the nayro the cagianem be a sect of the Nayros have a law and idol by themselves which they may never alter they make tile to cover the temple and the king palace the nayro may be with their woman but must wash themselves before they go home another sect be call Manantamar which be launderer nor may they or their posterity be of other function nor may they mingle themselves with any other generation they have idol ceremony and temple by themselves the Nayros may use their wife or woman rather their brethren or nephew be their heir the calton be weaver and have a distinct idolatrous sect otherwise be as the former beside these of better condition there be of base sort eleven sect which may not marry nor meddle with other the first of these be call Tiberi husbandman the second Moger and be mariner both have their proper superstition and use their woman in common the three be astrologer who they call canius great man ask their counsel but may not touch their person the Aggeri be mason and worker in metal the Muchoa or Machoe be fisher dwell in village by themselves the man thief the woman harlot with who they please the Betua be salt-maker the paerun be juggler enchanter and physician if such damnable devilish practice may deserve so honourable name which when any be sick and require their help use conjuration to cause the devil to enter into some of they and then by his suggestion declare the event of the disease and what sacrifice or other thing be to be perform they may not touch or be touch of other man the revolat be a base sort of gentile which carry wood into the city to sell and herb the pule be as excommunicate person and live in desert where the Nayros have no occasion to pass and when they go near any of these Nayros or any of the better sort they cry as loud as they can as the * * levit 15 13-45 leper among the jew that other may avoid they for if any touch they their kindred may for such action or passion stay they and as many of these pule also as may make satisfaction for such disparagement some night they will go of purpose seek to touch some of the Nayro woman with hand stick or hurl of a stone which if they effect there be no remedy for the woman but to get she forth and live with these villain or to be sell to escape kill by the hand of her kindred these pule be thief and sorcerer the pareas be of worse esteem and live in desert without commerce of any repute worse than the devil these ten sort or eleven if you reckon two sort of the Tiberi as our author do whereof one be warrior distinguish by a certain cudgel which they must carry in their hand from the Nayros be as well differ in religion matter of common life though for their several rite it be wrong to the reader at large to recite they if we have the particular to deliver but this be common in India that each trade and tribe distinguish a new Sect there be beside these gentile natural of malabar many stranger of indian moor and christian but in other kingdom of malabar the heathenish religion be little differ from that in Calicut Cranganor Cranganor be a small kingdom the inhabitant of the city which give name to the region be christian of saint Thomas profession about seventy thousand in number cochin be now grow great by the portugal traffic and friendship of the rest there be not much worth the recital the papal honour among the Bramenes be by ordination of perimal which place there the supremacy of the braman because he to who he give Coulam be a great man than the rest this papal title be Cobritin a dignity which the king of cochin still retain to be supreme head of the Bramenes for the ancient king of Coulan remove their seat to cochin which be then in their territory but war have since much alter the face of thing in those part h h bar. dec. 1. l. 9 in these part be now many christian proselyte of the jesuit conversion beside many of the old Thomas Christian both man and woman in cochin account it a great gallantry to have wide ear which therefore they stretch by art hang weight on they till they reach to their shoulder porca be a kingdom southwards from cochin but little we can say of it in travancor between Coulan and the cape be many christian if they may be so call which want sacrament for in fifty year together they have not see a priest only they have the privilege and name of thomaean-christian these thomaeans be now as the jesuit report reduce to their Catholicisme the king of i i Coulan Trauancor dominion k k od. bar. stretch beyond the cape comori where malabar end on the east-side fourscore and ten mile as far as Cael which diverse great lord hold under he among the rest be the signiory of quilacare in the city of quilacare be a idol of high account to which they solemnize a feast every twelve year where the gentile resort as the popish christian in the romish jubilee the temple sacred to this idol have exceed great revenue the king for so he be call at this feast erect a scaffold cover with silk and have wash himself with great solemnity he pray before this idol and then ascend the scaffold and there in presence of all the people cut off his nose and after that his ear lip and other part which he cast towards the idol and at last he cut his throat make a butcherly sacrifice of himself to his idol he that be to be his successor must be present hereat for he must undergo the same martyrdom when his twelve year jubilee be come along this coast dwell the paravi simple people and christian which live by fish of pearl the Nayros make such hole in their ear that l l cas fred. Caesar Frederick say he thrust his arm up to the shoulder in one of they they be prodigal of their life in the honour of their king Osorius m m Osorius de reb. Eman. tell of some which like the renown decci have vow themselves to death and not to return from the enemy without victory Aloisius Goveanus number in the sea coast of Coulam three and twenty town of which nineteen have christian church the malabar n n bar. dec. 1. l. 9 be general of one language and one kind of writing this their writing be in leaf of palm which they call two finger broad and long as the matter they intend write on both side with a stile of iron which they bind up in book between two board in great or lesser form as they please their writing be from the left hand to the right they reckon their time before the portugal come into the indies from the departure of Parimal there be two sort of moor one mestico of mix seed of moore-father and ethnic-mother call naitean mongrel also in their religion the other foreigner which come thither in trade there be also many jew which have almost lose their Judaism mind more their merchandise then superstition step. de brit. 1600. Maleas beside those former sect stephanus de Brito speak of the Maleas which inhabit small village in the mountain which be hunter of elephant among who be no theft or robbery and therefore they leave their door open when they go abroad they have no idol among they only they observe their ancestor sepulcher these have no commerce with their neighbour nor be much subject to king only pay they a kind of tribute have Arelli set over they as judge or magistrate under each of they five or six thousand man their house be make of indian cane daub with earth and some live on tree lay beam from one tree to another and so build they lofty cottage free from tiger and wild elephant whereof the mountain be full which they take in pit cover over with leaf they have fertile field and valley but not diligent husband they be content with one wife which they carry with they whithersoever they go though but a hunting-voyage they be as other malabar naked from the waste upward a long garment hang thence to the ankle and on their head a turban as the More their neck ear and nostril be lade with gold for the malabar wear gold aswell for nose-ring as earring these Maleas be of better estimation than the base vulgar nor be it account a pollution to touch they no more than other Nairos or thomaean christian they have their pipe and tabor on their feast they be also sorcerer and divine by familiar spirit but use not to kill or hurt man by witchcraft as other indian and malabar do a witty docible honest people perhaps descend of those Malliani which Plutarch and Curtius mention in the life of Alexander of the feast which all the malabar-king hold every twelve year in honour of the river Ganges we have there speak o o cap. where we have discourse of the river this feast last eight and twenty or thirty day with great solemnity the Samorin every day wash himself and offer sacrifice to Ganges after which he return to his palace with innumerable troop of man ride upon a elephant in great pomp and three day after in the morning and evening with great royalty make show of himself in a high throne many lamp of gold and silver burn about he many piece discharge with other ceremony of State the king prostrate himself on the ground and three time do reverence to the people and they to he the king vassal then do he homage after this many champion exercise their fencing-skill before he and at the sound of instrument the chief noble by two and two in a rank with their face to the ground do reverence the elephant be likewise to honour he twenty thousand crown be spend on this solemnity by the king another more devilish rite follow about the year 1520. the Zamorin slay a certain king in memory whereof the successor of that king send a certain number of their soldier to revenge his death themselves be sure to be slay these be call Amocae which be client to that king and be either to come themselves or to send so many soldier to the number of thirty which rush among the people and kill as many as they can themselves certain to be kill of the king soldier chap. 11 of the kingdom of Narsinga and Bisnagar @. i. of their funeral and idolatrous bloody rite from those place where our foot last rest or touch rather unto the cape Guadaverin a a magin gi. boter ben. betwixt that ridge of mountain call gate and the ocean which be there name the gulf of Bengala trend the kingdom of Narsinga or Bisnagar those two royal city contend which shall give name to this mighty empire contain two hundred league of sea-coast the king have in continual pay forty thousand Nairos but as occasion serve he can bring into the field many many thousand more as in that expedition against Idalkan specify by barrius and Boterus in which be a world of people seven hundred thousand foot forty thousand horse seven hundred elephant twenty thousand harlot he sacrifice also unto idol twenty thousand seven hundred and threescore head of beast and fowl in nine day space which in Idol-devotion be all bestow after on the poor in the year of our lord 1565. Biznagar b b c. fred. be sack by four king of the More as say Fredrick name they Dialkan Zamaluc Cotamaluc and Viridy through treason of two more captain which have seven or eight score thousand soldier under they but be of the same religion with the king of Decan betray their own king forsake he in the midst of the battle this be a just reward of treason to the true king of biznegar for three captain have keep the king thirty year as prisoner once a year show he to the people themselves rule the State when he die then ramaragio exalt himself to the throne temiragio the second sway the government and the three Bengahe be general of the army only temiragio escape and return when the decans have sack the city and be go to beznegar and send to goa great promise for horse if any merchant will bring any whereupon Fredrick go with other merchant which carry store of they but bring no store of money in payment the tyrant accept the horse but pay nothing temiragio temove his court from bezneger to penegorde eight day journey within land and his son put to death the son of that king before mention which have be imprison as this also have be till death by a murder hand free he hence grow many broil the noble refuse to acknowledge this new king and thus bezneger be forsake remain after this a habitation for tiger and wild beast contain in circuit four and twenty mile as our author that stay there seven month affirm he never see palace exceed that of Biznagar it have nine gate with guard of soldier here he observe their rite in burn the woman so often mention which after his and balby his relation be thus I have declare the like for substance before this as in some rite differ I add also the woman c c the solemnity of burn of the wife after her husband death the ancient mention this rite with Ael var. hist l. 7. c. 18. high lou. l. 1. see the same describe in Porchacchi fun. tau 17 take two or three month respite after her husband death the day be come she go early out of her house mount on a horse or elephant or else on a stage carry by eight man apparel like to a bride adorn with jewel and her hair about her shoulder hold in her left hand a looking-glass in the right a arrow and sing as she pass through the city say that she go to sleep with her husband she be accompany with her friend until it be one or two of the clock in the afternoon then they go out of the city pass by the river side to the burning-place where be prepare a great square cave full of wood here be make a great banquet the woman eat with joy as if it be her wedding-day and after they sing and dance till the woman bid to kindle the fire in the cave then she leave the feast and take her husband near kinsman by the hand and go with he to the bank of the river where she strip she of her clothes and jewel bestow they at her pleasure and cover herself with a cloth throw herself into the river say o wretch wash away your sin come out of the water she roll herself into a yellow cloth and again take her husband kinsman by the hand go to the say cave by which be erect a little pinnacle on which she mount and there recommend her child and kindred to the people after this another woman take a pot with oil and sprinkle it over her head and therewith anoint all her body and then throw it into the furnace the woman go together with the same present after the woman the people throw great piece of wood into the cave so that with those blow and the fire she be quick dead and their great mirth be on a sudden turn into great lamentation and howl when a great man die all the woman of his house both his wife and slave with who he have have carnal copulation burn themselves together with he among the base sort I have see say master Fredrick the dead man carry to the place of burial and there set upright the d d the wise immure with her dead husband woman come before he on her knee cast her arm about his neck while a mason make a wall round about they and when the wall be as high as their neck one come behind the woman strangle she the workman present finish the wall over they and this be their burial ludovicus Vertomannus e e Lud vert. l. 6 relate the same funeral rite of tarnasseri as in other part of India save that there fifteen or twenty man in their idolatrous habit like devil do attend on the fire wherein the husband be burn all the musician of the city solemnize the funeral pomp and fifteen day after they have the like solemnity at the burn of the woman those devilish fellow hold fire in their mouth and sacrifice to Deumo and be her intercessor to that devil for her good entertainment the cause of burn their wife be by some ascribe to their wont poison of their husband before this law f f Odoricus by other that the husband may have she help and comfort in the other world Odoricus g g Odoricus tell of a strange and uncouth idol as big as saint Christopher of pure gold with a new band about the neck full of precious stone some one whereof be of value if he value just more than a whole kingdom the roof pavement and seel of the wall within and without the temple be all Gold the indian go thither on pilgrimage some with halter about their neck some with their hand bind behind they some with knife stick on their arm and leg and if after their pilgrimage the wound flesh fester they esteem that limb holy and a sign of their god favour near to the temple be a lake where-into the pilgrim cast gold silver and gem for honour of the idol and reparation of his temple at every yearly feast the king and queen with the pilgrim and people assemble place the say idol in a rich chariot and with a solemn procession of virgin two and two in a rank sing before he and with musical instrument carry he forth many pilgrim put themselves under the chariot wheel where they be crush in piece more than five hundred person use thus to do who carcase be burn and ash keep for holy relic otherwise also they will devote themselves to such a martyrdom in this manner the parent and friend assemble and make a feast to this votary and after that hang five sharp knife about his neck and so carry he before the idol where he take one of his knife and cry for the worship of my god I cut this my flesh and cut a piece cast it at the face of the idol and so proceed at the last say now do I yield myself to death in the behalf of my god and be dead be burn as before our countryman h h sir John Mandevile sir John Mandevile report the same history of their Idol-procession and the ash of those voluntary martyr which they keep to defend they against tempest and misfortune he also say that some pilgrim in all their peregrination not once lift up their eyelid some at every three or four pace fall down on their knee to worship some whip other wound themselves yea kill themselves as be before say Nicolo di conti i i nic. di conti report the same in his time neither be this bloody custom yet leave as Linschoten k k Linschot l. 1. cap. 44. affirm by report of one of his chamber-fellow that have see it they have say he a wagon or cart so heavy that three or four elephant can hardly draw it which be bring forth at fair feast and procession at this cart hang many cable or rope whereat all the people hale and pull of devotion in the upper part of the cart stand a tabernacle and therein the idol under it sit the king wife play on instrument and while the procession pass some cut piece of their flesh and throw at the pagode some lay themselves under the wheel of the cart with such event as you have hear Gasparo balby l l balby cap. 30. and Arthus Dan Hist. ind. Oi. c. 2. relate the same and add that the priest which have care of this idol and certain woman be consecrate to these devotion from their cradle by their Zeal-blind parent and the woman prostitute their body to gain for the idol whatsoever they can get over and above their own maintenance this fill the city with strumpet there be of this sacred you may interpret it curse crew four hundred in one place of the city these have their place in the Idol-procession some of they in the chariot which be draw by man every one account himself happy that can touch or draw the same this he say be at Negapaton he further affirm that not far from the city of saint Thomas be the town Casta where the the wife be not burn as at Negapatan but a great grave be make for the decease husband they place the live wife by the dead corpse and their near kindred cast earth upon they both and stamp thereon they which marry wed in their own degree as a smith to a smith daughter and they pour out their prayer at the image of some kow or a serpent call Bittia di Capella their Bramenes burn cow dung and if they intend any war with other nation they anoint their nose and forehead with those ash not wash themselves till the evening they which sacrifice themselves to the pagode when they have wallow a long time in lustful pleasure shoot into the air piece of their flesh tie to arrow and diverse mangle themselves at last cut their own throat so sacrifice themselves to the pagode there be also certain people call Amouchi otherwise chiani which perceive the end of their life m m desperate die approach lay hold on their weapon which they call chisse and go forth kill every man they meet with till some body by kill they make a end of their kill they be loath it seem to come into the devil presence empty-handed or to go to hell alone some of they worship GOD in the likeness of a man some in the image of kine and serpent some invoke the sun and moon other some tree or river among many feast which they celebrate in the year one in autumn be most solemn in which they take some great tree and fasten it in the ground have first fashion it like a mast of a ship with a cross-yard whereon they hang two hook of iron and when any one by sickness or other misery have make a vow to their idol or pagode he come thither and be first admonish by the priest to offer his sacrifice they lift he with those hook by both the shoulder and there hold he to the idol till he have three time salute the same with clap his fold hand to his breast and have make some sport thereto with weapon which he have in his hand after this he be let down and the blood which issue from his shoulder be sprinkle on the tree in testimony of his devotion then they draw he up again by the middle to give thanks to the idol and then give he leave to heal himself if he can they which be in great misery or seek some great matter at the hand of their idol do this they have another feast celebrate in the night continue eight night in which many candle be see burn through the city three or four run from one end of street to the other and hurl rice and other meat after they say they offer it to the devil which follow they not dare to look behind lest he shall slay they in other place also they have those idol-chariot like unto tower to the draw whereof many thousand of devout person put their helping-hand 1598. n n an. dom. 1598. there be a great contention whether the sign of Perimal shall be erect in the temple of Cidambacham this sign be a gild mast with a ape at the foot thereof many ambassador be there about this quarrel some urge some resist this deed but the prince call the Naicho of Gingi will have it set up notwithstanding the priest great unwillingness the priest therefore both regular which be the jogue and secular Bramenes ascend up the roof of the church and thence threaten to hurl down themselves which twenty of the jogue do and the rest threaten to follow but the Naicho cause gun to be discharge at they which slay two and cause the rest to retire and break their covenant rather than their neck with their fellow a woman also of this faction cut she own throat for zeal of this new superstition @. 2 of the king and Bramenes in this kingdom the swell stile of this king of Bisnagar I think worthy to be here insert which be this o o the title of the king of Bisnagar the husband of good fortune the god of great province king of the great king and God of king the lord of horseman the master of they which can speak emperor of three emperor conqueror of all he see and keeper of all he conquer dreadful to the eight coast of the world vanquisher of the mahometans etc. lord of the east west north and south and of the sea etc. Vencapadinus ragiu devamaganus Ragel which now rule and govern this world bar. dec. 1. l. 9 cap. 1. these king of Bisnagar have as say barrius a great part of the western coast subject unto they all between the river of Aliga and cangerecora in which space be these coast town Ancola Agorapan Mergeu onor a royal city Baticala bendor bracelor Bacanor Carara carnate mangalor Mangliran Cumlata and cangerecora from this city stand on a river of the same name southwards unto the cape comori be reckon the malabar coast and although goa and Calcutta much hinder those his port yet to salute and shake hand with both sea argue a great state special where the adjoin be so small there be three Naichi or tributary king subject to he such in power jarric l. 6. c. 21. but in title Naichi that be deputy or precedent of Madura Gingi and tanaior the Naicho of Madura be lord of the fish coast the people be call Badagae and despise the portugal because they drink wine eat beef and suffer themselves to be touch of the Pareae and carry on their shoulder for these in their Brahmin zeal will not endure to touch or talk with the base vulgar and their Bramenes will die rather than eat that which a Brahmin have not dress and therefore Robert sforce Robert sforce a jesuite come among they profess himself of the Brahmin or rape blood that be of noble race procure a Brahmin to dress his meat abstain from flesh fish wine and egg after their country manner and attire himself in the habit of a Sanasse one of their votary and in pretence of chastity stir not out of his house in a whole year nor will be speak with by every one allege sometime his devout conference with God so to win credit with these ethnic he learn by conference with a Brahmin that they maintain that philosophical axiom that nothing can be make of nothing and hold three beginning or universal cause the first Padi that be God the second Paiu the matter of which they say the soul be make the three Passan the corporal matter they maintain also the (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) or Pythagorean passage of soul out of one body into another for else say they how can there be such diversity of man one a king another a servant one a Brahmin another a Parea they be also platonike hold the soul not to be the form of the body but enclose therein as a bird in a cage votary and doctor the Bramenes wear ash on their head it seem they be zealous baneane their saneass be ass indeed for literature only as hermit they vow chastity the Gorupi or Gorusi be the doctor of their Law the Jesuit profess the doctorship of these in the habit of the former which be a white garment to the ankle with another of the same colour but thin over it a red cloth cast over the shoulder one like a cap or hat on his head from his neck hang down a cord of five thread three of gold and two of white silk they eat but once a day their Bramenes have a proper language and mystical as roman for the romish holy call Gueredan which the jesuite learn and thereby out of their book that there have be in these part four law or sect three of which the Bramenes still observe to wit of Vesmu of brama of Rubren the four mere spiritual partly mix with other and partly lose tend to the salvation of the soul which he say that he bring now unto they their alm and bodily chastisement without this not be effectual to their salvation any may learn and choose a doctor for any of the other three but none be able to teach this when they become scholar to such doctor form of reverence they do a triple reverence unto the ground lift up their hand aloft then let they down to their head and must like the pythagorean of old which be learn of the indian rest satisfy with his master bare assertion without question or further dispute (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) he be once bring before a consistory of the Bramenes and accuse for his new doctrine some article be that he shall affirm that the wash in remanancor and Ganges be to no effect that the Bramenes be inferior to the or prince that they shall be all damn notwithstanding there be of they many nhanisij and Sanasses the nhanisij nhanisij also vow chastity and to forsake the World the precedent of this council clear the jesuite upon the apology of another Brahmin for that of remanancor ramanancor it be a corner of the fish region wherein be a temple famous through all the east which he that shall visit and wash himself in the sea just by shall be clear from all his sin aswell as if it be do in Ganges Madura and the territory thereof be number a hundred thousand Bramenes the chief of which be Chocanada as their bishop or pope he will have this jesuite expel the country for that this Frank so ever since the expedition to jerusalem under duke Godfrey of Bullen all western christian be call in all the east a name it seem which the saracen communicate to the Ethnic have eat with another franke. he mean Fernandes another jesuite that have not thus act the Sanasse and Gurupi among they he allege also that his temple be build in the ground of his pagode but this jesuite with gold stop this Bramenes mouth and have the soil of the church grant he in peace with promise of all favour one thing that hold they entangle in this error be that they hold it unlawful to copy out their law and religion in writing so that they which will learn they must like the druid from their youth learn they of some doctor and commit they to memory in which they spend ten year and more and if any shall write they they will pull out his eye Emanuel Leitanus another jesuite come to Madura in the like sanassian habit m. Leitanus observe the gorupian order and fall down before sforce to the ground he sit in a chair cover with red because some of the madurians be present the Bramenes in the kingdom of Bisnaga be of such power that nothing be do without they and of the five counsellor of state four be Bramenes yea with their face to the earth all man and the king himself adore the brahmin-pope nor do the king admit any to conference in the morning before he have see two Bramenes in Chandegrin be a clock that strike not four and twenty hour but sixty and four according to their division of the night and day each into four part and those subdivide into eight the jesuit conceive that thief Bramenes be of the dispersion of the israelite and their book call Sameseretan do somewhat agree with the scripture but that they understand they not they have some prophetical phrase and some of they affirm that God make Adam the first man and be press acknowledge one God the king and his noble speak the learned and sacred tongue of the Bramenes 1609. one of his great man rebel against he and fortify the castle of vellur the king besiege he and on his submission pardon he but so as he turn his fort which have stand the rebel in a hundred thousand crown into a palace p p a pardaw be four shilling 3. pardawe be 2. crown Ventacapatus his letter beside twenty fan each worth a hundred thousand * pardo and innumerable horse and elephant the same year do the king write to the king of Spain in commendation of the jesuit with promise to assist the viceroy against the moor and hollander which have obtain to build a fortress of the Naichus of Tanavapatan desire the same friendship that since the king of narse as day have be betwixt both their ancestor subscribe king Ventacaxa thus you see the same king divers entitle according to the city royal yea I find he call of the castle before name king of vellur so Floris style he pe. Floris say that in june 1614 he grant trade to the english as likewise do Obiana queen of paleacatte one of his Wiue's which it seem govern that city on july the nine and twenty his Abeskian be send be a white cloth where his own hand be print in sandall or saffron and another the like from the queen of paleacatte the king letter be write upon a leaf of gold wherein he make excuse of former wrong give they liberty to build a house or fort with other privilege he give Floris the english merchant a town of four hundred pardawe yearly revenue notwithstanding the hollander his countryman do what they can to hinder it W^ngal^ Floris his man have be in the king presence who lay his hand upon his head but on the eight and twenty of October follow news come that this king be dead have reign above fifty year his three wife of which Obiana queen of paleacatte be one burn themselves with his corpse and great trouble be expect the hollander have present this king with two elephant of Seilan Cotabaxa the king of Badaya and Lellengana his neighbour die not long before Mahmoud Umin Cotabaxa his brother son succeed Musulipatan be in his dominion golconda be the metropolitan city but he be a Moor of the sophi his Sect golconda be the city royal with the Naicho or king of Gingi vassal to the king or emperor of Bisnagar the jesuit find good entertainment here some of the jogue distribute the water of Ganges out of certain vessel cover with foul and filthy clothes which yet the people for devotion kiss these jogue with admirable patience endure the sun heat and one among the rest enclose himself in a iron cage with his head and foot only out of the cage that he can neither sit nor lie down at any time and on the cage be hang a hundred lamp which four other jogue his companion light at certain time and thus walk he in this his perpetual prison as a light unto the world in his vain glorious opinion they reason with certain Bramenes some of which hold the sun for God and yet sometime to have be a man and for his merit so promote some deny a multitude of god only allow that privilege to Pyrama Vidhun and vaitir one of which make another keep the three destroy all thing near to madure be a idol call Chocanada which by night appear in a vision to a priest and bid he go say to the Naicho of Madure that he or I must abide in this house whereupon he will not be corrival with his idol but resign the palace to he his devotion be such that every day while he sit in judgement a Brahmin ever and anon sound the name of Aranganassa in his ear and when one be weary another succeed in the same office never cease this idol remembrance although he there sit five or six hour I think meet to mention one custom q q discourse of China p. 40. which some report of the brama or pope-like Brahmin in these part who by his authority dispense with many of their law and dissolve marriage give liberty at his pleasure to the woman to marry another which his dispensation be seal on her right shoulder with a mark of a hot iron @. 3 of many other strange rite and of saint thomae CHandagrin be the royal seat of the great king of Bisnagar r r mechlor cotignus the chief family therein be the Bramenes Raias and Cretius they affirm that their idol Perimal do bring forth the Bramenes out of his head as the poet tell of Minerua the second out of his breast three out of his belly and all other inferior family out of his foot the Bramenes have some opinion not altogether dissonant from the scripture they say that God only by his thought make a man which they call Adam on the ten day of july 1600. happen a eclipse of the sun which the Bramenes say be by mean of the dragon which they make a celestial sign his bite of the sun and moon whereupon the king and other neither eat nor drink that day deplore their misery because the dragon devour the sun in the city prepeti three mile from Chandagrin be the feast of perimal in remembrance of his marriage at which the offering amount to two hundred thousand crown and the chariot of the idol be draw forth a mile and a half in procession by ten thousand man they have another feast of the kine because they suppose perimal to be the son of a cow and then the way and street be full s s Simon sa. of that cattle they have a feast in honour of the sun which last eight day solemnize by the emperor himself and he be judge a traitor which be not present thereat then they cast lot the king first and after the rest divine by arrow the next year destiny if a arrow light on a tree and be pluck out cause a red liquor to follow it prognosticate war if white peace not far hence be a idol call tripiti to which be great pilgrimage and Offering always they go some begin and the rest answer and so all continue to resound the name of the idol Gaia before they enter into the temple they shave and wash themselves the hermit which they call Sanasses live in desert and at sometime appear before the people naked the Girupi bear a great port and never go forth on foot the idol tripiti be seat on a mountain about which be fertile valley store with fruit which none may touch as be consecrate there be in the wood great abundance of ape so tame that they will take meat out of man hand the people esteem they a divine race and of the familiarity of perimal the chief God who they worship in many colour and shape as of a man ox horse lion Hogge duck Cock etc. Francis t t f. Fernandes Epist. 1598. Fernandes say that Cidambaram be the Mother-city of their pagan rite wherein be many stately temple and the revenue of the Bramenes amount to 30000. ducat but now they be pay but 12000. yearly here happen a strange accident the same day the jesuit depart the occasion of which be this there be in this city a temple of Perimal wherein they worship a ape call Hanimant who they report to have be a god and for I know not what together with many thousand of other god to have remain there be all transform into ape now when this principal ape be force to pass into the island Zeilan and want a ship he leap and at every leap leave a island or heap of land behind he so make way for his apish train to Zeilan the tooth of this ape be keep for a great relic in that island with great resort of pilgrim thereunto and in the year u u Linschot c. 44 1554. be by the portugal who make a road thither in hope of great booty take away the indian prince offer the viceroy three hundred thousand or as Linschoten tell seven hundred thousand ducat for the ransom of this ape tooth but the archbishop dissuade the viceroy who thereupon burn the same before those indian ambassador and throw the ash into the sea not long after a Beniane of Cambaya persuade the indian that he by divine power have take away that holy tooth be invisible present and have leave another in the room which be burn superstition be credulous and the king of Bisnagar give he a great sum of gold for that ape tooth wherewith he thus apish have bite and mock they which be after hold in like veneration as the former but to return to our cidambaran history they 10 10 f. fernand. tell that a holy man in great penance have many year hold his foot pierce through with a piece of iron and when he be often by God command to leave that self-rigour he flat refuse unless that he may see God dance about he which also he condescend unto and with the sun moon and star which play the musician he appear dance and as he dance a chain of gold fall from his foot whereof this town take name for Cidambaran signify a golden chain as Viega y y em. de Viega and ricius two jesuit travel to Chaudegrin they come to travilur where they say their idol with a white banner on his back and after he three sacred kine with drummer on their back and after they trumpeter and many musician of other sort then follow twenty woman dance which be also consecrate to the idol service and may not marry but yet prostitute their body these be rich attire and carry light the priest follow with the idol and be follow by the people with light at their return they set down the idol and set sodden rice before he to eat other mean while drive away the fly and other cover he that he shall not be see eat and at last one make a long oration of the worthy act of their god and then set he again in his place this last four hour and in the mean space many reason with the jesuit and some hold vain discourse of the creation as that there be seven sea one of salt-water the second of fresh the three of honey the four of milk the lift of Tair which be cream begin to sour the six of sugar the seven of butter that the earth have nine corner whereby it be bear up by the heaven other dissent and say that the earth be bear up by seven elephant the elephant foot stand on tortoise and they be bear by they know not what when the Naicho of Tangaor z z Melch. Cotig die 375. of his concubine willing offer themselves to the fire to honour his funeral so much can custom harden so delicate and softhearted a nature the temple a a gi. bot. ben. in the country have great revenue which in some place be increase by the devotion of woman which prostitute themselves to gain for their idol and many young girl be bring up for this purpose many be in these part of the sect of the guzzarate which kill no quick thing as be speak b b Osor lib. 4. some have a stone hang about their neck as big as a egg with certain line draw through the middle thereof and this they worship and call it tambarane they keep every Friday holiday the kingdom of Orissa have on the sea-coast 350. mile betwixt the rich kingdom of Bengala and Bisnagar poor of port and traffic Fredrick write that before the king of Patane have conquer Orissa there be great trade for oil of Zerzeline Lacca long pepper ginger Mirabolan and cloth make of herb which grow with a bowl as big as a orange yield silk the country be so safe that a man may have travel with his gold in his hand the king be a gentile and reside in the city Catecha six day journey within land the king of Patane be soon after subdue by the mogul the inhabitant except a few moor be gentile little or nothing that I can learn differ in rite from their neighbour of which you have hear some c c summario di pop. Orient. ascribe to the city Orissa as the name so the principality of the other city of this kingdom in these part be the city of saint Thomas or Malepur where they say saint Thomas after he have preach the gospel to the indian be martyr and burn the legend which some report of his death be too tedious to recite and as little likelihood of truth be in that long tale of the miraculous crucifix here find relate by d d Osorius lib. 3. Osorius who likewise declare the rite of those saint Thomas-Christian of their chaldean-pope cardinal patriarch and bishop of which in a another place we shall more fit speak on the first day of july saint Thomas holiday be celebrate as well by the pagan as christian and his sepulchre be have in devout estimation both of the moor gentile and christian each e e od. Barbosa pretend the right of his own religion to the church where this saint lie inter to which the indian christian go on pilgrimage carry with they a little of that earth for a great relic a Moor have the keep of the church which be build after our fashion and beg of the comer for maintenance of it and of a light continual burn therein the portugal f f Linschoten now inhabit this town almost desolate the jesuit also have here a residence the church door by the superstition of some be almost cut in piece and carry away to set in gold and silver and to wear about their neck as a holy relic the portugal herein be exceed vain and attribute hereunto many miracle verify that proverb which the spaniard use affirm the portugal to be g g few fool devout one send Linschoten a whole bead-roll or pair of bead thereof the bringer affirm that those bead have calm a tempest miraculous by the way the inhabitant in this respect have drive their Church-door full of nail but saint Thomas bone be now remove to goa those door be of such renown holiness because they be make of that wood which saint Thomas draw with his girdle out of the haven which it choke and can not before this miracle by any mean be remove one thing I think not to omit that there be h h Linschot c. 15 whole village and kindred of people in other thing like to other man but be bear with one of their leg and one foot from the knee downward as thick as a elephant leg which the common people imagine to be a curse by divine justice inflict upon the whole generation for that their progenitor murder saint Thomas Linschoten say he have see and speak with they and can learn no other cause thereof it be to they a deformity but no let or impediment otherwise p. Floris the governor of Musulipatan be of Mahomet posterity have agree for custom to take four and exact twelve offer the english there diverse wrong here the gentile have in those part a feast when the new moon come upon Monday and then both sex wash themselves in the sea as a matter of much indulgence for their sin and then after much indignity the capemerchant Floris perform a worthy exploit deserve still to flourish though he be dead the governor son be set over the custom and at the customhouse guard with his soldier novemb. 24. an. 1614 Floris enter alone as it be for business and as he have plot a few english follow by diverse way which seize on the weapon of the guard at the customhouse door and Floris lay hold of the governor son Wencatadra by name which be sudden convey into their boat three thousand people present run to the shore but be under their ship protection they both secure themselves and for redemption of his son force the father to pay all debt by he detain with satisfaction for wrong offer yet such be his superstition that he almost first starve a shipboard rather than he will eat or drink with the english thus from the four and twenty of November till the thirty he keep a strict Brahmin fast the english pity his misery and willing therefore to take pledge in his room but after that week of clean Lent without eat or drink he be redeem the debt be pay by his father and hence let the reader judge of bodily exercise and without true faith how little it avail in Narsapur Peta a place not far hence where they careen the globe happen in August that year such overflow of water that many thousand of man and cattle be drown town field of Rice and Salt-hill overflow four thousand house wash away and two stone bridge over the river one of nineteen the other of fifteen arch comparable to Rochester bridge stand three fathom above water many portugal also live in the part of Bengala adjoin like wildman and jaric speak of 1200. which thus observe not christianity and therefore may be reckon among these heathen and thus have we finish our perambulation of the continent of Asia some perhaps will marvel why I have not handle the muscovite and russian in this asian discourse to who I answer that of the tartarian subject to the Muscovite I have already speak and the rest of the muscovite dominion especial the most populous civil wealthy yea the imperial city itself by most map be ascribe to Europe that I speak not of the uncertainty of that trouble estate now these many year whereof I will have more certain and settle relation to bestow on our reader which I hope with God help in our european discovery shall be perform now let we ship ourselves over for we be not skilful of hanimant leap unto the island have first feast you with the fruit and other rarity of nature in India chap. 12 of the creature plant fruit and drug in India @. i. of their beast and live creature of the elephant and rhinoceros be already speak and of diverse other of their beast the elephant be a a vid. Arist. and Aelian hist animal plin. lib. 8. Gesner etc. of great use both for war and peace when the keeper employ he in any burden he get first on his neck and put his foot under the beast ear have a hook in his hand which he stick above between his ear b b so Linschot c. 46. but Arist. hist an. l. 2. place they within his body near the reins where he say I think it a error his stone lie they bind the burden with a rope which at his keeper bid he take in his mouth and wind it about his tooth and so draw the pack after he the elephant be say to keep themselves chaste to one female which be think to bring forth in a year and half or as Aristotle affirm two year William clerk which serve the mogul diverse year in his war say that he have see in one army twenty thousand elephant whereof four thousand for war the rest female for burden young etc. in the engender the female lie on her back some say if any shall be witness of that act the elephant will seek to kill they their run mad once a year be in their season of lust nor do they grow mad till they grow to a certain age and those male the wild one keep in herd or company all of one male breed keep together and sometime perhaps more for Andrew battle live nine month in the wood of Africa have see he say in a hear hundred of they they bear say clerk but three man one before to guide another behind to make they go the three in the midst for fight to which end they have four piece in a kind of tower on their back c c Christ Acosta in fine Linschot lib. 1. cap. 46 Thomas Lopez and c christophorus acosta Linschoten and other modern author as also Aristotle Pliny Aelian and other of the ancient relate strange report of the elephant for the reader delight I will mention some a elephant be weary haste home his keeper after much entreaty not prevail tell he it be for the king of Portugal service which he will have he do the beast answer ho which in the malabar language signify I will I will as acosta interpret fulfil his request the same elephant want his meat his master say it be because his kettle wherein he use to boil it be break and therefore will he to carry it to the tinker which he do and bring it again but ill mend whereupon he be send again and the tinker to cry he amend it worse the elephant carry it to the river which run by to see if it will hold water and find it to run come back with great noise and anger the tinker entreat pardon and at the three time do it well which yet the elephant will not believe till by trial he see it hold water and then show it to the stander by that it will hold carry it home a soldier hurl a Coco shell at a elephant which because he can not then repay it put the shell in his mouth and a few day after see he in the street at cochin he burl the same out of his mouth at the soldier again another soldier injure the keeper of a elephant which will have revenge the wrong but be forbid by his say keeper but after espy the soldier when his keeper be absent he take he up in his trunk and duck he diverse time in the water and then set he down where he have take he up they be very ambitious one be upbraid of laziness by his keeper when as his burden be to heavy for he to draw and therefore they have bring another elephant to help he disdain a companion thrust he away and draw he dead in the place another in like case fall on his foreleg and weep at his keeper chide and although he admit a companion till the great difficulty be overcome yet feel it then in his own power to draw he put away the other elephant with his head and tooth to recover his credit Plutarch tell of one which learn his theatrical gesture practise they alone by moonlight another which reveal his keeper hard usage to his master with other like story Pliny report thing more incredible of the admirable capacity gratitude and other quality of this beast be tedious to recite a ample testimony hereof be the example of the king of avarice his elephant before mention Plutarch Pliny and Aelian add also religion d d plut. an. in wash himself adore the sun lift up his trunk into the air but this be rather the relater superstition as that which also follow in Plutarch of jove offence with Antiochus for offer four elephant in sacrifice in expiation whereof he make four other of brass Galuanus in his discovery mention a small vermin in sian which cleave fast to the trunk of the elephant and suck out his blood and life his scull be so hard that it can be pierce with a hand-gun he add that in his liver be say to be the likeness of man and woman and he which have one of they about he be safe from wound by iron perhaps it be the cabal a beast who bone do so prevail in Nahodabegua that no wound so long as his chain be on can bring any blood from he as be before observe in our relation of malaca the mighty elephant which ever I read of by many degree if not some degree beyond truth be that which Eleazar be say to kill which exceed his fellow and yet each of they bare say the story two and thirty fight man with their furniture in wooden castle beside the keeper whereas Pliny and Aelian e e Ael an. lib. 13. c. 9 and clerk speak but of three and other modern observer but of five or six in those tower gird for fight to the indian and therefore the best elephant of the rhinoceros be speak before the best be in Bengala it be less and low than the elephant snout like a hog with a horn therein whence he have this name his skin seem as it be arm it be enemy to the elephant as for the unicorn we have before observe that none have be see these hundred year last pass by testimony of any probable author for web which say he see of they in Prester john court be a mere fabler and casper Swenckfield f f de quadrup a physician testify of the common unicorn horn that it be inferior to heart horn in efficacy against poison and therefore not likely to be it I can be of opinion that the horn in Venice and other place keep as jewel be of the sea unicorn a fish which have a horn in the forehead or nose thereof Linschoten think the rhinoceros be the only unicorn that the rhinoceros be only male and the vulture only female as Baubinus show many author conceit be not only absurd but impious g g gen. 7.2 to hold of the tiger have be speak and the harm they do in Pegu Nicholas Pimenta h h rei Christ in ind. or. report that the tiger crocodile and a certain Lizzard or newt lerius see the like in Brasile as great and as cruel as the former do wonderful spoil in Bengala both by land and near the shore he tell of one strange escape of a man in a vessel near the shore assault at once by a tiger from land and by a crocodile from the water and the tiger with more swiftness and fury aim at his prey pass over he into the crocodile mouth the admirable swiftness of this beast be record by i i lib. 8. cap. 18. Pliny author agree k k Lopes scal. ex. 208. etc. that both in Asia and Africa they rather prey on black people then on the white europaean a certain negro dream that he be tear of a tiger the next night lodge in a safe place of the ship but there have his dream verify the bengalans do not fear they that superstitious they give diverse name unto they think if they shall call they by the right name they shall be devour of they God providence have yet appear in create a little beast not big than a little dog which no soon espy this beast the most dreadful of any in the world but present assault he and with bark make he run away both beast and man convey themselves into place of safety so that sometime this ravener die of hunger musk be make of a certain beast call Gudderi which live as l l m. polo lib. 2. cap. 37. polo say in Thebeth and have a kind of swell near the navel which once in the moon shed his musky blood the most m m God de Cruz. Mendoza cor. say it be a beast in China which feed only on a sweet root call Camarus he they take and bruise all to piece with blow and lay he where he soon putrefy and then cut it out skin and flesh together and tie it up like ball or cod Pantogia affirm that it be the stomach of a beast somewhat great than a cat which live in the wood in country adjoin to China however our great sweet we see be but rottenness and putrefaction there be in malacca Zion and Bengala some goat who horn be esteem excellent against poison which Linschoten affirm of his own experience as for fowl they have parrot of many kind some reckon fourteen and Noyras more please in beauty speech and other delight then the parrot but they can be bring out of that country alive of bat they have as big as hen about java and the neighbour island clusius n n clus exot. lib. 5. cap. 1. buy one of the hollander which they bring from the island of swan Ilha do Cerne new style by they Maurice island it be above a foot from the head to the tail above a foot about the wing one and twenty inch long nine broad the claw whereby it hang on the tree be two inch the pisle easy see etc. here o o cap. 4. they also find a fowl which they call of the bigness of a swan and most deform shape in p p cap. 3. Banda and other island the bird call Emia or eme be admirable it be four foot high somewhat resemble a ostrich but have three claw on the foot and the same exceed strong it have two wing rather to help it run then serviceable for flight the leg great and long they q q de bri. part 5. ind. orient say it have no tongue and that it put out the pisle backward as the camel that it devour orange and egg render the same in the ordure nothing alter it strike with the heel like a horse will swallow a apple whole as big as one fist yea it swallow down burn coal without harm cornel. Gerardi and in a contrary extreme piece of ice of the bird of paradise elsewhere be show the falsehood of that opinion which conceive they to want foot whereas they go as other bird but be take the body for the most part together with the foot be cut off and they be dry in the sun be so harden and close as if nature have so form they this be testify by r r a. pigafet Holland nau. Pigafetta and the hollander and my kind friend and love neighbour master Henry colthirst have have of they whole of this clusius in his have a large discourse show diverse kind of they a great and less and say that John de Weely of Amsterdam sell one of they which have foot to the emperor 1605. but I will not herein be tedious of the bird and beast of India acosta Linschoten clusius beside Gesner and other can inform the studious they have crow so bold that they will come fly in at the window and take the meat out of the dish as it stand on the table before they that be set thereat and be such vexation to the buffle that they be force to stand in water up to the neck that they may be rid of they Pyrard tell of the like crow in the maldive both dreadless and numberless and of great trouble which they have there by the gnat rat mouse dormouse and pismire noisome beyond credit as also snake and shark he tell of pinguey fowl as big as pigeon which so fill the air and earth in some island that they can scarce set their foot free their egg be hatch by the sand which be white and subtle like that of a hourglass by reason of the heat they have rat which the cat dare not touch as big as young pig which undermine the foundation of house in such sort with their dig that they sometime fall to the ground there be other little red rat which smell like musk incredible be the scathe which they receive in goa by the pismire which with such huge multitude will present assail any thing that be fatty or to be eat that they be force to set their cupboard and chist wherein be their victual and apparel with a wooden cistern of water under every of their four foot and that in the middle of the room and if they forget to have water in the cistern present these ant be all over and in the twinkle of a eye say Linschoten they will consume a loaf of bread the like cistern have they for their bed and table and for the perch whereon they set their canary bird which else will be kill by pismire yea though it hang on a string from the roof of the house the poor sort which want cupboard hang their fragment in a cloth on the wall have a circle of charcoal about it with this wall to keep out this small creature and great enemy there be other ant almost a finger long and reddish which do great harm to fruit and plant great be the harm which moth and worm do in man clothes and book which can very hardly be keep from they but more hurtful be the Baratta which fly and be twice as big as a bee from which nothing almost can be keep close enough and be to be esteem as a plague among they like to the pismire and be common in all fat ware and sweet meat and when they come upon apparel they leave their stain egg behind the salamander be say s s Icones de Bry ind. or. part. 4 to be common in the i will of Madagascar a island of Africa by which they sail to India of serpent t t i. vert. l. 5. cap. 22. they have diverse kind and very venomous beside one other kind as big as a swine which be destitute of poison and hurt only by bite but the superstition of the king of Calicut multiply their serpent for he cause cottage to be set up to keep they from the rain and make it death to whosoever that shall kill a serpent or a Cow they think serpent to be heavenly spirit because they can so sudden kill man so much have that old serpent both at first and since delude man by this venomous creature there u u an. Galuano be hog with horn in the Moluccas in celebe and Mindanao be hog which beside the tooth they have in their mouth have other two grow out of their snout and as many behind their ear of a large span and a half in length of fish they have great plenty and variety they have of hayent or Tuberon which devour man especial such as fish for pearl and other bathe themselves in cistern not dare to adventure the river for they one Thomas Smith a Englishman ride before surate enter into the water have the outside of his thigh share off by one of they and though he escape from the fish yet not from death by effusion of blood Linschoten tell the like in his ship that one have his leg bite off and put his hand to the place be present deprive thereof but this be too common of fish-monster like man and like a hog some write and as monstrous be that which Maffaeus 10 10 maff. hist ind. lib. 7. tell of a whale which with the opposition of his huge body stay the course of a ship sail with eight other ship into India with so great a noise and shake as if they have fall on a rock neither can the wind which fill the sail further her course the mariner when they see two element of wind and current so strong encounter look out and see this monster with her sin embrace the side of the ship and interlace the stern with her tail apply her body to the keel which contain about y y a hundred and five dodrantes eighty foot in length they think present that some hellish fiend have be send to devour they and consult of remedy at last send out their priest in his holy vestment with cross and exorcism who like the great devil prevail with these weapon and the whale forsake they without further hurt there be z z Lins cap. 48. certain fish shell like Scalop shell find on the shore so great that two strong man with a leaver can scarce draw one of they after they they have fish within they a ship call saint Peter fall upon sand sail from cochin and split the man save themselves and of the wood of the old ship build a caravel wherein to get the continent but in the meanwhile be force to make a sconce and by good watch to defend themselves from certain crab of exceed greatness and in as great number and of such force that whosoever they get under their claw it cost he his life as two mariner of the ship tell Linschoten no less strange be that which happen to captain Saris in his way between saint Laurence and Zeilan in a dark night when they can not see half the ship length before they on a sudden they have a fiery gleam and shine light from the water so that they may thereby see to read at the first they be afraid of break ground but after find it to be nothing but certain shell fish in those water who shell yield so bright a lustre crab here with we have a sympathy with the moon and be full with her fullness in India there be a contrary antipathy for at full moon they be empty they have oyster in which the pearl be find which be fish for by ducker that dive into the water at least ten twenty or thirty fathom these man be naked and have a basket bind at their back which be at the bottom they rake full of oyster and dirt together and then rise up and put they into boat they lay they after on the land where the sun cause they to open and then they take out sometime many sometime few pearl as each oyster yield which be sometime two hundred grain and more the king have one part the soldier a second the jesuit a three and the fisher themselves the four a small recompense for so great a danger in which many man every fish time lose their life the hollander find tortoise so great that ten man may sit and dine within one of the shell @. 2 of the indian tree fruit and strange plant of the indian plant diverse have write both in their general herbal as Pena and Lobel Gerard with other herbarist and in peculiar work of this subject clusius Garcias de Orto Christopher acosta etc. some also pretend themselves nature principal secretary have find out in these and the like not only temperature learn by experience but a a Oswald Crellius signature of nature own impression fit to their several and special use in physic find out a strange harmony and likeness in the great and lesser world but leave these speculation to better leisure let we take a little view of the indian tree plant and fruit of their fruit Ananas be reckon b b Paludanus one of the best in taste like a Apricock in show a far off like a artichoke but without prickle very sweet of scent it be first bring out of the west indies hither it be as great as a melon the juice thereof be like sweet must it be so hot of nature that if a knife stick in it but half a hour when it be draw forth it will be half eat up yet moderate eat hurt not a man jacas be big than the former and grow out of the body of the tree they be of many pleasant taste but hard to digest of Mangas there be three sort they be as big as Goose-egg the first sort have stone which the second want the three be poison so deadly that yet no remedy have be find against it of the like bigness be the caion yellow of good savour full of juice like lemon at the end as apple have a stalk so this fruit have a nut like the kidney of a hare with kernel toothsome and wholesome the lambos exceed in beauty taste smell and medicinable virtue it be as big as a pear smell like a rose be ruddy and the tree be never without fruit or blossom common each branch have both ripe and unripe fruit and blossom all at once Linschoten say on the one side the tree have ripe fruit and the leave fall the other cover with leaf and flower and it bear three or four time in a year the jangomas grow on a tree like a plum-tree full of prickle and have power of bind the papaya will not grow but male and female together but of these also the carambola jambolijn and other indian fruit I leave to speak as not write a indian herbal but only mind to mention such thing which beside their country have some variety of nature worthy the observation for the rest translate by Carolus clusius Paludanus Linschoten christophorus acosta write particular of these thing and other in their general herbal may acquaint you of this sort be the indian fig tree if it may be call a tree which be not above a man height and within like to a reed without any woody substance it have loaf a fathom long and three span abroad which open and spread abroad on the top of it it yield a fruit in fashion of the cluster of grape and bear but one bunch at once contain some two hundred fig at least which be ripe they cut the whole tree down to the ground leave only the root out of which present grow another and within a month after bear fruit and so continue all the year long they be the great sustenance of the country and be of very good taste and smell and in those part man believe that Adam first transgress with this fruit but of great admiration be the c c of this beside Linschoten see with clusius note exot. l. 7. c. 2.6 tree be the most profitable tree in the world of which in the island of maldiva they make and furnish whole ship so that save the man themselves there be nothing of the ship or in the ship neither tackle merchandise or aught else but what this tree yield the tree grow high and slender the wood be of a spongy substance easy to be sow when they make vessel thereof with cord make of Cocus for this nut which be as big as a ostrich egg have two sort of husk as our walnut whereof the uppermost be hairy like hemp of which they make Ockam and cordage of the other shell they make drink cup the fruit when it be almost ripe be full of water within which by degree change into a white hard substance as it ripen the liquor be very sweet but with the ripen grow sour the liquor extract out of the tree be medicinable and if it stand one hour in the sun it be very good vinegar which be distil yield excellent aquavitae and wine of it also they make by set it in the sun sugar of the meat of the nut dry they make oil of the pith or heart of the tree be make paper for book and evidence of the leaf they make cover for their house mat tent etc. their apparel their fire and the rest of the commodity which this tree more plentiful in the indies than willow in the low country yield will be too tedious to recite they will keep the tree from bear fruit by cut away the blossom and then will hang some vessel thereat which receive from thence that liquor of which you have hear it be the canarijn live and they will climb up these tree which yet have no bough but on the top like ape this tree have also a continual succession of fruit and be never without some no less wonder do that tree d d clusius describe this tree out of the relation of plin. lib. 12. curt. l. 9 Strabo l. 5. Theophrastus lib. 4. and mention like kind if not the same out of Lopez de Castagneda lib. 7. Ouiedo lib. 6. Lopez or Pigafetta of congo etc. 1. c. 1. cause which be call or the tree of root clusius call it by Pliny authority the indian fig tree and Goropius with more confidence than reason affirm it to be the tree of Adam transgression it grow out of the ground as other tree and yield many bough which yield certain thread of the colour of gold which grow downward to the earth do there take root again make as it be new tree or a wood of tree cover by this mean the best part sometime of a mile in which the indian make gallery to walk in the fig be like the common but not so pleasant the * * Garcias ab horto lib. 2. c. 1. c. acosta c. 37. say it grow most in malabar deserve mention it grow at goa bring thither as be think from malacca the hollander see one at Achilles in Samatra in the day time and at sun-setting you shall not see a flower on it but within half a hour after it be full of flower which at the sunrising fall off the leaf shut themselves from the sun presence and the tree seem as if it be dead the flower in form and greatness be like to those of the orange-tree but sweet in acosta judgement than any flower which ever he smell the portugal have use all mean to have it grow in Europe but our sun have refuse to nourish such sullen unthankful malcontent and that you may know the indian want not their metamorphosis and legend they tell that a man name parisatico have a daughter with who the sun be in love but light forsake she he grow amorous of another whereupon this damsel slay herself and of the ash of her burn carcase come this tree Bettele e e the plant Bettele be a leaf somewhat like a bay leaf and climb like ivy and have no other fruit neither be any fruit more in use then these leaf at bed and board and in the street as they pass they chew these leaf and in their gossip or visit of their friend they be present present with they and eat they with Arecca which be a kind of indian nut. it save their tooth from disease but colour they as if they be paint with black blood when they chew it they spit out the juice and it be almost the only exercise of some which think they can not live if they shall abstain one day from it they have a herb call Dutroa which cause distraction without understand any thing do in a man presence sometime it make a man sleep as if he be dead the space of four and twenty hour except his foot be wash with cold water which restore he to himself and in much quantity it kill jarric call it Doturo and say that Pinnerus the jesuite and his family at Lahor be by mean of this herb give they by a thievish servant distract and the good then carry out of their house the woman give their husband thereof and then in their sight will prostitute their body to their jewd lover and will call they Coruudos stroke they by the beard the husband sit with his eye open grin like a fool when he return to himself know nothing but that he have sleep another strange herb be call sentida or feeling f f they have the like plant in Guiana for that if any pass by it and touch it or throw sand or any thing else on it present it become as if it be wither and close the leaf so continue as long as the man stand by but so soon as he be go open fresh and fair and touch it again it wither as before the indian suppose it will procure love and restore virginity a physician among they become mad with study to find out the nature of this herb Pigafetta speak of another sort as after shall follow but the strange plant for so may we term it be that at goa the horn of beast slaughter be throw together in one place lest they shall be occasion of indignation and reproach to any the show or name of a horn be there ominous these horn thus cast forth after a certain time take root and the root grow two or three span in length Galuano g g Discon Galu tell of a tree in Mindanao the one half whereof which stand towards the east be a good remedy against poison the western half yield the strong poison in the World there be a stone on which whosoever sit shall be break in his body the tree of japan which thrive best with that which kill other tree and in a natural antipathy to nature be kill with that moisture which quicken other and that in Ciumbubon who leaf be say to have foot and to go in their due place shall be mention but of all the most wonderful be that plant of Sumbrero a island not far from Nicubar and sumatra grow on the sand by the sea side which some english then be there with sir james Lancaster offer to pull up shrink itself into the ground as have sensitive life and motion neither without great force will it be bring forth the cause they find that the root be a great worm which as the plant grow into a great tree die by degree or exchange that sensitive into a vegetative life the first growth be out of the mouth of the worm be then but a small twig full of green leaf as big as a bay leaf the worm in process of the growth turn into this tall grow tree the reader may smile as at Virgil polydorus or some of Ovid metamorphosis think this incredible but yet behold another change they pluck up some of these resist plant to bring they home for rarity as they do many strip off the leaf and bark and thereby I know not with what natural horror they after find that as it dry it die beneath the name of death into a hard stone like white coral thus have you a threefold retrograde in one thing Viues lib. 1. from that degree of life which have local motion to a Stirpaniman or (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) a sensitive plant which move itself but not out of the same place as oyster and the like from thence in a second remove to a mere plant or tree and in a three degree to a tropidity and stony lifelesseness nor do thou deride this as mostrous incredible impossible the retrograde of man I leave the certainty thereof to the relator but examine if in thyself thou find not a great and more manifold retrograde in this story of creature what fit to be observe then man for who the rest be create in thyself degenerate from that man which God create after his own image and become the diminutive of himself nay less than that not homulus but Mulus as the horse and mule that have no understanding a mule that be a profitable beast but of man not the cretan alone that of epimenides and Paul be true tit. 1.12 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) they be evil beast yea evil wild beast yea evil wild and venomous the word will bear it nay saint Paul proceed in further degrade this proud man (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) belly the worst part of the worst beast all belly like Spider nay worse for their belly work net to keep they but these be slow belly idle nay idol-belly slow except in devour and therein the glutton God even till like oyster we have but sense for sensuality for touch and taste this Dux saxon not scarce suffer we to move from the table and that also a great and big prince in our day have have cut with a great inlet for his great belly the belly as well a shape deity as the of jupiter Ammon but alas the belly and what nature have place beneath it have place we beneath that sensitive life which the belly have and with this plant here mention we be worm not man plant not worm be populus our corruption from our first state have make the whole people of mankind as a moorish ill plant plant yea in the greek it have a more fit name * * (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) of another greek word (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) a stone Durumgenus virg. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) our retrograde be into a hard stone so vain a thing be man @. 3 of spice and drug pepper whereof there be diverse sort grow at the foot of Arecca or some other tree on which it climb as a betele or i i Hieron da s. Stephano ivy grow in bunch like grape half a span long and as big as one finger green like ivy when it be gather and in five or six day dry in the sun become black cinnamon k k Garcias ab horto l. 1. c. 15. be the inner bark of a tree as big as a olive with leaf like bayleave and fruit like a olive the dry of the bark make it roll together within three year after the tree yield another bark as before in Seylon be the best they of Ormuz call it Darchina that be wood of China and sell it at Alexandria call it l l sina ginger m m ginger grow like young reed or Gladiolus with a root like a lily it be plentiful in malabar clove n n clove grow in the molucco on tree like bay-tree yield blossom first white then green at which time they yield the pleasant smell in the world and last of all red and hard which be the clove they be so hot of nature that if a pail or tub of water shall stand in the chamber when they cleanse they or any vessel of wine or other moisture in two day the clove will suck it out and dry it the same nature be of the unspunne silk of China the nutmeg-tree o o nutmeg be like a peach or peartree and grow most in Banda and java the fruit be like a peach the inner part whereof be the nutmeg which be cover and interlace with the Mace or flower and over that be the fruit like a peach as I have see they conserve when the fruit be ripe the first and outermost part open as it be with our walnut than the mace flourish in a fair red colour which in the ripen become yellow be of three sort the indian use it in their meat and common chew it in their mouth as be good against a stink breath and evil humour in the head it be much like to Panike s s lac. lac be a strange drug make by certain wing pismire of the gum of tree which they suck up and then make the lac round about the branch as the bee make honey and wax the raw lac be of a dark red colour but be refine they make it of all colour and therewith varnish their bed table and use it for other ornament and for hard wax so say Paludanus they beat the lac to powder and so mix all manner of colour upon it as they listen and make thereof such roll as be here sell for hard wax indigo or Annil grow on small bush like Gooseberry bush and bear a seed like a cabbage as be before observe cut up and after long rot tread by ox and ground Linschoten say it be sow as other herb in due time pull and dry and then make wet and beat and then dry again and prepare first it be green and after blue of q q sanders sanders there be three sort white yellow and red in Tymor a island by java be whole wood of sanders the tree be like nut-tree with a fruit like a cherry but unprofitable only the wood which be the Sanders be esteem Snakewood r r Snakewood grow in Seylon and be good against the sting of snake and other poison a medicine learn of the beast quit which be in continual enmity with snake herewith heal their bite the tree of s s Calamba aloe be like olive tree but somewhat great the innermost part of the wood be best with black and brown vein and yield a oily moisture it be sell in weight against silver and Gold there be another t t Pala aquilla kind wherewith they burn their dead brahmin the best which they call Calamba grow in Malacea and be use much for bead and crucifix Monfart say the portugal pay a hundred crown a pound for it to make their bead u u opium opium be the juice of the head of black poppy be cut a dangerous drug use much in Asia and Africa which make they go as if they be half asleep they suppose I know not what conjunction and efficacy both of Mars and Venus therein but be once use must daily be continue on pain of death which some escape in acosta 10 10 accost and Arom company by the help of wine Bangue be another receipt of like use especial with slave and soldier make they drink merry and so to forget then labour Civet civet. or Algalia be the sweat of the civet cat and grow in the outermost part of the cod and be hot and moist benjoin benjoin be a kind of gum like frankinscence and myrrh but more esteem it grow in the kingdom of siam java sumatra and malacca the tree be high full of branch with leaf like those of the lemon tree they cut the tree and from those slit proceed this gum which be best when the tree be young and be call benjoin of the sweet smell the old tree yield white the young black of frankincense we have speak in Arabia it be also a gum the best on those tree that grow on hill and stony place myrrh be a gum also bring out of Arabia foelix and the abexine coast manna manna be bring from the usbek country behind Persia and reckon to Tartaria and be a dew that fall on certain tree and hang on the leaf like ice on the Tyles of house it be gather and keep in glass vial and much use in India Camphora Camphora be the gum of certain tree in borneo and China as great as nut-tree sweat out from the midst of the same Tamarind Tamarind grow on a tree as great as a plum-tree with leaf like myrtle the flower white like orange flower the leaf of the tree turn always towards the sun and when it go down they shut together and cover the husk the fruit be about a finger long crooked with shell wherein be kernel as big as a bean cover about with that which they call the Tamarind of Mirobolanes Mirobolanes be five sort almost like plum Spiconard Spiconard be sow and grow on plant about two or three span high like corn with great vein wherein the Spiconard grow cubebus grow like pepper or ivy against a tree the leaf like pepper leave and the husk but every grain have a stalk of itself but if I shall here recite the indian leaf the Galanga can fistula with the rest I shall tire the reader with a apothecary bill these as the rare or chief I have choose so as it be to recreate our reader with a walk and hour view in this indian garden be before full cloy with our tedious narration of their superstition I may add here a discourse of gem as diamond ruby emerald etc. but it become not my poverty to talk so much of jewel Monfart tell that the king of Biznega have a rock of diamond in which he keep fifteen thousand man at work reserve all the great to himself so that none be sell but small except by stealth he say he see one with the great mogul as big as a hen egg purloin from this king and cost the other little less than a million it weigh four score and eighteen mangelin every Mangelin five grain the y y bezar-stone bezar-stone be likewise take out of the maw of a persian or indian goat which the persian call Pazar and in the country of pan by malacca they find within the gall of a hog a stone of great force against poison and other disease than that pazar-stone it be think that these stone do proceed of the pasture whereon these beast feed the amber be find as well in other place as in India z z Garcias ab horto in clus Exot. l. b. 7. c. 1. vid. seal ex. 104. Garcias think it to be the nature of the soil as chalk bolearmenike etc. and not the seed of the whale or issue from some fountain in the sea as other hold clusius tell a probable opinion of d. marel that it be a excrement gather in the whale belly but of these and of innumerable other both sensitive and vegetable creature the reader in our pilgrim or voyage now publish may observe from other eye much more than here be place to express chap. 13 a general discourse of the sea and of the sea in and about Asia @. i. of the true place form greatness and depth of the sea after our long perambulation of the asian continent the sea environ do solicit our next endeavour that the reader may there refresh his weary sense with a new succession of nature variety and human vanity and first while our bark be make ready to ship we over to some of those island let we as it be on the shore take view of this so strong so weak so constant and so unconstant watery element that the earth and sea make one globe we have elsewhere show in the history of their creation in which the earth be as it seem at the first form of it more perfect spherical and whole cover with water by the power of that almighty decree and word let the water be gather into one place that the dry land may appear both the water as * * Augustine Aquinas etc. some gather be more condensate which before be more subtle and therefore occupy more room and the earth a a Damas. lib 2. Orth. fit c. 10Vid clavium in I.S.B. and brerewood inquiry c. 13. be in some place lift up in other depress with deep furrow and trench to make room and convenient receptacle for the sea and withal fit matter yield for the elevation both of mountain above the ordinary height of the earth and of the earth and continent also in the high place whence the great river derive their original in comparison of the Lowes and maritime part where they empty themselves into the sea this be the proper seat of the element or water call b b Isid. Orig. l. 13. c. 12. of the equal and plain face and superficies thereof or as Lactantius with a further fetch observe because hence all thing be breed and nourish now because water be either without motion as in lake or of a uniform motion as in river or diverse as in the sea the heathen c c Aesch Scholiastes ascribe a trident or threefold sceptre to Neptune their suppose sea-god that the earth and sea have one and the same centre both of gravity and greatness appear by this that the part of the earth and water fall from a high place without other impediment have the same direct descent a piece of earth also fall perpendicular into the water with equal and right angle and that the water natural incline to a roundness appear in the small drop thereof which gather themselves into that form and by the easy discern thing on shore from the top then from the hatch of the ship in the^r d d vid. i. de Sac. Bosc clau. Murulam etc. sea likewise by the elevation or depression of the pole and star no less in sail than land-travel to the north or south also in prevent or lengthen the sun light by sail east or west as before have be observe in the spaniard and portugal meet at the philippina and differ a whole day in their reckon the portugal lose by meet the sun in their eastern course that which the spaniard get by follow he in a western yea even in one day sail this may be manifest record cast l. 4 as record instance in a ship sail west from Island in one of their day of twenty hour get half a hour and in the next day return with like swiftness lose as much of the sun yea in river of very long course beside that descent before mention from high to low passage some e e Eras Reinholt vid. keck problem and Dane. tract 3. Pbys Arist. de cael. l. 2 c 14. observe a kind of roundness or circular rise in compass the globe which else must need be exceed difform in the river of Nilus amazon and other which run near a eight part thereof the sea be great and wide say f f psal. 104.25 and 26. the psalmist and at first cover the whole earth like a garment till for man use g g gen. 1.9 the dry land appear which for man abuse be again in the day of Noah cover and have not God h h psal. 104 9 set the sea a bound which it can pass it will so some translate it return to cover the earth for ever it be his i i 5 22 perpetual decree who command and it be make that though the wave thereof rage yet they can prevail though they roar yet they can pass over and thus many of the ancient and late interpreter of genesis do aver that the earth be indeed low than the water as in the begin of this work be observe as if God do by a kind of miracle in nature bridle and restrain the tempestuous force of the sea to use basil word with sand the weak of all creature thus hold Aquinas Carthusianus Catharinus and other which opinion be grant how easy be it for the sea to enclose the earth in her watery mantle and again to make a conquest of the dry land have such force of her own and such re-inforcement from the air and the earth itself her own power even by order of nature and proportion of the element can but seem dreadful in which as the air exceed the water and be itself exceed of the fire so the water to some seem no less to surmount the earth as the low and least of the element and what army of exhalation do the sun daily muster in the great airy plain which will succour their mother in such a attempt beside that even the earth as it be every where compass of the sea do compass in itself so many sea lake Rivers in the uppermost face thereof as profess partaker and the inward bowel thereof have daily intelligence and continual conspiracy with the water by those secret pore and privy passage whereby it come to pass that albeit k k Eccles. 1.7 all river run to the sea yet the sea be not fill and be it possible that so many world of water shall daily and hourly flow into this watery world and that such a world of time together and yet the sea nothing increase but that as Solomon there say the river go to the place from whence they return and go that be they run into the sea and thence partly by the sun force elevate and restore in raines and other meteor partly by fill the vein of the earth with spring do both way return again in river to the sea this l l vid. Zanc. de Oper and G.B.B. rel. Arist etc. appear by the dead sea and by the caspian which receive many river without open payment thereof to the ocean and at the strait of Gibraltar the ocean common have a current in at one end and the euxine sea at the other beside abundance of other water out of Europe Asia Africa and yet be no full psal. 107.24 many indeed be the wonder of the lord in the deep and this concern the height depth and profundity thereof one of the high deep and require the profound skill to search that the water be gather on swell heap in round form compass the earth be already prove which to a vulgar capacity may seem to enforce a height of the water above some part of the earth but see that the earth and water have one centre and height be proper to be measure by distance from that centre it seem unlikely that the water shall be high than the earth or altogether equal to the height thereof in who channel and concavity it be contain and though the sea swell and lift up itself into that form which best agree to that globe which be compact of it and the earth yet be it not capable be a liquid fluible body in the great depth and wideness of such elevation as we see in high and mountainous region whereby the earth seem to exceed the due and just proportion of she own globosity and thereby no less to excel the high elevation as we may term it of the sea than the cliff and shore do those water which approach they and what need a conceit of miracle in the very ordinary constitution and conservation of nature though all nature if we regard it as a creation by supernal power be nothing else but miracle some indeed dream of I know not what proportion of the element whereby they will have the water to exceed the earth as before be say and it be true that the upper face and utter superficies of the water for aught that be know to the contrary be as great m m Scalig. say twice so great as that of the earth but if we compare the depth of the water with the diameter of the earth we shall find that in most place the one be not so many fathom as the other be yea whoever sound at such depth and whereas the diameter of the earth be by some reckon 8/11. and by some more who ever cast line and lead into the sea to measure a thousand fathom yea in n n scal. Exerc. 38 scaliger opinion the earth be so much great than the water that if the mountain be cast down into these watery receptacle and the earth bring into a perfect roundness there will no place in it be leave for the water record o o rec. castle l. 4 record not so much as he yet hold the earth almost ten thousand time as great as the sea and all other water and if we receive the jewish tradition mention by our apocrypha p p 4. esdr 6 42 and 47. esdras this may be more probable for he say that even in the utter face of the globe the water be gather into a seven part and six part of the earth keep dry some imagine q q t. lid. or. font a bottomless depth pass quite through the earth through which the moon be in the other hemisphere cause the heighten of the tide no less than when she be present in we which give no small help also in their conceit in the general deluge which if it be true add a great proportion to the sea than we have observe but because little reason and no experience can be show for this assertion I will not insist in refutation but that deluge be cause by break up the fountain below and violent storm from above confute that opinion that the sea shall be high than the earth which then may have effect the flood without either of those former cause but why do I drown my innocent reader with myself in these depth of the sea which some measure by the height of hill other r r Brerewood Enquir c. 13. resemble those extraordinary land-height to extraordinary whirlpool but see the sea be tenant to the earth which have as before we have say remove itself in some sort to make way and room for it the more ordinary height and elevation of the one may seem to answer the more ordinary depth and descend of the other these bottom of the sea have also their diversify shape and form as it be of hillock mountain valley with the s s the bank towards new-found land be as a large hilly region of the sea see l. 8. c. 4. acclivity and declivity of place as in the shelf shallow rock island appear and as the land be not only high than the sea at the shore so be it apparent that in remote place from the sea the land do beside the exorbitant swell of mountain in the ordinary level exceed the height of Maritine region which thence receive those river which require descent all the way of their passage which in some be one thousand in some two thousand mile and therefore be it likely also that the sea answer in like proportion it be observe to grow shallow near the shore and different deep in the far recess of the main @. 2 of the saltness and motion of the sea the saltness of the sea some ascribe * * patric pancos l. 24. coelum and salse vid. Keckerman prob. Naut scal. Exerc. 77. Du Bartas 3 day arr. mont. nat. obs lid. Disque bot. Relat. mar. to the first creation some to the sweat of the earth roast with the sun some to the saltness of the earth especial in mineral of that nature some to adust vapour parley let fall on the sea partly raise from it to the brink and face thereof some to the motion of the sea some to under-earth or under-sea a a lid. disq fire of bituminous nature cause both this saltness and the motion also of the sea and some to the work of the sun which draw out the pure and fine part leave the grosser and baser behind as in this little world of our body the pure part of our nourishment be employ in and on the body the urine and other excrement remain do detain a saltness I will not determine this question as neither that of the ebb and flow of the sea which some * * appolonius phil. lib. 5. say be the breath of the world some the fire aforesaid boil in and under the water some the water in hole of the earth force out by spirit some the meeting of the east and west ocean some ascribe it to the b b Silius etc. moon natural draw water as the loadstone iron some to the variable light of the moon a variable light they all give we they that send we to God and his decree in nature have say what be the true cause but not how it be by natural mean effect certain it be that the ocean and the moon be companion in their motion uncertain whether the ocean have a natural power in itself or from the moon so to move which be make so much the more doubtful by reason that they follow not the moon in all place of the word alike Vertomanum write that in Cambaia the tide be contrary to the course they hold in these part for they increase not with the full but with the wane of the moon and so the sea-crab do likewise in the island of Socotora don John of c c don John of Cast m.s. Castro observe many day and find contrary both to the indian and our wont that when the moon rise it be high sea and as the moon ascend the tide descend and ebb be dead-low water when the moon be in the meridian and this operation he find continual with we also our high Tides be two day after and not at the very full and Change about Vaygats Stephen Borrough find it to flow by fit very uncertain Scaliger d d Exer. 52. say that the full-moon at Calicut cause the increase of the water and at the mouth of Indus not far thence in the same sea the new-moon but what exceed difference of the tide do we find in the down and other place on our own coast both for time and quantity that at once in the compass of one sight there shall be both flood ebb and these differ in degree and that on some place of our coast it shall rise one fathom in some two in the Thames three at or near Bristol ten and on some part of the french coast near saint malos fifteen whereas our shore over against it rise but two the like difference may be observe between the tyrrhene sea and that on the opposite coast of Barbary the one swell the other not at all heighten in the east and west indies I can instance the like not mention those current which hinder all course of tide further the flood continue in some place seven hour in some four in most six in the strait of Sunda some have observe that it flow twelve hour and ebb twelve in e e some say Aristotle drown himself hear for not find out this scorer Negropont it be say to ebb and flow seven time a day and patritius affirm that himself observe at Ausser in liburnia in a hand-made strait of sea-water the same to happen twenty time in a day again we see these tide-motion differ according to their daily weekly monthly and as some add half yearly and yearly alteration all which variety can be attribute to one simple cause neither to any universal whether sun moon or native heat of the sea or any the like although we must needs acknowledge which we can know one principal cause hinder or alter by manifold accident and therefore produce effect thus diversify other motion also may be observe in the sea as that namely which be continual and if we call the tide the breathe this may be term the pulse of the sea whereby the water always wash the shore fall on and off cover and present uncover the foot of such as stand by which have force to expel all Heterogenean or differ nature as drown carcase wrack and the like this as that of the tide patritius Peucorus lydiate and other attribute to a kind of boil which as in a vessel of seethe water cause it thus to rise and fall and to expel the dross and thing contrary but the heat which cause this boil one ascribe to the sun another to fire in the sea another to the natural heat of the sea engender spirit and cause rarefaction and motion patritius do not only aver this but that the sea be as a sublunary planet move itself and move by the superior body to effect the generation of thing for which cause f f Orp he Orpheus call the ocean father of god man and other thing the saltness thereof be in his opinion the instrument of this motion and the near inward and most proper cause of marine move as in the two mexican g g Cortes lakes appear the one whereof be salt and ebb and flow which the other be fresh do not this saltness say h h Vid. pat. Pancos. 27 28 29 30. he with great heat engender more spirit in moisture the cause of great tide he think to be the shallowness and narrow shore the force of the ocean thrust the same most forward where it find interruption and indraught the certainty of the motion he ascribe according to his philosophy to the soul of the world move this as other planet for my censure it shall be rather on myself then these opinion where silence rather than boldness become i i prou. 17. ult. even a fool while he hold his peace be account wise and to borrow the word of a subtle disputer k k scal. 52. psal. 107. let this also be arrange among the wonder of the lord in the deep rather to be admire then comprehend I may here speak of other sea-motion either particular or accidental as that in the open sea between the Tropic l l accost hist ind. uncertain whether it may be term a easterly wind or some impetuous violence cause by the superior motion which draw together with they the inferior element likewise those current in diverse coast as at Madagascar on the african and in the great bay on the american shore from other accident arise other motion cause by the wind in the air which somewhere have their set season by whirlpool or rather contrary current meet in the sea by cape indraught river island of the land by the conception and travel throw in the water in bring forth some imminent tempest and the like I may speak of strange current in many sea upon the coast of Africa near to saint Laurence and John de noua and Mayella captain Saris have relate that the current detain he a long time even almost to desperation of get out and one of they so dreadful that it make a noise like that at London bridge with a fearful ripple of the water the more the further from land and there where they found a hundred fathom depth as it be proclaim open defiance to wind and sail notwithstanding their puff threat and most swell look in four and twenty hour carry they a whole degree and nine minute from the course which under full sail with the wind assistance they intend @. 3 of the original of fountain and other commodity of the sea I may add touch the original of fountain which both scripture and reason find no other store sufficient derive from the sea how they be from thence convey by secret channel and concavity under the earth and by what workman of nature thus wrought into new fresh water scaliger experiment to prove the sea-water at the bottom fresh ar. mont. nat. obs pag. 210. scal. ex. 46. by bottle fill there by cunning diverse or otherwise be by patritius his experience as he say find false and this freshness of the spring not withstand their salt original from the sea may rather be ascribe to percolation and strain through the narrow spongy passage of the earth which make they leave behind as a exact toll their colour thickness and saltness now how it shall come to pass that they shall spring out of the earth be high than the sea yea out of the high mountain have exercise the wit of philosopher some ascribe it to a suck quality of the thirsty or spongy earth some to the weight of the earth press and force the water upward some to the motion of the sea continual as in a pump thrust forward the water which expel the weak air and follow it till it find a outlet whereof both by the continual protrusion of the sea and for avoid a vacuum or emptiness which nature abhor it hold continual possession some find out other cause and master Ladyate in a treatise of the original of spring attribute the same to under-earth fire which no less by a natural distillation work these water under the earth into this freshness and other quality than the sun and heavenly fire do by exhalation above yea such be his speculation of these hide fire that he make they the cause of wind earthquake mineral gem fertility and sterility of the earth and of the saltness and motion as be before say of the sea but loath be I to burn or drown my reader in these fiery and watery dispute let we from these speculation retire ourselves to the experimental profit and commodity which this element yield concern the commodity a a with ambr. and Basil in hexaem thod serm. 2. provide etc. of the sea as the world general so the little model of the world the island whereof this of great Britain be just acknowledge the most excellent of the world sometime account another world have great cause to celebrate and acknowledge the same it be a wall of defence about our shore great purveyor of the world commodity to our use conveyor of the surquedry and excess of river by traffic of nation which itself sever a open field for pastime of peace a Pitch field in time of war disdain single personal combat and only receive whole city and castle encompass with wall of wood which it set together with deadly hatred and dreadful force of the element the fiery thunder airy blast watery billow rock shelf and bottom of the earth all conspire to build here a house for death which by fight or flight on land be more easy avoid and how do it scorn the invincible title of the spanish fleet in 88 and effect thus much on our behalf against they the b b vid. ambr. hex. l. 3. c. 5. Isid. Orig. lib. 13. sea yield fish for diet pearl and other jewel for ornament variety of creature for use and admiration refuge to the distress compendious way to the passenger and portage to the merchant custom to the prince spring to the earth cloud to the sky matter of contemplation to the mind of action to the body once it yield all part of the world to each part and make the world as this treatise in part show know to itself superstition have have her sea-prophet which have find out other sea-profit as for the purge of sin and the roman divine cause c c jul. Obseq hermaphrodite to be carry to the sea for expiation the persian magi think it pollution to spit or do other natural necessity therein but of these in diverse place @. 4 of the variety of sea and of the caspian and euxine the sea be common divide into the mediterranean and ocean and under that midland argol be contain all the sea and gulf that be seat within the land as the arabian persian baltike Bengalan and especial such as the sea of Sodom and the caspian which have no apparent commerce with the ocean but principal be that sea call mediterranean which enter at the strait of Gibraltar be both large than any of the rest contain above ten thousand mile in circuit and abut not on one only but on all the part of the elder world wash indifferent the shore of Asia Africa and Europe the sea bear also the name of the country city hill Rivers and land by which they pass or of some other accident there happen as the atlantike or German ocean the adriatic the red white or black sea the sea of lady the euxine by a contrary appellation for their in hospitality but to contract our speech unto Asia we find the sea prodigal of his best thing and of himself unto it clasp with a lovely embrace all this asian continent save where a little neck of land divide it from Africa and no great space together with Tanais from Europe yea as not herewith satisfy his love to this asian nymph in many place he insivate himself within the land by gulf or bay twine his love arm about some whole country other where as it be by hostile undermine he make sea far from the sea and have yield so many island as rather may seem admirable then credible of those sea banish from community and society with the ocean be that sea of Sodom large describe in our first book many other lake also as of Kitaya Van Chiamay dangu Guian and the like as great or much great do no less deserve the name of sea but the most eminent of all the rest be the caspian d d vid. ortel Scalig. ex. 51. or hyrcan sea call in these day diverse of the place thereon situate as the sea of Bachu etc. the moor call it as they do also the arabian gulf Bohar Corsun that be the sea enclose it have be diverse time sail on and over by man of our nation pass that way into Tartary ant. lenk Hak. to. 1. Media and Persia the first of who be master Anthony jenkinson 1558. who affirm that this sea be in length about two hundred league and in breadth a hundred and fifty without any issue to other sea the east part join with the turkeman tartar the west with the chyrcass and Caucasus the north with the nagay tartar and Volga which spring out of a lake near Novogrode run two thousand mile and there with seventy mouth fall into this sea the south have Media and Persia in many place it have fresh water in other brackish in other salt as our ocean if we hold the sea natural or by self-motion or by exhalation salt then the freshness may be attribute to the abundance of fresh river which all come run with tribute of their best wealth to this seem close-fisted miser which for aught the world can see of his good work communicate with no other sea any part of that abundance which the river Volga Yaic Yem Cyrus Arash Ardok oxus Chesel and other many bring into his coffer and yet be this usurer never the rich nature itself hold a close conspiracy to dispossess he of his needless treasure yea the river themselves his chief factor and broker in the winter time grow cold in allegiance and freeze in respect wont duty or else be detain by a great commander the general of winter force frost who then close and lock up both they and he in icy prison till the sun take a near view of this encroach usurper by the multitude of his arrow and dart chase he out of the field and free this sea and Rivers from their cold fare and close dungeon wherewith ice their hard gaoler have entertain they ch. bur. ap. Hak. and in a m. s. which I have see Christopher Burrough relate that from the middle of November till the midst of march they find this freeze charity of the caspian to their cost be force with great peril and pain to travel many day on the ice and leave their ship in the sea which there be cut in piece with violence of the frost and yet be Astracan on the northern shore where Volga and the caspian hold their first conference in six and forty degree and nine minute from whence this sea extend beyond the forty degree southwards the freshness of the river make it thus subject to frost which have no power over the salt water of the ocean as by most learned e e Merula Cos. l. 3. c. 5. stuck in ar. etc. man be hold which appear in the Baltic and euxine sea which hold not so full commerce with the ocean and fill with fresh river be make a easy prey to that icy tyrant who force the more open sea with their salt defence easy withstand and although from the mouth of river bay and shore he bring whole island of ice into those watery plain yet even unto the pole so far as have be discover the sea with open mouth proclaim defiance and enjoy his elementary freedom the euxine sea which be divide from the caspian by a hundred league of land have this reason of the freeze ascribe by disarius in f f macrob. sat. l. 7. c. 12. marcellinus come an. 401. Macrobius that the fresh water which flow from so many river be light than those on the sea swim on the top and be subject to frost which the sea-water be not and this force of the fresh water be common to most great river as plata Zaire and other and in the euxine it be observe of Phasis by g g ar. periplus pont. eux arrianus the thaw of those frost be the cause of those fog and mist which so much infest these sea and be so great a hindrance in all northern discovery and hence in likelihood come the proverb of cimmerian darkness rather than from that hansem which Haithon mention a place of a hundred mile compass with a wall of pitchy darkness whence sometime the crow of cock and like sound be hear but none dare enter or other like fabulous h h vid. scal. ex. 259. conceit of the poet from these dark mist the euxine be call also mare Maurum or the black sea it be in old time call the sarmatian cimmerian taurican caucasean phasian pontic and what other title people hill river or special occurrent fix on it of the description thereof arrianus have write a whole treatise and Stuckius have large comment thereon and i i in parergo see also gyllius marcianus ovid. de Ponto ammianus etc. Ortelius have bestow good pain in that argument to who I refer the reader arrianus be employ in this discovery by Adrian the emperor begin at Trapezond where he set up adrian image and where before that be a temple dedicate to Mercury and philesius his nephew he sail from thence descry and describe the coast river city about this sea in Phasis he observe the lightness of that water fresh on the top salt in the bottom where it be mix with the sea or rather slide over it they have here a law that none may carry water into Phasis and if they have any in their ship they must at the entrence of this river cast it forth otherwise fear a unlucky and dangerous navigation the water of this river he say will last uncorrupt ten year this Phasis Aeschylus call the limit of Europe and Asia at the left hand of the entrance be set the image of the phasian goddess seem by her Cymbal in her hand and lion draw she Charioa to be none other than rhea there also as a holy relic be show the anchor of the ship Argo which because it be of iron seem to our author to be counterfeit counterfeit relic especial there be the fragment of a anchor of stone which seem more likely to be that of the argonaut so much chant by the poet other monument of jason he find none but to look back to the straight or thracian Bosphorus Dous itiner gill. de Bosp Thracio l. 1. he there name the temple of jupiter Urius Dousa and gyllius report the pleasantness and fertility of these part here do jason sacrifice to the twelve god and build a temple to they apello have six temple near the strait the most ancient at chalcedon give place to none of the oracle two at Byzantium and the other near thereunto but with these and manifold other antiquity Gellius can best acquaint the more leisurely reader of all the city along this shore I can but mention heraclea where be observe the devotion of jupiter stratius his altar plin. l. 16. c. 44. and two oak plant there in his honour by Hercules this city be also make famous by the legend of Hercules descend to hell of Cerberus Acheron and the like Memnon Herac pont. of this city Memnon write a large history some part whereof do yet remain Cotta after a strait siege subdue it to the roman among other spoil seize upon the pyramidal statue of Hercules who he will have serve he in a thirteen labour exceed in sumptuousness greatness elegance near to which be his club of solid gold as be also his lion skin and his quiver many monument and offering he carry out of the temple both Memnon and Aelyan tell of Dionysius son of Clearchus king of heraclea Aelian varl l. 9 c. 13. which grow into so gross and unwonted degree of fatness that it make he unfit not for state-affair only but for necessary function of life especial in his sleep from which to awaken he this remedy be devise to thrust long needle into his flesh which while they pass through that newcome flesh and fatness be no more feel then of a stone till they come to the more natural flesh of his body when he sit in judgement he have a kind of cupboard which have the rest of his body leave his face only open to be see marcianus Heracleotes mar. Her. gr. one of this city have write a periplus or circumnavigation of these and other sea but lest I seem freeze in these cold narration or to have lose myself in these cimmerian mist I will get i out of this sea and observe the principal island adjacent to Asia for if I shall after all these discourse of the sea enter into a new of the huge whale and other variety of fish and monster inhabitant of the sea which be think to have creature resemble in some sort all those of the land both man and beast I shall grow tedious Gesner de Aquatil vid. Olaum mag. etc. and Gesner with other have do it already I shall find more due place for the strange in some other part of this history chap. 14 a brief survey of the island adjoin to Asia also some fancy of the sabbatical river and enclose jew @. i. the island from japan to the persian gulf if we shall ship ourselves for the discovery of the island in the north-east sea of Asia we be like to find cold entertainment see his navig-written by himself Hak. tom. 1. sir Hugh Willoughby with his company lose themselves in this be freeze to death Stephen Burrough after attempt and find out scarce worth the find Vaygats and noua Zembla as bad or worse have be the success of pet jackman and other both dutch and english and the russian report to Heberstein be in some thing so fabulous as of their slata Baba Sigism ab herb. and of man die every November and revive in April follow that a may well suspend his credit to the rest what balakus in his letter to mercator Hesselius in his late map of these part or any other have write will be but mean spokesman to procure any reader with we in this north-east discovery steer therefore another course and coast another way to the east and south part of Asia let we take a brief survey of that world of island in those indian sea reserve a more full description of the chief of they to the chapter follow and then proceed to a more leisurely view of the arabian and some of the mediterranean island and first in this course we be encounter with the island or a a of the island of Asia benedetto bordone and t. Porcacchi have write large treatise of this iland-subiect island rather bear the name of japan the principal whereof be three of which more afterward some mention believe it that listen near to japan certain island of amazon with which the japonite yearly have both worldly and fleshly traffic and when a ship come from japan so many woman as there be man come to the shore and leave each a pair of shoe with her mark which who so take up be her paramour these be second by the island of China which do as it be hedge and fence it in of which there be little in author worthy mention in Macao or Amacao the portugal have a colony but the chief island of China be Anian in the gulf of Cauchin-China further from the continent from japan southwards be many island call by the name of Lequio Lequio the great and the less rich in gold nigh to the same be Hermosa and next to these the philippinae so call of b b p. bentii tab. Philip the second king of Shaine by who charge and charge they be discover in the year 1564. long after that magellanus have lose his life in the discovery of these part some make this name hold some proportion to the spanish ambition call all the island philippinae which be between new Spain and the gulf of Bengala in all after their account eleven thousand whereof only thirty be subject to the Spaniard as thomas jesus have observe but of all these afterward for here we but mention they they begin their reckon at noua Guinaea where first we see Cainam the next Banda Banda which name be proper to a island so call and common also to her neighbour Rosolarguin ay rom Neyra in four degree to the south which alone in the world be c c g. bot. ben. say by some to bring forth nutmeg and Mace the man here be merchant the woman attend to husbandry the island deal moro moro. abound with rice and Sagu the pith of a tree which yield meal where d d a. Pigafetta be wild hen which sit not on their egg but bury they a good depth under the sand where the sun hatch they they have no kine but a fish of like lineament which they take in their net Gilolo Gilolo have a Mahometan prince and be a great island the people be men-eater amboyno Amboyno be the name of many island rude both in soil and people which eat their own parent when they be old David Middleton in a write discourse of one of his indian voyage mention a island among or near these of Amboyno call Bangaia the king whereof be a gentile a Hollander here obtain such sway that none dare displease he he have two house full of the daughter of the inhabitant which best like he beside many slave of both sex his life be mere epicurean he will dance and sing and be drink two day together nor will he be command by any of his countryman he be Collector or treasurer to the king of ternate in those part and send he what he can spare at Banda the hollander will not suffer the english to trade and every where else both east and west and north and south as may be instance in the particular if force or fraud by slander raise on our people can effect it they testify that gain be more precious to they then the love of our nation near to the island last mention be the Moluccae five in number other reckon more ternate Tidor Motir Macbian and Bachian famous through the world as be nature storehouse of clove their worship be direct to the sun moon and other heavenly and earthly creature the king of Tidore chief priest come aboard the consent of which ship David Middleton be chief in the Moluccas be find those admirable bird of paradise or as the portugal call they fowl of the sun the e e selebe selebe abound with gold abandon of goodness people with idolater and men-eater the island of f f Moratay Moratay be more northerly where battata-root be their bread their neighbour fare in the island of Tarrao sanguine solor and other in those island which more proper bear the Philippine title Mindanao be of very large circuit and have diverse famous city Tendaia for her excellence be by the first discoverer call the Philippina Luzzon encompass a thousand mile in which the spaniard have build a town call manilla and have thither carry cattle for breed this city stand in fourteen degree and a quarter borneo be repute as big as Spain rich attend with many island of small circuit it have a city of the same name found on pile in the salt water with sumptuous building of hew stone cover with Coco leave the king be a mahometan at Sagadana in this island there be a english factory the great java be by Scaliger call a epitome of sum of the world rich in many commodity the cabal be a wild beast in this island who bone do restrain the blood from issue in wound party the south part be gentile as the country within the land but towards the shore they be mahumetan touch the lesser java there be some controversy which shall be it the strait g g Nathaniel Martin of Sincopura be dangerous not above a musket shoot over there be two ledge of rock on either side at the entrance and within sink rock betwixt malacca and Samatra nature have as it be sow that field of water with island the principal of which be Bintam Samatra within the country be ethnic in our navigation you have the voyage of Francis Pyrard out of whole large story of these island we have not be niggardly to bestow the principal observation on our reader of their number suppose 12000. custom creature etc. towards the coast be moor a island large rich and populous divide into many kingdom the gulf of Bengala be as it be guard with a double rank of island which Neptune have set as garrison of those sea but these all be not worthy the honour due to Zeilan call in old time Taprobana which name other apply to Samatra from thence alongst the coast of India be see few island of any greatness but further into the sea be the maldiva h h Pyrard say of male the principal island and that signify a heap of island so call of maldiva one of their number who name signify a thousand island Hieronymo de Sancto Stephano number they between seven and eight thousand some of which be divide by large sea some by small arm the ocean somewhere with his greatness threaten to swallow they and in other place as curious of his delightful search steal rather then force a separation provoke the passenger to communicate in his sport who sometime help with some over-growing tree can leap from one island to another yet have not nature thus diversify their situation yield they diversity of her riches save that it seem here she have choose her chamber for the palm or coquo-nut which in other place she have in comparison but scatter here store that by this store the people may supply all their other want yea beside the land-coquo there grow another under the water big than the former a special antidote for poison the inhabitant be addict to subtlety and sorcery and in the island next to the continent moor bear sway in the rest pagan other island of small reckon we reckon not Diu have long be famous for the war therein vain attempt by the Turk and indian against the fortress of the portugal @. 2 the persian gulf and of the passage down Euphrates thither the sabbatical stream and enclose jew the persian gulf have leave some remnant of land extant the chief be Ormuz a famous mart which the moor there maintain under the government of a Moor after make tributary to the Portugal which nature have make barren industry plentiful the more fertile element yield barrenness and sand the barrenner bring in a double wealth pearl and merchandise John newbury which sail down Euphrates to this sea and so to Ormuz visit Bagdet by the way which he say be twenty or five and twenty mile southward from old Babylon testify of the woman in Ormuz that they slit the low part of their ear more than two inch which hang down to their chin this our countryman die in this travel have travel to Constantinople into the black sea and Danubius and through the kingdom of Poland and Persia the indies and other part of the World but for the description of the passage down the river Euphrates to the persian gulf I know i i Monfart say he go from Aleppo in a caravan of 10000 man which travel all by night guide by the star through the desert 3. day to Nane or Euphrates the usual way be to by our etc. none which have do it so exact as Gasparo Balbi a venetian which that way pass to Ormuz and India who relate the same in the diary of his travel sometime the trunk or body of tree under the water of this river conspire dangerous attempt sometime zelebe and other over-hanging mountain threaten ruin and even now seem to swallow they in their dark-devouring jaw sometime the violence of some steep current as it be hurl they into a whirlpool always the arabian ready attend for prey and spoil one city or rather the carcase of a city whereof only the ruin be remain stand on the left hand of this river great in his opinion then cairo in Egypt the mariner affirm to he that by the report of the old man it have three hundred threescore and six gate from morning to noon with the help of the stream and four oar they can scarce pass one side thereof this be call elersi perhaps that which be ancient call edessa he speak of the caraguoh inhabit as they pass which agree neither with turk moor nor persian in their sect but have a heresy by themselves he travel more than one whole day by one side of old Babylon from Felugia to bagdad though the ground be good yet see he neither tree nor green herb but all barren and seem to retain some mark of the prophecy threaten by Esay against this place they which dwell here and travel from hence to Balsara carry with they pigeon who they make their letter-post to bagdad as they do likewise between Ormuz and Balsara the coast of Persia as they sail in this sea seem as a parch wilderness without tree or grass those few people which dwell there and in the island of * * in Lar say Monfart be the strong and best furnish castle of the persian Lar and Cailon live on flesh be in manner themselves transform into the nature of fish so excellent swimmer be they that see a vessel in the sea though stormy and tempestuous they will swim to it five or six mile to beg alm they eat their fish with Rice have no bread their cat hen dog and other creature which they keep have no other diet in the island of Bairen and those of a a see their name in balby cap. 14. gonfiar they take the best pearl in the world in Muscato threescore mile from Ormuz they dare not fish for they for fish which be as cruel to the man as they to the innocent oyster they hold that in April the oyster come to the top of the water and receive the drop of rain which then fall wherewith they return to the bottom again and therefore fish not till the end of july because that substance be not before ripen and hard in sail from Ormuz to Diu he say they pass over a bay of a hundred and thirty league of water white like milk I have see a extract of a chronicle write by Pachaturunuras pach. chron. which reign in Ormuz three hundred year ago testify that one Mahomet be king of amen in Arabia foelix pretend title to Persia build a city on the continent of Hormuz which his posterity hold in succession of many generation it happen that king Cabadim fly from the king of creman come to jarum that be a wood so they call this island which be almost all of salt the river be brackish from a salt mountain in the midst thereof and the side of the river white salt yet there then grow thin wood here he build Ormuz which Albuquerk make tributary to the portugal be lady of the island thereabouts and principal staple of merchandise for those part of the world Odoricus Odoricus bal. c. 9 speak of the intolerable heat in those part and balby testify that near Balsara many person die of the extremity of heat which happen to four of their company which force by heat and weariness sit down and with a hot blast of wind be all smother Ormuz * * see the relation thereof in our voyage I have also a story or chronicle of their king write by king Pachaturunxa in Arabic be late take from the portugal by the persian in the discourse of these asian sea and this persian among the rest I think it worthy relate which b b l. de Urreta hist Aethiop l. 1. c. 6. Lewis de Urreta in his aetheopian history tell of a certrine jew though perhaps but a tale for a liar such as he have be evict in his aethiopian story lose his credit where he speak truth yet even tale serve for mirth be intermix with serious history brand that they may be know for rogue or jester be it as it will he tell that this jew travel alongst the shore of this persian sea by some in-lets and arm thereof which embay themselves within the land see the sea lofty and swell by force of the wind and tide seem to threaten the high element but even now ready to swallow up the earth roar out a loud defiance in such sort that the poor jew be amaze and dreadful fear therewith and this continue the space of some day while the jew travel thereby but on the Saturday and Sabbath superstition command the jew and nature the handmaid of divinity enjoin the angry element to rest a sudden calm follow as if wave and wind will accompany the jew in his devotion and have forget their former fury and wont nature to remember the sanctification of this day the jew have hear before that there be a sabbatical river which some place in Aethiopia some in Phoenicia other they can tell where in a credulous fancy persuade himself that this arm of the sea be that sabbatical stream and that he now see the experiment of that relation with his eye fancy have no soon affirm but superstition swear to the truth and credulity tickle he with gratulation of divine favour to himself that have live to see that bless sight ravish with this conceit he fill his budget full of the sand which be of a more gross and cleave nature then in other place and carry it with he as a great treasure unto the place of his habitation there he tell his countryman that now the Messiah will not be long before he come for now he have find this sign thereof the sabbatical river show this sand in proof thereof credit judaeus Apella the jew believe quick all but the truth especial in Portugal whither he come with this report many thousand move by his word remove their dwelling and sell their substance will needs go into these part of Persia by the sabbatical river to fix their habitation there wait for their promise Messiah one and a chief of this superstitious expedition be amatus Lusitanus a physician of great note account one of the most learned of his profession and a writer therein and John micas a merchant of great wealth they pass through France Germany Hungary their company like a snowball increase as they go with the addition of other jew of like credulity when they come to Constantinople there be of they in many band or company thirty thousand Cabasomi Bassa the turkish commander think to gain by this occasion and will not suffer they to pass over the water into Asia without many hundred thousand of ducat except they will pass on horseback this example be soon both spread and follow of the other bassa and commander in Asia as they go their wealth and substance be every where so fleece that they come into Syria much lessen in number in estate miserable and beggarly new officer every where as new hungry fly light on these wretched carcase so I may call they some they whip some they empale some they hang and burn other thus be these miserable pilgrim waste and don John baltasar be present when Amato aforesaid be dead with this affliction his physic book be in a outcry to be sell at Damascus and because they be in latin no man will buy they till at last another jew become Chapman micas one of the wealthy man which Europe hold die poor in a hospital at Constantinople and this be the issue of their pilgrimage to the sabbatical stream which they suppose to find in this persian gulf where we have too long hold you the spectator of this jewish tragedy and yet let i entreat your patience a little long in consider the occasion of this error we have elsewhere f f l. 2. c. 5. mention this sabbatical river now you shall understand that the jew general have drown their wit therein Rambam g g Elias thisb rad. sambation Eldad dan. apo gen. 2. esd 13-40 call it Gozan Genebrard allege many r. r. testimony of it but of all and of all let Eldad Danius his tale which Genebrard have translate find some favourable entertainment the rather because one of our apocryphal author seem to weave the same web which as the worthy person deserve first examination esdras therefore so we suppose he and this be not all his jewish fable report that the ten tribe which Salmanasar lead captive take counsel among themselves to leave the multitude of the heathen and go forth into a further country where never mankind dwell that they may there keep their statute which they never keep in their own lord and they enter into Euphrates by the narrow passage of the river for the most high than show sign for they and hold still the flood till they be pass over for through that country there be a great way to go namely of a year and a half and the same region be call Arsareth then dwell they there until the latter time and now when they shall begin to come the high shall stay the spring of the stream again etc. here you see no less miracle then in jordan or the red sea for their passage which see it be through Euphrates you will pardon our jew for search it near this persian gulf especial see his good master the rabbin have increase this tale with the enclosure of these jew from pass again into our world not by the continual course of Euphrates as esdras insinuate but by the sabbatise of the sabbatical stream which by eldad description be two hundred cubit over full of sand and stone without water make a noise like thunder as it flow which by night be hear half a day journey from it on the sabbath it be continual quiet and still but all that while arise thence a flame that none dare enter or come near by half a mile thus the fire if not the religion of the sabbath then detain they no less than the stony stream on the week day and what stony heart can refuse they credit yet do not he and esdras agree of the inhabitant both derive they from the ten tribe but Eldad challenge no less antiquity then from ieroboam who contend with rehoboam the godly catholic israelite refuse to fight against the house of David choose rather to attempt this pilgrimage and so pass the river Physon for the scripture have forbid they to meddle with Egypt Ammon or Amalck they go and they go till they come into Ethiopia there do the four tribe of dan Nepthali gad Aser settle themselves which continual war upon the seven kingdom of Tusiga Kamtua Koha Mathugia Tacul Bacma and Kacua fie on the simplicity of our geographer which know not one of these no better than esdras his Arsareth they have a king who name be Huziel Mathiel under who they fight each tribe three month by course the tribe also of Moses for they imagine his child cleave to their mother religion which be a Madianite or ethiopian be turn to their truth and they all observe the Talmud the Hebrew tongue the ordinance of the elder and suffer nothing unclean among they yea no utopian state comparable to they he tell the like tale of the other tribe but how come he thence to tell this news true I wonder no less than you yet he say he go to the sea forget that before he have compass his country with the sabbatical stream and there be take captive and by his leanness escape the cannibal else our fat story have be devour be sell to a jew of who perhaps this forge tale procure his redemption howsoever the tradition hold both for these enclose jew and that sabbatical stream that it shall be seek here-away or find no where the recite be sufficient refute to a reasonable understanding and yet the jew be not only besot with these their enclose brethren imagine their Messiah may be among they although they know not whether to ascribe this transportation to salmanaser or to Alexander the great or to the day of ieroboam but christian also tell h h Orentius in geog. of they about the pole and they know not where and I have see a print pamphlet of their come out of those their enclosure in our time with the number of each tribe yea postellus Boterus and many other derive the tartar from they brerewood enquiry cap. 13. which dream they which please may read at large confute by master Brerewood it be about the year 1238. when Eldad come from thence into Spain if any lust to have another guide for the sabbatical stream master fuller i i fulleri miscellanea l. 1. c. 9 learned labour will give he good direction he say it be the same which Brocard in his description of the holy land call Valania he also correct the usual translation of Ptolemey and josephus learned casaubon Casab exercit. 15. bar. be of his mind and add other thing ridiculous enough out of the rabbin out of who muddy lake this river flow to enclose the fabulous Jew aforesaid if any marvel why in a discourse of the sea we add this I answer that we can find the land whereto it be due and therefore one absurdity must follow another but let we proceed @. 3 of the red sea sir h. middleton take and of Rhodes and Cyprus the red sea or arabian gulf seem unwilling to be the ocean subject so many small island do she continual muster in resistance beside her undermine the the sea with her shallow channel conspire the destruction of many heedless mariner that here will adventure as tenant to the sea in their move house once by a mighty hand be it help to prevail against the sea force to discover a dry land in the midst thereof and with her watery erect wall to guard those new passenger till the same hand reverse it or rather reward the then empty belly thereof with the prey of so many thousand egyptian Babelmandel Camaran and Mazua be account among the chief of these isolet Suachen have most sovereignty be the seat of the turkish bassa for Abassia arianus in his periplus of the red sea and agatharchides in a treatise of like argument mention not many island therein Orine Alalaeae Catacumene and that of Diodorus in the mouth of the straight don John of Castro have write a exact treatise from his own experience of these sea and island which master Hakluit have in a write copy out of which we shall observe more in our coast about Africa Thomas jones who be in the ascension in this sea speak of twelve or thirteen desolate island where they find refresh with coko fish and turtle-dove whereof one may with his hand take twenty dozen in a day the strait be a mile and a half over but now not chain mokha be the chief staple of indian commodity which pass that way to cairo and Alexandria this Moha or Mokha be eighteen league within the Bab and have be often visit by k k ins l. 7. c. 11. english ship but in the year 1610. they deal treacherous and barbarous with sir h. Middleton and his fleet both here and at aden aden have be of great trade a great city now ruinate neither shop of any account within it nor ship of merchandise without adorn the same as in time past neither do the turk deserve better who take it by treachery at first dam. goet diens Oppug nic. downton S.H. Middleton hang up the king come to visit they and keep or rather lose and lessen it still by like treachery thus deal they with captain downton his company in colour of trade surprise twenty and make they prisoner and yet worse be the general deal with at Moha the aga after much protestation of love and vest he public to testify the grand signior grace in cloth of gold give leave to set up their pinnace with many office and offer of kindness on the eight and twenty of November sudden assault the english kill eight knock down the general and take he with eight and forty of his company and master pemberton also with nine of his men. they attempt present to surprise the darling with three great boat full of soldier where they find the trumpeter asleep and slay he with another the deck upon occasion of romeage that day for quicksilver be cover with victual none of the company fear or prepare for offence or defence happy one throw forth a barrel of powder and disturb they with fire which when their captain Emer bahare cry to cut the ship cable make they mistake and cut the boat-rope so drive away leave their captain and six and twenty more behind to the slaughter and with a piece they give present warning to the trade increase sir Henry ship so that their villainy succeed not by sea their intent be to become master of all Rehib Aga his pride Moha the port of Mecca the next day sir Henry Middleton with seven more all chain by the neck be bring before the aga who stern demand how he dare come into their port of Moha so near their holy city of Mecca be the port and door thereof add that the bassa have order from the great Turk to captivate all christian in those sea although they have his own pass he press the general to write to the ship that they shall come on shore out of the water into this fire and not prevail cause he to be take out of his chain and collar and clap a great pair of fetters on his leg and manacle on his hand separate from the rest of his company lay he in a dirty dog-kennel under a pair of stair at night the consul of the Banian entreat some mitigation so that he be remove to a better room but lodge on the bare ground continue in this misery they hope meanwhile for want of water and victual to obtain the ship till December 20. order then come from jeffar Bassa to bring they to Zenan or Sinan chief city of yeoman or Ayaman then be re-examined as before his iron be knock off and with four and thirty more english he be send thither the turk themselves pity their manacle and some of they do they favour master pemberton make a strange escape Zenan be ninescore mile from Moha north northwest in 16. 15. there they arrive january 5. be their Divano or councel day convey as in great pomp and triumph one by one the general be carry up into the castle to a room twelve step high where two great man take he by the wrist and lead he to the bassa sit at the upper end of a long gallery cover on the floor with Turkey carpet and when he come within two yard of he he be stay the bassa with frown demand his country and other question like those of the aga. then be he with four or five more commit to the keeper house the rest to the common prison clap in iron where they have with their small allowance starve if the general have not relieve they by the mean of some of the turk themselves by promise a a he promise the Riha or lieutenant 1500 venetian piece a Moor of cairo and Hamet waddy the bassa merchant and other be their friend and other mean become their friend on January 17. arrive nineteen more of those which have be betray at aden on the 11. of February they be all free of their iron whereas they hear their intent have be to cut off the head of the chief and make slave of the rest and at last with fair promise return to Moha in the begin of March and on the 11. of may the general make his escape by this device he send to the ship for provision as for long stay and especial for wine and aquavite which he give bountiful among his keeper so that at noon they go home to rest their lade brain the Agae himself also be go that day on pleasure out of town Thus the english have some tolerable liberty since their return carry one empty tun to the shore and a other after it in which be the general the rest of the company be appoint by sundry way to meet there at the boat which be appoint to come from the ship and thus they get aboard a few only stay long and therefore leave behind but these with other their good by force be render to they have recover their ship the treacherous Aga be remove Ider Aga place in his room and since jeffar Bassa be also report to have lose his head in their way to Zenan they be much annoy with cold in the mountain cold in Arabia Zenan the chief city the ground euery night cover with a white frost and the ice in one night a finger thick the city be big than Bristol have a wall of mud orchard and garden within the same there be many woman and child keep as hostage to secure the parent and husband allegiance the way be by ragged mountain especial between Tayes and zenan and have many Censer or inn by the grand signior erect for the case of traveller their return from Zenan be on the nineteenth of February eighteen mile to surage where the people be poor clothe from the waste to the knee the twenty to damane twenty mile a town consist of five hamler join a plentiful place the next day they travel till after midnight and come to ermine fifteen mile the two and twenty they go fourteen mile and the three and twenty stay at naquellamare a common inn on the hill there be a castle the governor a arabian no Turk may pass this way without pass and licence the arab in the most place rule and the people not brook the turkish insolence the four and twenty they take up ass but the people take they away again notwithstanding the bassa warrant they go fifteen mile the five and twenty sixteen mile to rabatanim censor the six and twenty as far beyond to Merfadine the seven and twenty to Tayes a city half as big as Zenan with a mud wall and a castle on the first of march sixteen mile to fufras the second eleven mile to asanbine the four to Mousa seventeen mile hereabout and at Tayes be store of indigo the five they come to Moha the country be populous all the way and because it be so little know I have particular relate this journal on the five of January be great resort of people to fufras in devotion towards one of their saint there bury and thence they go together to Mecca Moha Moha be a town unwall very populous seat close to the sea a salt sandy barren soil the Aga have be as they say catamite to jeffar Bassa as the other at aden also at their return he feast sir Henry and call for the Alcoran kiss it and swear that he bear he no ill will he may rather have swear by their ship for that be the deity that he most fear Assab Road. these in this time find a good road call Assab for their refresh in the abex or Habesh shore the king of Roheita a town near the Bab kind entertain they at this assab-road they have wood and water enough but brackish with other provision at reasonable rate on the shore they be Mahometan within land Christian this king come ride pompous on a cow to the english when general Saris be there with fish-shell hang for a jewel on his forehead the better sort speak and write Arabic see of these l. 7 c. 11. the vulgar another language but this be african and so may we reckon Socotora (@) those two island which confront it of a a gi. bot. ben. which one they say be the habitation of Men and the other of woman which sometime have intercourse one with the other but the Air nature inexorable and heavy handmaid not suffer any long abode to each but in their own allot portion loath be I to look any further into that boisterous sea and therefore leave all that huge tract of Africa as compass by a sudden thought but unsaluted we shall find other asian island in the mediterranean and because be now weary the Archipelago will be too tedious a passage for we neither be there many island worth name in propontis or the euxine we will speak a little of Rhodes and Cyprus and then remember how long we have forget our reader patience the former of those contain about a hundred and twenty mile fertile in soil and of most pleasant air cause by that love which Phoebus bear to it there never pass day in which he do not in his bright and shine apparel salute it and for this city happy be that huge colossus of brass gild over and repute the most wonderful of the world seven wonder here dedicate to the sun though some ascribe it to jupiter the workmanship of chares lindius of threescore and ten cubit b b this inscription be in the basis as Meursius translate it which word show both the author lindius laches and the height four score cubit Meursius in translat. Constant or as other tell a hundred and forty three foot but itself tell fourscore cubit in height which fall by a Earthquake the oracle forbid the rhodian to erect again but nothing forbid Mabias it muavi the five caliph after his seven year war about Constantinople as say c c Constant porphyrogenitus imp. cap. 21. theophanis chronicon Constantius out of theophanes invade this island to carry away nine hundred Constantius number many more camel burden of this brazen carcase the temple of Liber be here enrich with many present of the greek and roman to both which the city of Rhodes be have in friendly and honourable regard much be their force by sea in ancient time and for two hundred year space it be the seat of the hospitular knight which now reside in Malta drive thence by mighty Solyman these knight have also by purchase of king Richard d d of his take Cyprus beside other chronographer see richardus canonicus trin. London in Rich. 1. cap. 48. and 50. the first of England the island of Cyprus e e Adrian Roman theat lib. 2. of the modern commodity see m. George sandys lib. 4. dedicate by the poet to Venus to who the inhabitant be too much addict as appear by their temple and other vanity in her honour at Paphos she be worship in the likeness of a navel and round thereabouts by the devil work it rain not Trogus write that the cyprian prostitute their daughter before they marry they to mariner on the shore we have see at Rome say R. volateranus the attendant of queen carlotta never a whit better than those ancient of Cyprus thus report ammianus marcellinus lib. 4. it be ennoble by two city salamis and paphus the one famous for Jupiter image the other for the temple of Venus it be so plentiful in all thing that it need no help of other nation and of her own abundance be able to set forth a ship from the keel to the topsail with all provision furnish to the sea neither grieve I to tell it the roman more greedy then just make themselves lord thereof for Ptolemy the king be confederate with we be proscribe without any fault but the defect of our treasury who therefore poison himself and the i will become tributary Sextus Rufus say as much Amasis be the first if we believe Herodotus @ that ever conquer Cyprus and make it tributary he also say lib. 4. that the cyprian be partly from Salamine and Athens partly from Arcadia partly from cythnus from Phoenicia and from Aethiopia Pliny affirm g g Herod Thalia that it be sometime the seat of nine king and be diverse name as Acamantis Cerastis Aspelia amathusia i i ortel theat macaria cryptus and Colinia it be such a forest of tree h h plin. l. 5. c. 31. that when as their ship and mine be not able to waste they it be make lawful for any man to fell and destroy they and for his labour to possess the land which he have so clear bartholomaeus Saligniacus say he see fly fish in the sea about Cyprus which in the atlantike ocean be common he see also a ram in Cyprus with seven horn HONDIUS his map of Cyprus CYPRUS in the time of Constantine it be forsake of the inhabitant as before forsake of the element which refuse to water with any drop of rain that island sometime call macaria or happy the space of seventeen year together or as other have it six and thirty repeople from diverse part by Helena the mother of Constantine u u quadi geographia and remain to the greek empire till that lion of England make it a prey and the knight purchase who sell it to Guido Lusignun who posterity fail the venetian succeed till SEYLIM the second mind to erect a religious hospital to testify his magnificence in Hak. voyages the take of Famagusta etc. be large relate tom. 2. p. Contarenus Turc and ven. begin with a irreligious foundation for whereas their holy law will not suffer any thing to be dedicate to holy use which their own sword have not conquer he break league with the venetian and rob they of this island which they be think not with the just title before to have possess but it be high time to bethink we of our indian shore whence we have take so large a prospect where we be stay to be transport into the chief of those island there to take a more leisurely view of their region and religion and if any be desirous to read the ancient name and description of the sea and island about Asia marcianus heracleote and Sculax Carnandensis have write especial treatise thereof which David Hoeschelius have publish in greek very profitable to the learned student of the ancient geography as be the work also of Isidorus characenus Artemidorus ephesius and dicaearchus Messenius which he have join with they chap. 15 a large relation of some principal island of Asia and first of the island of japon @. i. a preface touch the jesuit and a description of japon with some of their strange custom the jesuit have not more fix the eye of the world upon they in the western part than they have fix their own eye on the eastern here seek to repair with their untemperedmorter the ruin of their fall Babylon there lay a new foundation of their after-hope here by their politic mystery and mystical policy endeavour to recover there by new conquest to make supply to their loss here for busy intrude into affair of state suspect by their own hate by their adversary there by seem to neglect greatness and to contemn riches of the mighty be not fear while other believe observe and admire they both here and there they spare not to a a mat. 23.15 compass sea and land to win proselyte every of their residence or college be as so many fort to establish this new roman monarchy but with unlike advantage encounter there with reason or rather with the carcase of reason attend with ignorance and superstition who Owlish eye can endure the interview of truth though darken with those cloud wherewith they overcast it here with truth yea the soul of truth true religion who shield of faith and sword of the spirit these the strong part of the strong gate of hell can prevail against a spanish faction of spanish humour and success more easy conquer a world of the naked american and effeminate indian then keep all they have in Europe such be the arm of the one and the preach of the other yet will I fain be thankful to the one and the other b b benefit by the Spaniard and jesuite the first for further geographic with knowledge of a new world the other for make a possibility of a better world to some whereas otherwise there be a general desperation of all neither be the wound of popish superstition so absolute mortal as the ethnic atheism c c (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) ephes 2. the d d of the want of their conversion see t. a jesuite and the epistle of xavy Baptista Montanus etc. one have no foundation at all the other show the true foundation although their babylonish slime even here supply the room of better mortar beside their stubble hay and wood build upon it better a mix truth than a total error and a maim Christ than none at all but howsoever they be behold to they for their divinity it be inhumanity in we not to acknowledge a beholdingness to they for that they give we the knowledge of many people although in all their discourse this caution be necessary not to yield they a catholic and universal credit where we any way may spy they daub the wall of their pretend catholic church in relate their miracle and such like we will remember they be jesuit in other thing not serviceable to Rome we will hear they as traveller when lie do not advantage they nor hurt we but as the labour of the jesuit may every where breed shame to our negligence in a better quarrel so in japon it be most of all admirable that the further part of the world shall be so near to their industry and that you at last may be acquaint with japon we will borrow of they to pay your hope by this long introduction suspend Maffaeus who have translate and set forth more than thirty of those japonian epistle in the twelve book of his indian history do thus describe it beside other less three principal island bear the name of japon which the d d mercator think japon to be the aurea Chersonesua which agree not with Ptolemey l. 7. c. 2. who place it under the line first and great more particular challenge and contain in it three and fifty kingdom or principality the chief city whereof be Meaco the second be ximum divide into nine signiory the three Xicoc quarter into four lordship so that there be in all of this japonian dominion three score and six shire or petty kingdom the space of land be measure two hundred league in length in breadth somewhere ten in other place thirty between the thirty and thirty eight degree of latitude eastward from China our countryman William adam e e Adam in a letter which be bring home by the last indian fleet bear date from Firando octob. 23. 1611. which now live there and have do these many year and therefore have better mean to know the truth place it from the 35. to the 48. degree of northerly latitude the length east and by north and west and by south for so it lie be two hundred and twenty english league that way and south and north two hundred and three score league almost square the soil be not very fertile subject to much snow the air wholesome the bowel of the earth be store with diverse metal the tree be fruitful and one c c a strange tree wonderful in that it abhor moisture and if happy it be moisten it shrink and become wither which they remedy by pluck it up by the root and after it be dry in the sun to set it in dry sand if a bough be break off and nail on again it grow they have two high mountain one of which cast forth flame and in the top thereof the devil use to show himself in a bright cloud to some that by long fast have prepare themselves to this sight the other call Figeniana be by some league high than the cloud they much esteem a tall personableness they pluck off the hair on their head child before the common people half way the nobility almost all leave but a little grow behind which grow long and be tie up on knot to touch which be to offer great indignity to a man they can endure much hardship a infant newborn in the cold of winter be present carry to the river to be wash their education be hard yet be they neat they use fork as the Chinois or stick not touch the meat with their finger and therefore need no napery they sit on carpet and enter the room unshod their table be a hand high some eighteen inch square curious wrought to each guest one and change at every new service or change of meat frois say speak of feast they have three of they at the begin of the feast set before each guest with diverse gild dish in each of they and as many at the end and in great solemnity more they use d d l. Armerda much the powder of a certain herb call Chia of which they put as much as a walnutshell may contain into a dish of porcelain and drink it with hot water at the departure of friend they will show all their most precious household furniture the best whereof they employ about the heat water or other use for this herb which be of precious account with they the woman in japon which want mean to bring up their child Mel nun with inhuman butchery do deprive they be newborn of that life which not long before they have communicate to they their house be most of wood because of often earthquake and some of stone temple and monastery they have for both sex and more have till Nubunanga destroy they their language be one and yet exceed diversify according as they differ in state or sex or as they speak in praise or dispraise use a diverse idiom they use character in writing and print as in China their sword be of a most excellent temper their custom differ in many thing from other man e e custom in thing indifferent be comely or uncomely black be a festival colour white a funeral their meat drink perfume be as dissonant to we their tooth be colour with black as beauty livery borrow of art which we by art will avoid they mount on the right side of the horse they sit as we rise to entertain a friend they give to the sick person salt thing sharp and raw they use pill never let blood we contrary as in other rite either to other ridiculous all their noble be call Toni among who be diverse degree all of they hold their all in to find so many soldier to the war at their own cost general the whole nation be witty poverty be a disgrace to no man reproach theft perjury diceplay be hateful very ambitious they be in all thing respective to their credit full of courtesy each to other never brawl no not at home with their household the inconstancy of that state learn they by use to prepare for and to welcome every State they be exceed subtle hypocritical and double-dealing they be also of cruel disposition not to their enemy alone but sometime will assay the goodness of their blade and strength of their arm on some innocent body and in case of distress they esteem it a credit to prevent the sentence f f sometime this be the sentence thus to kill themselves or at least a mitigation of the sentence so esteem there as with we the behead of great person condemn to a death more ignominious of law by bloody execution do on themselves which they usual do in rip up their breast across a servant or friend attend to smite off his head and if it be a man of any sort his friend and follower in like manner with their own hand pluck out their bowel to testify their love the governor have absolute rule over their inferior yea in every private family the authority extend to life or death the people say Adam be exceed courteous and valiant they be govern in great civility no land better with severity of justice they be very superstitious and of diverse opinion HONDIUS his map of japan Japan i. @. 2 the voyage of some english to japan and their abode there this our countryman * * w. Adam his strange voyage and adventure go chief pilot of a fleet of hollander of five sail 1599 and winter in the Magellan strait from April to September near to the i will of saint Mary in seven and thirty degree in the South-sea the ship wherein he be and another of the fleet lose their man in fight with the indian they sail thence to japan and seek the northcape which be false place in map in thirty degree but find it in 35@ in this voyage from saint Mary hither they be four month and two and twenty day and then there be but six beside himself that can stand upon their leg they anchor near bomage and two or three day after a jesuit from Langasack come aboard they the king of Bungo befriend they with houseroom and refresh for their sick but three of their company die the next day and three after only eighteen be leave the emperor send five galley or frigate for they about fourscore league distance and demand of they many question touch our country and the term of war and peace in which it stand with other then be he command to prison and two day after convent again and demand the cause of his voyage the jesuit and portugal inform against they as robber of all nation and use their best friend to their worst designment so that every day they look to be cross or crucify which be there the usual death of malefactor but the emperor answer they have not hurt he and after long imprisonment he be suffer to return to his ship and restitution of the good before seize on command but without effect because they be disperse they have fifty thousand rial give they this city be call Saca two league and a half from Ozaca from thence they be remove to quanto a hundred and twenty league eastward near to Eddo where the emperor reside they can not obtain leave to go where the hollander trade but be allow each man two pound of Rice a day and eleven or twelve ducat a year in process of three or four year the emperor employ adam in make he a ship after the fashion of we which * * he be no shipwright as he can he do which win he favour and a large annuity he after build he another a hundred and twenty ton and by this mean and acquaint he with some principle of geometry and the mathematics grow in such favour that the jesuit and portugal his quondam enemy be now glad to use he as a mediator in their suit to the emperor he have now give he a lordship with eighty or ninety husbandman or slave to serve he a favour never before do to any stranger he can never obtain leave to return home to his wife but the emperor be content he shall write for a dutch and english trade to be there establish yearly they have there say he a indies of money a good attractive to bring they thither and thither since both hollander and english have resort the first english ship that there arrive be the Clove 1613. general Saris adventure from Bantam thither by the Moluccas and after a intricate passage among rock and island which he fear will have enclose he without possibility of egress through a open sea he arrive at last at Firando he be well entertain there by king Foyen and his nephew the young king who come aboard begin their compliment of salutation at the foot put off their shoe and join their hand the right within the left move they to and fro before their knee they be entertain with a banquet and music to their good content no soon be they go but multitude of their gentry come aboard with their present but to prevent danger they obtain a Gardiano from the king daily they be oppress with multitude to gaze on the ship and her beautiful stern and some woman see the picture of Venus and Cupid hang in the general cabin fall on their knee thereto whisper for they dare not open profess it that they be Christian and this picture they take to be that of our lady and her son such a ridiculous image scarce a image of truth be there in image call layman book indeed a a jerem. 10.8 doctrine of vanity and b b hab 2.18 teacher of lie whence it be a easy descent to c c joh. 4.22 you worship you know not what after that the king come aboard again with his woman which there sing and play on instrument observe time and that by book as it be prick but with harsh music to english ear he give he the choice of diverse house to hire for his abode but little sale may be make the people not dare to trade till the emperor licence be obtain six week he stay here expect the come of master adam before name with who he after pass to the court eight hundred mile further first from this island by water to Ozaca thence to Surunga or Sorungo where the old emperor reside he be well provide of necessary for his water-passage by the king of Firando and for his land-iourney also with man and a Palankine for himself and a spare horse and one and twenty other horse for his man raken up as with we post-horse by the way the three day after they be come to Sorungo they be admit to the emperor presence in his castle where they ascend on certain stair and come to a mat room in which they sit a while on the mat after the eastern fashion wait the come of the emperor to who they be anon admit and deliver his majesty letter unto he which he take and lay upon his head and with promise of speedy dispatch will they to repair to their lodging after their tedious journey thence they go to Edoo where the prince keep his court and find honourable entertainment Surungo be as big as London with the suburb but Edoo be both a great and fair city all or most of the nobility have there their fair house gild and make a gallant show the old emperor wise make way to his son succession almost put he into present possession of the state by the great court and pomp here then at Surunga the prince secretary be father and therefore of great experience to the secretary of the emperor the prince be above forty year old he return to Surunga I have publish the form of they in captain Saris his voyage tom. 1. l. 4. c. 1. the japonian alphabet of 20. the malayan which ca. Saris can speak of 24. letter and have article of trade grant which the secretary advise they shall propound as brief as may be the japonian affect brevity these * I have see in the japonian character seem to differ from that of the Chinois in form but like for paper and manner of write with pencil take the ink from a stone whereon it be mix with water the line downward multiply from the right hand to the left seal with a red print of ink and not with wax some say the japonian have letter captain Saris bring diverse of their book which seem rather to be character than letter as far as I can guess unlike to the Chinois yet with like art of print the picture in their book not comparable to the art in we he hear that they have but twenty character which must be understand of letter for character stand for entire word can easy be number as in China we have observe be return after the view of Meaco to Firando he there settle a factory of english merchandise this trade still continue see Pring voyage etc. in my voyage leave master cock with some other of our nation there in trade himself return from Bantam since this some intelligence have be receive from master cock as we shall observe in due place and other have be employ in this japonian trade whither the Chinois resort with many junk notwithstanding their mutual hatred the japonian ready to kill that man which shall call he a chinese and the Chinois so hate all trade with stranger that themselves here report that five thousand have late be slay by the king therefore and the officer put out of their place the new officer nevertheless for bribe permit these this egress and this may serve by the way to answer such a a a question move by some whether any jesuit have be in China as will by no mean believe that the jesuit have set foot in China because the Chinois dare not for any sum carry a stranger thither and protest that none be admit no nor any jesuit there see for all this I easy believe the Jesuit also acknowledge and therefore in many year even after the mart be permit in canton to the portugal can not be admit till great importunity after many many repulse on the one side and on the other side bribe prevail especial for these as not seem dangerous so few in number so sacred in profession so far in habitation so admirable for art so liberal in the give art which go beyond all the seven liberal and at last after many year press with present unto the king himself and those so acceptable as in that story be mention the Chinois at Bantam know it not and no marvel for these be merchant near the coast from which the jesuit have their residence very remote their china fashion of keep much within go abroad with their face cover with veil fan and chair curtain and so few in such a sea of people may easy escape their sight somewhat that b b sup. l. 4. c. 1. and 19 especial the last @. before by we relate more the jesuit own history can clear this point which I here mention because diverse in speech and writing so confident affirm that none of the jesuit be or have be in China when as yet in so many foreign port they meet with china-merchant all trade on peril of their life if bribery prevent not severity but I will not kindle that fire of contention in these relation which between those nation so easy flame the Chinois and japonian the emperor send his letter to his majesty of great Britain as do also the king of Firando with promise of much kindness to his subject which with many other rarity of this and the rest of captain Saris his voyage and action in the Red-sea cap. Saris his journal commend sinc. at Bantam the Moluccas and other place I have in my book of voyage now publish to which and other japonian voyage there add I refer the more studious @. 3 of the government and courage of the japoner ye have hear that in the empire of japon be sixty six signiory or petty kingdom all subject to one monarch touch their ancient king we can say little but as it seem in these last eight hundred year they have have much Civil-war each labour to make himself lord of as much as he can the three last have be the great which japon in many age have see the first of these be Nabunanga a great tyrant a great be quabacondono his successor both in tyranny and empire who from a cutter of wood climb to the imperial sovereignty he have a nephew al. Frois. 1595. who he cause to be make quabacondono content himself with the title of Taicosama but grow in jealousy of this rise sun soon bring he to a set enforce he to cross or kill himself with other of his companion after the japonian manner before his death have no child but one infant he send for Gieiaso lord of eight kingdom and commit to he as protector the administration of the kingdom adjoin as counsellor four other great prince and five other of his own creature that these may rule the state in the minority of his son for further security he take a oath of these and all the nobility and marry the niece of Gieiaso to this young emperor be about two year old he also make marriage betwixt other of the nobility to hold they in concord but these bond be too weak for soon after the nine counsellor or governor break out against Daifusama so be Gieiaso now call who taicosama have appoint chief of the ten and this fire be smother kindle the second time into a great flame which bring all japan into combustion wherein Daifusama be conqueror add many kingdom to his own and at last the empire also which be all this while entitle upon Firoi or Fireizama or Findeorizama the son of Taicosama Daifusama usurp the empire change his title into cubo captain Saris call he Ogoshasama perhaps a late title he hold more kingdom in his hand then any former fifteen beside those that Taicosama hold this be their policy to keep some signiory immediate subject and make other tributary this emperor fortify at gieudo or Edoo in his kingdom of quanto employ three hundred thousand continual in his work from February to September Iap. 1606. 1607. where now his son reside as apparent heir to this monarchy Fireisama son of Taicosama keep at Ozaca where by late intelligence from master cock we understand that there have resort to he of exile malcontent and other eighty or a hundred thousand against who Ogoshasama gather a army of three hundred thousand the issue of which war we have not yet hear dec. 10. 1614 but only that Ozaca a city as big as London within the wall be burn all japon sometime obey one prince call or Dairi a a maff. l. 2. who at length addict himself to his private delight and put off the burden of rule to his officer grow in contempt and at last every one seize on his own province whereof you have hear there be threescore and six leave the dairi a bare title and a herald kingdom to give term of honour at his pleasure whence he raise great revenue otherwise subject except his title as be all the rest to the lord of tensa so they call the noble kingdom adjoin to Meaco this b b Cos. Turrian or Dairi descend by succession from the ancient king out of which he be choose and be honour as a God he may not touch the ground with his foot which if he do he be put by the place never go out of his house seldom be see of the people he sit in his seat with a bow and arrow on one hand of he on the other a dagger if he shall kill any or if he show himself a enemy to peace he be deprive as well as if he have tread on the ground all great man have their factor with he to procure new title of honour the only fuel of his greatness the king of China give royal ensign to Taicosama persuade he to depose and abolish the dairi which he live not to effect they have another general officer or chief justice which denounce war and in peace give sentence on matter in controversy but these be but the instrument of the lord of tensa as be also the bonzij these be their religious among who one be supreme in case spiritual by who all their old holy be order and all new be confirm or dash the tundi which be as their bishop be by he consecrate and confirm although their nomination be by lay-patron he dispense with they in diverse privilege and immunity he enjoy great revenue and sovereignty and be advance hereto by money and kindred the tundi give priestly order and dispense in small matter as eat flesh on day prohibit they be subject in spiritual thing to these in secular affair to their king and civil magistrate through their division and many war they be much infest with robber and pirate till Quabocondonus in stead of so many tyrant erect one and become universal monarch of japon between he and the king of China happen war about the kingdom of Coray which the japonite leave upon his death and the Chinois also as care for no more than they already have many of they still be pirate very much fear and not suffer to land in any place captain davis have experience of their dare spirit to his cost for have take a ship of they sir ed. Michelborne and not possess himself of their weapon because of their humble semblance they watch opportunity and slay he and think to have take their taker and make themselves master of the english ship have a watchword or token for those aboard their own ship to murder the english there dangerous have this fray prove have not the murder piece with almost a clean riddance of they cruel decide the quarrel yet will they not desire their life and pull the pike of such as have wound they through their body to revenge it with their sword this be general to the japonian call it fortitude or desperatness or cruelty or in some respect all of they quabacondono the nephew of Taicosama before mention seem to delight in blood and butchery and observe as a ordinary recreation at set time to have condemn person bring before he in a place purposely enclose and frame to this inhumanity in the midst of which be a fair table and thereon those wretch be set in what posture he please so to try his arm art and blade in this beastly carve of human body sometime also set they for mark to his piece or arrow sometime exenterate woman to open and curious to search the close cabinet of nature always provoke vengeance to repay he in his own coin for old Taicosama have a young child of his own body study how to remove this quabacondono it be a custom in japon that the fatherr grow old resign their signiory to the son or heir the lord of tensa which title include the japonian empire add another ceremony to visit that son now in possession so to acknowledge a kind of subjection all the lord in the empire do the like in public solemnity this time be appoint and quabacondono provide all variety of cheer for entertainment a thousand choice waiter to attend and thirteen thousand of their japonian table little big than our trencher but all be disappoint by Taicosamas jealousy refuse to come after that he pick quarrel with he and cause he to go to the c c Coia be a city consecrate to Combodassi a Bonzi the first author of their letter many bonzij attend his holy and the prince be all there bury or a tooth of they at the least p. bert. tab. aug. 15. 1595. monastery of Coia a receptacle for exile quabacondono in this distress shave his hinder-lock and beard change his name to Doi the bonzij give he entertainment at Coia as to other exile without any respect to his present title or late power a few day after come a mandate from Taicosama that they shall all pluck out their bowel after the japonian custom first begin a honourable servant who have cut himself open across the breast be by quabacondono after reverence do to he behead and then other in order after the same manner the five be quabacondono who head after he have rip up himself be strike off with the same sword which he have use before in his butcherly recreation and last he that have smite off his head commit execution upon himself the bonzij present burn all their body in the same place one of this company be offer by Taicosama his liberty which he refuse choose kind to die with he who in life have use he kind the like execution follow in other one of which be the mighty lord in tensa who be slay his son but 16. year old have his life offer but send word to Taicosama he can not live without revenge of his father death go present to a temple in Meaco and before the idol Fotoco disembowel himself of all Quabacondonos wife and their follower one and thirty chief woman and three of his child little infant be carry in cart to the place of execution where the executioner present present they with Quabacondonos head that death may first enter at their eye which by a bloody hand soon possess all the other member their body be all lay in one grave over which Taicosama raise a temple with inscription the temple of traitor after other wife and child of the other noble execute he demolish to the ground the palace which quabacondono have build with the city by he found consist of little other then three hundred nobleman house this be the japonian policy under show of attendance to keep the at the court so to be secure of their person and practice I have be the long in this relation to show the japonian tyranny in this example whereof it be easy to give you many the poor if sentence of death be determine on they will if they can have knowledge and mean prevent it with this account honourable kind of death cross themselves and whensoever any man be execute present every man rush in and try his Catan or sword on the body of the dead thus shred into gobbet not a piece leave big than a man hand this captain Saris see do on a woman and her two paramour at Firando who she have appoint to visit she but one come soon an before the other be go they quarrel to draw a sword in a garrison town and adultery d d yet be adultery common be both death and they be all thus execute the like for steal one for a little bag of rice another for a piece of lead not worth above six penny their door stand open so little do they fear thief and they make ordinary through-fare through other man house cross in japan crucify be common the body still hang and putrify by the highway their cross have two cross timber fasten to the main post which be set into the ground the one for the expansion of the hand the other of the foot with a short piece in the midst to bear up the weight of the body they bind they thereto and run a lance into the right side of the crucify sometime two across head be usual which in solemnity be thus perform one go before with a Mattocke another follow with a shovel a three with a board or table contain the crime which also he himself follow next hold in a stick to which be fasten a paper make like a vane the end whereof be in his hand tie behind he by which cord the executioner lead he on each side a soldier with his lance rest on he at the dismal place without show of fear he sit down and hold out his head present wipe off other mangle he as be say m. cock since captain Saris his return the king of Firando be dead and three of his follower cross themselves their body be burn and enjoy the same sepulchre with he and the mintmaster a great man with this old emperor have already promise thus to die with he woman actor be in java and diverse place of the east indies I can lead you from these tragedy to their comedy which in japon be common and that by common woman which be to be hire of their pander or owner for this the bed or attendance at table to fill your drink but it be noteworthy that the pander be dead be by a bridle make of straw put in his mouth draw about the street and cast on a dunghill or some open place to be devour of beast or fowl this hinder not but these Hydra head multiply sometime great man at their great solemnity will themselves in person personate the act of their ancestor this captain Saris see the king of Firando with the chief man do while he be there all the town and neighbourhood send their present and come to view the same and not the mean but admit to meat in the king presence I can from hence conduct you to the monstrous building raise be Taicosama employ night and day one hundred thousand man at work I can present you with the pompous entertainment of their great solemnity this be a tyrannical policy to cause gentry and nobility of this stir nation thus to impoverish themselves with all possible bravery that so their hand may be too short for state practise but with remember these thing I shall forget my principal scope let we therefore take view of their religion @. 4 of their sect and bonzian college they have many sect some reckon they twelve all true agree in disagree with truth some of they epicure-like deny God providence and the soul immortality they hold that a man have three soul which one after another come into and depart out of the body few of their bonzij will open teach this doctrine but labour to hold the people in awe amida and Xaca they preach as saviour and to be worship some of their sect e e Icoxuana do believe a eternal life and promise it to all such as call upon these suppose deity as saint which sometime lead so austere a life for the sin of mankind that for a man to vex his mind or macerate his body for his own sin or to do good work will not only be superstitious but offensive and derogatory to their merit and here the kind-hearted jesuite f f franc. Gasp be pang with a fit of charity to yoke the lutheran with they as if the suffering of jesus be but the superstition of amida as if either the suffering of man imperfect borrow duty can be or the suffering of God can not be meritorious or as if the lutheran deny Christian contrition who affect be indignation g g 2. cor. 7.11 effect self revenge as they do popish confession and satisfaction these god they call Fotoques other god of a less mould they call Camis which have their charge and peculiar office for health child riches etc. as among the elder that I trouble not the queasy stomach of the late roman these be king and nobleman or inventor of art of who they they have as true tale as Homer of the legend yield Taicosama that die h h an. do. 1598 franc. Pasiuss lud. Frois a few year since the first in which these many late age take the title of a king which together with the crown he receive of the king of China ordain before his death that his body shall not be burn after the wont manner but close in a chest and in a sumptuous temple for that purpose build i i al. Valignan his image shall be enshrine and worship with the title of Scinfaciman or new Faciman the name of their Mars or Warlike God which be also do he have appoint by Will the form of that temple which shall be build unto he which by those be do captain Saris see it have on each side fifty stone pillar very stately for matter art and seat on a Hill the people call he the principal Cam of their cam at the first erection his corpse be there entomb and his statue erect for their superstitious worship thus he which in his youth have use to cut wood and carry it into the market to sell for his daily sustenance for his valour promote in military honour at last become the great monarch that japon have see in eight hundred year and not content with human greatness will aspire to that divine whereof he himself have be a derider in other his name before be Faxiba call after Quabacondonus the high title next to the Dairi and signify the chief of the treasure next borrow a kingly stile from China will mad folly on his deathbed bequeath godhead to a man and immortality to a carcase when he can no long hold out his pride cruelty and other wicked course which make his presence dreadful his memory detestable Nabunanga be his predecessor in his state and impiety arrogate divine honour to himself k k lud. Frois but destroy the temple of their god together with the temple-keeper the bonzij this appear as Frenoiama a famous university of those bonzij nine mile from Meaco wherein eight hundred year past a japonian king have erect three thousand and eight hundred temple with house adjoin for the bonzij allow to their maintenance the three part of the revenue of the kingdom of voman hence proceed their order and government in affair both of state and religion be a seminary of law and superstition but these temple in time diminish to eight hundred and the bonzian discipline as much impair and alter from austerity in some to wantonness in other from art to arm the bonzij take part with Nechien enemy of Nabunanga who enrage hereat make truce with the one to destroy the other the bonzij not prevail by their sue for peace fortify themselves for war in the temple of quanon their god of health and long life much frequent with pilgrim from all part much solemnize with their pompous procession like in all part if you believe the jesuite to their solemnity which grow the more famous for that these be but the preamble to the like pomp in Gibon festival at Meaco but all prevail not with Nabunanga who destroy both temple and priest with fire and sword burn four hundred other temple for company in the year 1572. at Meaco he burn twenty of these bonzian cloister of the great sort beside fourscore less and in one of they threescore bonzian woman or nun who devotion be employ in beg for the reparation of the temple of Daibud among the rest as the grecian have their Mercury with his so the japonian have their jizu with his trident to convey soul depart into their allot eternal residence the bonzij his chaplain by lot inquire whither they shall remove he he command it and they with great solemnity perform it but out of a place which then escape to another l l out of the fry pan into the fire wherein and wherewith he be burn facusangin be another bonzian academy adorn with many college which he destroy Xuanguen the king of cainochun shave his head and beard and profess himself a Bonzi and not only attire himself in their habit but thrice a day do perform their superstition have six hundred bonzij to his follower he write to Nabunanga entitle himself the patron of those religion the other in his answer style himself the tame of devil and enemy of sect but after that he will be a god soon do he cease to be a man the immortal God hate corrival by his own subject destroy his life riches and memory these bonzij be for the most part gentleman who their parent have many child for want of maintenance thrust into cloister Shave as you have hear and shaver covetous pill and poll the people of their money by many device as by sell they scroll to keep they by the devil from hurt of devil after death borrow of money here m m Bal. gagus to repay with great interest in the future world give the creditor a bill or scroll of their hand for security by tell of thing steal or lose which they do by enchantment call a devil into a child who be so possess answer their question by sell their blessing and curse like Balaam some by vow the most live unmarried as the bonzian woman another sect call janambuxos before their admission into that order live two thousand or more together on a high mountain for the space of threescore day macerate themselves with self-inflicted penance the devil in diverse shape meanwhile appear to they and after this they be receive into that damnable fellowship distinguish by white flock hang down their neck curl hair and black hat and so wander from place to place give notice of their come by a little bell. another sect call Genguis dwell on some high hill black of complexion and as be suppose horn marry wife of their own kindred pass over great river by the devil help who on a certain hill at time appoint appear to they of who by the name of amida he be worship in another hill he be wont to appear to his devout follower who then he will lead as they think to paradise indeed to destruction they say that a son not able to persuade his father from this passage to paradise secret follow he with his bow and arrow and when the devil appear shoot and wound a fox who he follow by the blood to a lake wherein he find many dead man bone they have another university in japon call Coia who bonzian student be of the sect of Combendaxis suppose the inventer of the japonian letter n n Vid. claud. duret he in his old age dig a foursquare cave into which he convey himself affirm that he then die not but after some million of year will return in the day of one Mirozu which then shall be a most worthy king in japon about his sepulchre burn many lamp send thither from diverse nation with opinion that such as enrich that monument shall themselves here be enrich and in the other life by Combendaxis patronise in the college here live six thousand of those shaveling from who woman be restrain upon pain of death at Fatonochaiti the bonzij train up witty and proper youth in all trick of subtlety and guile o o a coney-catch trick acquaint they with genealogy of prince that so they may counterfeit to be the son of such or such great man and borrow money on that credit may enrich their wicked college till the sleight be find they be kill of the inhabitant there be that worship the sun and moon who have a image with three head which they say be the virtue of the sun moon and element p p Cos tur. these worship the devil in visible shape appear to they with many and costly sacrifice some bonzij play the physician which burn certain paper in which be write the sentence of Cam and Fotoch which paper be burn they put the ash in drink and give the same to cure disease and with lie to turn away lie and fraudulent deal some hold Xacas book in such veneration that without it they hold it impossible to be save other bonzij have be in other age in high reputation of holiness but e e Gaspar Vilela one especial not a hundred year since the author of the sect call Icoxos the ruler or general of which sect be open wicked but so adore of the people that if he but look on they they will salute he with tear of joy pray he that all their sin may be pardon and therewith give he no small quantity of their gold his yearly festival be so honour with throng of the people that in the entry of the cloister many be tread under foot which yet be of the blind people account a happiness many willing yield themselves to be kill in that press and in the night while his praise be sing there be a great howl and lamentation nequiron be author of the sect Foquexan there be a image or colossus of copper in the way from Ozaca to Sorungo call dabis make hollow sit upon his heel of huge greatness and yield a great sound if any hallow in the hollow thereof as some of captain Saris his company do at Meaco he observe one temple as great as the body of Paul westward from the choir with a stone roof bear up on as high pillar he see a idol great than the former reach up to the top of the arch that of dabis be in their way to the pilgrimage of Tenchadema where master adam tell he that he have be there they every month present the devil with a new virgin instruct by the bonzij to ask he certain question which he in human shape appear answer have the carnal use of her body if some Bonzi make not the devil cuckold as in our egyptian relation you shall find of Tyrannus some of their bonzij profess a military discipline as the knight of Malta the profession call Neugori be institute by Cacubau who be therefore deify in which some intend their prayer while other fight and other perform their task of make five arrow a day their government be a anarchy every one obey and command the mean person among they have a negative in all their consultation and nothing be agree on till all be agree in the night they often kill one another without remorse and yet such be their religion this sect hold it a sin to kill a fly or any live thing among the bonzij there f f laurent japon be two principal man which if under their hand-writing they give their testimonial to other of their order it be as confer a degree yea a kind of canonization for thenceforward they sit in a chair and be adore and appoint to other student their task of meditation one of these puff up with vanity and arrogance profess to know what he be before he be bear and what shall become of he after death Valentine caruaglio g g valent. Caro iap. in relate the death of some principal noble which withstand Daifusama the present emperor speak of a certain Bonzi which never stir out of door but upon such occasion who accompany with many of his sect after other hallow ceremony do give they a certain book to kiss and lay it on their head wherein they repose much holiness and worship it as a god but one of they name Augustine reject he cry out he be a christian and therewith take out a picture of queen catharine of Portugal sister to Charles the five in which be also represent the holy virgin and our lord and with great reverence lay it three time on his head and so resound the name of jesus and Maria be behead this I mention to let you see the japonian christianity some of the bonzij be diligent preacher with great zeal and eloquence declare the goodness of their amida and exhortation to call upon he @. v. of their feast their bloody pilgrimage and confession MEaco their chief city be chief also in superstition have have if report lie not on the hill near to it seven thousand cloister or abbey one of which be so famous that the king in their war will vow great sum of gold and after victory pay the same there the people also in distress make it their sanctuary where the devil by vision delude they in August they celebrate the feast of Gibon with pageant fifteen or sixteen chariot cover with silk go before in they be child with minstrelsy every chariot be draw with thirty or forty man and follow by their peculiar company or trade and after they chariot of man arm which all pass by the temple in the morning in the evening two litter come forth carry by man the one of the god the other of his leman then follow the three of his wife with which the man run up and down in such a confuse manner as may signify her jealousy here the people weep and pray to their goddess who yet with a contrary devotion they comfort and last as if by the people mediation the litter be join together and carry into the temple in the same month they have their feast of Allsouls in which they light many lamp at their door and all night walk up and down the city and many suppose at a certain place they meet with the walk ghost of their decease friend and after welcome ceremony they set victual h h bait in the journey to paradise before they at least in that place where have a little attend they invite they to their house the reason of this refresh they allege the long journey to paradise which in less than three year space can be pass and therefore they have need of hearten two day this feast last in which they cleanse their grave and give present to the bonzij in march they have festival play in which many meet in the afternoon paint with the image of their god on their shoulder and part themselves into two rank the boy begin with stone the man continue the fray with arrow pole and sword always with the death of some and impunity of the doer the four month be a kind of Lent or devout season nic. Trigaut in which every day in the week the bonzij preach twice or thrice a day in the praise of Xara at Sacai in july they keep the feast of Daimaogin to who many temple be dedicate in which the idol be carry with much pomp on horseback follow first by the bonzij than the nobility after they certain witch who arm troop of soldier follow then come the litter of the god all gild carry by twenty man answer each other in certain hymn the people worship l. Frois they believe diverse paradise into each of which their peculiar god carry their own worshipper and some make overhasty journey thither on this sort he watch certain day and then out of a pulpit preach of the contempt of the world other betake they to be his companion and some give their alm on the last day he make a oration to his fellow who all drink wine go into their ship carry a scythe to cut up all the bramble in their way and put on their clothes stuste their sleeve with stone and hang a great stone about their neck to help they the soon to their paradise hurl themselves into the sea and great honour be do to they be thus dead I see one say Vilela that have seven of these companion which with their great alacrity and my great amazement do this but they which worship amida observe another rite be weary of live they put themselves in a strait hole of the earth receive breath only by a reed and so continue fast and pray till death some in honour of a certain idol do cast themselves down from a high tower where this idol be place and after their death be repute saint other i i pet. Alcaceut sail to their paradise as before but when they have launch into the deep make hole in the ship keel for death to enter and the sea to swallow both it and they diverse also cross and disembowel themselves before their idol for with such sacrifice their god be please josephus acosta k k joseph accost histor indiae lib. 5. cap. 25. tell of a strange confession which be observe in this order there be say he in ocaca very high and steep rock which have pike or point on they above two hundred fathom high one of which high and more terrible than the rest daunt and terrify the Xamabusis which be certain pilgrim to look up unto it upon the top of the point there be a great rod of iron of three fathom long place there by a strange device at the end of this rod be a balance tie whereof the scale be so big as a man may sit in one of they and the goquis which be devil in human shape command those pilgrim to enter therein one after another not leave one of they l l all this be represent to the eye in picture by Theodoret de bry. Americae part 9 then with a engine or instrument which move by mean of a wheel they make this rod of iron to hang in the air one of the Xamabusis be set in one of the scale which because there be no counterpoise in the other seal present hang down and the empty one rise to touch the rod aforesaid whereupon the balance hang then the goquis tell the poor pilgrim that he must confess all his sin that he can remember with a loud voice that all may hear which he present do some of the hearer laugh some sigh at every sin mention the other scale fall a little till that have tell all it remain equal with the other wherein the sorrowful penitent sit then the goquis turn the wheel and draw the rod and balance unto he and the pilgrim come forth and another enter till all have pass if any conceal any sin the empty scale yield not and if when he be urge to confess he grow obstinate the goquis cast he down from the top where in a instant he be break in a thousand piece a japonian who have seven time make trial hereof be convert to Christianity report this but the terror be such say he that few will conceal any thing the place be hereof call Sangenetocoro that be the place of confession thus much acosta who as I thank for the story so I will a little trouble for he will more patient hear and bear than some of his hot brethren with a question concern confession and if the question come too late yet the society live and will long than a better thing in to a college of who japon have bring we as their name here testify the question be whether every residence of the jesuit be not a Songenotocoro of ocaca that be a place of confession so do Sangenotocoro signify of which we may exclaim (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and if you will (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the one for the cruel terror wherewith it fill the conscience and the latter for the fleshly filthiness wherein ocaca be not blame but their a a our Chaucer in the Friar prologue cor. Agrippa c 64 and many of the papist hemselue confess thus much of their confessionist Aluar. Pelag. Ouand jac. de Graf etc. see Whites way to the church pag. 219. and John nic. pilgrimage Poggius etc. church have be stew and confession the bawd but to let this pass and consider the former what rack or rock can ocaca yield like to this which the b b Concil. trid. Sess. 14. cap. 5. can. 67. council of Trent have frame that full confession of all mortal sin lo here the rack even the very thought against the two last commandment with the circumstance of the sin be necessary by divine ordinance unto all which have sin after baptism and lo here the rock anathema to the gainsayer tush your coin be not currant although you yield it profitable and comfortable and satisfactory to the offend church except you yield all necessary all divine divine shall I call you or goquis devil in the flesh that make a hell in the spirit of man that with your and with your circumvent poor christian and put they in a ocacan balance over hell-mouth there to fall without such favour as to be break in piece go cardinal and write d d Bellar. tom. 3. lib. 3. whole volume for the proof hereof yet will I rather choose to enter the sangenotocoro-scale then your Confession-school Esay it may be indeed to scare Jesuitical conscience that account treason religion yea pleasant and delightful to such statist to have king upon the knee of their body to pour out before they the secret of their soul and they be wise than Solomon e e prou. 25.3 which esteem it unpossible to search out the king heart but to such as have business enough to know and rule themselves and do indeed make conscience of every duty what intolerable anguish be here prepare when man heart beside that it be wicked and deceitful above all who can search it be like a untamed heifer who can rule it have I not need always to have a priest at my elbow to who to shrive i f f jer. 17.9 who know the error of his life and who know when he have make his due premeditation to examine they this make Bellarmine use the difficulty of confession g g Bellar. poenit lib. 3. c. 12. as a argument of the divine institution thereof it be so difficult say he that no power of man or the church can have impose it and therefore it be divine I will not say who institute the balance of ocaca and yet it be a hard thing and never the like hear of I say that the gospel impose not such hard thing this be to bring we back to the law but prescribe a h h matt. 11.30 easy yoke and a light burden easy to such as love not their ease light to such as like and delight in it but this even to those that dote upon it and devote themselves to it be not only hard but altogether impossible witness Bellarmine himself witness experience in such i i Sheldon motive in the preface as have try it more near than Bellarmine controversy will give he leisure yet live in continual disquietness and torment of their conscience in the use of their sacrament of confession receive no rest day nor night as serve god who can give it they these be the word of sheldon happy bring out of that darkness wherein and whereof he be a priest and minister to a clear light who out of his own knowledge add that it be not imaginable what inconsolable life some that be frequent in the use of confession as necessary to salvation do lead there be no stony heart which will not pity they know their torment but lest any man think that some goquis have hurl i out of the scale of my history to fall and split myself upon these Jesuitical rock I will return to our narration of the japonite @. 5 of their idol temple funeral I have mention too many of their idol already amida Xaca Faciman and other I may here add their idol * * l. Almeida Casunga of who they beg riches a japonian 1611. find one of his image by change whereupon he promise to himself store of wealth but soon after all that he have be seize on by the governor this cause he to cast this idol out of door and as the jesuit say to become their scholar I may annex Tamondea bosomonde homocondis and Zoiolis to which four their superstitious opinion commit so many heaven in custody canon and Xixi the son of Xaca Maristenes tirigis and other will be too tedious to report organtinus a a organtinus tell that while upon a time the feast of this last be solemnize a shower of stone rain with such violence that the company to the number of twenty thousand betake they to their heel but amida be most wear in their lip beggar ask and beg in his name chapman in buy and sell sound and sing it the bonzij promise salvation to all that invoke it admirable be the temple b b l. Frois for matter and workmanship erect to he one near to Meaco be a hundred and forty else in length with a huge image of amida have thirty image about it of soldier beside aethiopian and devil yea wind and thunder figure and a thousand image of canon on each side of the temple five hundred all in like but monstrous shape with thirty arm two only hold proportion to his body the breast adorn with seven face all the image and other furniture so glitter with gold that it dazzle the beholder eye Almeida describe a temple of they in Meaco call cobucui which have three porch with so many cloister and other piece of stately and costly workmanship two mighty colossus or statue of lion be set as porter at the door in the midst of the temple be set Xaca and his son about he there be threescore and ten pillar of cedar of such height that as the register book of the temple testify each of they cost five thousand ducat these and the wall be paint the roof artificial frame a hall for the bonzij forty else long and twelve broad of like workmanship with the temple whereunto be annex their chamber a hundred and fourscore in number a library full store with book bath buttery kitchen huge caldron a ell deep to heat their water for drink which they never drink cold neither in summer nor winter parlour four and twenty with light burn in they all night before it be a fish-poole fifty else square full of fish which none may touch it be six hundred year since the foundation of this temple the pleasant and spacious walk before the temple of Casunga plant with lofty cedar and pine water with a goodly stream arch with a double row of pillar adorn with fifty lantern on each side of solid metal cover with gold and curious wrought which burn all night the large monastery of bonzian nun which be above five and forty year old devote themselves to these holy the Qoire not to be enter by any but certain religious which there sit in garment of silk these with other like may tempt my pen to be tedious and so may the temple of Fachiman in the same grove more costly and curious than the former and another without it consecrate to dai which have two giantly porter of stone fourteen else high fourscore and eighteen pillar of wonderful height and three else and a half in compass it be build seven hundred year since and be twenty year in building a tower or steeple of wood be bear up with thirty pillar in which do hang a brazen bell the mouth whereof be two else the compass six the depth three and a half the thickness above thirteen inch there be many dear and dove consecrate to the temple which go into man house no man touch they their walk set with Orange tree and other their rarity of art and nature they which will further learn let they resort to Almeida our author one temple be dedicate just by to a lizard which they make author and patron of learning without altar or image in it he that read of the huge work of Taicosama hold sometime a hundred thousand workman in labour at once may present to his imagination the incredible building which those tyrant by so many slavish hand can raise their busy wit appear by their curious question to John Fernandus of the nature of the soul of angel and devil etc. and some of they c c ed. Silvius see the absurdity of the bonzij worship nothing at all the bonzij as the jesuit report raise slanderous rumour of they to be eater of man flesh and cause of the war and plague which their god provoke by this new sect send among they they d d pet. Alcaceva slander the new convert as miserable apostate which become Christian because they will not be at the charge of their idolatry the jesuit e e nic. Trigaut tell of a great woman possess with a devil which say that he be a fox for some injury offer by the maid thus deal with the mistress there be in those part store of fox multiply by their superstition not dare to hurt any notwithstanding their great harm because forsooth they be the devil instrument to punish they yet in this case the wizard be consult counsel to take a fox without hurt he which with a trap be do and to give he all kind entertainment with most delicate food and usage so to pacify the goodwife angry daemon who yet like a devil with fair entreaty grow worse hereupon another famous wizard be call who write a long scroll bind himself in the Devil-foxe name to free the woman subscribe with his blood which scroll he hang on the fox neck before take which be neat trim and shave by a barber and paint as their woman be of pale complexion use be let go and the devil intermit his torture awhile but after reiterate the same the woman husband cause all the fox thereabouts to be slay for this perfidiousness and a three wizard cure the mistress by conjure the devil into one of her maid they be very curious and ambitious in set forth their funeral their Funeral thus brief the friend * * l. Frois epi assemble in their best array to the fire the woman of his acquaintance go forth in white raiment with party colour veil on their head and their maiden attend their chief woman be carry in bed or litter of cedar after they follow the man in sumptuous habit next come the chief Bonzius of his sect in his carry in a costly bed attend with thirty other bonzij in their linen vestment then one in ash-coloured garment for that be also a mourn colour with a long torch light show the corpse the way to the fire follow with two hundred bonzij sing to the deity which the dead have chief observe other beat on a basin till they come at the fire other carry paper-basket full of paint flower which they shake out by the way as a token that his soul be go to paradise eight bonzij draw banner on the ground in which be write their idol name ten lantern with the same inscription be carry with light burn two follow with torch unlighted wherewith afterward they kindle the fire many come after in ash-coloured habit with threesquare cap on their head with the name also of their devil therein write which name another bear write in a table with large letter of Gold after all these do you think you have lose he come the corpse sit in a bed in white bear by four man his hand join in a pray gesture his child be next the elder carry a torch to kindle the fire last come the multitude with such cap as we speak of after a hour hallow their holy by all this multitude and three time compass about the enclose square place in which beside table for viand the fire be make the chief bonzij in a unknown language mumble over a hymn and light a torch do thrice brandish it about his head thereby signify that the soul be without beginning or end and then cast it away two of his child take it up and after a triple ceremony the body be lay thereon kindle therewith the wood on which they hurl costly wood and oil and so burn the carcase to ash which do the child make incense adore their father as now assume to the heavenly society and rich reward the bonzij next day they return and put the relic of this corpse ash and bone into a gild vessel which be hang in the house there to receive like exequies and afterward with no less ceremony bury every seven day and seven month and seven year his child renew their devotion the poor spend herein two or three hundred the rich as many thousand ducat in the obit of great person the lord and man of rank assemble themselves and be call every man by name to do honour to the image of the decease with incense as in sacrifice after so much wickedness of man let we add somewhat of the admirable work of God in japan @. 7 of the strange earthquake and tempest in japan with some other observation on the a a l. frois relat de Legat. civen add many other strange effect hereof in Bungo and other place Vid. and pet. gomez two and twenty day of july in the year 1596. it rain ash round about Meaco cover the ground as if it have be snow soon after it rain both there and in other place red sand and after that as it have be woman hair and not long after follow a earthquake that hurl down temple and palace wherein Taicosama have then new employ night and day a hundred thousand workman to his exceed cost and their intolerable slavery which with their ruin destroy thousand six hundred gild image in the temple of janzusangue be cast down and break in piece as many remain whole it bring up the sea a great way upon the main land which be carry back with it into the sea not leave mention that there have be land so be the city ochinofama swallow famaoqui Ecuro fingo Cascicanaro the neighbour-town attend she in this new voyage and become sea the ship in the haven find no more security but be also devour the like happen in the year of our lord 1586. to Nagafama a place frequent with merchant which the sea before have enrich then with a earthquake devour the earth in many place open such wide mouth that a caliver-shot can scarce reach from the one side to the other belch out of that yawn such a stink as none be able to pass by the earth and sea not only shake with fear but bellow out such roar cry under that blow of their creator hand as do make the accident more dreadful yet be all soon forget and Taicosama tell to building of new palace Francis Fernandes write that in the way from malacca to japan they be encounter with great storm which they call tuffon that blow four and twenty hour begin from the north to the east and so about the compass these happen in june and july it be there cold in November December January and February because of continual north and northwest wind while captain Saris be there a terrible tuffon blow down the house in Firando turn they over with the fire in they which must needs have fire they but for as strange a accident so much rain come withal a Bonzi pretend to have be tell by their god or devil that such a night their town shall be burn this make such outcry every night the devil still prove a liar that they can not sleep that tuffon sink diverse junk and do much harm to the hollander wharf bring up the sea so terrible that it make the earth to shake and yet the year after worse harm be relate from Edoo by master cock this fair city all overflow and the people force to flee into the mountain the water take possession of those gild house and the wind carry away all the tile of the king palace stately build in his new fortress these tile all gild but now none to be find the pagan ascribe this to the charm of the jesuit late banish the christian japonian unto that persecution their woman be as white as with we but not well colour which they supply with Art there be woman at Firando which live in their boat and take fish by dive in eight fathom deep their eye be red by this dive they easy this way know they have three sort of silver it be with little cost reduce to the spanish purity their house be floor with mat and they fringe with silk gold or other stuff the Japander confirm and subscribe their compact and bond with their Blood their silver be in bar their gold coin in long form he that list further to be acquaint with japonian affair may resort to the epistle of the jesuit which beside these I have name be many and of that society be not many less than two hundred in this island a a gab. matosus 1603. Eman. acosta which also be now become a episcopal see some city be become whole b b fran. Cabralis pet. Gomes christian if we believe the jesuit abandon all their ethnic paganism and idolatry will god no leaven be mix with their christianity Peter martinez their first bishop tell of above twenty thousand in a year convert to christian religion whereas in China they have find small success notwithstanding that they c c Emen. jesseria there promise to themselves a more plentiful harvest then in any other nation the first of they be xavier one of Ignatius first companion and like to have be canonize before he too which die in China 1552. and lie bury at goa of which Arias Blandonin and the jesuit tell many strange thing but the first find of this island be by Galuanus ascribe to Anthony Mota and his fellow 1542. but before these m. polo write of this island which he call d d pol. l. 3. xepangu whither Cublai the great tartarian can in the year 1264. scent two captain to conquer the island the wind as angry with the tartarian and take part with the islander raise so stormy a sea that when there be now thirty thousand of their company land in a little island they be force to put off to sea and scatter with tempest the islander set forth a navy to take those tartarian which so confuse order that enterprise that the tartarian find mean to make themselves master of their enemy navy and therewith to sail away Marcus Paulus report like thing of their idolatrous religion as you have hear of idol with head of ox hog and dog and other deform shape and some with many hand as a testimony of their great power the enemy which they take in war not able to redeem themselves he say they do eat in solemn feast he add that in the japonian language Mangi be call Cin as now it be Cina or China I have presume to add a piece of a letter of Quabacondonus to the viceroy of India which after other thing have these word japan be the kingdom of Chamis who we esteem to be the same with Scin which be the begin of all thing this scin be the substance and very be of all thing and all thing be one and the same with Scin and into Scin be resolve which in scina be call jutto and in tescincu Buppo in the observation of the law of this Chamis consist all the politic government of japan both inward and outward etc. between the sect of amida and Xaca happen a late grievous quarrel 1609. both sect number great multitude joan. Rodrigues nic. Trigaut and be say in time past to have number betwixt they three thousand college or monastery in the mountain not far from Meaco their original be from Sijenoyama a town in the say hill those of the Amidan sect be call Fandoxus the other of Xaca foquexus now it happen that one of these foquexus transport with zeal in a sermon of his have rail on amida and his sectary which by one of they be soon answer whereupon follow a challenge of disputation betwixt they which come to the ear of cubo who follow amida he command that both of they shall come to Yendo or Edoo to try the matter before he where the foquexus fear the emperor the rather because he have show the bitterness of his zeal against one of cubos son which he say be late dead be now damn for be of amidas heresy and ride up and down all japan without rest appear here and there and now can he speak but half word be surprise with his fear a passion which be the betray of the succour that reason offer cubo command that he shall be strip of his bonzian habit in a public congregation by other priest together with his companion lade mean while with insolent word and blow after this they and eleven more of their sect above twenty in all be bind and lead up and down this city and other the chief city of japan in which before he have preach last all of they be carry back to Miaco and cart the preacher have his ear and nose cut off the rest their * * Rodrig say their ear cut off and not their nose but both to the preacher and that 21. house or monastery be therefore desolate nose and the matter take up by the king of fingo which follow Xaca obtain this conclusion that all the foquexus shall by their public writing confess that the founder of their heresy which first teach the worshipper of amida to be damn be a impostor and that Xaca never have teach so thus have this emperor deal with the japonian sect nor be he equal to the jesuit christianity for in Yendo so the jesuit call that imperial city of the prince we Eddo and Edoo proclamation be make that none of the noble shall become Christian and many inferior king persecute the same special Michael a the king of Arima which have before use bad mean to remove his father so to become his untimely successor this his father John have a little before be employ against the portugal ship of Macao the reason be some quarrel at Macao betwixt the portugal and japonian who be severe inquire into by the Portugal magistrate flee home and acquaint cubo with the business hereupon this ship arrive in japan at Nangasach he send this king of Arima against they in which fight the Portugal ship long prevail by casualty be fire and by themselves cast fire into the Gunners-room blow up to the loss of a million of good this John use indirect mean to obtain part of the kingdom of Fyen his hope increase by the marriage of the emperor niece to his son Michael notwithstanding his former wife the issue be ann. 1612 that while the father entertain one policy the son have two the one for that land of Fyen the other to supplant his father who seem to forget the japonian custom in their age to relinquish the government to the son or successor this at last he effect by his father banishment first and soon after his death and now become of his wife religion lit. 1613. persecute the christian and banish the jesuit he burn or roast rather eight of his subject after saint Laurence his example and the emperor himself have much distaste the jesuit the reason be not mention by the jesuit but captain Saris then in japan affirm that a ship of the portugal come from Macao Ogashasama send to have some rarity buy for his use the governor I know not whether it be the king of Firando move the jesuit to effect the emperor pleasure they say they be religious man this belong to the captain of the Ship he be solicit say it belong to the master the master be ask and answer the jesuit rule herein thus be the business wound in a circle they seek it seem to heighten the price and the governor to who the emperor have send accuse the Jesuit as be under the cloak of religion merchant hereupon he cause their temple to be pull down and all remove to nangasacke and prohibit any mass-saying within five league of the court which while some presume in their zeal to transgress say mass in a hospital of leper within that compass they be crucify therefore captain Saris in his journey to Sorunga meet with some of their church thus take down diverse junk be lade with they for such be the japonian building with joint in their timber and without nail that it may easy be remove the relic of these crucify person be reserve as great holy as great folly I shall have say and since master cock have write that the jesuit be all banish japan and their church pull down and burn the jesuit have some goodly college as at Meaco one as large as the a a that part within the wall tower-hill whither the child resort daily to their school and before these day the king b b hen. Cuyckius of Bungo Arima and omur send their ambassador to the pope than Gregory the thirteen with letter of devotion to his holiness and. Schottus and have audience in the consistory the three and twenty day of March ann. 1585. this be the jesuit policy say * * Lins l. 1. c. 26. Linschoten to make the japonite to know the magnificence of Europe and by that mean principal to enrich themselves with gift and privilege howsoever the japonite think themselves hereby much oblige to the pope as by the letter of don sancio the king or lord of omur and Protasius of Arima to pope Xistui 1590. appeareth but for a farewell to these japonian jesuit I like their be there so well that I can wish all of that society be preach in that island or act the scripture-story upon the stage which i i Arias Sanctius bap. Montanus be one way of instruct the japonite or if you like that rather a whip themselves in their vainglorious procession which be another of their japonian lecture that so they may in some measure expiate the crime of their european brethren or any way else so that our Europe be well rid of such vermin Coray be a hundred league from japan by sea which be so troublesome that in the five year war between the japonite and the corayan it swallow above five hundred ship this kingdom of Coray be a hundred league long and threescore broad tributary to China and confine upon the tartar they be good archer but not so good soldier as the japonian nor so well weapon but better provide of ship Taicosama war upon it both to make it his way as be think to China and especial that have subdue it he may place the king his vassal in japonia there so to possess all that japonian state immediate himself there be to the north of japan near to Sassuma certain plentiful island call liuquiu the portugal name they sechy which by the king of Sassumas endeavour cubo have conquer the king noble and a rich booty take formosa be a great barren island betwixt macar and japan not far from China to which it be tributary betwixt who and the Japander have be late quarrel Lewis Frois speak of a great nation of wild people to the north of japan three hundred league from Meaco which be clothe with beast skin with great beard and moustache a people give to wine valiant dreadful to the japonite they worship the heaven and other religion they have not captain Saris be tell at Edoo Edoo of a i will call Yedzo northwest from japan by one which say he have be there twice * that the people be hairy as monkey and that further north there be small people of little stature these of Yedzo be as tall as the japonian with who they have continual traffic have little apparel but from they of corea he be also tell that there be many bog for which cause they have wagon with broad wheel to keep they from sink and observe the monson or season of the wind of which you have hear how certain it come yearly in all the east they have sail fit to those wagon and so make their voyage on land with such wagon full of soldier taicosama as he be tell have intend to assail China but be prevent by one which to poison he poison himself chap. 16 of the philippina @. i. of the spanish island and other adjoin it be already show that those island receive this name of Philip the second king of Spain and that this name sometime be in a large sense attribute to all these island in those huge sea but more proper to those which Lagaspi discover in the year 1564. and where the spaniard have since that time have some place of abode Mendenao Tendaya luzon and their neighbour lie farreinto the sea before Cauchinchina and Cambaya betwixt the seven degree and the twenty of northerly latitude but first of all other Tendaia be call Philippina by the spaniard which discover it out of New-spain 1542. as juan gaetan one of they testify they be a a gio. bot. ben. many in number some of they very great rich in Rice honey fruit bird beast fish gold and enrich further with trade from China seventie of these island be subject or friend to the spaniard of ancient time they be subject as some say to the Chinois b b discourse of China of f. juan. gon. de mend. until they do voluntary relinquish they the cause of much civil war among themselves that Anarchie prove worse to they then a tyranny or rather the worst tyranny every man become a tyrant and as he have mean of wit strength and follower prey upon other use or sell they for slave which their division make a easy way to the spanish conquest they worship the sun and moon observe in their honour solemn and sumptuous feast in the illocos they worship the devil and offer to he many sacrifice in recompense of a great quantity of gold which they say he have give they their feast and sacrifice be do by woman which be witch of they call Holgo reverence among they as priest these have ordinary talk with the devil and many time in public these wrought strange witchcraft they answer unto all question that be demand of they although their answer be often either lie or riddle they use lot as the Chinois and be observer of time if they begin a journey and meet with a lizard or other worm they will return home say the heaven prohibit their proceed they have now among they many preacher and monastery of the augustinian franciscan and jesuit but the wicked life of the spaniard be so offensive to the inhabitant that the discourser himself a friar tell here of a notable story c c pag. 349 a certain islander soon after his baptism die and appear after to many of his countryman persuade they to be baptize as a way unto that happiness whereof he now have in himself most bless experience only they must be baptize and observe the commandment which the spaniard preach to they of who and of other like unto they there be in that happy place infinite number hereupon he vanish and some be persuade but other of they refuse say that see there be spanish soldier in glory they will not go thither because they will not be in their company a like history Bartholom de las casas d d Crud el. Hisp relate of a western indian at the time of his death answer to a Dominicke friar which counsel he to die a Christian and so to be capable of heaven when he hear there be spaniard in heaven he will rather be in hell with his forefather then in heaven with the spaniard the spaniard e e francis-vaez 1601. have their bishop and archdeacon and beside other religious seven college of jesuit Boterus f f G.B.B. part. 4 lib. 3. say that the king of Spain have think to have make manilla a bishopric and add three other archbishopric captain g g Oliver a Noort 1600. Noort a Dutchman that compass the world lose a ship here in fight with the spaniard and sink one of they he affirm that the convert of these part be more popish christian then in the midst of Rome or Spain and more addict to their superstitious folly in these philippina h h tho. Cand sh voyage Hak. tom. 3. some carve and cut their skin with sundry streak and device all over their body moreover as we have speak of ball wear in their yard or bell rather for they make a loud ring as they go if they wrap they not up very close by the man of Pegu so here the man and man-child among they have nail of tin thrust quite through the head of their privy part be split in the low end and rivet which be do when they be young and the place grow up again without any great pain they take it out and put it in as occasion serve this here as that in Pegu be say to have be practise to avoid the sin of sodomy whereto before they be prone the male also be at least in some i i on the i will Capul of the philippina circumcise the people worship the devil who oft time appear to they in conference in most ugly and monstrous shape there be among they a island of negro inhabit with black people almost as big as England in nine degree here also be those k k ant. Galuana black people call man-eater and sorcerer among who devil walk familiar as companion if these wicked spirit find one alone they kill he and therefore they always use company their idol they adorn with ostrich feather they use to let themselves blood with a certain herb lay to the member and lick with the tongue with which they can draw out all the blood in their body they be like the cafer or ethiopian and be divide into many kingdom as l l Nic nun. ay gaetan ap. ram. nun write Migindinao Mindanao or Vendenao be a great island contain by juan Gaetan observation three hundred and four score league in compass it be inhabit of moor and gentile there be many king in stead of bread they use Rice and Sagu there be pepper ginger and gold singular good Tendaia environ a hundred and sixty league from twelve to fifteen degree of latitude the people idolatrous abound with pepper ginger gold and mynes when as Magellan first of all man m m a Pigafettae by the west discover these eastern island in the island of Buthoan and Caleghan he can learn no other religion observe among they but that lift up their hand close together and their face towards heaven they call on their god by the name of abba in Zubut in token of friendship he and the king do let themselves blood on the right arm for so be their wont to confirm league of amity the king have his skin paint with a hot iron pencil he and his people at magellan peswasion be baptize and burn their idol which be make of hollow wood with great face and four tooth like boar tusk in their mouth paint they be all over but have only a forepart and nothing behind they wear in their yard a nail of Gold they have many wife but one principal they n n Mas. Transil observe many ceremony in kill a hog in sacrifice as it seem to the sun after the sound of their cymbal and certain cate set down in platter two old woman come forth with trumpet or pipe of reed and do reverence to the sun and then clothe themselves with sacred vestment one of they put about her forehead a hairlace with two horn hold another heir-lace or scarf in her hand and so begin to sound dance and call upon the sun wherein she be follow by the other both of they in this manner dance about the hog which be there fast tie the horn beldame still mutter certain word to the sun and the other answer she then do she take a cup of wine and after some ceremony pour it on the hog and after that with a lance after dance and flourish she kill the hog all this while a little torch be burn which at last she take into her mouth and bite it and the other woman wash the pipe with the swine blood and with her finger imbrue with blood mark the forehead of her husband first and then of the rest then do they untire themselves and only with woman associate eat the cheer in the platter and after singe the hog and eat he without these ceremony they eat no swine flesh from hence Magellan go to Mathan where in a battle with the islander he be shine in pulaoan they keep cock for the game but eat not of their flesh forbid by their superstition in Ciumbubon they find a tree which have leaf like those of the mulberry have beside on each side of the leaf as it be two foot with which as if it have be move and sensible it will stir and go up and down Pigafetta keep one eight day in a platter and when he touch it present it will flee from he and move up and down he think it live of the air in Burneo the people be partly moores and partly gentile and according to their religion have two king and two royal city situate in salt-water the moor when they kill a hen or a goat use first certain word to the sun the gentile o o Mas. Transil worship the sun and moon esteem the one male and the other female he the father this the mother of the star who also they reckon in the catalogue of their demigod they salute the sun in his morning-approach with certain verse and adoration which they also perform to the moon and demand of they child riches and other their necessary after death they expect no future state the spaniard hear of great pearl as big as egg which the king of Burneo have and if you believe they they take a oyster themselves who fishy substance weigh seven and forty pound the Moor king in Burneo be serve in his palace and attend only by woman and maiden in Gilolo p p Pigafetta they be likewise some of the arabian sect the other gentile the moor have two king of their law each of which have six hundred child the gentile use to worship the first thing they encounter in the morning all the day follow q q got. Arthus pag. 396. they be sometime man-eater some of the islander be by the portugal convert but the king be poison by a mahometan they decline yet one nobleman name John first kill his wife and child with his own hand lest they shall apostatise and then offer himself to endure any torment @. 2 of the molucco Banda Amboyna and selebe the molucco be usual reckon five as before be say but many other island be subject to they and by some author call also by that name the king of ternate be say to r r sir fr. Drake have seventy island under his subjection and in his port represent great majesty both here and in Banda the mahometan superstition have set foot and prevail as in the other adjoin island the moor be as zealous to win proselyte as to enrich themselves none of these island be above six league in compass enrich with clove but of other fruit barren and poor one tree s s maff. lib. 5. they have which out of the cut branch yield a white wholesome and savoury liquor for drink they call it Tuaca and the pith thereof afford they meat call Sagu taste in the mouth like sour curd melt like sugar whereof they make certain cake which will endure good for food ten year HONDIUS his map of the indian island indiae orientalis the clove-tree not only suck up all the moisture of the earth where they grow disdain any other plant shall grow near they like our incloser sudden drink up all the heaven liberality in shower but with their thirsty appetite intercept the run water that descend from the mountain before they can betake they to their mother lap the ocean refuge in this island t t galuane be say to be man have ankle with spur like to cock here be hog with horn a river store with fish and yet so hot that it flay off the skin of any creature which enter it oyster so large that they christian in the shell crab so strong that with their claw they will break the iron of a pickax stone which grow like fish whereof they make lime in u u jac. Neccius ternate be a mountain which as it be angry with nature for be fasten to the earth do not only lift up his high head above the airy region of cloud but endeavour also to conjoin itself with the fiery element wherewith it seem to hold some intercourse with dreadful thunder belch out light flame mix with a dark smoke like proud greatness waste itself with it own flame and fill the neighbouring-valley with ash it be not much above a hundred year since first the sect of Mahumet enter the Moluccas but now 10 10 lud. fernand. la. Masonius both here and in Amboino the jesuit have their residence and have persuade many to their catholic faith and whip procession Stephan ab y y got. Arthus pag. 403. hagan in the year 1605. win this island of Amboino and the fort of the portugal to the state it be a Clove-island the king of ternate be mahometan in z z Holland Navig 1598. and 99 Bilibald Stobaum ternate theft be never suffer unpunished the hollander see a boy of eleven or twelve year for steal a leaf of tobacco lead up and down with his hand bind behind he for a public spectacle and derision to other boy they maintain deadly war with the portugal and spare none of they that they can get if a eclipse of the sun or moon happen they howl and make piteous lamentation persuade themselves that their king or some great man among they will die experience thereof be the six of August 1599 when the moon be eclipse about eight of the clock at night they every way by cry out by strange gesture pray and beat their basin and drum express a lamentable passion of grief for the fear aforesaid and the eclipse be past when they see that neither the king nor any other be dead they observe the next day solemn lie festival with public procession of old and young of all sort they esteem it a miracle when the hollander tell they that there be in their country which can prognosticate of eclipse long before Columbus a a Gas ens lib. 1. cap. 5. use the like simplicity of the jamaicans to his preservation for when they forsake he he threaten unto they the anger of God whereof they shall see a evident token in the darken of the moon within two day which according to the natural revolution of the heaven know to Columbus come to pass the islander with dread and fear show all readiness to his service the conceit of the moon eclipse have be diverse some indian think that she be whip by the sun till the blood follow the greek attribute the same to thessalian charm for remedy whereof they b b Plutarc p. aemil. Seneca hippol. and med. Tibul. l. 1. eleg. 8 Manil lib. 1. astron Iwenal Martial etc. use to beat on instrument of brass and light torch and cast fire up towards heaven and the athenian persecute natural philopher and meteorlogians as adversary to divinity as appear in Diagoras Protagoras and Socrates till Plato bring they to another mind plutar. nicias the water about ternate be so clear that they fish by the eye and can see the anchor in the bottom of the water at sixteen or seventeen fathom deep as if it be but a foot and espy every fish which pass to no small advantage of their fish when the king go to the mesquit a boy go before which bear his sword on his shoulder and in the other hand a kid after he follow the king soldier after they another with a censer next to who come the king with a tiresold over his head to keep off the sun when they be come to the door there be vessel of water to wash their hand and foot before they enter and then the floor be cover with white cloth whereon they prostrate themselves with their face to the earth soft mumble their mumpsimus-devotion in the midst be a pulpit spread with white cloth in stead of a bell they have a great drum hang up which they beat with club they have in every temple also one bell but without a clapper all come at that peal or sound with their weapon arm the moluccians c c jac. neccij Navig in part ind. orient de bry. be better proportion then other indian have more beard which the elder man nourish and wear long for their great authority brown of colour and mean of stature for valour they have not their like in all India especial those of ternate choose rather to die then flee and esteem it a great credit to fight against great multitude their shield be of wood two span broad and 4. foot long they be exceed addict to sloth and ease none work in any handicraft their house be of timber and reed without one nail in they which their slave build and do also their other labour they have no money and the silver which they have be employ to vessel of plate their riches be their clove wherewith they provide they of other necessary they never see their wife till they be marry nor the wife they Makian and Moher be now subject to the king of ternate Tidore and Batian have their peculiar king this people have the power to elect their king so that they choose one of the royal and ancient family the king of ternate call himself king of Gilolo whereof he have but a part and that by conquest the bird of paradise say this author have two foot as well as other bird but as soon as they be take they be cut off with a great part of their body whereof a little be leave with the head and neck which be harden and dry in the sun seem to be so breed the moor d d Pigafetta make the islander believe that they come out of paradise and therefore call they Manucodiata or holy bird and have they in religious account they be very beautiful with variety of feather and colour Amboyna bring forth orange citron lemon clove sugarcane and other fruit be a very fertile island the inhabitant be simple live spare and be attire like other the moluccans they spend much rice whereof they make loaf like sugarloaf they have galley e e Navig holland 1598. b. Strobaeum de Brv part 5. ind. or. have the picture of these galley etc. after their manner form like dragon which they row very swift they call they Karkolleu the admiral come to the hollander with three of these full of arm man which row round about they express manifold sign of joy with song and drum the slave sing as they row they have three piece of ordnance in every galley which they discharge answer in that kind by the hollander but two of the holland ship not find sufficient store of commodity for they all go to Banda pass by Poel Setto a island not inhabit bear northwest from Banda five dutch mile they say it be inhabit of devil and whosoever must pass by make all possible haste to be go much affright either by self-fancy or devilish imposture Banda be four and twenty dutch mile from Amboyna and divide into three part which comprehend five mile the chief city be nera in this island be more store or nutmeg then elsewhere in the Moluccas for which cause they resort hither from java China and malacca they profess Mahometism so devout that they never go to their watch before they have pray in the whereinto they enter be first wash after the Mahometan manner but pray so loud that they may be hear a great distance their word of prayer be Stofferolla Stofferolla Ascehad a Ascehad a Ylla Ascehad a ill lolla ill lolla mahume die Rosulla at the pronounce of which last word they strike their hand over their face in which gesture they think be much holiness other prayer they mutter over very soft with little move their lip they stand upon mat and lift up their eye twice or thrice to heaven after which they kneel down bow their head twice or thrice to the earth thus they do often every day both at home and in the street they have their public meeting and banquet in their temple very often every one bring his part of the cheer which sometime they do in the wood a hundred in a company at these time they consult of public affair they have civil war nera and lantoor hold together against three other town two little island Polleruijn and Poelvunay take part with nera Polerine or Poolaroon and Polaway and when occasion require come thither with their boat to consultation where they be entertain in public feast the manner whereof be that they sit down in order in stead of a table every one have a piece of a leaf of the banana tree then be set before each a piece of Sagu bread after that a dish make of the leaf of another tree with a little sodden rice and flesh-pottage which they hurl by handful into their mouth devour rather then eat the same in the meanwhile the gentleman arise with their weapon and exercise themselves in martial game with dance the quarrel betwixt these islander grow about the cut of certain tree from whence it be come to cut and kill one another with cruel butchery they exercise sea-fight in their or galeot with great dexterity with great shout and cry the gentleman dance on the hatch very active they be very bloody and barbarous yet bury the head of their enemy with sweet odour if any of their friend die the woman make a shrill and loud cry to call he again which not effect they provide a great feast whereunto all the kindred and friend be invite they bury they almost after our fashion in a white sheet the corpse be carry on man shoulder the man first and woman after follow a censer be there leave fume all the day and might and in the night they keep a light burn in a little house which they have set over the grave in the morning and evening all of all sort come and say their prayer a long while together at the grave and be ask wherefore they say that the dead shall not arise again they have a play with the ball exercise by many of they not as among we with the hand but with their foot toss the same up into the air and take it one of another with admirable sleight thus have we relate from dutch testimony in Banda the hollander be report to have four factory and three castle cap. Saris suit bantame they be far more fear of the native then love they raise a fort near to one of their or temple to the profanation as they think of their holy ground and of the sepulcher of their dead which for this cause they spare not hence do the bandese burn with indignation which yet they conceal and with goodly protestation desire the dutch general Verhauf which be there at that time with many ship to come into their house or place of council this be compass with tree and bush in the midst have a fair round place where they sit upon mat their chief magistrate be the sabandare Verhauf promise to come and when he be by one of his countryman that have long continue there admonish of the treachery of this people he yet scorn to fear and with some three hundred follower at the appoint hour march thither the xeriff one of Mahomet kindred wear as note hereof green in his turban which have before invite he to this assembly with all lowly semblance meet he tell that in such arm troop they shall not dare to speak their mind he present command his soldier to stay take with he some two and forty chief man enter and sit down with the Bandese senate crosslegged a Bandese and a Hollander together and so through all the company at the watchword each Bandese stab his neighbour Dutch and present the general head be smite off and carry out to his soldier now busy in play or altogether idle their piece lie on the ground and in this case they be sudden assault by a ambush hide there in the thicket and be in great danger to have lose their fort. the english in their ship may see the fight in another place the hollander turn one of their mesgid into a fort. the offend bandese offer their slave liberty to dispossess they they refuse till a javan merchant than there with his junke offer his ten slave aboard his junke to give the onset thus they go about three hundred each man with a firebrand in one hand and a creese in the other adventure on the shot and soon fire the fort over their head slay every man n. Bangam these island of Banda be subject as some but untrue report to the king of botone with who one m. Richard welding a Englishman be in great favour the king have a son which be mad who a certain italian undertake to cure be send to attend he in the other world Martin bring his patient die under his hand m. welding have serve he in his war and get victory for he and honour for himself and his nation it be report that late near to the hollander fort in * * the more full relation of this earthquake so it be see in my voyage l. 5. tom. 1. together with a description of these island in cap. fitzherbert Letter there also may you see diverse letter of the king of Tidore ternate Bantam to his majesty and three surrender to he of diverse of those island and the war which the Banda business occasion in the indies betwixt the dutch and our merchant as their own and we have relate the same Banda there issue a great fire out of the sea which continue a good space and be likely to have fire the hollander fort the native wait for such opportunity but by shift of the wind it escape the sea in that fire place be many many fathom deep than it have be before but our english have since this be publish enjoy not only commerce but fort and dominion by voluntary subjection of the bandanese themselves the cause of great war betwixt the dutch and we the particular whereof you may see at large in my book of voyages the hollander and the spaniard be in continual war for these Molucca island they drive out the portugal by force about ten year since but the spaniard have succeed in the quarrel which yet be manage on both part so as the native have the worst for they both wear out the country people in war which between Tidore and ternate be ancient by these bellows kindle into continual flame that there be scarce sufficient to gather their clove Machian yield the most store in the three year which be most plentiful about 1800. bahar on other year almost eleven hundred the spaniard have a castle on ternate another on Tidore in Gelolo also and battachina two other but the hollander have three in terenate and as many in Tidore one in Amboyna one in battachina in batchame one in botoone two bulwark in mechame three in Moutter one beside their other indian fort and all their factory they have their wife also to help man if that name may be give to woman their fortress in some place their seaforce and land-vice be add make they dreadful to the Spaniard hateful to the indian and for their insolence distasteful to the * * capt. Saris. Will keeling w. Floris w. Bangam r. Cock Martin bring m. ball etc. english under pretence of I know not what conquest stiff deny terrible threaten disgraceful deprave the english under who name they have yet bear themselves in many place of the indies and with main force and violence bind the native to their own trade and that at low price and hard condition which make they love the more liberal though imperious and proud spirit of the Spaniard more than that account fordo deal of the Fleming in the Moluccas and Banda island before we leave these Moluccas and their dependent island we may conclude with a tragedy wherein blind superstition and beastly cruelty be principal actor when Menesius k k Art. hist ind. orient cap. 46. be governor of the Portugal fort in ternate he keep a sow which some of the devouter mahumetan kill he get the chief priest accessory to the fact into the castle at his delivery make his face be grease with Bacon by the jailor which cause the people to oft abuse to some portugal Menesius in revenge cut off the hand of two of they the three have his hand bind behind he and be bait with two dog on the seashore which his implacable enemy transport he into like dogged humour though he be not with Hecuba transform into the shape insomuch that fasten with his tooth on one of their ear he hold fast till his strength fail he sink into the sea with the dog and be drown in celebe they l l od. Barbosa eat man flesh m m Hak. tom. 3. the king of the Moluccas be wont to send condemn person to celebe to be devour nicolaus nun write that celebe be very large and contain many and great island the soil be exceed fertile the inhabitant comely and tall rather ruddy then black they have many king which be cause of many contention three of they be convert Peter Mascarenia in a letter date a thousand five hundred sixty nine speak of a king of Zion in celebe which be baptize and his subject therefore rebel against he one town only except and that he and the king of Sanguim do take up a cross on their own shoulder which the chief man have before hew of a fair piece of wood and help to erect the same and then with the multitude kneel down worship it southward of celebe be situate a little island where sir Francis Drake grave his ship this island be thorough grow with wood in which every night certain fiery fly make such a light as if every twig or tree have be a burn candle here they find bat as big as hen and plenty of cray-fish so great that one will suffice four man to their dinner they dig themselves hole in the earth like coney at macassar in this island be a english factory in this island some be moor some ethnic they enuenome their arrow-head which be make of fishbone with a incurable poison there be priest which conform or rather deform themselves to the habit of woman nourish their hair on the head and pluck it out of the face they gild their tooth and use break wanton effeminate gesture they be call Becos and marry one another for they to lie with a woman be capital and punish with burn in pitch these men-monster women-devil much hinder the portugal conversion @. 3 of the javas and other adjoin island not far from hence be java of which name m. Paulus and nich. di conti reckon two great island ascribe to the one two thousand and to the other three thousand mile in circuit the less be near to the firm land of the south continent where beach and some other province be name by Paulus and Vertomannus of heathenish superstition the less java have in the day of m. Paulus eight kingdom in six of which himself have be which he name Felech wherein the rural inhabitant be idolater the citizen moores the Idol-worshipper eat any flesh whatsoever of man or beast and observe all day what they first see in the morning Basma a a m. Paulus lib. 3. these seem rhinocerote the second acknowledge the great Cham sovereignty but pay he no tribute here be certain unicorn head like swine foot like a elephant with one horn on their forehead with which they do not hurt any but to that end use certain prickle that grow on their tongue they delight also in the mire like swine here be little ape much resemble man in their countenance which they use to preserve with certain spice have flay off their skin and leave the hair grow in those part where nature cause man to be hairy and sell they to merchant to be carry over the world as the body of little man happy the only true pigmy the world yield in samara the three of those kingdom none of the North-star can be see they be man-eater and idolater but not so brutish as in dragorian the next kingdom where if a man be sick his kinsman consult with their sorcerer who inquire of the devil whether he shall escape or no and if the answer be negative they send for certain man special design to that villainous mystery which strangle he and then they dress and eat he among the kindred even to the very marrow in his bone for say they if any flesh shall remain it will putrify and worm will breed thereof which after for want of sustenance will perish whereby the soul of the dead party will be much torment the bone they bury safe that no beast shall touch they such dread have they of beast and cruelty in a more than beastly cruelty and such a care to observe humanity and piety in a most impious inhumanity Lambri the next kingdom have in it some man with tail like dog a span long the last be Fanfur where they live of bread make of pith of tree the wood whereof be heavy and sink to the bottom if it be put in water like iron and therefore they make lance thereof able to pierce armour for it be three finger thick betwixt the hollow and the bark to let pass Pentan Sondar and other idolatrous island and come to java maior this country be very rich but in time past of most abominable custom nic. conti n. di conti. say that they feed on cat rat and other vermin and be most vile murderer not stick to make trial of the good cut or thrust of their blade on the next body they meet with and that without punishment yea if the blow or thrust be deliver with fine force with much commendation Vertomannus b b vert. lib. 6. affirm of they that some observe idol some the sun or moon other a ox and many the first thing they meet in the morning and some worship the devil when man be old and not able long to work their child or parent carry they into the market and sell they to other which do eat they and the like they use with the young sort in any desperate sickness prevent nature with a violent death and esteem their belly fit sepulcher than the earth account other fool which suffer the worm to devour so pleasant food for fear of these man-eater they stay not long there it seem that they have much leave their brutish custom since win to more civility by trade of the moor and christian especial such as be of the arabian law although as our own countryman report which have there live a man life be value to the murderer at a small sum of money they be a proud nation c c scot. if a man shall come in where they be set on the ground after their manner and shall sit on a chest or high thing it be as much as his life be worth the d d bert. Ta^ king of Bantam break promise with the hollander when they object it my tongue he answer be not of Bone when they be sick e e gio. Bot ben. they vow unto God upon their recovery a more honourable death which they perform after their recovery by the murderous hand of some other upon they they be f f od. Barbosa great enchanter and observe hour and fit minute and moment of time for compose their blade and armour of which they be conceit that be temper with their charm and superstition with the least draw blood of another they will kill he themselves in their enchant armour safe from other blow they abide in expectation of these martial minute for their conjure armour sometime eight or ten year before they can finish they the javan g g bar. dec. 2. l. 9 cap. 4. of the hollander navigation in these part see Isacius Atthus the dutch history of grave Maurice say that their ancestor come from China which country they forsake because of the tyranny wherewith they be oppress and in great multitude people this island they wear their hair and their nail long they be dutiful to their superior the great man stir not forth without a great troop of follower they be seldom idle much busy about their scabbard and weapon which they use to poison they be not without their weapon night or day which they will not suffer another man to touch they be so eager of revenge that they will press on their adversary weapon draw it through their own body to kill he that have wound they they have Mahometan temple where they do their devotion with great silence they acknowledge JESUS Mahomet David and Moses four prophet they observe their hour and two fast or lent the great man wife never go out of the door to be see their city be Ballambua and Panarucan a little from whence be a burn hill which first break forth 1586. and oppress infinite number of man and cast great stone into the city for three day space make one continue night of darkness Passarua the king whereof marry the king of Ballambuas daughter and the second night after he have lie with she slay she and her attendant because he will not turn Mahometan joartam Surrabaia Tuban matara be also royal city as be daunia Taggal Charabaon and many other but bantam be of most traffic frequenced by portugal dutch and english in which every day be three several market here merchant when they come may buy a woman for their fleshly and worldly business you may add the devil too to make up the number which at their departure they sell again public affair be treat and handle by night at which time the counsellor of state meet and ascend some tree or the roof of the house view the heaven till the moon arise and then go into the senate-house the woman in java act comedy they punish adultery with death the woman choose her near friend or ally to stab she the southern part of java be little know be full of lion and wild beast it have be fatal to many english but much through their own distemper h h capt. Saris. with rack a wine make or rice and their contagious woman John Milwards journal relate of their voyage against their will by the south of java and of some island bay and other observation in those part not far from Bantam i i io. Isac Pontan hist Amstelodam nau. Batau 1594 ap. de bry part. 3 c. 33. live certain of the passarran which be there oppress by their king come hither and here obtain a piece of ground to build they a city which be call Sura they have a king or governor and live quiet follow husbandry they eat nothing that have life a common superstition of the indian wear white clothes of paper make of the leaf of tree and never marry herein resemble the jewish essee yet never want succeed generation many of the javan daily consecrate themselves unto their society the Chinois in java do sometime bring up crocodile and eat they Bantam be the chief factory of the english although they have other the king of Bantam have the title but the Pangram exercise the power and have shut up the king where none but at his pleasure may come at he the situation of this city be low and unwholesome it be often subject to fire in diverse of which fire our english have by God blessing well escape not far from hence at the i will pulo Penione the trade increase perish in the careen most of the company both of english and other which wrought on she die of a infectious sickness which a Chinoise offer by sacrifice to the devil to clear sir Henry Middleton here die of this sickness and the ship too want that head and necessary hand to sustain she bequeath that goodly fabric to the two element fire and water which not agree in the divide while each labour to have all the ship be lose in the quarrel a great loss of our great merchants-ship that England ever have but not till after great exploit and not comparable to diverse loss of the portugal or hollander k k 1615. general Butts the dutch general cast away with two ship and their rich lade the three some good save but after loss of 135 man find drive in the sea beside many other loss mart. bring th. crowther etc. at the island mauricius and other place both there and at their own door the king of Tuban l l Bilib stobaevo be the rich king and mighty in all java they have many horse and make great account of they deck they with gallant furniture of gold silver and the counterfeit of dragon and devil on their saddle they ride and manage their horse with great skill jambee be another Passaman for unwholesomeness Madura be north from java a fertile island of rice the soil whereof be so moist and waterish that their buffal and man go almost knee-deep when they sow it Arosbay be the chief city they be thievish and give to spoil and captive many of the hollander which go thither on shore to buy commodity which they be force to redeem at a dear rate in these part be bat as big as hen which the people roast and eat the island baly be east from java very populous contain as be think six hundred thousand inhabitant they be ethnic and worship that which they first meet in the morning here and in pulo Rossa the woman be burn with their dead husband one man be say k k cor Houtman cor. Gerardi to have have fifty of his wife for they marry as many as they please burn with he while the hollander be there the island have many bull buffal goat swine horse with many kind of fowl fruit and metal the chief man be carry by slave on seat bear on their shoulder or else in chariot draw with buffal in the voyage of master Thomas Candish l l tho. Candish Hak. tom. 3. pag. 822. be mention make of a javan king call Raia Ballomboam very age m m Houtman say he be alive 1596. suppose 160. year old which have a hundred wife and his son have fifty their custom be that when the king die they burn the body and preserve the ash five day after the wife of the dead king go to a place appoint and there she which be dear in his favour throw a ball from she and where that ball rest thither they go all and turn their face eastward stab themselves with a Crise or dagger to the heart they be very resolute people and dread no attempt which the king shall enjoin they be it never so dangerous all the race of this king Ballomboam be raze and utter destroy by the Passaruan after a long siege which war be begin in the blood of the king of ballamboam daughter who he slay as be before say and add this drunkenness unto his thirst jortam or n n Navig Oliver Noort joartam contain about a thousand household the inhabitant be ethnic and have their temple in wood to which they resort to say and do their holy at noon before their deform devil-formed Pagodes in this city dwell the chief pope or hey priest of that superstition who authority be great in all those part he be a hundred and twenty year old and have many wife which nourish he with their milk be not able to take other sustenance a deadly enemy to the christian who the king do yet with some privilege favour Edmund Scot write that they use in Bantam martial law adultery be death The free javan must to every wife keep ten women-slave which be their concubine also some keep forty but they may have but three wife they be proud and by this multitude of slave poor cruel and cowardly their criss or dagger be two foot long wave indenture-fashion and poison that few escape the vulgar sort have little religion but many pray to the devil who for that end they have paint in their house and set wax candle and sing before they for fear of hurt which they do not to God because of his goodness the most of their work be to carve stick for their Criss-handles they be couzener thief idle glutton take Betele opium tobacco they have diverse Sect yet most be in manner atheist many Chinois dwell there some think that if they be good they shall be bear again after death to great riches and that wicked man shall be turn into toad or other ugly beast every new moon they burn sacrifice and sing over they certain prayer in the mean while tinge a bell which at the end of every prayer they ring out which be also their passing-bell ceremony when any be ready to die they furnish their altar with goat hen duck sometime raw and sometime ready dress all which they eat only certain paper paint and cut out in curious work they burn many of they have some skill in astronomy they keep no sabbath but what day they begin any great work they after keep holy they have soothsayer which sometime run up and down the street like madman with sword in their hand tear their hair and throw themselves against the ground Chinois cut not their hair for than they may not return to China they buy slave and get child of they which they carry with they to China but sell the mother the * moor if they be great man o o Houtman have mosque in their own house they have one great one in the city foreigner whereof be many from many place inhabit the suburb they buy by night distil wine of the Chinois and drink it secret be forbid it by their Mahometan Law it be about the year 1560. that this people become of that Sect the man and woman pass their time day and night in much sloth dalliance and chew betel epicuri chap. 17 of Samatra and Zeilan SAmatra be esteem by some a a gi. bot. ben. maff. lib. 4. g. Arthus hist indiae orient cap. 40. the great of the eastern island stretch itself almost seven hundred mile in length in breadth above two hundred the air be not very wholesome by reason of the situation under the line and the multitude of lake and river whereout the sun drink more than he can well concoct and therefore as it be belch out here continual such crude and undigested vapour their food be millet Rice Sagu and fruit their riches be pepper ginger Cassia silk benjoin gold tin iron etc. the kingdom of Campa yield tree who pith or marrow be aloe which be prize in India at the like weight some say of gold the bark be call Aquila in the sea-coast they be moor in religion and so have be about these last two hundred year up within land they be pagan and in many place as in the kingdom of Andragiri and Arundell they be man-eater they be divide before the portugal enter India into nine and twenty kingdom whereof the chief be Pedir after that pacem and now acem for Abram sometime a slave since king of acem have conquer almost all the north part of the island and with help from the Turk and the arabian distress sometime the affair of malacca this king b b Linschot give in marriage with his daughter to the king of jor a piece of ordnance such as for greatness length and workmanship can hardly be match in all Christendom here be a c c p. bertius tab. hill call Balaluanus which continual burn and a fountain as be report which run pure balsam some d d ortel maff. lib. 4. think that this be chersonesus aurea of the ancient Galuanus e e discovery of the world write that the baca or man-eater in the mountain of Samatra gild their tooth and esteem the flesh of black people sweet than of the white the flesh of their kine buff and hen be as black as ink they say that there be certain people there call Daraqui dara which have tail like to sheep here be say also to grow a tree the juice whereof be strong poison and if it touch the blood of a man kill he but if a man drink of it it be a sovereign antidote as for those tayled-people a slander by becket legend f f see lambert perambul report of some kentishman injurious to that angry saint and after apply to our whole nation many indeed esteem the english to be tail Galuano affirm that the king of Tidore tell he that in the island of Batto-China there be some which have tail have also a thing like unto a dug between their cod out of the which there come milk Nicoli di conti g g nic. di conti. say in his time the samatrans be all gentile and the man-eater among they use the skull of their eat enemy in stead of money exchange the same for their necessary and he be account the rich man which have most of those skull in his house in Vertomannus time they have money in Pedir mark on the one side with a devil on the other with a chariot draw with elephant their h h l. vert. religion he say be the same with those of Tarnassari burn their wife in like manner the inhabitant be cunning artificer merchant and sailor their ship have at each end a prow which with marvelous agility they can dispose forward or backward make use of the same according to the diversity of wind and channel which there be very changeable in acem i i Herman de Brec Arthus pag. 559. be mesquit of timber and reed with vessel of water at the entry for they to wash according to the arabian custom the king come little abroad nor may any go to he except he be send for by a officer with a gild staff or dagger to his palace they pass through seven gate one after another guard with woman expert at their weapon and use both piece and sword he have none other guard for his person in salute the king they lay their hand fold on their head which in other salutation they lie on the forehead sultan Aladin the king be as Cornelius Houtman report first a fisherman and grow famous for his exploit by sea be prefer to the marriage of the king kinswoman and the office of admiral afterward he become protector of the young king the former be dead but prove his murderer and send a thousand of the chief man to follow he into the other world ennoble base fellow of his conspiracy and usurp the state to himself he be suppose a hundred year k k in 1598. old so old that his elder son who he keep at home with he have make his young king of Pedir imprison he l l 1604. sir ed. Michelborn allege that he be too old for government and war on his brother our english first m m sir james Lancaster have trade here in the last time of queen Elizabeth who name be then famous in those part for her exploit against the spaniard the queen letter direct to this king be receive with great State first he entertain the messenger with a banquet give he a robe and a piece of calico wrought with gold and offer pledge for the general safety for who he send six elephant with drum trumpet streamer and much people the great elephant be thirteen or fourteen foot high and a small castle like a coach cover with velvet on his back in the midst whereof be a great basin of gold with a rich cover of silk wherein the letter be put the general be mount on another elephant but be stay at the courtgate till the king pleasure and licence be again send the king make he a feast the dish be of gold or Tambayck which be mix of gold and brass their wine be of rice in which the king drink to the general out of his gallery a fathom high than where they sit it be as strong as after the feast the king damosel make music and dance which be a great favour for they be not common see the chief prelate be appoint one of the commissioner for article of league which be conclude they take a prize of 9 hundred tun and be like to be take themselves by a strange spout as they call it which fall not far from they as in one whole drop enough to have sink any ship and sometime continue a quarter of a hour together as pour out of a vessel the sea boil therewith n n the like happen there may 5. 1613. pat. Copland the king send a letter and a present to the queen and at their departure ask if they have the psalm of David and cause they to sing one which he and his noble second with a psalm as he say for their prosperity the court o o cor. Houtman have three guard between each of which be a great green the king may see all that come himself unseen the wall of his house be hang sometime with cloth of gold velvet or damask he sit crosslegged with four criss two before and two behind very rich forty woman attend he with fan clothes sing and other office he eat and drink all day or chew betele and Arecca talk of venery and cockfighting when they will do reverence which we use to perform by uncover the head they put off their hose and shoe hold the palm of the hand together and lift they above the head with bend of the body and say they use not to put malefactor to death but cut off their hand and foot and banish they to the i will Polowey and if they execute they it be by elephant tear they or thrust a stake in their fundament this king have a hundred galley of which some will carry four hundred man open without deck their oar like shovel four foot long row with one hand a woman be admiral he not dare through self-guiltiness to trust man they have many differ dignity and degree for their clergy John Dauyi use to pray with bead have school they have one prophet disguise in his apparel who they much honour they bury their dead in the field with their head towards Mecca lay a free stone at the head and another at the foot with signification what the decease have be the king have they not of stone but of gold and this king have two make for he each weigh a thousand pound enrich with stone they have a tradition that Achen be Ophir once every year they observe a solemn ceremony of go to church to see if Mahomet be come then be there forty elephant rich cover and on they the noble one spare for the prophet and another whereon the king ride with much pomp when they have look into the moskee and not see their Mahomet the king return on that spare elephant pider Manaucabo and Arundell be tributary to Achen 1613. April twelve captain best anchor in the road of Achin and be kind entertain Patrick Copland m. best the king send a Arancaia ride in a tent on a elephant back attend with two or three of the king boy for he be attend by boy abroad and by woman within to receive his majesty letter which be thus carry in a basin of gold the general follow with forty or fifty men. after this letter and a present deliver the king tell they they shall see some of his pastime which be first cockfighting next that the fight of ram than his tame elephant after they his Buffoloes all as they succeed exceed the former in fierceness last the antilope which the general have give he all this while do the king take tobacco in a silver pipe give he by his woman stand in a close room behind this do supper be serve in by young boy of fourteen or fifteen year old in swaffe which be a mettle half copper half gold and continue from seven of the clock till almost twelve in which be serve in four hundred dish beside hot drink the next day the king send the general a elephant to ride on otherwise none may do it and appoint one of his chief Arancaias always to attend he free access be likewise grant at all time which none else may do without the king Creese or dagger there use as a sceptre and the article agree on between sir james Lancaster and his predecessor be promise to be ratify on the second of May all stranger be invite to a feast keep at the spring of the river in the water six mile from the city two elephant be send for the general the dish be serve in by boy swim with one hand and hold the dish or strong drink in the other of all these drink they must taste and then throw the rest into the water this continue from one till five they have five hundred dish well dress general best weary of sit so long in the water have leave to depart a hour before the rest the captain of the dutch house take his bane either with hot drink or cold sit so long in the water and soon after die the king give the general a new title call and charge his noble to call he Arancaia pule that be the honourable white man june the second they be entertain with a fight of four elephant and a wild tiger which be fasten to a stake and yet so fasten on their trunk and leg that he make they roar and bleed extreme sometime wild elephant fight before he which will soon kill each other but that tame one be fasten to they which draw they back fourscore or a hundred man help and for their tame they use to set one wild between two tame this king send to his majesty a present and a letter in form for paint and write very curious the word thus interpret pedrucka sirie sultan king of king renown for his war and sale king of Samatra and a king more fear than his predecessor fear in his kingdom and honour of all border nation in who there be the true image of a king in who reign the true method of government form as it be of the most pure mettle and adorn with the most fine colour who seat be high and most complete like to a crystal river pure and clear as the choice glass from who flow the pure stream of bounty and justice who presence be as the fine gold king of Priaman and of the * * this reason be allege why sumatra shall be aurea Chersoneflus and Ophir and not the continent of malacca which hath no gold with disc. r. di mal. tes pol. p. 3. of this ophyrian dispute see Varerius his treatise io. Vassius ortel pine etc. our ophyrian discourse in the first book of voyages mountain of gold viz. solida and lord of nine sort of stone king of two sumbreroe of beat gold have for his seat mat of gold his furniture for his horse and armour for himself be likewise of pure gold his elephant with tooth of gold and all provision thereunto belong his lance half gold half silver his small shot of the same a saddle also for another elephant of the same mettle a tent of silver and all his seal half gold half silver his sepulchre of gold whereas his predecessor have all these half gold half silver his service complete of gold and silver a king under who there be many king have take oath king of aurow all the country of Priaman tecoo barouse be subdue by he be now under his command seventie elephant and much provision carry by sea to make his war in aurow where God give i more victory than any of my predecessor this great king send this letter of salutation to JAMES king of great Britain viz. England Scotland France and Ireland to signify the great content he have receive by his highness letter deliver by the band of Arancaia pule Thomas best his majesty ambassador at the receipt whereof his eye be surprise with a celestial brightness and his spirit ravish with a divine joy the open thereof render a savour more fragrant than the most odoriferous flower or sweet perfume in the world for which cause I the great king of Samatra do profess myself to be of one heart one mind and of one flesh with the most potent prince JAMES king of England and do earnest desire that the league begin may be continue to all posterity and herein I take my great felicity there be nothing in the world more pleasant or joyful to i and for a testimony of my desire that the league and amity begin may be continue betwixt we I have return this letter unto your majesty make also my prayer unto the great God for the continuance of the same and it shall be my great honour to receive memorial from so great a potentate and so remote a nation and for a pledge of my love and honour and continuance of our league I send your majesty a Creese wrought with gold the hilt thereof be beat gold with a ring of stone a Assagaya of swasse half copper half gold eight Purslan dish small and great of camphire one piece of sower stuff three piece of calico lawn which your majesty accept as from a brother I shall rest satisfy and much honour and so with my prayer to the great God creator of heaven and earth for your majesty long life with victory over your enemy and prosperity in your land give at our palace at Achilles the 1022. year of Mahomet by the account of the moor this letter for the strange swell form and because it contain a petty inventory of the king wealth and some knowledge of the adjoin kingdom I have thus verbatim express this king of Achilles be a proper gallant man of war they be master copland word of * * 1613. two and thirty year of middle size full of spirit strong by sea and land his country populous his elephant many whereof we have see a hundred and threescore or a hundred and fourscore at a time his galley and frigate carry in they very good brass ordnance Demicanon culverin Sakar minion and the like his building be stately and spacious but not strong his court at Achilles pleasant have a goodly branch of a main river run about and through his palace which branch he cut and bring six or eight mile off in twenty day while we continue at achi. Samatra be very mountainous the people courteous without the king chop no stranger may have ingress or egress he desire the general to commend he to the king of England and to entreat he to send he two white woman for say he if I beget one of they with child and it prove a son I will make he king of Priaman Passaman and of the coast from whence you fetch your pepper so that you shall not need to come any more to i but to your own english king for these commodity he be cruel he pluck out one of the eye of a nobleman for look on one of the king woman wash in a river another wear a Shash beyond his degree captain Saris have his head cut round so far as that too large some he boil in scald oil some be saw in piece spit alive their leg cut off or otherwise torture it be report that in his predecessor time when malacca be besiege the portugal put on shore here by the ozy and miry land be make a easy prey to a ambush of achiner in the reed which take many of they who by the king command have all of they all their privity present cut away to return to m. Copland on the three of july 1613. the king armada of a hundred and twenty or two hundred frigate and galley arrive from joar which kingdom Laxamar the general have then subdue to this king with the kingdom of Siak bring both those king with two of their brethren and some dutchman prisoner to achi. at tecoo they stay eleven week and buy a hundred and twenty ton of pepper bury five and twenty man which get their death at Passanan for Tecco be a healthful place where and in the country about the pepper most grow in Nicobar they be base people and till not the ground Sumbrero be ten or twelve league northward from this island where that plant grow not a plant but a worm but a stone before * * sup. c. 13. @. 3. observe the people be tawny and naked they paint their face their priest in their sacrifice wear apparel so close as if it be sow to they and horn on their head turn back with a tail also hang down behind for so the devil they say appear to they their face and hair be deform with green black and yellow colour HONDIUS his map of Zeilan CEILAN @. 2 of Zeilan ZEilan which some call Seylon other Ceilan be by barrius aver to be Taprobana sometime according to Marcus Paulus a a m. Paul l. 3. his report think to have comprehend 3600. mile in circuit since much impair by his over-mighty neighbour the sea which have now leave not above 250. mile in length and a 140. mile of breadth unto it Barbosa @ the indian call it Tenarisim or the delicious land and some be of opinion that this be paradise so just be the judgement of the high that when as man wander from he cause he also to wander from himself and from his habitation yea the place itself have also wander in man wander conceit over the world yea and out of our habitable world altogether as before be c c vid. sup. l. 1. ^4 and Mos Barcepha in Bib. pat. and Hopkins etc. show man now seek it as vain as before they lose it it be in fashion d d lib. 1. resemble a egg by a shallow channel separate from the cape comori the heaven with their dew the air with a pleasant wholesomeness and fragrant freshness the water in their many river and fountain the earth diversify in aspire hill lowly vale equal and indifferent plain fill in her inward chamber with metal and jewel in her outward court and upper face store with whole wood of the best cinnamon that the sun see beside fruit orange lemon etc. surmount those of Spain fowl and beast both tame and wild among which be their elephant e e Linschot an. Corsali honour by a natural acknowledgement of excellence of all other elephant in the World these all have conspire and join in common league to present unto Zeilan the chief of worldly treasure and pleasure with a long and healthful life in the inhabitant to enjoy they no marvel then if sense and sensuality have here stumble on a paradise there woody hill as a natural amphitheatre do encompass a large plain and one of they as not content his beetle-brow with that only prospect disdain also the fellowship of the neighbour mountain lift f f maff. lib. 3. up his steep head seven league in height and have in the top a plain in the midst whereof be a stone of two cubit erect in manner of a table hold in it the print of a man foot who they say come from Deli thither to teach they religion the jogue and other devout pilgrim resort thither from place a thousand league distant with great difficulty of passage both hither and here for they be force to mount up this hill by the help of nail and chain fasten thereto nature have prohibit other passage Maffaeus and Boterus can persuade themselves that this foot-step be a relic and memory of the aethiopian eunuch other will have it further fetch and father it upon Adam the first father of mankind of who the hill also be name Pico de Adam the moor g g od. Barbosa call it Adam Baba and say that from thence Adam ascend into heaven the pilgrim be clad in their palmer weed with iron chain and skin of lion and other wild beast upon their arm and leg they wear button with sharp point that cut the flesh and draw blood which they say they do in God service before they come at the mountain they pass by a fenny valley full of water wherein they wade up to the waste with knife in their hand to scrape from their leg the bloud-leeche which else will end their pilgrimage and life before the time for this dirty and watery passage continue eighteen mile before they come at the hil who proud top will disdain climb if art do not captive nature and bind the hill with chain of iron as be say when they be mount they wash they in a lake or Poole of clear spring water near to that foot-stone and make their prayer do thus account themselves clean from all their sin this holy journey be general perform by the islander say Vertomannus once a year he add h h vert. l. 3. c. 4. that a Moor tell he that this foot-print be two span long and that Adam here a long time bewail his sin and find pardon but Odoricus affirm that they report this mourn to have be for Abel and to have last three hundred year and of the tear of Abel and Eve this purify water to have proceed which Odoricus i i Odoricus prove to be a tale because he see the water spring continual and it run thence into the sea he say that this water have in it many precious stone and the king give leave at certain time of the year to poor man to take they that they may pray for his soul which they can not do but first anoint with lemon because of the horseleech in that water there k k bert. tab. be reckon nine king in this island the first of Colmuchi to who the rest pay tribute viz. the king of janasipatan triquinamale Batecolon villassem Tanamaca Laula gall and Candy in Candy l l Her. de Brea be statue artificial wrought five or six fathom high which these symmetrians proportion to the stature of Adam gather by that print of his foot in Vintane m m georgius spilbergius be a pagode or idol temple the compass whereof be a 130. pace it be very high and all white except on the top which have the spire thereof gild insomuch that man be not able when the sun shine to look thereon it have a tower or square steeple of excellent workmanship there be many other temple and a monastery also of religious person which be attire in yellow have their crown shave with Bead in their hand and always seem to mumble over somewhat of their devout orison be in high estimation of sanctity with the vulgar and free from public labour and burden their monastery be build after the manner of the popish be also gild with Gold in their chapel be many image of both sex which they say represent some of their saint they be set on the altar and be clothe with garment of gold and silver before they be the image of boy which bear up great candlestick with wax-candle burn therein night and day every hour they resort to these altar to their Mumpsimus they hold a solemn procession while the hollander be there in which their abbot ride on a elephant rich attire lift up his hand over his head with a golden rod therein the monk go two and two before he in order partly bear and play on many instrument of music partly bear wax-light and torch the man also and after they the woman and maid follow in like order and the fair virgin be busy with game and dance be naked from the navel upward beneath cover with smock of diverse colour their arm and ear adorn with gold and jewel any man that shall see it say our author will think our western monk have hence borrow their ceremony their image be in every corner of the way which they adorn with flower in Candy the chief city of that kingdom be pagode innumerable the house or temple be of stone like the temple in these part some statue be as high as the mast of a ship the people here if they have once touch meat which for quantity or quality they can eat they cast it to the dog neither will any man be he never so mean eat that which another have touch the woman go naked from the waste upward they marry as many wife as they can keep the king make use of their superstition for pretend to build temple he after leave they unperfect excuse himself that they have not contribute sufficient sum of money and therefore exact a new there be one statue of great stature with a sword in his hand which by illusion of the devil if it be not the delusion of fabulous report make as though he will strike the king with his sword as he be enter the temple and put he in great fear whereas before he have make a mock of it the singale or native inhabitant say that the world shall not perish as long as that image continue safe when any one be sick he sacrifice to the devil have a box hang in his house to that end therein to gather somewhat for his offer some pray unto the image of a elephant head make of wood or stone that they may obtain wisdom whereof this prayer argue their great want some eat no quick creature they eat no beef nor drink any wine they worship whatsoever first meet they in the morning George Spilberge be bountiful entertain of the king of Candy n n Herman de Brec ap. de bry part 8. ind. or. but Sebald de Weert be with diverse of his companion slay after he have receive much kindness of the king his importunity to get the king into his ship make he suspect some treachery the king of Motecalo have ear adorn with jewel and hang down the lappet of they be so stretch to his shoulder he be kind to the hollander but they incense he against they by kill certain kine for some of they say that the soul of kine slay after that manner be hurl forthwith into Hell he observe one pagode to whole feast he go while the hollander be there the solemnity whereof be to continue ten day till a new moon with great concourse of devout person of the superstition of perimal and the worship of the ape tooth celebrate in this island we have already show in the chapter o o chap. 10. of Narsinga the Cingalan language which they speak in this island be p p gi. bot. ben. think to have be there leave by the Chinois sometime suppose I think false lord of Zeilan in Marcus Paulus his day the tartarian have not pierce thus far for the king then reign refuse to sell to Cublai can than the great monarch in the world at a price a ruby which he have leave he by his ancestor esteem the rich jewel in the world be as he q q Paul l. 3. c. 19 say a span long and as big as a man arm clear and shine as if it have be a fire in this island be reckon nine principality or kingdom but r r Linschoten not long since their chief king be murder by a barber who drive the other king out of the country and usurp the monarchy to himself practise hostility against the portugal the Cingulas be very cunning artificer in all metal one of they present the archbishop of goa with a crucifix so cunning wrought as if he have give life to the image of one dead he send it to the king of Spain as a rare jewel not to be equal in Europe the inhabitant here be active and expert in juggle both man and woman travel through India with their strange hobby-horse to get money by this vanity the sea-coast as in other indian island be inhabit with moor the inland with pagan the portugal have a fortress at Colombo the islander s s od. Barbosa be not warrior they give themselves to pastime and pleasure they go naked from the girdle upward they make wide hole in their ear which they stretch out with the weight of their jewel to their shoulder Monfart relate that Zeilan have whole forest of cinnamon and mountain of crystal and that out of their river they draw pearl ruby saphire and cats-eye that they worship the first creature they meet eat nothing that have blood make no more bread than will be eat at a meal their religion prohibit they to eat any two hour old the hollander find exceed both good and bad entertainment with the king of Candy now for that question whether Zeilan or Samatra be that taprobane of the ancient be very doubtful yet that report in Pliny t t plin. li. 6. c. 22. many reason for proof hereof see in a little book call the circumference of the earth of taprobane seem more to incline for Zeilan for he say that in Claudius time a servant of annius plocamus which be customer for the red sea be carry from the coast of Arabia beside Carmania in fifteen day which I think can not possible be do to Samatra likewise the excellency of the elephant beyond all the indian agree to Zeilan and have Samatra be so know at that time the other part of India it be like have be better discover than they be in those time this taprobane be discover to be a island by onesicritus Alexander admiral of his fleet in these part it be then account another world and therefore shall be the period of our pilgrimage and perambulation in this asian part of the world which by the gracious goodness of his almighty guide the pilgrim have now pass and have lead the industrious reader along with he @. 3 the conclusion of this asian pilgrimage the popish pilgrim be wont to beguile their weary step with music u u w. Thorp ap. fox act. mon. our pilgrim with wanton song bagpipe Canterbury bell etc. when they come into a town make more noise than the king with all his clarion and minstrel so Chaucer tale Eras colloq etc. or pleasant tale according to the delicate devotion of those time and easy be their pardon and penance at their journey end and in these our time madonna de Loretto must give entertainment to many pilgrim which as if Venus be become her chamberlain have their curtezan-consolation to solace their Pilgrim-pain the devout friar and nun themselves that have defy the devil and deny the world by a new vow devote to the flesh disguise themselves in lay-habit travel thither and from thence as man and wife only at Loretto cover all with their cowl and if confession discover it hide again as a double cover but to we vow cowl and such salace-solace be want the end of this labour be but the begin of another our penance endure all the way neither have we hope of pardon and indulgence from some severe penitentiary and censour who great virtue be to find or seek fault in other have the muse be propitious and the grace gracious we will have have some musical and graceful harmony at least in phrase and method but even the muse which whilom so grace that father of history 10 10 see diverse example here of in John Nichols pilgrimage and w. Lithgow report the like when he be there Herodotus that each of they vouchsafe if you vouchsafe it credit to bestow that book on he which he entitle with their name seem afraid of so tedious a journey nor will the grace grace we with their company many indeed offer themselves with their rule method and precept of history as bodinus Chytraus Possevinus Mylaeus Folietta Viperanus Zuinger Sambucus Riccobonus patritius Pontanus Foxius Robertellus Balduinus and other which have write treatise of that argument but I think such attendance will be chargeable especial to a traveller and their many rule will not have add wing to my head and foot as the poet paint their Mercury but rather have fetter my foot and make my weak head forget itself with their remembrance I therefore follow nature both within i and without i as my best guide for matter and manner which common yield beauty as lovely if not so curious as those which bankrupt themselves with borrow of art the issue of our body and mind herein be like say Cherea in the comedy to conceit curiosity may hide rather than commend nature bounty which of itself be always more honest if not more honourable Est. 2.15 Aelian Var. hist lib. 12. c. 1. never can the persian court parallel the goodliness of ester and Aspasia which yet neglect the persian delicacy once I have have sufficient burden of the business in hand enough it be for i to go though I do not dance under it but it be time to leave this idle discourse about our course in this asian history and bethink we of our african perambulation relation of the region and religion in Africa of Egypt Barbary numidia Libya and the land of negro and of their religion the six book chap. i. of Africa and the creature therein @. i. of the name and limit of Africa whether this name Africa be so call of a a gen. 25.4 epher or apher the son of midian and nephew of Abraham by his second wife Keturah as josephus b b antiq. lib. 1. cap. 15. affirm allege witness of his opinion Alexander Polyhistor and cleodemus or of the sun presence c c consul f. Lewis de Urreta lib. 4. cap. 1. Botero Bernardo Aldrete antigued var. etc. because it be or of the cold absence of (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) as Festus say or of the word Feruca d d dom. nig. g. Arthus hist ind. orient c. 4. which in the arabian tongue signify to divide whereupon they call this part of the world Ifrichia because it be say e e io. leo. lib. 1. Leo divide by Nilus and the sea from the rest of the world or of f f Pom. Mela. lib. 1. cap ^ Ifricus a arabian king which chase by the assyrian here seat himself or of (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Aphar the Hebrew word which signify dust as Aphra the Syriac also fit agree to the sandy and parch soil or if any other g g many of the ancient and Leo ascribe all beyond Nilus to Asia so polyhist l. 3. c. 37. Dion of etc. can give more probable edymology of the name I listen not to contend nor be it meet for i to be religious in these question of name in this quest and Inquirie of religion it be a great Peninsula by one isthmus or neck of land between the red sea and the Mediterranean join to the continent which with the red sea aforesaid be the eastern limit of Africa as the Mediterranean on the North and elsewhere the ocean for Nilus be a more obscure and uncertain umpire some divide the world into two part Asia and Europe account Africa a part of Europe which opinion Varro ascribe to Aratosthenes Sallust Lucan and aethicus with Simlerus mention it it be twice as big as Europe and yet not so much people Nature have make here her solitary place or retire accend by scorch heat and shower of sand as a counterfeit of those heavenly rain h h maginus and move water which the air and sea afford in other place such be the many desert in Africa only fertile in barrenness although in other part it be both fruitful and populous the equinoctial circle do in manner divide it in the midst and yet old Atlas never shed his inowie hairt but have always on his huge and high top unmolten snow whence sometime it be disperse as from a store-house in such incredible quantity that it cover cart horse and the top of tree to the great danger of the inhabitant and the fountain be so cold as a man be not able to endure his hand in they mount Atlas aforesaid stretch from the ocean i i Oc. Antlanticus bear name of he almost to Egypt other mountain of name be those of Sierra leona and the mountain of the moon etc. one lake Zembre yield three mighty river disemboke themselves into three several sea Nilus which run northwards forty degree from hence in astronomical reckon Cuama which run into the eastern and Zaire into the western sea of which river and of other like the reader shall find more in due place speak Africa some part of Africa be beyond admiration for barrenness some for fertility Pliny k k plin. lib. 13 cap. 22. mention a city in the midst of the sand call tacape in the way to Leptis which have a spring of water flow plentiful and dispense by course among the inhabitant there under a great date-tree grow a olive under that a fig under that a pomegranate under that a vine under that wheat pease Herb all at once the vine bear twice a year and otherwise very abundance will make it as bad as barren somewhat be gather all the year long four cubit of that soil square not measure with the finger stretch out but gather into the fist be sell for so many this budan l l bud. de Ass. lib. 5. sum and proportion by the acre after the roman measure and say that a acre of that ground after that rate be prise at 12800 which make 320. french crown not reckon the defect of the cubic which bring add add much to the sum the roman reckon six province in Africa Ptolemey number twelve but than be not Africa so well know as now John Leo m m io Leo lib. 1 a Moor both learned and experience have spend many year in travel divide Africa into four part Barbaria Numidia Libya and the land of Negro Numidia he call Biledurgerid or the region of Dares and Libya he call sarra for so the arabian call a desert but he thus exclude Egypt and both the high and low Aethiopia which other n n maginus pory add hereunto and make up seven part of Africa @. 2 of the beast wild and tame many be the o o io. ler. lib. 9 creature which Africa yield not usual in our part elephant be there in plenty and keep in great herd together the Giraffa or camelopardalis a beast not often see yet very tame and of a strange composition mix of a Libard hart Buffe and camel p p p. Bellon lib. 2 cap. 49. do large describe he see his description in moreson and sandys also master Sanderson see one at cairo and have describe he in his voyage which I have print tom. 1. lib. 9 and by reason of his long leg before and short behind not able to graze without difficulty but with his high head which he can stretch forth half a pike length in height feed on the leaf and bough of tree the camel in Africa be more hardy then in other place and will not only bear great burden but continue to travel fifty day together without carry with they any corn to give they but turn they out at night to feed on thistle bough and the little grass they find and no less patient be they of thirst be able to endure fifteen day without drink upon necessity and five day ordinary the arabian in Africa count they their great wealth for so they describe a man riches say he have so many thousand camel and with these they can live in the desert without dread of any prince six q q g. Sandye hundred weight be his ordinary load yet will he carry a thousand in lade or unlade he lie on his belly and when he be lade proportionable to his strength will rise not suffer more to be lay on he for satisfy his thirst they say in his often belch he raise up a bladder wherewith he moisten his mouth and throat they be say some the only that engender backward which other have affirm also of the lion tiger elephant rhinoceros and Ounce and some denis it not of those alone but even of the camel who void urine backward but by a strange work of nature be say in that act to shoot forward of camel they have three sort the first call Hugiun of huge stature and strength able to carry a thousand pound weight the second less with two bunch on the back fit for carriage and to ride on call of which they have only in Asia the three sort call Raguahil be meager and small able to travel for they be not use to burden above a hundred mile in a day and the king of Tombuto can send messenger on such camel to segelmesse or Darha nine hundred mile distant in seven or eight day without stay or change by the way their camel also be docible they will more be petswade to hold on a journey further than ordinary by song than blow in the spring they be mare-wood and mad of copulation in which time they be very ready both to hurt their follower and to kill their master or any that have whip or hurt they of horse they have both wild which they entrap by subtlety and tame of which the Barbary horse be famous in Europe and Asia high prize the lant or dant be a kind of wild kine but swift than almost any other beast they have also wild kine and wild ass the adimmain be as big as a ass otherwise resemble a ram. they have other sheep r r Caius animal speak of two kind the tail of the one three cubit long of the other a cubit broad vid. Hero Thal Arist. hist a 8. plin. 8. 49. Aelian etc. who tail weigh twenty pound and sometime fourscore or more carry on little cart behind they but those adimmain be find in the desert and keep to profit yield they milk and cheese the female only have horn the lion in cold place be more gentle in hot be more fierce and will not flee the onset of two hundred horseman arm master John vassal s s of eastwood in Essex a friend and neighbour of i tell i that he bring out of Barbary a lion skin which from the snout to the top of the tail contain one and twenty foot in length a thing seem incredible a rarity and prodigy also to those barbarian and I can almost doubt whether memory fail not for otherwise the relator I know to be otherwise wise and honest strange it be that a lioness by show she hinder part to the male shall make he run away in time of their couple eight or ten will follow one female with terrible and bloody battle among themselves they spare such man as prostrate themselves and prey rather on man than woman and not at all on infant except compel by hunger Pliny tell that Alexander set thousand on work by hunt hawk fish or other mean to take and learn the nature of creature that Aristotle may be by they inform thereof who write almost fifty treatise of that subject whereof it seem most be lose he cite out of t t Aristot hist he that lion bring forth small deform lump at the first time five and every year after one less after the five burden remain barren it can stir till it be two month old nor go till it be six if you believe he the libyan believe that the lion have understand of prayer and tell of a Getulian woman which lie at the lion mercy beseech he so noble a beast not to dishonour himself with so ignoble a prey and conquest as she a weak woman be u u Ouied. histor ind. l. 16. c. 11. Urban calueto in benzon l. b. 3. the like be tell c of a spanish dog of one didacus Salazar a Spaniard this man according to the bloody practice of that nation mind to fill his dog belly with a old woman flesh which be his captive give she a letter to carry to the governor and so soon as she be a little past loose his mastiff who present have overtake she the woman terrify prostrate herself to the dog and sue for her life good master dog master dog say she in her language I carry this letter to the governor and show it he be not fierce on i master dog the dog have change it seem with his master his doggedness for the other humanity make a stay and lift up his leg only piss on she and depart to no small wonder of the spaniard that know he but to return to the king of beast his tail seem to be his sceptre whereby he express his passion he shrink not at danger except some covert of wood shroud he from witness and then he will take the benefit of flight which otherwise he seem to disdain mentor a man of Syracuse be encounter with a lion which in stead of tear he fawn on he and with his dumb eloquence seem to implore his aid show his disease foot wherein mentor perceive a stub stick which he pull out the like be report by Gellius a. Gellius noct. Attic. out of Polyhistor of a fugitive servant who have perform this kind of office to a lion be by he gratify for a long space with a daily portion of his prey but after this the man be take and present to his master a roman senator who exhibit game to the roman wherein servant and condemn person be expose to the fury of the beast among who he place this servant and by a wonderful fate this lion also be a little before take and bestow on he for this solemn spectacle the beast run with violence to their bloody encounter sudden this lion stay and take little better view fawn on this his guest and defend he from the assault of the other beast whereupon by the people entreaty who have learn the story of he he be free and the beast give he which follow he with a line in the street the people point and one Elpis a Samian perform a cure on another lion pull a bone out of his throat at the lion gape and silent moan and in remembrance hereof build a temple at his return to Bacchus at Sango who before he have invoke before in fear of a Lion Pliny and Solinus among other african beast mention the which some think to be male one year and female another by course this Aristotle 10 10 Arist. hist animal l. 6. c. 32. deny this beast have no neck joint and therefore stir not his neck but with bend about his whole body he will imitate human voice and draw near to the sheep-cote have hear the name of some of the shepherd will call he and when he come devour he they tell that his eye be diversify with a thousand colour that the touch of his shadow make a dog not able to bark by engender with this beast the lioness bring forth a crocuta of like quality to the he have one continue tooth without division throughout his mouth some think this to be the Lycanthropos or Man-wolf some the civet. cat some a fable howsoever old and late philosopher physician and historian mention it something perhaps tell of it be fabulous but it be absurd to deny the eyesight of so many witness he that will read a pleasant story of the take they let he read buibequius his epistle if a entire story Banhinus his second book de hermaphroditis in Africa also be wild ass among which one male have many female a jealous beast who for fear of after encroach bite off the stone of the young male if the suspicious female prevent he not by bring forth in a close place where he shall not find it the like be tell of bever y y plin. l. 8 c. 30. whitney emble Solinus which be hunt for the medicinable quality of their stone be say to bite they off when they be in danger to be take pay that ransom for their life it can be true that be report of the Hyaeneum z z Marbodeus de gemmis a stone find in the Hyaena eye that be put under the tongue of a man be shall foretell thing to come except he foretell this that no man will believe what our author before have tell the Libard be not hurtful to man except they annoy he but kill and eat dog dabuh be the name of a simple and base creature like a wolf save that his leg and foot be like to a man * * sol. in cap. 36. call they Celphos so foolish that with a song and a taber they which know his haunt will bring he out of his den and captive his ear with their music while another captivate his leg with a rope Scaliger think this be the which the turk call Zirtlan and take with a rope fasten to the leg he that go in profess he be not there till they be there sure of he the zebra of all creature for beauty and comeliness be admirable please resemble a horse of exquisite composition but not all so swift all over-lay with particoloured lace and guard from head to tail they live in great herd as I be tell by my friend Andrew battle who live in the kingdom of congo many year and for the space of some month live on the flesh of this beast which he kill with his piece for upon some quarrel betwixt the portugal among who he be a sergeant of a band and he he live eight or nine month in the wood where he may have view of hundred together in herd both of these and of elephant so simple be the zebra that when he shoot one he may shoot still they all stand still at gaze till three or four of they be dead but more strange it seem which he tell i of a kind of great ape these great ape be call pongo if they may so be term of the height of a man but twice as big in feature of their limb with strength proportionable hairy all over otherwise altogether like man and woman in their whole bodily shape except this that their leg have no calf they live on such wild fruit as the tree and wood yield and in the night time lodge on the tree he be accompany with two Negro-boy and they carry away one of they by a sudden surprise yet not hurt he as they use not to do any which they take except the captive do then look upon they this slave after a month life with they convey himself away again to his master other ape there be store and as Solinus report * * satyr be think to be a kind of ape these be natural there be other unnatural of human copulation with goat a three sort diabolical illusion and a four poetical tale see these thing at large in Baubinus de Hermaphrod l. 1 also dread in Solin etc. satyr with foot like goat and sphynge with breast like woman and hairy whereof Pierius say he see one at Verona and a kind of coney also at the same time four time as big as the ordinary and which be more incredible have each of they four genital member Philippo Pigafetta speak in his relation z z congo translate by A.H. of congo of other beast in Africa as of the tiger as fierce and cruel as lion make prey of man and beast yet rather devour black man then white who mustachio be hold for mortal poison and be give in meat cause man to die mad the Empalanga be somewhat like to a ox their sheep and goat never bring forth less than two and sometime three or four at a time they have wolf fox dear red and fallow roebuck civet-cat sable and marten the river-horse seem peculiar to Africa a beast somewhat resemble a horse shorter-legged with great foot and a very great head with horrible tooth so fearful by land that a child may affright they and in the water as their proper element though their aliment be grass corn in the blade and other like from the earth they be audacious and dare but of this and many other african creature too long here to relate the reader may inform himself more full in my voyage in jobson battle santos Aluares John Leo and other there publish @. 3 of crocodile serpent and other strange creature they have snake and adder whereof some be call Imbumas five and twenty span a a Strabo and agatharchides write that they have see serpent 30. cubit long long live in land and water not venomous but ravenous and lurk in tree for which take purpose nature have give it a little horn or claw within two or three foot of the tail wait for their prey which have take it devour horn hoof and all although it be a hart. and then swell with this so huge a meal it be as it be drink and sleepy and unwieldy for the space of five or six day the pagan negro roast and eat they as great dainty the bite of their viper kill in four and twenty hour space Africa for monster in this kind have be famous as in the roman history appear Attilius b b a. gel. l. 6. c. 3. and jul. obsequens cap. 29. pl. l. 8. c. 14. etc. Regulus the roman consul in the first punic war at the river bagrada encounter with a huge serpent and plant his engine and artillery against the same who skin send to Rome for a monument be in length a hundred and twenty foot as Gellius out of tubero report the scale c c Osor l. 4. c. 8. treasury of time l. 5. c. 31. see the whole chapter Vitriaco testify that the crocodile hatch her egg only with her sight and other thing not probable arm it from all hurt by dart or arrow and with the breath it kill many and have eat many of the soldier before they can with a stone out of a engine destroy this destroyer the river of Niger Nilus Zaire and other have store of crocodile whereof some be of a incredible bigness and greedy devourer thirty foot long from a egg less than a Goose-egg Aristotle say that crocodile have no tongue but I myself have see both great and little say our author dead and dry in all which I find a tongue but very short flat and large strange it be that they tell of the number of sixty in this beast the age sixty year the tooth joint egg and day of lay and hatch be all number by sixty the crocodile tail be as long as his body his foot with claw his back arm with scale almost impenetrable he move only his upper jaw and that so wide that some of they be able to swallow a entire heifer as some report they say also that the female lay her egg where Nilus will make a end of his flow that year as if by secret providence she divine how far the river will rise in engender she lie on her back and through the shortness of her leg can turn herself on her belly but by the male help from which be scar by the clamour of some watch this opportunity she be easy take which they do also by pitfall and other mean four month together in the winter they eat nothing they be thick-sighted by land and easy take their prey by water which be do by their tail they be bold upon the fearful and fearful upon the bold yet a fearful beast to encounter rise on his tail with such hellish jaw and devilish claw over the assailant as require a undaunted spirit for which the tentyrite be famous easy conquer they author tell of a little bird which as he lie gape go into his mouth and pick his indent tooth which he can devour by reason of her sharp feather raise like bristle when he offer to shut his mouth on she the ichneumon or rat of Nilus be say to gape for this occasion of his gape and then to run into his belly and gnaw himself a passage out therefore worship of the egyptian the ichneumon be as big and as clean as a cat snout like a ferret but without hair and black sharp tooth round ear short legged long tayled suppose of both gender buy at market in Egypt to kill mouse and rat they prey upon all lesser serpent destroy crocodile egg and strangle all the cat they meet with love poultry can endure the wind their mouth be so little they can bite any thing that be thick mount Atlas have plenty of dragon gross of body slow of motion and in bite or touch incurable venomous the desert of Lybia have in they many Hydra Dubb be the name of a kind of great lizard not venomous which never drink and if water be put in his mouth he present die he be count dainty meat and three day after he be kill p. Pigaset at the heat of the fire he move as if he have life in congo be a kind of dragon like in highness to ram with wing have long tail and chap and diverse jaw of tooth of blue and green colour paint like scale with two foot and feed on raw flesh the pagan negro pray to they as god for which cause the great lord keep they to make a gain of the people devotion which offer their gift and oblation the chameleon be know among we admirable for their airy sustenance although they also hunt and eat fly and for the changeableness of their colour p into all as Theophrastus say but red and white a a Solinus c. 33. and Theophrast animal the Tarandus be a beast some what resemble a ox in quantity a hart in shape the skin hard a finger thick fit for shield haired like a bear live as Theophrastus affirm in Sarmatia Solinus say in Aethiopia seldom see of incredible changeableness to the colour of that which be next it the Polypus seem by his breath to change his colour his lung extend almost through all his body which Aristotle testify he do both for fear and hunt his prey add the same quality of another fish call a cuttle another serpent have a rundle on his tail like a bell which also ring as it go but if any desire to know the variety of these serpent Solinus in his thirteen chapter will more full satisfy he and bellonius in his observation manifold be these kind of serpent in Africa as the Cerastes which have a little coronet of four horn whereby he allure the bird unto he lie hide in the sand all but the head and so devour they the dart themselves from tree on such creature as pass by the Amphisbena have two head the tail also onerate I can say honour with a head which cause it to move circular with crooked wind a fit emblem of popular sedition where the people will rule their prince needs must their motion be crooked when there be two head and therefore none the Scythale be admirable in her vary jacket the Dipsas kill those who she sting with thirst the hypanale with sleep as befall to Cleopatra the hemorrhoids with unstaunchable bleed the prester with swell and not to poison you with name of many other of these poisonful creature the basilisk be say to kill with her sight or hiss b b Galen lib. Pliny say it be twelve finger long and nine inch l. 8. c. 21. albert. mag. mirab. Galen describe it and so do Solinus and other it be not half a foot long and have three pointel Galen say on the head or after Solinus streak like a mitre it blast the ground it touch the herb also and tree and infect the air so that bird fly over fall dead it fray away other serpent with the hiss it go upright from the belly upward if any thing be slay by it the same also prove venomous to such as touch it only a Weasill kill it the bergameni buy the carcase of one of they at a incredible sum which they hang in their temple which Apelles hand have make famous in a net of gold to preserve the same from bird and spider the Catoblepas be say to be of like venomous nature always go with her head into the ground her sight otherwise be deadly as for the monster that by mix generation of unlike kindness nature unnatural produce c c io. Baptista porta etc. I leave to other discourse Levinus d d Lemnius l. 4. c. 12. Lemnius tell that of the marrow in a man backbone be engender a serpent yea of a egg which a old cock will lay after he be unable to tread hen any long be say he by the same cock sit produce a basilisk and tell of two such cock at zirizea kill by the people which have find they sit on such egg Theophrast also say that serpent be plentiful engender of much rain or effusion of man blood in war mouse be multiply in dry season which the store of they this dry winter 1613. confirm of which he say there be great one in Egypt with two foot which they use as hand not go but escape ostrich keep in company in the desert make show a far off as if they be troop of horseman a ridiculous terror to the caravans of merchant a foolish bird that forget his nest and leave his egg for the sun and sand to hatch that eat any thing even the hard iron that hear nothing they have eagle parrot and other fowl but none more strange than that which be term nifr big than a crane prey upon Carnon and by his flight bury his great body in the cloud that none may see he whence he espy his prey and live so long that all his feather fall away by age and then be foster by his young one other fowl they have too tedious to relate of which let the reader consult jobson santos and other relation in our voyage publish grasshopper do here often renew the egyptian plague which come in such quantity that they intercept the shine of the sun like a cloud and have eat the fruit and leave leave their spawn behind worse than their predecessor devour the very bark of the leafless tree the old depart none know whither and sometime with a southeast wind be carry into Spain the arabian and libyan eat they before they have spawn to that end gather they in the morning before the sun have dry their wing and make they able to fly one man can e e joh. bapt. mat. 3. eat locust and many people be therefore call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) gather four or five bushel in a morning f f p. Oros lib. 5. cap. 11. orosius tell that once they have not only eat up fruit leave and bark while they live but be dead do more harm for be carry by a wind into the sea and the sea not brook such morsel vomit they up again on the shore their putrify carcase cause such a plague that in Numidia die thereof eight hundred thousand and on the sea-coast near Carthage and Utica two hundred thousand and in Utica itself thirty thousand soldier which have be muster for the garrison of Africa in one day be carry out of one gate one thousand and five hundred carcase they be say to come into Barbary seven year together and other seven not to come at which time corn before so dear be sell for little and sometime not vouchsafe the reap such be their soil and plenty the juice of the young be poison Pliny call g g plin. l. 11. c. 29. they a plague of divine anger they she say he with such a noise that one will take they for other fowl and pass over huge tract by sea and land in Italy the people by they have be drive to h h take out of the sibylle book Sibyllius remedy for fear of famine in cyrenaica there be a law thrice a year to war against they destroy the egg first than the young and last the grow one in Lemnos a certain measure be appoint for each man to bring of they to the magistrate and they hold jay in high regard because they kill they with fly against they in Syria man be compel to kill they in Parthia they eat they joel. 1 and 2. etc. the scripture also often threaten and mention this plague as God great army but otherwhere they seem stranger in Aethiopia they have their principal habitation Clenard mention i i 150 ep. Aristot in hist an. and their mischief about Fez where they bring Cart-loads of they to fell the people devour these devourer aluares in his thirty two and thirty three chapter tell of these grasshopper in Aethiopia that in some place they make the people truss up bag and baggage and seek new habitation where they may find victual the country all desert and destroy and look as if it have snow there by reason of the unbarked tree and the field of maize the great stalk whereof be tread down and break by they and in another place a tempest of rain and thunder leave they more than two yard thick on the riversbank this he see with his eye but if we stay a little long on this subject the reader will complain of their troublesome company here the studious of nature rarity in these part may resort to Leo and other as also for their further satisfaction in the fish and monster of the water as the Hippopotamus in shape resemble a horse in bigness a ass they go k k Aelian lib. 5. cap. 53. into the corn ground of the egyptian and in their feed go backward towards the river so to beguile man who look forward for they they mean while convey themselves into the water in l l theoph. Simocatta hist maurus l. 7. cap. 16. this river of Nilus in the time of mauritius mena be governor of Egypt there with many other see near the place where cairo now stand a giantly monster from the bottom of his belly upward above the water like altogether to man with flaxen hair frown countenance and strong limb some imagine he to be Nilus the suppose River-deity after he have continue in the common view of all man three hour there come forth of the water another like a woman with a smooth face her hair partly hang and partly gather into a knot and black of colour her face very fair rosy lip finger and breast well proportion but her low part hide in the water thus from morning till sunset they feed their greedy eye with this spectacle which then sink down again into the water Hondius speak of a mermaid take in the netherlands and teach to spin I swear not to the truth of it but many history speak of some like man in their whole shape both in our and other coast and some like lion and for mermaid in the voyage m m 5 ges aq. of Henry Hudson for northerly discovery 1608. Thomas hils and Robert rainer see one rise by the ship side on the fifteen of june from the navel upward her back and breast like a woman as likewise her bigness of body her afterpart like a porpoise and speckle like a Mackerill Robert juet in his relation of that voyage when they call their company to see it she sink down I may add many other creature strange and wonderful and yet not so wonderful as the effect and virtue which Albertus Mizaldus and other tell of these and other creature such be the sea-kine lesser than the land-kine the Tartaruca a tortoise which live in the desert of huge bigness etc. the people which inhabit Africa be arabian moor abyssine egyptian and diverse sort of the heathen differ in rite from each other as shall follow in our discourse the monster which Pliny and other tell of beside Munster and Sabellicus out of they I neither believe nor report chap. 2 of Egypt and the famous river Nilus and first king temple and monument according to Herodotus Diodorus and other @. i. the name of Egypt and of the river Nilus after our general view of Africa Egypt may just challenge the principal place in our african discourse as be both in situation next to Asia whence we be late come and consequent from thence first people beside that religion our lodestar have here find the soon and solemn entertainment and not in religion alone but in policy philosophy and art the grecian a a jamblicus which will seem the first father of these thing have be disciple to the egyptian as b b am. m. l. 22. D.S. l. 1. plin. d. os and be volat. 12. lact. l. 4 c. 9 Hieron ad Paul am. marcellinus and d. siculus Plutarch and many other affirm hence Orpheus musaus and Homer fetch their theology Lycurgus and Solon their law Pythagoras Plato Anaxagoras eudoxus Democritus Daedalus here borrow that knowledge for which the world have ever since admire they let it not then be impute to i as a tedious officiousness if I long detain the reader otherwise delight with the view of those ril which hence have flow among the greek and latin poet and philosopher in survey these egyptian fountain and well-spring whence have issue especial a deluge of superstition that in elder time drown all the neighbour part of the World nor let it be tedious unto we to behold in this historical theatre those egyptian rarity the sight whereof have draw not philosopher alone but great prince too and mighty emperor to the undertake of long and dangerous journey as c c Aelian Sparta Severus Severus who though he forbid Judaism and Christianite yet go this pilgrimage in honour of serapis and for the strange sight of Memphis Memnon the pyramid labyrinth etc. Vespasian also and other do the like the name of Egypt say d d antiq. l. 1. c. 6. Broughton consent josephus be mesre of Misraim the son of cham as the egyptian themselves be call Mesrai so the arabian at this day call it as Leo e e io. Leo l. 8. Mitzer and Mitzer postellus Aldrete Africa affirm but the inhabitant they call chibth this chibth they say be he which first rule this country and build house therein the inhabitant also do now call themselves thus yet be there not now leave any true egyptian save a few christian the mahometans have mingle themselves with the arabian and african these christian be hereupon f f b. enquiry cap. 22. call cophti of their nation as master Brerewood observe not of their religion which be the same with the jacobite and the egyptian in some ancient monument be term aegophti and the name Aegyptus which some derive from Aegyptus brother of Danaus be likely to come of that chibth or this aegophti and all these name may seem to borrow their original from Koptus a chief city in Egypt as both Scaliger g g d. Chyter and Lidyat be of opinion * * coptus as Pliny say be the near mark to Nilus of Arabia and indian merchandise lib. 2. c. 9 the land of Koptus so be aethiop of and Thebeth or Thebais Ignatius the patriarch of Antioch in a arabic epistle write to Scaliger call Egypt the land of Kopti where he speak of or the computation of year by those koptite christian reckon from the nineteenth year of Dioclesian at which time he destroy the christian church and slay a hundred and forty four thousand martyr in Egypt and other seven hundred thousand exile the turk h h scal. E.T. 4. 5 Lidyat E.T. call both the country itself and principal city cairo by the name of misir thus sing a old pilgrim in write rhyme without name of the author in Egypt be a city fair that height Massar or else kare Egypt be before call if we may believe stephanus i i steph. Byz Roffinus ortel thes. and other Aeria and otherwise also by the name of Aeria potamia Ogygya melambolos Haephestia Ethiopia some add k k Apollon. argon Hepia as Nilus be also call Melas of the blackness the river be first call Oceanus than Egyptus and after that Nilus and Triton Egypt have on the l l Tzetz ad Lycophron east the gulf and some part of Arabia on the south the fall and mountain of Aethiopia on the west the desert of Libya on the north the mediterranean sea all which nature have set not only as limit but as fortification also to this country Nilus be by Ovid m m fast 5. tib. l. 1. cla. Epig. call for his foreign spring by Tibullus which supply the place of shower to Egypt whereupon Claudian sing Egyptus and Lucan Egypt no rain nor merchandise do need Nilus do all her wealth and plenty breed hereupon the roman account it their granary and the Turk Selym when he conquer it say he have now take n n g. Sandys a farm that will feed his gemoglan without it the earth be sand perhaps have not be earth nor be there above one well of sweet spring water nor brackish in all Egypt the water of Nilus be sweet wholesome and yield no misty vapour this river run through the midst thereof sixty mile from o o Agatharchides ap. phot. 250. Lewis del Marmol l. 11. cairo make by division of himself that delta to which some appropriate the name of Egypt refute by jupiter Ammon who oracle say Herodotus reckon all that Egypt which Nilus overflow Ptolemaus p p ptol. l. 4. c. 5. number three of those Deltas touch the head of q q vid. eustat in Dionys aethicus and other divide Egypt into the superior and inferior this be that delta the other Thebais ortel Simler Nilus Bredenbachius affirm that many sultan have send man on purpose furnish with skill and provision for the discovery who after two or three year return affirm that they can find no head of this river nor can tell any certainty but that it come from the east and place not inhabit both of like truth and before the sultan Sesostris Cambyses Alexander Nero be report to have make search for the head of this river Nero man by the help of the aethiopian pass far up to large unpassable marsh full of weed the extent unknown late geographer relate that Nilus arise out of a lake in twelve degree of southerly latitude out of which not only this river run northwards into the mediterranean but Zaire also westward Zuama and Spirito Sancto eastward into the ocean as be say all overflow their territory in the same time and from the same cause what this cause shall be many both old and late writer have labour to search Herodotus diedorus Pliny and Solinus have lend we the conjecture of antiquity herein r r p. Pigafetta l. 2. c. ult. ap. ram. Fracastorus and rhamusius have bestow their discourse on this subject as Goropius also and other of s s scal. 47. lucret. l. 6. Lucan l. 10. late year have do the most probable cause be the rain which t t goro in Becces Niloscopium Goropius in his Niloscopium derive from a double cause for the sun in place near the line do show more mighty effect of his fiery presence exhale abundance of vapour which in terrible shower he daily repay except some natural obstacle do hinder as in some place of u u acosta hist ind. Peru where it seldom or never rain and hence it be that the indian both east and west and the african reckon their summer and winter otherwise then in these part of the world for this time of the sun near presence with they they call winter in regard of these daily storm which he seem to recompense they with other six month continual serenity and fair weather not then raise by reason of his further absence any more exhalation than be by himself exhaust and consume which time for that cause they call summer GOROPIUS therefore out of his conjecture tell we of a twofold winter under both Tropic at the same time under cancer the rainy winter which in manner as you have hear attend on the sun under Capricorn the astronomical winter in the sun absence where also he suppose it to rain at that time by reason of the high hill there situate and the great lake which minister store of moisture beside that cancer be then in the house of the moon again the wind 10 10 p. Pigafetta 1.2 etesij that be to say ordinary every year in their annual course every winter lift up the cloud to the top of the hill which melt they into rain whereby all the river in Aethiopia be fill and cause those overflow which in Nilus be strange because it be in Egypt far off from the rain that cause it Aristides y y Aristot ap. phot. 249. say that Aristotle find by his wit and Alexander by experience send man thither for that purpose that rain be the cause of this overflow and that those rain be cause by etesian wind which say he be by the approach sun engender in the north part and carry to the south where meeting and multiply on the top of the high aethiopian hill they cause rain master sandys affirm that some month before this rise of Nilus for diverse day you shall here see the trouble air full of black and ponderous cloud and hear a continual rumble threaten to drown the whole country yet seldom so much as drop but carry southward by the north wind that constant blow at that season the egyptian by three pitcher hieroglyphical intimate a threefold cause the earth the south ocean and these rain strange it be that the earth of Egypt adjoin to the river preserve and weigh daily keep the same weight till the seventeen of june and then grow daily heavy with the increase of the river experiment general affirm by french english and other Marcus Fridericus Wendelinus have write a large book which he call nili and have preamble with a pretty preface book of the wonder of water saint Ambrose have give he a good text in his Hexaemero the sea say he be good the hostry of river the fountain of shower the derivation of overflow by it remote nation be join danger of battle be remove barbarian fury be bound it be a help in necessity in peril a refuge a delight in pleasure wholesomeness to the health conjunction of man separate compendiousness of travel a shelter of the afflict a subsidy to the public treasury the nourishment of sterility hence be shower transfuse on the earth the sun draw the water of the sea by his rarify beam and exhale it up to the cold shady cloud there cool and condensate into shower which not only temper the drought but make fertile the field what shall I reckon the island which be as it be embroider jewel in which those which with firm purpose of chastity put off the secular enticement of intemperance may choose to lie hide to the world and to avoid the doubtful turn against of this life the sea therefore be the closet of temperance the school of continence the retire place of gravity the haven of security the time-tempest calm the sobriety of the world the incentive of devotion the voice of singer contend with the wave surge etc. these praise of that holy father give to the sea may here be set as prince Nilus his inheritance the ocean elder son a river of long course and further fetch and more unknown pedigree than any river that age of the ancient know and from so equal a arbitrament to three sea the West-atlantic the east-indian and unknown-south run so many degree to the north in pilgrimage to that holy ground where Christ himself have seek refuge and whence by a mighty hand God have deliver Israel and in who water Moses make the beginning of the egyptian plague for more holiness be in Christ foot than can be unholiness in Egypt elder idolatry or late mahometan fury and yet those precious foot impart no holiness to the ground or man where faith receive not what thence ready flow still do Nilus visit and ever forsake those who Christ visit and which have forsake Christ as drown himself for anguish or under the sea bottom to seek close and private intelligence with jordan where the water be as pestiferous in that dead sea as be the deed devilish which overwhelm the sodomite region therein and from the neighbour region chase the canaanite first and after the carnal israelite but I be almost drown also betwixt these place of divine judgement Wendelinus have give we the elder name schichor (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Oceanus Aegyptus Triton astaboras jupiter Aegyptius Gichon Syris chrysorrhoas Noym Mahara Abbabuius Syene dyris he tell we also the original out of the negus his title to be in goyome a country subject to the abassine argue against the conceit of those which make Nilus one of the river of paradise and philosophical discourse of the overflow the mouth and issue and the quality thereof but so large that I rather refer the studious to he then presume hence to enlarge this discourse already tedious he have pack his book as a full store-house of ancient and modern ethnic and christian authority of all kind in this argument in my voyage now publish Aluarez and the jesuit give great light to this obscure-famous river John Baptista Scortia a jesuite have late publish two book of this one river with manifold speculation thereon it seem not without cause that the name paper be derive from grow in Nilus so much paper have be write thereof see jobson of Gambra he derive Nilus from two lake which I dare not adventure there be so many Hippopotami and crocodile therein the overflow be common to most river under the line to Zaire and diverse river of Africa but the cause and effect be in short stream more evident to Gambra also who overflow be as obscure on the Guinaea coast as Nilus on the egyptian likewise to Menan of Pegu and Indus which Philostratus in diverse other thing compare to Nilus and the river of siam in Asia and to the river of amazon and Guiana in America friar z z Historia de la Etiopia l. 1. c. 28. Lewis de Urreta ascribe the overflow to some secret passage and pore whereby the ocean and the mountain of the moon hold mutual commerce this increase of Nilus continue forty day or more after which follow the decrease as long in the middle of Nilus say a a leo lib. 8. Leo over against the old city of cairo stand the isle Michias or the measure isle contain one thousand and five hundred family and a temple and a foursquare cistern of eighteen b b himerius ap. phot. 243. mention this measure Nilus by cubit cubit depth whereinto the water of Nilus be convey by a certain sluice under the ground in the midst whereof be a pillar mark also with eighteen cubit to which officer for the purpose resort daily from the seventeen of june to observe the increase which if it amount to fifteen cubit and there stay it do portend fertility and how much over or under so much less abundance in the mean time the people devout exercise prayer and alms-giving and after the price of victual especial of corn be proportionable appoint for the whole year the city and town of Egypt while this inundation last be so many island master sandys c c s. l. 2. write that it begin to arise with the arise sun on the seventeen of june swell by degree till it mount sometime four and twenty cubit but that the uttermost heretofore seventeen be the most that it attain to present by that image of Nilus have seventeen child play about it bring from hence by Vespasian and dedicate in his temple of peace still to be see in the Vatican at Rome that year when he be there it do rise at cairo three and twenty cubit about two mile above the city at the end of old cairo in the begin of August they cut the bank for soon it will destroy the unreap fruit the bassa himself in person give the first stroke a world of people attend boat or in pavilion on the shore with night triumph and rejoice welcome in the river into the land diverse day together the bassa feast three day in the castle of Michias in the night their many light place in building erect of purpose for this solemnity make a glorious show these light be say to succeed the devilish sacrifice of a young man and a maid wont to be offer at this time to Osiris and Isis every night they have firework every Turk of account have a gallant boat adorn with streamer chamber and the light artificial set to represent castle ship house or other form in the day make sea-fight other practise like exercise on land the soil be sandy and unprofitable the river both moisten and manure it yea if there die in cairo five thousand of the plague the day before yet on the first of the river increase the plague not only decrease but mere cease not one die the day after which we have elsewhere ascribe to the sun entrance into leo. the land be otherwise a very desert as appear two year together when Cleopatra reign Nilus not overflow and in Joseph seven year of famine the river be part of pharaoh dream by which he stand and out of which the fat and lean d d gen. 41.1 2 3 vid. com. mart. marl Munst etc. kine ascend and thus say Herodotus the land of Egypt do not only owe the fertility but herself also unto the slimy increase of Nilus for e e raine be infectious if at any time it fall in Egypt except in and about Alexandria where Pigifetta say it rain sac. lib. 19 rain be a stranger in this country seldom see and yet often than welcome as unwholesome to the inhabitant pharus by Homer mention far off in the sea be now adjoin to the continent the mouth or fall of Nilus number by the prophet Esay f f isaiah 11.15 and other in old time seven and after Pliny who reckon the four small eleven be now as willielmus tyrius out of his own search testify but four or as other writer but three worthy of consideration Rosetto balbicina Damiata where the saltness of the earth and shell find in it may seem to confirm Herodotus opinion that Nilus have win it from the sea which Goropius labour to confute Aristotle @ do not only aver the former opinion with Herodotus but add that all the mouth of Nilus except that of Canopus may seem to be the labour of man c c a. meteor l. 1 vid. Hieron Es. 12. and not natural channel to the river HONDIUS his map of Egypt Aegyptus @. 2 the division of Egypt and the great work of their ancient pharao EGypt be ancient divide into Thebais delta and the region interjacent and these subdivide into six and thirty nomi which we call shire whereof Tanete and Heliopolite be the assignment of Jacob family h h d. Chytr they call goshen from whence Moses after conduct they into Canaan as Strabo i i stra. lib. 16. also witness the wealth of Egypt as it proceed from Nilus so be it much increase by the fit conveyance in the natural and hand-laboured channel k k Sesostris Ptolemy Traiani thereof their harvest begin in April and be thresh out in may. in this one region be sometime by Herodotus and Pliny report twenty thousand city Diodorus l l diod. sic. l. 1. siculus say eighteen thousand and in his time three thousand he also be tell by the egyptian priest that it have be govern about the space of eighteen hundred year by the god and hero the last of who be orus after who it be under king until his time the space almost m m Olymp. 180. of fifteen hundred year to Herodotus they report of three hundred and thirty king from Menas to Sesostris the scripture who chronology convince those lie fable call their king by one general name Pharaoh which some n n morn ver. Ios. antiq. l. 3. c. 2 interpret a saviour josephus say it signify authority and make ancient mention of they in the day of Abraham some begin this royal computation at Mizraim if our Berosus which annius have set forth be of authority k k pseudo Berosus he tell that cham the son of Noah be by his father banish for particular abuse of himself and public corruption of the world teach and practise those vice which before have procure the deluge as sodomy incest buggery and be therefore brand with the name Chemesenua that be dishonest cham in which the egyptian follow he and reckon he among their god by the name of l l Xenoph. de aequivocis call cham Saturnus Aegyptius Saturn consecrate he a city call chemmis the psalm of m m psal. 75. and 108. David do also thus entitle Egypt the land of cham which name be retain by the egyptian themselves in Jerome n n hier. in gen. bring conc. day chemmis after Diodorus be hallow to pan and the word signify Pan cit^^'s in Herodotus his time it be a great town in Thebais have in it a temple of Perseus square and set round with palmtree with a huge porch of stone on which be two great statue and in it a chapel with the image of Perseus the inhabitant want not their miraculous legend of the appatition of their god and have a relic of he a sandale of two cubit which he sometime wear they celebrate festival game in his honour after the greek manner Herodotus also mention a island call chemmis with the temple of Apollo in it some say o o plut. in os Thebes be call in their holy Chemia or Chamia and all p p Arist. meteor lib. 1. Egypt be sometime call Thebes Lucan q q Lucian syr. say the egyptian be the first that have temple but their temple have no image their first temple be report r r diod. sic. l. 2. to have be erect in the time of s s Osiris be suppose by some to be the son of chaus vid. inf cap. 6. patric Osiris and Isis who parent be jupiter and juno child to Saturn and rhea who succeed Vulcan in this kingdom they build a magnificent temple to jupiter and juno and two other golden temple to jupiter coelestibus and jupiter Ammon or cham which we before speak of institute unto they priest and golden statue Menas be reckon the first king after those demigod t t morn Christ Relig. cap. 26. who build a temple to Vulcan and teach the people to sacrifice and other rite of religion long after he Busiris build Thebes which be u u Herodot l. 2. Dionys (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) etc. Iwen. thebe say to have a hundred gate and many stately erection of temple colossus obelisk by the one name they call their more than giantly image by the other their pillar of one stone fashion like a needle pomponius laetus and Martianus speak of two of these Obelisk with hieroglyphical inscription carry from Hieropolis in Egypt by Augustus to Rome the one fourscore foot high the other a hundred and thirty which be break in the raise Pliny mention these and other at Rome one of which he make serve for the measure of the sun shadow in Campus Martius in dial-wise he speak of a obeliske at Thebes make and raise by twenty thousand man of four temple there be one contain in circuit thirteen furlong in height five and forty cubit the wall four and twenty foot thick the ornament answer to the structure but the gold silver ivory and jewel be take away by the Persian when Cambyses burn the egyptian temple out of those fire they report flow three hundred talent of gold and 10 10 the egypt-talent of silver be reckon 250. l. of our money and gold be usual account 12. time so much two thousand and three hundred of silver among the seven and forty sepulcher of their king that of Simandius be reckon most sumptuous the gate whereof be two hundred foot long and five and forty cubit high within be a square cloister contain in each square four hundred foot bear up with statue of beast in stead of pillar of sixteen cubit the roof make of stone of two pace broad beautify with star then be there another gate like to the former but full of work with three huge statue to himself his mother and daughter within this be another cloister more beautiful than the former but for the particular of these thing let our reader refort to Diodorus siculus who partly from the priest relation and in great part from his own sight deliver they at large he add that there be a inscription contain the cost and charge hereof to be three thousand and two hundred million of minae these sum be admirable and scarce to be parallel in any history excel even those sum which David leave Solomon for the temple and only surmount by those which Sardanapalus be say to have consume together with himself in his funeral fire for if we account every mina three pound two shilling and six penny as master Brerewood have observe of the attic mina out of many author which yet be less than the egyptian and but half so much as that of the hebrew and alexandrian it come to ten thousand million of our pound a sum incredible improbable that I say not impossible yea neither be those thing credible which ctesias tell of Sardanapalus which Brerewood sum after the attic talon at two and twenty thousand and five hundred million of pound in gold and eighteen thousand two hundred and fifty million of pound in silver even in those thing also which the sacred history avouch of David howsoever the truth be beyond all name of certainty yet the interpretation of that truth be not full agree upon as we have elsewhere show this cost of Samandius although enlarge in the tell do not disagree to that egyptian opinion esteem their house their inn and their sepulcher their eternal habitatation of the race of Simandius be ogdous that build e e in 69.51 and 29.50 Memphis call in the scripture Noph compass a hundred and fifty furlong at the part of Nilus into that delta-division where the succeed king abode forsake Thebes till Alexandria be after build by Alexander Thebes be call diospolis or Jupiter city where as Strabo f f Strab. l. 17. report be consecrate to jupiter a beautiful virgin of noble birth who until the time that she have she natural purgation have the carnal company of whosoever she please and at this her menstruous accident be bewail as dead and after marry such virgin the greek say he call pallade many year after ogdons succeed Sesostris g g antiq. l. 8.4 josephus be of opinion that Herodotus err in the name and ascribe the deed of h h 2. Chron. 12.9 Shoshak to Sesostris to which also the computation of Herodotus do agree reasonable in the time i i volater li. 12. lud. reg. lib. 4. other account he the same with sesachis in Diodorus the huge conquest of this Sesostris be beyond all that ever Alexander achieve if we credit author at his return he build in every city of Egypt a temple to their chief god at their own cost and offer a ship of cedar two hundred and eighty cubit in length silver on the inside gild on the outside learned m. Fuller Misc l. 2. c. 4. hold the relation of tearcon and Sesostris to be in great part fabulous and rather troublesome expedition then settle empire to the chief God at Thebes and two obelisk one hundred and twenty cubit high wherein be engrave the greatness of his empire and revenue at Memphis in the temple of Vulcan he dedicate statue of himself and his wife thirty cubit high of his child twenty and when he go to the temple or through the city his chariot be draw by king as Lucan sing Sesostris in the western world by war compel king to draw his memphian car thus we read in our own chronicle k k Hoveden Malmesbur mat. west fox act. and monument Speed stow chron. etc. of Edgarus pacificus sometime king of England row in a boat by eight king himself hold the stern Tacitus l l annal. 2.15 tell of rhameses a egyptian king who conquer the east and south part of the world help herein as the priest tell Germanicus with the force of Thebes who have then seven hundred thousand fight man this be write in egyptian character at Thebes interpret by one of the priest together with his revenue not inferior to the roman or parthian empire pheron the son and successor of Sesostris enrage at the rage of Nilus swell above eighteen cubit cast a dart against the stream m m Her. lib. 2. and thereupon lose his sight which by the advice of the oracle in Butis be restore by the urine of a woman which have never know man but her husband which cause he to burn his own wife and many other fail in this new experiment and to marry she who at last he find by this proof to be honest he set up in the temple of the sun two pillar each of one stone of 100 cubit high and eight broad after succeed Memphites Rhasinitus and Cheopes this last shut up all the temple in Egypt and busy they in his own work one hundred thousand by course ten year together in build a pyramid for his sepulchre the least stone be thirty foot and all grave Nilus pass under it by a trench it be reckon among the wonder of the World his daughter and brother make two other odious therefore to the egyptian who will not once name they this be hollow the other solid they do it say he in hope of the resurrection for they will not inter their dead body because of the worm nor burn they because they esteem fire a live creature which feed thereon must together with it perish they therefore with nitre and cedar or with composition of myrrh cassia and other odour thus preserve they Scaliger say n n sca. ep. ad Putean they set these body in their dine room that their child and nephew may behold they while they be eat some also report o o gi. bot. ben. porc. fun a cap. 11. Thevet cosmog de Levant that the poor sort use hereunto the slimy bitumen of the dead sea which have preserve a infinite number of carcase in a dreadful cave not far from these pyramid yet to be see with their flesh and member whole after so many thousand year and some with their hair and tooth of these be the true mummia the More and indian violate the sepulcher and either burn they as be report they sometime do in stead of firewood which be scarce in those part or else sell they at cairo a body for a dolour the city be nigh twenty mile from thence for these mumme be near the place where Memphis sometime stand in that place be some indifferent great and a number of little pyramid with tomb of several fashion many ruinate and many violate the ancient egyptian covet there to be bury as the place suppose to contain the body of Osiris under every one or wheresoever lie stone not natural to the place by remove the same descent be discover like the narrow mouth of well have hole in each side of the wall to descend by but with troublesome passage some well-nigh ten fathom deep lead into long vault belong it shall seem to particular family hew out of the rock with pillar of the same between every arch the corpse lie rank one by another shroud in a number of fold of linen swathled in band of the same the breast of some be stain with hieroglyphical character within their belly be paint paper and their god enclose in little model of stone or metal some of the shape of menin coat-armour with the head of sheep hawk dog etc. other of cat beetle monkey and such like they wrap the dead body in manifold fold of linen besmear with gum and after other ceremony lay the corpse in a boat to be waft over acherusia a lake on the south side of the city by Charon so they call the ferryman and there the body be bring before certain judge who if convince of evil life deprive it of burial the most terrible of punishment to the egyptian about this lake stand the temple of Hecate with the port of Cocytus and Lethe or oblivion Styx and other poetical fable have hence their derivation but let we return to the pyramid and view they as they now stand with master sandys his eye have first tell a miracle or imposture rather of the moor with piece of mumme stick in the sand many thousand on good Friday resort to see the arm and leg of dead man appear on the other side of Nilus to the gain of the ferry-man for this cause perhaps delude the superstitious vulgar baumgarten mention it in his time and think it a illusion of the devil whether he or he we will not now examine full west from cairo close upon the libyan desert have cross Nilus and a plain twelve mile over they come to the three pyramid the great of they be ascend by two hundred and fifty five step each step above three foot high of a breadth proportionable no stone so little through the whole as to be draw by our carriage bring out of the mountain of Arabia with a double wonder of the conveyance and mount the north side be most wear by reason of the humidity of the northern wind in these part from the top be discern the country with her belove Nile the mumme and many huge pyramid afar off each of which be this away may be repute wonderful descend on the east side below from each corner equal distant they approach the entrance into which they go with a light in every man hand a narrow and dreadful passage stoop or creep as down the steep of a hill a hundred foot the descent still continue but few dare to venture further Pliny write that at the bottom be a spacious pit eighty and six cubit deep fill at the overflow by conceal conduit other add that there be in the midst a little island on that the tomb of Cheops the founder master sandys say that climb over the mouth of this dungeon they ascend by like uneasy passage about a hundred and twenty foot and thence pass through a long irksome entry direct forward they come to a little room with a compass roof of polish marble from hence they climb a hundred and twenty foot high at the top enter a goodly room twenty foot wide and forty foot long the roof of a marvellous height the stone so great that eight floor it eight roof it eight flag the end and sixteen the side all of well wrought theban marble at the upper end be a tomb of one stone uncover and empty breast high seven foot in length and almost four in breadth sound like a bell more probable suppose the bvilder sepulchre if any desire a more exact survey let he resort to our author and other eye and pen-witness not far hence be that Sphynx a huge coloss with the head of a maid and body of a lion suppose by bellonius to be the monument of some sepulchre by Pliny of amasis it yet continue all of one stone and be a huge face look towards cairo the compass of the head say p. martyr * * leg. bab. l. 3. a eyewitness be fifty eight pace Pliny a a lib. 36. c. 12. number eight pyramid and say that the compass of this Sphynx about the head be a hundred and two foot the length a hundred and forty three master sandys affirm that unto the mouth it consist of the natural rock thus advance the rest of huge flat stone lay thereon wrought altogether into the form of a aethiopian woman heretofore adore by the people not so huge as before report the whole be but sixty foot high the face disfigure by time or the moor superstition detest image Pliny write that three hundred and sixty thousand man be twenty year in make one of the pyramid and three be make in seventy eight year and four month the great say he cover eight acre of ground and bellonius affirm that the pyramid rather exceed then fall short of the report of the ancient and that a strong and cunning archer on the top be not able to shoot beyond the fabric of one which Villamont be there cause to be try and find true William Lithgow write that the height of one be 1092. foot b b Pliny say 883. f. and the second 737. the three 363 as their dragoman tell he the top thereof be all one c c sandys have three stone stone which he measure seventeen foot in every square yet on the ground seem as sharp as a point diamond the other be low and want step to ascend on they they be of marble but I will be loath to bury the reader in these sumptuous monument the witness of vanity and ostentation of which beside the ancient martyr bellonius Euesham Villamont and other eye-witness have large write mycerinus be reckon the next king better belove of his subject who daughter be bury in a wooden bull d d Porcharch in his Funerali Antichi Tau. 12. hath set forth this in picture Hont Cos. lib. 3. reg 23.29 in the city Sai to which every day be odour offer and a light set by night this ox once a year be bring out to the people next to he be asychis who make a pyramid of brick and these brick be make of earth that cleave to the end of a pole for this purpose in a vain curiosity thrust into a lake yet be all these wonder exceed by the labyrinth the work say some of Psammetichus or after Herodotus of the twelve peer which reign in common as king partly above ground partly beneath in both contain 3500. room Herodotus say he see the upper room the low he may not as be the sepulcher of the founder and of the sacred crocodile all be of stone and grave the cause of make this labyrinth be diverse deliver by demoteles the palace of mothetude by lysias the sepulchre of meris the most probable opinion that it be consecrate to the sun the pattern to Dedalus for that in Crete represent but the hundred part of this the entrance be of parian marble pillar plin. l. 36. c. 13. the work be divide into region e e there be in Egypt 73. nomi 10. in Thebais 10. in delta and 17. in the middle region and perfecture sixteen vast house be attribute to sixteen of they there be also temple for all the egyptian god and Nemeses above in fifteen chapel many pyramid also each of forty else and found on six wall after a weary journey they come to those inexplicable way the labyrinth of this labyrinth have before ascend high hall and gallery each of ninety step inly adorn with pillar of Porphyry image of their god statue of king and monstrous shape some of the house be so seat that the open of the door cause a terrible thunder as terrible be the dark way and most of all without a guide the inextricable wind enfold wall and manifold deceive door make by many passage none at all no cement or mortar be use in all this huge work the lake of Maeris be not less wonderful compass three thousand six hundred furlong and fifty fathom in depth make by meris who name it bear in the midst be two pyramid fifty fathom above and as much beneath water one for himself the other for his wife the water flow six month out and six month in from Nilus the fish be worth to the king coffer twenty of their pound a day the first six and a talon a day the last six month of necus who the scripture call Pharaoh necho and of his victory against the syrian in Magdolo or Magiddo where he slay king josiah Herodotus witness he also make this necus author of that trench from Nilus to the red sea which Strabo ascribe to Sesostris Pliny f f plin. l. 6. c. 29. make Sesostris first author second by Darius who in this business be follow by Ptolemaeus one hundred foot broad seven and thirty mile long but force to leave the enterprise for fear of the red sea overflow Egypt or mix his water with Nilus tremellius think it to be the labour of the israelite in that servitude from which Moses free they he consume in this work 120000. egyptian after he reign Sammi and then apries about these time g g anton. Galua Nabuchodonosor conquer the egyptian according to ezechiel prophecy ezech. 30. but they have also civil war Amasis h h Philostrat. Apollon. l. 5. cap. 15. say that Apollonius see a lion which one have tame offer to fawn on he withal utter certain murmur interpret that speech of the lion to the people say that he sometime have be amasis the egyptian king whereupon he be send with pompous procession of the priest to leontopolis and there place in the temple deprive apries who be of a base birth of a great basin of gold in which himself and his guest have use to wash their foot make a image and place it in the most convenient part of the city and observe their superstitious devotion thereunto say that they ought now no less to respect he notwithstanding his former base birth and office when he be a private man to maintain his prodigal expense he use to steal from other and when they redemand their own he commit himself to the censure of their oracle such oracle as neglect his theft he be a king do neglect he bring from the city Elephantina twenty day sail a building of solid stone the roof be of one stone one and twenty cubit long fourteen broad and eight thick and bring it to the temple at Sai he ordain that every one shall yearly give account to the magistrate how he live and maintain himself and he which bring a false account or live by unjust mean be put to death he be bury as be suppose in that Sphynx abovesaid psammenitus his son succeed who Cambyses deprive chap. 3 of the egyptian idol with their legendary history and mystery @. i. of Osiris and Isis their legend of the creation etc. if we stay long on this egyptian stage partly the variety of author may excuse we which have entreat of this subject partly the variety of matter which add some light to the divine oracle not that they need it which be in themselves a light a a 2. pet 1 19 shine in a dark place but because of our need who owlish-eye can so easy discern that light deserve a large relation for whether the history of the old testament or the prophecy of the new be consider both there literal we read of egyptian rite practise and here mystical of like superstition in the antichristian synagogue revive therefore b b Apoc. 11.8 spiritual call Sodom and Egypt no where can antiquity plead a long succession of error nowhere of superstition more multiplicity more blind zeal in prosecute the same themselves or cruelty in persecute other that gainsay oh Egypt wonderful in nature who heaven be brass and yet thy earth not iron wonderful for antiquity art and arm but no way so wonderful as in thy religion wherewith thou have disturb the rest of the world both elder and late heathen and Christian to which thou have be a sink and mother of abomination thy heathenism plant by cham water by jannes jambres Hermes overflow to Athens and Rome thy christianisme be famous for many ancient father more infamous for that arrian heresy which rise here eclipse the christian light the world wonder and groan to see itself a arrian I speak not of the first monk who egg here lay be fair and beginning holy but by the devil brood bring forth in after-age a dangerous serpent thy Mahometism entertain with like lightness of credulity with like eagerness of devotion have be no less troublesome to the arabian sect in Asia and Africa then before to the heathen or christian in Europe the first author it seem of this egyptian as of all other false religion be cham as before be say which have take deep root in the day of joseph the patriarch and in the day of Moses their priest c c genes 41.8 exod. 1.7 wiseman and soothsayer confirm their devotion with lie miracle as the scripture testify of jannes and jambre and d d she Asclep Hermes Trismegistus of his grandfather and himself the grecian ascribe these devotion to Osiris and Isis of who the history and mystery be so confuse that Typhon never hew Osiris into so many piece as these vain theologian and mythologians have do they be forsooth in the egyptian throne king and Queen in the heaven the sun and moon beneath these the element after Herodotus they be Bacchus and Ceres Diodorus make Osiris the same with the sun serapis Dionysius Pluto Ammon jupiter Isis the moon Ceres and juno Appollodorus make her Ceres and io. Antonius and Cleopatra style and figure themselves the one Osiris and the other Isis in Macrobius and Servius she be the nature of thing * * Adol Occo Numis he Adonis and Atis Plutarch add to these interpretation Oceanus and sirius as to Isis Minerva Proserpina Thetis and if you have not enough Apuleius will help you with Venus Diana Bellona Hecate Rhamnusia and heliodorus near home make Osiris to be Nilus the earth Isis so true it be that e e 1. cor. 8.4 io. 4.12 georg. stamp tab. Cosmogr a idol be nothing in the world and idolater worship they know not what Stampellus interpret Osiris to be Abraham and Isis to be sazeb who Moses call also Ischa orus Apollo or horapollo say Isis be the star call of the egyptian sothis which be the dogstar therefore call Isis because at the first rise of that star they prognosticate what shall happen the year follow the like be in use among the cilician who observe the first rise of that star from the top of Taurus and thence say Manilius thence they foretell what store of fruit or want what time what health what concord they descant Tully in the first book of his divination recite the same out of heraclide ponticus of the cei but the egyptian have more cause to observe that star because Nilus do then begin to increase and therefore from thence they begin to reckon their Tekuphas or quarter of their year as the jew from nisan but to search this fountain further you may read the egyptian opinion in Diodorus f f Diod. sic l. 1. how that the world be frame out of that chaos or first matter the light thing ascend the heavy descend the earth yet imperfect be heat and harden by the sun who violent heat beget of her slimy softness certain putrid swell cover with a thin film which be by the same heat ripen bring forth all manner of creature this muddy generation be say they first in Egypt most fit in respect of the strong soil temperate air Nilus overflow and expose to the sun to beget and nourish they and still retain some such virtue at the new slake of the river the sun then more desirous as it be of this egyptian concubine who the water have so long detain from his sight engender in that lustful fit many creature as mouse and other who forepart be see move before the hinder be form these new-hatched people can not but ascribe divinity to the author of their humanity by the name of Osiris and Isis worship the sun and moon account they to be god and everlasting add in the same catalogue under disguise name of jupiter Vulcan Minerva Oceanus and Ceres the five element of the world spirit fire air water and earth these eternal god beget other who not nature but their own proper merit make immortal which reign in Egypt and bear the name of those celestial deity their legend of g g some think that this Osiris be Miz aim the son of cham. morn see this legend at large in cael. Calcag derch Egypt Osiris be that he have set Egypt in order leave Isis his wife governor appoint Mercury her counsellor the inventor of arithmetic music physic and of their superstition make a expedition into far country have Hercules for his general with Apollo his brother Anubis and Macedon his son who ensign be a dog and a wolf creature after for this cause honour and their counterfeit worship pan * * polyaen stratag l. 1. make pan to be Bacchus his general in his indian expedition maron and Triptolemus and the nine muse attend with the satyr thus do he invade the world rather with art than arm teach man husbandry in many part of Asia and Europe and where vine will not grow to make drink of barley at his return his brother Typhon slay he reward with like death by the revenge hand of Isis and her son orus the disperse piece into which Typhon have cut he she gather and commit to the priest with injunction to worship he with dedication unto he of what beast they best like which also shall be observe with much ceremony both alive and dead in memory of Osiris in which respect also h h lactan. lib. 1. they observe solemn to make a lamentable search for Osiris with many tear make semblance of like joy at his pretend find whereof Lucan sing always seek say Lanctantius and always find to establish this osirian religion she consecrate a three part of the land in Egypt for maintenance of these superstitious rite and person the other two part appropriate to the king and his soldier this Isis after her death be also deify in a high degree of adoration than Osiris self one thing be lack to our tale which be also lack a long time to Isis in her search for when she have with the help of wax make up of six and twenty part which she find so many image of Osiris all bury in several place his privity which Typhon have drown in Nilus be not without much labour find and with more solemnity inter and that the devil may show how far he can besot man the image i i arnob. gent. l. 5. Natalis com. l. 5. cap. 3. hereof be make and worship the light of this darkness shine as far as Greece who Phallus Phallogogia Ithiphalli Phallophoria and Phallaphori issue out of this sink together with their membrous monster Priapus yea the egyptian have lose their own eye in this filthy superstition bestow they on the image of Osiris his stone which they portray with a eye athenaeus k k athen. l. 5. c. 5. tell of ptol. Philadelphus in a solemnity wherein he list to show to the world his madness or as it be then esteem his magnificence a place worth the read to they who be not here glut with out tedious egyptian banquet he among many sumptuous spectacle present a l l Phallus be the image of a man yard Phallus of gold paint with golden crown of a hundred and twenty cubit length have a golden star on the top who circumference be six cubit this be carry in a chariot as in other the image of Priapus and other idol of Typhon the poet m m apollod Origen dear l. 1. nat. com. etc. fable that after the god by the help of mortal man have slay the giant the earth in indignation for the loss of that her giantly brood lie with Tartarus bring forth Typhon which exceed all the former for his height surmount the mountain his head reach to the star one of his hand to the west the other to the east from which proceed a hundred head to dragon his leg be entwine with roll of viper which reach to his head fill the world with terrible hiss his body cover with feather his eye flame with fire a flame stream also out of his mouth thus be he arm and fight against heaven and make the god run away into Egypt and turn themselves into many form with many tale more which I surcease to rehearse of the Isiacal rite n n laur. Pig mens Isiac exposit that brazen table suppose to have be some altar-cove after possess by card. Bembus full of mystical character explain by Laurentius Pignorius in a treatise of this argument may further acquaint the desirous reader Diodorus think this the cause why they consecrate goat and erect image of satyr in their temple affirm that their priest be first initiate in these bawdy rite @. 2 the cause of consecrate their beast and the mystical sense of their superstition their canonize beast of which the egyptian and syrian say o o nat. lib. 1. Tully conceive strong opinion of devotion than the roman of their most sacred temple be p p philo. jud. praec. Ios. count Appius die canic p. 2. Colleq 1. dog cat wolf crocodile ichnumod ram goat bull and lion in honour of Isis their sacred bird be the hawk Ibis Phoenicopterus beside dragon asp beetle among thing creep and of fish whatsoever have scale and the eel yea their reason do not only to sensible thing ascribe divinity but garlic and onion be free of their temple divide therefore by q q Inuenal sat. 15. Tarneb 18. 12. add garlic as worship and swear by ja^end o numina for this cause some r r Trem. and Iurs. in genes 43. exod. 8. think the hebrew be in such abomination to the egyptian that they will not eat with they as eat and sacrifice those thing which the other worship example whereof deodorus a eyewitness tell that when Ptolemey give entertainment to the roman who friend he be declare a Roman at unaware have kill a cat can not by the king authority send officer for his rescue nor for fear of the roman be detayin from their butcherly fury for such be their custom for the murder of those sacred creature to put to death by exquisite torment he that have do it witting and for the bird Ibis and a cat although unwitting slay and therefore if any espy any of they lie dead he stand aloof lament and protest his own innocence the cause of this blind zeal be the metamorphosis of their distress god into these shape second their ancient Ensign three the s s Tusc. qu. l. 5. profit of they in common life Origen t t Orig. lib. 4. hier. Roman rep gent. l. 1 add a four because they be use to divination and therefore say he forbid to the israelite as unclean Eusebius out of the poet cite a five cause namely the divine nature diffuse into all creature after that of the poet God go through sea and land and lofty sky I may add a six that (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) or transanimation u u that the same soul shall one while quicken a man another while a fish or beast or bird pass from one to another which Pythagoras it seem borrow hence and from India yea Aeneas Gazeus 10 10 in Bib. pat. tom. 8. a platonike in his Theophrastus or dialogue of the soul immortality affirm that Plato learn this opinion of the egyptian and disperse it through all his book as do Plotinus and other his follower after he number among the rest Prophyrius and jamblichus if I may with the reader patience I will add somewhat of their mystery of iniquity and this mystical sense of this iniquity for as many have sweat in unfold the mystery of that church which spiritual be call Sodom and Egypt as Ambrose de Amariolo Amalarius durandus Durantus and other so here have not want mystical interpreter porphirius jambliochus Plutarch and the rest such be the deepness of Satan in the shallowness of human both reason and truth water and fire they use in all their sacrifice and do they devout worship say y y euseb Praep. l. 3. c. 2 Porphiry because those element be so profitable to man use and for this use sake they adore so many creature at Anubis they worship a man but especial they hold in veneration those creature which seem to hold some affinity with the sun even that stink beetele or Scarabee do these more blind than beetle in their stink superstition observe as a live image of the sun because forsooth all scarabee be of male sex and therefore also say z z Aelian animal l. 10. c. 15 Aelian soldier wear the figure of the Scarabee in their ring as thereby insinuate their masculine spirit and have shed their seed in the dung do make a ball thereof which they roll too and fro with their foot imitate the sun in his circular journey julius firmicus a a jul. Firm. mist profan c. 1. inveigh against they for their worship and supplication and superstitious vow make to the water and for that their fabulous legend of Osiris Isis and Typhon unfold the history and mystery Eusebius follow this argument in the several beast which they worship but to avoid tediousness I leave he to look on Plutarch pain in this argument he b b de os and be make Isis to be derive of the verb (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) to know as be the goddess of wisdom and knowledge to who Typhon for his ignorance be a enemy for without knowledge immortality itself can not deserve the name of life but of Time their priest shave their own hair and wear not woollen but linen garment because of their profess purity to which the hair of man or beast be but a excrement disagree and for this cause they reject beef mutton and pork as meat which cause much excrement yea their Apis may not drink of Nilus for this river fatten quality but of a fountain peculiar to his holiness at heliopolis they may not bring wine into the temple hold it unseemly to drink in the presence of their lord they have many purification wherein wine be forbid their king which be also priest have their sacred stint of wine and do not drink it at all before Psammoticus time esteem wine to be the blood of they which sometime war against the god out of who slay carcase vine proceed and hence proceed drunkenness and madness by wine their priest abstain from all fish they eat not onion because they grow most in the wane of the moon they procure also tear and thirst their king be choose either of the priest or of the soldier and these also after their election be present choose into the college of priest Osiris signify many eye in the egyptian language o be much and a eye the image of Minerva at Sai have this inscription I be all which be which have be which shall be who shine light no mortal man have open Ammon c c (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) egyptiaca Osiris Tumblichus de mysteriis they call am the same as be before say with ham or cham the son of Noah in the vocative case as invocate he who they hold the chief God of the world to manifest himself they esteem child to have a divine faculty and observe the voice of child play in the temple and speak at adventure as oracle because Isis seek after Osiris have inquire of child they interpret astronomical the dogstar to belong to Isis the bear to Typhon Orion to horus the inhabitant of Thebais acknowledge nothing for God which be mortal but worship Gneph which they say have neither beginning nor end so many be the interpretation in their mystical theology that truth must needs be absent which be but one and these may rather seem subtle fetch of their priest to gull the people than the true intent of their first author of idolatry because Typhon be of red colour they consecrate red bull in which yet there may not be one hair black or white they esteem it not a sacrifice acceptable to the god but contrary as which have receive the soul of wicked man and therefore they curse the head of the sacrifice which they hurl into the river and since have use to sell to stranger the devil happy will teach they a apish imitation of that sacrifice of the red cow num. 19 the priest abhor the sea as wherein Nilus die and salt be forbid they which they call Typhon spital in Sai in the porch of Minerva temple be picture a infant a old man a hawk a fish and a sea-horse the mystery be o you that be bear and die God hate shameless person the hawk signify God the fish hatred the sea-horse impudency by their Osiris and Typhon they signify the good and evil whereof we have not only vicissitude but mixture in all these earthly thing and here Plutarch be large in show the opinion of these wiseman which when they see so much evil and know withal that good can not be the cause of evil they imagine two beginning one whereof they call God the other devil the good Orimazes the bad Arimanius this opinion be father on Zoroastres betwixt those two be Mithres who the persian call a mediator so the chadaeans have among the planet two good two bad three of middle disposition the grecian their jupiter and Dis and harmonia beget of Venus and Mercury Empedocles call the one friendship the other discord the pythagorean d d vid. soc. l. 1. cap. 17. call the good one bound abide right square etc. the other duplicity infinite move crooked long etc. Anaxagoras the mind and infiniteness Aristotle form and privation Plato the same and another hence appear how true it be that e e 1 cor. 2.14 the natural man perceive not the thing of God nor can know they and hence grow the manichaean heresy all f f nat. com. l. 6. and 8. the deformity and defect of thing Plutarch ascribe to Typhon who they also call Seth Bebon and smy say Pignorius that which be good to Osiris and g g the horn of Isi for so they picture she be by Suida^ ascribe to that fable of Io which some say be Isis Isis to this the matter to he the form in the town of Idithya they burn live man who they call Typhonian scatter their ash and bring they to nothing this be open do in dog-day but when they sacrifice any of their sacred beast it be do close and at uncertain time according to which custom Achilles Statius h h achil. stat. lib. 3. frame his history of Leucippe sacrifice by egyptian robber and pirate for expiation of their villainy and protection against their enemy the rite whereof be after some hymn sing by the priest to kill and rip she and have view and taste the liver to bury she he that will furthor be acquaint with these mystery let he resort to Eusebius and Plutarch jamblichus have write a large treatise where the more curious reader may further satisfy himself he muster in their rank and order first the god than archangel next angel than daemon after they hero principality and soul in their subordinate order Marcilius * * Marsit fie in Iamb. translate according to Proclus ficinus do thus dispose his egyptian mystery or mystical opinion of God the first in order be the second or the three the four Emoph the captain of the heavenly deity the five captain of the workman of the world the understanding of the soul of the world call Amun Phtha Vulcan Osiris but these way be too rough cragged and thorny for a dainty traveller they that will I may read jamblichus Proclus porphyrius translate by Marsilius Eicinus Caelius Calcagninia a a Dereb Egypt have also write a large treatise of these egyptian mystery much may the reader gather also out of doctor Rainolds his learned treatise rain l. 2. c. 3. @. 2 of HERMES Trismegistus MErcurius Trismegistus so call b b gen. Dier lib. 2. cap. 8. because he be thrice great king priest and philosopher be say c c Lactantio lib 1. c. 6. Lactantius call Thoth or thoyth of who they name their first month acknowledge to have receive their law and letter from he he build the city hermopolis and of the sait be honour for a God of he also Augustine de civitate dei lib. 8. cap. 26. illustrate by the annotation of Viues will further acquaint you Goropius d d Hermanthenae lib 6. hieroglyph l. 1. Gallica lib. 4. from a speech of jamblichus that all sacred write be ascribe to Mercury Trismegistus conjecture after his far fetch fashion that Trismegistus signify God in Trinity and unity which he gather also out of the word get or God and that no mortal man be intend by Mercury but God himself call Thoyt or theut as the head of all thing and that the eternal wisdom of God first teach man letter e e he say the hebrew borrow their letter from the cimmerian and find great mystery in the name of the letter that the egyptian be subdue by the cimmerian who come thither out of Phrygia and change their religion leave they both their hieroglyphical character wherein also be include mystery of holy thing and their language both which the priest observe in their liturgy and devotion divine thing be not meet to be ascribe to man and therefore all the book of their divinity be ascribe to Mercury who image be a head end in a square statue a resemblance of that divine wisdom and constancy they use to set up these image in the highway therein engrave some good moral admonition for which cause they be call mercury and Hermes as his dutch etymology declare Herman signify nothing but a public admonish and merkman that which man ought to mark and most diligent to attend the like he do in the name of Harpocrates and other their deity some of they through ignorance from hieroglyphic as the emblem of George Christopher f f hier. l. 8. he say Christopher be first so paint of some egyptian or Hieroglypher see Rainold ^e id. k. e. and litan and margaret among the romist become god whether these thing be true or for which Scaliger censure Goropius I listen not to determine nor to fill these page with store of matter of this nature from he with who the desirous reader may himself find entertainment where he will show the mystery of their pyramid to signify the fiery soul of the world and obelisk the sun and other thing more than ever the egyptian themselves conceive for how can they without help of Goropius his dutch g g fran. patricij Zoroaster Franciscus Patricius as he have take great pain out of psellus joannes Pieus and other for the open of the assyrian and chaldaean opinion and have collect three hundred and twenty oracle and sacred sentence of Zoroaster so he have with no less industry publish twenty book of h h f. p. she Trismegist Graecolat. Hermes or Mercury Trismegistus he affirm that there be two of that name the one grandfather to the other the elder of which be counsellor and instructor of Isis and the scholar of Noah he have a son name tat which beget the second Hermes which Hermes have a son also call tat by which likeness in name great confusion and unlikelihood have happen in history this second Hermes he suppose live in the day of Moses but be somewhat more ancient both the elder and young be writer as he show out of their work and call Trismegisti not for that he be great king priest and philosopher as ficinus say nor for their clear sentence touch the holy Trinity but as the french use the word thrice for the superlative as man thrice or most excellent in learning the same Patricius have set forth three treatise of Asclopius of which name be three learned egyptian asclepius vulcani inventer of phyvoke asclepius imuthe inventer of poetry and another which have no surname to which Hermes dedicate some of his book and the same asclepius i i Asclepius sole and daemonib lib. 1. in the begin of his first book call himself the scholar of Hermes in the write of these egyptian translate into greek and explain by the egyptian priest the greek philosopher especial platonike and pythagorean learn their divine moral and natural philosophy antiquity and learning hold we long in these man company the more curious may have recourse to their own work for my own opinion I can believe so ancient monument of ethnic author to remain but as in the sibyl Berosus Henoch and many other old author lose some new obtrude on the world in their name yet I leave to each man his own censure twenty thousand book be ascribe to Hermes some say thirty six thousand five hundred twenty five he in his asclepius k k Asclep c. 9 translate by Apulcius thus write Egypt be the image of heaven and the temple of the whole World but the time shall come when the egyptian devotion shall prove vain and their piety frustrate for the divinity shall return to heaven and Egypt shall be forsake of her god and no marvel see that these god be idol the work of man hand as himself l l cap 13. after show and when as they can not make soul they call m m Origen count lib. 4. say that among other spell they use to adjure devil in the name of the god of Israel God of the hebrew God that drown the egyptian in the red sea or conjure into they the soul of devil or angel by which the image may have power to do good or evil for thy grandfather o asclepius say he be the first inventer of physic to who be a temple consecrate in a mountain of Libya where his worldly man his body rest for the rest or rather his whole self be go to heaven and do now heal man by his deity at then by his physic the same do n n this may be that Mercury of who Tully say egyptij n. d. lib. 3. Mercury my grandfather preserve all such as resort to he much may the willing reader learn further of their superstition which he thus free confess in that author who prophecy God be thank by the bright and powerful sunshine of the gospel be long since effect chap. 4 of the rite priest sect sacrifice feast invention and other observation of the egyptian @. i. of their Apis and other beast serpent and other creature worship thus far have we launch out of their history into their mystery to return to the relation of their beast and bestial superstition Lucian a a Lucian Astrologia say that Apu represent the celestial bull and other beast which they worship other sign in the zodiac they that respect the constellation of do eat no fish nor a goat if they regard Capricorn Aries a heavenly constellation be their heavenly devotion and not here alone but at the oracle of jupiter Ammon b b Strabo l 17. Strabo say that they nourish many creature which they account sacred but not god this nourishment after c c diod. sic. l. 1. Diodorus be in this sort first they consecrate unto their maintenance sufficient land such votary also as have recover their child from some dangerous sickness accustom to shave their hair and put it in gold or silver offer it to their priest the hawk they feed with gobbet of flesh and with bird catch for they the cat and ichneumon with bread and milk and fish and likewise the rest when they go their procession with these heart display in their banner every one fall down and do worship when any of they die it be wrap in fine linen salt and embalm with cedar and sweet ointment and bury in a holy place the reasonless man howl and knock their breast in the exequies of these unreasonable beast yea when famine have drive they to eat man flesh the zeal of devotion have preserve untouched these sacred creature and if a dog die in a house all in that household shave themselves and make great lamentation if wine wheat or other food to be find where such a beast lie dead superstition forbid further use of it principal man with principal meat be appoint to nourish they in the circuit of their temple they bathe and anoint they with odoriferous ointment and they provide to every one of they a female of his own kind their dead they bewail no less than their own child in their funeral they be exceed prodigal in the time of Ptolemeus Lagi their Apis or bull of Memphis be dead the keeper bestow on his funeral over and above the ordinary allowance and offering fifty talent of silver borrow of Ptolemey that be twelve thousand and five hundred pound of our money after the egyptian talon or after the alexandrian eighteen thousand seven hundred and fifty pound and in our age say Diodorus a eyewitness of these his relation some of these nourisher have bestow a hundred talent on this last expense which be twice as much as the former after the death of this bull which they call Apis be make a solemn and public lamentation which they testify by shave their head although their purple lock may compare with those of Nisus say d d luc. de sacra Lucian and after his burial e e Solin am. marc. be a hundred priest employ in search of another like the former which be find be bring to the city Nilus and there nourish forty day then they convey he into a close ship have a golden habitacle in which they carry he to Memphis and there place he in the temple of Vulcan for a God at his first come f f euseb praepar. Euang. l. 2. c. 1. only woman be permit to see he who I know not in what hellish mystery lift up their garment show he nature secret and from thence forth may never be admit the sight of he at his first find the people cease their funeral lamentation at his solemn receive into Memphis they observe a seven-day festival with great concourse of people his consecration be do by one wear a diadem on his head they make the people believe he be conceive of lightning he g g Strabo l. 17. vid. Naz. orat. 24. and have a chapel assign to he and call by his name he be keep in a place enclose before which be a hall and in that another enclose room for the dame or mother of Apis. into this hall they bring he when they will present he to stranger Psammetichus be the founder of this building bear up with coloss or huge statue of twelve cubit in stead of pillar and grave full of figure once a year h h Solinus Plutarch he have sight of a female choose by especial mark and slay the same day on a set day which he may not outlive according to their ritual book they drown he in the bottom of a sacred fountain and then bury he as aforesaid with much mourn after this solemnity it be lawful for they to enter into the temple of serapis Darius to curry favour with the egyptian offer a hundred talent to he that can find out a succeed Apis of this Apis thus write saint i i de civit. l. 18. c. 5. Augustine Apis be the king of the argive who sail into Egypt and there die be worship by the name of serapis their great God this name serapis be give he say Varro of his funeral chest call in greek (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and from thence serapis as if one shall say Sorosapis after serapis it be enact that whosoever shall affirm that he have be a man shall be do to death hence it be that in the egyptian temple Harpocrates k k Vid. Hieroglyph gorop l. 4. a image hold his finger on his mouth be join a companion to Isis and serapis in token of conceal their former humanity suidas l l suidas say that Alexander build unto he a magnificent temple of which and of this serapis we shall large declare in the next chapter Viues out of nymphodorus say that this carcase in that chest whereof the name serapis be derive be of a bull not of a man Eusebius m m euseb chron. name two king call by this name Apis one a sicyonian the other of Argos the first more ancient the other the son of jupiter and Niobe call after serapis but Apollodorus n n apol. bibli l. 1. c. 2. affirm he the son of phoroneus and brother of Niobe and therefore the sicyonian king be more likely to be the egyptian Apis builder of Memphis for the other o o scal. in eus die in Peloponnesus which of he be call apia Caelius Calcaguinus p p cael. cal. de reb. Egyptiacis affirm that their Apis be but the symbol of the soul of Osiris and that serapis be a egyptian word and signify joy and mirth but who can find truth in falsehood or certainty in superstitious error the mark q q Viu in aug. ciu. l. 18. c. 5. of the next Apis be these all his body be black with a white star in his forehead after Heredotus or in his right side say Pliny like unto a horn moon for he be sacred to the moon say marcellinus on his back he have the shape of a eagle a knot on his tongue like a beetle if such a one may seem impossible to be find as no doubt it be rare and therefore costly Augustine r r attribute it to the devil work present to the cow in her conception such a fantastical apparition the power of which imagination appear in s s gen. 30.39 Jacob example but what a beastly stir have we here i think I hear some whine reader say about beast t t Apis. ovid. met. 9 and bull I answer that it deserve the more full relation both for the multitude of author which mention something of this history for the antiquity and especial for the practice of the same superstition u u Bulling. Orig. error in Aaron and jeroboam calf after their return from Egypt the school of this idolatry beside this Apis of Memphis they in other place observe other as Mnevis a black bull consecrate to 10 10 suidas the sun as Apis be to the moon with his hair grow forward worship at heliopolis bacis y y macrob. another that be feign to change colour every hour at Hermunthus beside onuphis and Menuphis otherwhere thus by sin beast become god man become beast if this be not a base degree of baseness to worship beast and in they devil to content themselves with mean house and never to be content with the magnificence and sumptuousness of their temple to beast z z Orig. count lib. 3. that be they have glorious chapel with grove and stately temple with goodly Gate-way and porch but when you be within once you shall see nothing but a cat or some such carrion worship etc. and even at this day in Cayro and other place of Egypt they account it according to their Mahometan superstition no small point of charity to be bountiful and liberal to bird which they will redeem a a Ioach. vaget geographist to liberty and to dog cat and other beast set they meat and good provision at appoint time as for the camel that have carry the Alcoran at Mecca in their pilgrimage you have hear b b sup. l 3. c. 6. already how religious they esteem the touch thereof Dousa c c g. Dous itinerar see the like at Constantinople some pluck off his hair as holy relic some kiss he some wipe off his sweat therewith to rub their face and eye all entertain he with frequent concourse and at last eat his flesh distribute into small part for that purpose we be further to know that although Egypt worship beast yet not all the same these d d Strabo lib. 17. Stuckius his fusius. vid. clem. Paren and Meruetum only be universal receive three beast a dog a cat a bull two fowl the hawk and the Ibis two fish Lepidotus and other beast have their sect of worshipper as sheep among the theban and sait the fish call among the latopolitans a Cynocephalus at hermopolis which be a kind of great ape e e with Gesner quadrup and Aelian lib. 10 c. 30. or monkey natural circumcise and abhor from fish a wolf at lycopolis the babylonian near to Memphis worship a beast call Cepus resemble in the face a satire in other part partly a dog partly a bear likewise other city other beast which cause great dissension whereof f f Iwen. sat. 15. see that whole satire Aelian lib. 10. cap. 21. Iwenal Combos and tentyra do both yet burn with mutual hate because they both do spurn at one another god etc. Strabo see in the Nomus or shire of Arsinoe divine honour give to a crocodile keep tame in a certain lake by the priest and name suchus nourish with bread wine and flesh which the pilgrim that come to visit he offer now the tentyrite and those of Elephantina kill crocodile and in the city of Hercules they worship a ichneumon a beast that destroy crocodile and asp and therefore even at this day of much estimation as bellonius g g p. Bellon observe where you may see his description these imagine that Typhon be transform into a crocodile at hermopolis they worship a goat and goat have carnal mixture with woman h h volat. Scalig. write of a leaden crododile frame by art to chase away these beast melt after by achmed ben-tolon ep Vaz the ombite more beastly esteem themselves favour of their crocodile God if he fill his paunch with the flesh and blood of their dear child as Balbi and other report of the modern inhabitant of Pegu before relate king Menas build a city call crocodile and dedicate the Neighbour-fen to their food they be as scrupulous in the use of meat some i i diodor. sic. l. 1 abstain from cheese some from bean some from onion other after their own fancy this multiplicity of sect be ascribe to the policy of their ancient king according to that rule divide and rule for it be not likely they will join in conspiracy who religion the most mortal makebate have disjoin at Coptus where the holy of Isis be most solemn there be say k k Aelian l. 10. c. 23. Aelian store of great scorpion which present kill such as they sting but yet the woman which there lament Isis no less than widow the death of their husband or mother of their child and go barefoot be never hurt by they here they devote the male goat to their belly the female to their goddess hawk be consecrate to orus or the sun because they fly and look direct against the sunbeam of this bird they fable that it live seven hundred year they which will may find in that his ten book the reason of diverse other their beastly and foul devotion to fowl and beast too tedious for this place they hold serpent in so sacred account that e e l. Pig Isiac exp Osiris be never paint without they and jesephus f f Ios. cont ap. lib. 2. say that it be reckon a happiness which I think few will envy they to be bite of asp as also to be devour of crocodile venomous be that old serpent which both here and in other nation then and at this day have procure divine honour to this first instrument of hell as if he will thus exalt this trophy of his ancient conquest in despite both of God and man in that creature whereby man perish and which God have curse except we will rather attribute it to a devilish malice or apish imitation of that brazen serpent set up by g g joh. 3.14 Moses in the wilderness the figure of Christ crucify who break this serpent head Jeremy the prophet be stone some h h vine in August say at tanis in Egypt and be after worship of the inhabitant there such be their difference of sect for his present remedy the sting of serpent I think by this time either my relation or their superstition be tedious and yet I have not mention other their god both stink and monstrous loath be I to search the water for their deify frog and Hippopotami or play the scavenger to present you with their beetle-god out of their privy yea their privy i i ortel Clement and min. foelice and fart have their unsavoury canonisation and go for egyptian deity lettice suitable to such lip so Jerome k k in Es. c. 46. and cap. 12. and alias deride their dreadful deity the onion and a stink fart which they worship at Pelusium less brutish though not less idolatrous be it in l l Ae. var. l. 13. cap. 22. Strab. lib. 14. mention a temple and image of Homer at Smyrna with a coin call Ptolomaeus philopator to erect a temple to Homer in which his image be place comely sit environ with those city which challenge he for they that come near to reason in the egyptian m m plut. de osir and be deity though far enough from religion when they express God like a man with a egg in his mouth thereby intimate that God create the world with his word so in the city Sai they express in hieroglyphike a infant a old man a hawk a fish and a river-horse on the door of Minerua temple as if Minerva shall say o you which be bear and die know that God hate impudence this also by the way we add for difference of egyptian hieroglyphike and indian picture n n see acosta Gomara and our picture book tom. 2. lib. 5. in Mexico that these express history those conceal mystery the indian describe thing as plain as they can the egyptian yield a double shell before you come to the kernel and therefore more implicit and difficult than the other for that a picture of a hawk a fish and a river-horse shall represent such creature be evident but that one of these shall represent God the second hatred the three impudence be a mystery and if well search a absurdity and a thing much to be admire that wise man shall so admire thing so ridiculous @. 2 of their sacrifice their jewish rite and of their priest their sacrifice be so diversify in their kind that Peucer o o peut Canic s. Maioli part 2. Colloq. 1. say they have six hundred threescore and six several sort of they some they have peculiar to special god p p Sard. lib. 3. cap. 15. as to the sun a cock a swan a bull to Venus a dove to the celestial sign such thing as hold correspondent similitude beside their sacrifice of red man to Osiris Busiris q q triflesque Eusiridis arras be say to have offer thrasius first author of that counsel worst to the counsellor thereby to appease angry Nilus that in nine year have not overflow they offer every day three man at heliopolis in stead of which bloody rite amasis after substitute so many waxen image thus be their god beastly their sacrifice inhuman or human rather too much other thing they observe of their own invention frame to themselves deform and compound shape who image they adore such be their canopi swaddle as it be in clout so resemble orus with head of dog or other creature Osiris r r tab. Isiaca Bembi in aegypto Canicipites serpenticipite afinicipite etc. and and athanas count gent. justinus mart. Apolog. 2. and cyprian v. be sometime see with the head of a hawk Isis with the head of a lion Anubis always with the head of a dog and contrariwise beast picture with the head of Osiris and Isis monstrous misseshapen figure of misseshapen monstrous mystery they borrow of the jew abstinence from swines-flesh and circumcision of their male to which they add excision of their female still observe of the christian in those part Theodoret testify s s theod. ser. 1. that Pythagoras receive circumcision of the egyptian which they receive of the hebrew Ambrose t t am. de Abraeham l. 2. c vlt affirm that the egyptian circumcise both sex at the age of fourteen year as the ismaelite at thirteen because that then the lust of copulation begin to burn which reason teach to need circumcision and therefore it seem they use it in those part that be the seat and instrument of lust and not either in regard of original corruption or the promise seed which be hide mystery to their mystical superstition it be like the devil will thus profane this divine sacrament of circumcision as at this day in the heathen nation about congo and in jucatan in America before the spaniard come there they so abhor swine u u vid. Brerew Enq. cap. 13. that if one by the way touch they he present wash himself and his garment neither may a swineherd have access into their temple or marry with their daughter yet do they offer swine to the moon and Bacchus Isis and Osiris when the moon be at full in this sacrifice they burn the tail milt and leaf and which on another day will be piacular on that day of the full they eat the rest Aelian 10 10 Ael animal l. 10. c. 16. give this reason of their hatred of swine because it be a gluttonous beast not spare the flesh neither of their own young nor of man as on the contrary they worship the stork for her piety in nourish her age parent that I speak not of their wedlock chastity for breach whereof y y crol de signaturis Crollius tell from the relation of a eyewitness that in a wood near to spire in Germany the male complain to a congregation of stork cause they to tear his mate in piece the egyptian also have a conceit that swine milk will breed the leprosy and that swine be beast odious to the sun and moon he cite out of Endoxus that they spare they for tread their seed into the ground which be their harrow and tillage when Nilus have new leave the soften earth to send these labourer their kine and swine to tread in the miry earth the corn which they sow therein the egyptian z z Drus 3. lib. 2. swear by the head of their king which oath whosoever violate lose his life for the same without any redemption the priest in old time renown for their learning in Strabo time be ignorant and unlearned no woman a a io. Boem. lib. 1 cap. 5. h. Roman rep g. l. 3. c. 4. may bear priestly function these priest may not eat egg milk or oil except with salad they may not salute mariner nor look upon their child or kinsfolk they b b Sard. l. 3. c. 18. Herod l. 2. wash themselves in the daytime thrice and in the night twice they be shave wear linen garment always new wash be daily allow sacred meat c c Du Bartas colonies of their ancient priest thus Du Bartas sing in syluester tune the memphian priest be deep philosopher and curious gazer on the sacred star searcher of nature and great mathematics ere any letter know the ancient atticke Tertullian d d tert. exhort castitatem speak of the continence of Apis his priest and add that certain woman consecrate to the african Ceres voluntary relinquish marriage and from thenceforth may not touch a male no not so much as k sse their own son their magic skill appear in jannes and jambre which withstand Moses and in Hermes testimony of himself r. Solomon on Exod. 8. write that Pharaoh say to Moses and Aaron do you bring straw into Ophraim a city full of straw and do you bring enchantment into Egypt de Orig. c. 17. etc. which abound therewith postellus derive the egyptian and oriental science from Abraham to who he dare to attribute their divination by the air water fire earth bird and allege rambam authority that the great part of the Alcoran be take out of the egyptian learning and say that Moses and Solomon study the same and expound in scripture what Abraham have teach they to which also he ascribe the jewish exorcism in cast out devil but some devil I think have teach he so to commend these devilish art as he do no less the Alcoran and the jew cabala call they a excellent appendix to Moses and both of I know not what magical faculty Raziel first infuse into Adam in the purity of his creation and teach by the angel Raziel by he deliver in verbal tradition write first by the Henoch the book whereof Nimrod steal from Noah which Abraham may learn either in that chaldean nation or from Melchisedech but let we observe these priest further when they sacrifice they make choice of their beast by certain religious mark a cow they may not sacrifice as consecrate unto Isis they kindle a fire and sprinkle water over the sacrifice with invocation of their god kill it cut off the head which either they sell to the grecian if they will buy it or cast it into the river with imprecation that whatsoever evil be imminent to they or their country may be turn upon that head this ceremony e e Gramay as seem to have come to they from the jew and they have be as liberal of their rite since to the catholic for so they will be call as appear both by this relation and by the testimony not only of Moresinus f f Moresm dep. rel. a Protestant but g g magini ptol. pol. beroal in Apuleium and Beroaldus popish writer although daub over with new mystical signification as in Bellarmine and other the pure catholic be see their priest h h Draudius in Solinum be their judge the elder of which be chief in pronounce sentence he wear i i Aelian var. hist l. 14. c. 34. about his neck a saphire jewel with the image of truth therein engrave the priest k k alex. alex. gen dier. l. 2. c. 8. of Isis beside their shave and linen garment have paper-shoe on their head Anubis in their hand a timbrel or a branch of Sea-wormwood or a pineapple they have one chief priest or primate of Egypt as appear l l Ios. count ap. lib. 1. be egyptiaca hel. hi. Aeth l. 7. Herod l. 2. say that they have 341. priest and as many king before his time by josephus and heliodorus who make thyamis to succeed his father Calasyris in this high priesthood at Memphis manetho also enjoy this pontifical hierarchy as appear by his epistle to Ptolemeus which after shall follow Philostratus m m Philost vit. apol. lib. 6. c. 3. speak of gymnosophist which some ascribe to India heliodorus to Ethiopia he to Ethiopia and Egypt these say he dwell abroad without house on a hill a little off the bank of Nilus where grow a grove in which they hold their general assembly to consult of public affair have otherwise their study and sacrifice apart each by himself Thespesion be the chief of this monkish college when Apollonius after his visitation of the babylonian magi and indian n n Domitiano imperatore Brahmin come thither these hold the immortality of the soul and account Nilus for a god if a man at Memphis have by chance-medley kill a man he be exile till those gymnosophist absolve he Hercules temple at Canopus be privilege with sanctuary to give immunity to fugitive and malefactor thus elsewhere Osiris Apollo in Syria Diana at ephesus every cardinal house say o o pius 2. Asia a pope in Rome saint Peter p p pol. vir. l. 3. at Westminster and other popish oratory privilege den of thief @. 3 of their feast and oracle their feast be many of which * * Herod lib. 2. Herodotus reckon one at bubastis in honour of Diana to this place the man and woman at this festival solemnity sail in great multitude with minstrelsy and shout and as they come to any city on the water side they go on shore and the woman some dance some play some make a brawl with the woman of the place and thus resort to bubastis they there offer great sacrifice spend in this feast more wine then in all the year beside hither resort of man and woman beside child seven hundred thousand in Busiris be solemnize the feast of Isis in which after the sacrifice many thousand beat themselves but with what they do beat themselves be not lawful to relate the Carian that inhabit Egypt do also cut their forehead with sword signify thereby that they be foreigner this city be in the midst of the egyptian delta and in it a very great temple of Isis a three feast be at Sai in honour of Minerva where assemble by night they light candle full of salt and oil and therewith go about the wall of the city this solemnity be call * * (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) lightburning or if you will candlemas this night they which come not hither yet observe the set up of light throughout Egypt a four be at heliopolis in honour of the sun a five at Butus of Latona wherein only sacrifice be use at papremus be observe the solemnity of Mars with sacrifice but till sunset only a few priest be busy about the image a great number of they stand before the door of the temple with wooden club and over-against they above a thousand man that pay their vow each with club in their hand who the day before carry the image out of a gild chapel of timber into another sacred room those few which be choose for the idol-service draw a waggon with four wheel on which the chapel and image be carry those that stand at the porch forbid these to enter but the votary to help their god beat and drive they back here begin a great club-fray in which many be wound and many although the egyptian conceal it die of the wound the cause forsooth be because here be shrine the mother of Mars to who her son at ripe age resort to have lie with but be repel by her servant whereupon he procure help elsewhere be revenge of they hence grow that solemnity on the seven day of the month Tybi * * Hospin fest cap. 7. which answer to our January and December be solemnize the come of Isis out of Phoenicia in which many thing be do in despite of Typhon the coptite than hurl down a ass from a steep place and abuse ruddy man for this cause they have a a plut. de os also in their bacchanal solemnity most filthy rite in which be drunken they carry image of a cubit length with the privy member of a monstrous size with music accompany with the elder matron this yard which they call Phallus be usual make of figtree Herodotus b b lib. 2. say that beside their swine-feast they observe another to Bacchus without swine in like sort as the grecian in which they have such cubital image make of sinew or as coelius c c Coel. rhod. l. 7. cap. 17. read it make to be draw to and fro with sinew or string carry by woman in the month Thoth which mostwhat agree to September the nineteenth day d d plut. ibid. be holy to Mercury in which they do eat honey and fig say withal truth be sweet on the nine day of this month they observe another feast wherein every man before his door do eat roast fish the priest do not eat but burn the same before be mention the seek of Osiris this be a egyptian feast observe in the month Athyr which answer somewhat to November from the seventeen day in which they imagine that Osiris perish four day be spend in mourn the cause be four Nilus slake the wind then blow the day shorten the winter approach here be the mystery unfold on the nineteenth day they go by night to the sea and bring forth a sacred chest in which be a golden box into which they pour water and make a shout that Osiris be find then they mingle the earth with water add spice and costly perfume and make a image of the moon apply these mystical rite to the nature of the earth and water about the winter solstice they carry a cow seven time about the temple e e hosp. cap. 27. in remembrance of the sun circuit which in the seven month will be in the summer solstice the original of Isis seek Osiris be before show some make Typhon the husband of Isis which slay Osiris her son or brother as diverse diverse esteem he for incest commit with she and cut he in piece Anubis her huntsman by help of his dog find out the piece again this say f f m. f. Octau arnob. lib. 2. Minutius foelix be resemble every year true the play of Christ his crucify and resurrection which be observe in all church of the roman religion yearly may seem to have have this egyptian original once index have cut out Viues tongue where he speak against they as g g Viues in Annot. aug. civet lib. 8. cap. 27. lib. 1. cap. 17. before upon like occasion be note this feast be also mention by julius firmicus and other they have another feast call Pamylia of Pamyle the nurse of Osiris who go to fetch water hear a voice bid she proclaim that a great king and benefactor be bear on this holy day be carry in procession a image with three stone or as Plutarch h h de osir say with a threefold yard in which beastly rite he find a foolish mystery not worth the tell but I think this feast of feast have glut every man the egyptian have many oracle of Hercules Apollo Minerva Diana Mars jupiter and other the oracle of Latona at buty i i Peucer s. ma. di. can. pag 2. ' 2. tell Cambyses that he shall die at ecbatana whereby he secure himself for Syria and yet there die in a obscure village of that name whereas he have interpret it of the great city in Media their Apis and serapis be also esteem oracle annibal be deceive by the oracle of serapis tell he of his death which he construe of Libya and fall out in a place of the same name in Bythinia at Pelusium if we may believe Achilles Statius k k achil. stat. lib. 2. and 3 be the temple image and oracle of jupiter Caessius and by a oracle he make Leucippe a virgin to be appoint for sacrifice at Memphis a cow at heliopolis the bull Mnevis at Arsinoe the crocodile be their oracle but it be too tedious to relate the rest @. 4 of the invention and disposition of the egyptian the first among their invention we may reckon the derivation of their superstition to other that the elder roman entertain these damnable egyptian holy appear by the temple chapel street coin dedicate unto Isis serapis etc. mention by Onuphrius Rosinus victor Fabricius Apianus amantius Gruterus golizius Occo and other writer of roman antiquity of Isis and serapis be certain public place in Rome name Iseum and serapeum * * antiq. 18.4 josephus relate of one Paulina a noble woman of Rome marry to Saturninus devote to the superstition of Isis who Decius Mundus have solicit in vain to dishonesty notwithstanding the offer of two hundred thousand drachma which come to five thousand six hundred and twenty five pound for one night but with a quarter of that sum he corrupt the priest of Isis one of which tell Paulina that the god Anubis inflame with her love have send for she which message be welcome to she and to her husband not distasteful thus Mundus under pretext of Anubis obtain a night lodging meet she three day after merry jest at she for save his money but not her honesty whereupon Tiberius banish he crucify the priest and raze the temple command the image of Isis to be cast into tiber. but these superstition be revive soon after Vitellius * * sueton. in Vit the emperor not refuse to wear a linen religious garment open in her solemnity Vespasian also honour they and Domitian in the religious habit of Isis convey himself unknown from Vitellius and his persecutor husbandry a a laur. coru. by some be ascribe to they but false Adam Cain Noah and other be in this before they astronomy also be not their invention but b b Ios. ant. l. 1.8 teach they by Abraham geometry c c dom. nig. aph. com. 3. Clein strom. l. 1. Bas in princip prou. Girana Cos. l. 2. cic l. 1. a. Thevet c. 4. be more like to be they drive to seek out this art by Nilus overflow idolatry to the star be first here practise say Lactantius for lie on the roof of their house as yet they do without any other canopy than the azure sky first they behold then study last adore they gaudentius Brixiensis d d g. b. in Exod. 6. apply the destroy of the egyptian firstborn to the perish of idolatry through the light of the gospel the egyptian say he be the first which worship the image of dead man magic be also ascribe to they of who timely professor jannes and jambre be a instance physic be fetch also from hence and write both after the vulgar sort as also that of the priest hieroglyphical whereof Horopollo a egyptian Pierius Goropius Michael Mayerus Curio Schualenberg beside Mercerus and Hoeschelius with other have write Aelianus e e l. 14. 34. account Mercury the first inventor of their law the woman * * Sophocles in oedip. vid. scholiast ib. nymphod in Egypt do perform the office which belong to the man buy sell and other business abroad the man spin and perform houshold-task Claud duret f f Del'Orig de langues c. 40. etc. have express beside a discourse of their region and learning two egyptian alphabet if any desire to see the form of their letter which g g Nazion 3 jul. and Elias some think that the phoenicians borrow from Egypt and lend by Cadmus to the grecian but I be not of their mind this elegy or commendation be give they by martial from Egypt sure the boy birth may proceed for no land else such knavery can breed and Propertius alexandria the place where Alexandria do stand be noisome and a coney-catching land we may here add out of Flavius vopiscus h h flau. Vopisc Saturnius trebellius Pollio testify the like in his a testimony of the quality of the egyptian they be say he inconstant furious braggart injurious also vain licentious desirous of novelty even unto common song and ballad verfifier epigrammatist mathematician wizard physician both for christian and samaritan and always thing present with a unbridled liberty be distasteful to they he bring also for witness of this assertion Aelius adrianus who in a epistle to seruianus affirm thus I have learn all Egypt to be light waver and turn with every blast of fame they which worship serapis be christian and even they which call themselves bishop of Christ be devote to serapis no ruler be there of the jewish synagogue no samaritan no christian priest which be not a mathematician a wizard a chirurgeon or anointer of champion this kind of man be most seditious most vain most injurious the city Alexandria rich wealthy fruitful in which none live idle gouty man have somewhat to do blind man have somewhat to do or have somewhat which they may make nor be the gouty-fingered idle they have one GOD he do the christian he do the jew he do they all worship I wish they nothing else but that they may be feed with their own pullen which how they make fruitful I be ashamed to tell thus much adrianus the pullen he speak of it seem be such as even to this day they use to hatch not under the hen but in furnace of dung i i Timberly book describe this at large and Sandys and ash wherein thousand of egg be lay for that purpose that which he speak of the christian be either of some heretic or lukewarm timeserver to be understand or else remember that it be Adrian a ethnic who intelligence be from such as himself in those time hate the christian of who through blind zeal of their idolatry what do they what do they not fain and devise even more odious than here be express as ecclesiastical history show the jew have give Adrian cause by their treason to hate they and flatterer opportunity to belie they let he that love i tell my tale but a man will marvel to hear Adrian blame the egyptian so much for that for which himself in author be so much blame namely superstition and sorcery for he make image of Antinous which he erect almost in all the world say k k dionis Nicaei adr. Dion this Antinous be in high estimation with he some think his minion he die in Egypt either drown in Nilus as Adrian write or which be the truth be sacrifice for whereas Adrian be exceed curious and addict to divination and magical art of all kind in the hellish rite whereof be require the soul of such a one as will die voluntary Antinous refuse it not and therefore be thus honour and have a city in Egypt new repair from the ruin and dedicate in his name yea he report l l Aelius spartianus in Adriano he see a new star which forsooth be the soul of this Antinous the greek make a god of he and a giver of oracle whereof Prudentius sing antinoum etc. prudent count symmachum l. 1. adrianique ganimedem justin martyr apol. 2. and he cause money to be coin with the picture of the temple of Antinous which Adrian have erect and a crocodile under it Choul m m Choul della Relig. rom. Antich express diverse form of these antinoan coin and one with inscription of Marcellus the priest of Antinous ammianus marcellinus n n am. mar. l. 22. ascribe to the egyptian a contentious humour addict to law and quarrel their vanity and superstition may further appear by that which diophante o o diophante lacedem  record of one syrophane a rich egyptian who dote on his son yet live dedicate a image in his house unto he to which the servant at any time when they have displease their master betake themselves adorn the same with flower and garland so recover their master favour some p p coelius Rhodig lectionum l. 16.3 make the egyptian first inventor of wine which they say be first make in the egyptian city Plinthis and of beer to which end they first make malt of barley for such place as want grape when a man prove more in show then in substance as hypocrite who the truth itself call white tomb the proverb term he a egyptian temple because those building be sumptuous and magnificent for matter and form to the view but the deity therein worship be a cat dog or such other contemptible creature the natural fury q q Polyb. hist l. 15. c. 31. exod. 1 etc. and cruelty use among the egyptian have make they infamous among author both profane and divine and stephanus Bizantinus say that they which practise close subtle crafty couzenage be say (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) to play the egyptian Aeschylus also the greek poet make they mint-master therein and perhaps those rogue which wander over so many country and live by their wit and theft be therefore r r tes pot. 3. part pag 169. have a whole discourse of they call egyptian rather than for the nation be the scum and dregs of other nation disguise by a devise tongue and habit call in some country their life resemble much the or Rezuini roguish arabian wander in Syria and other part bellonius say that these wander through all the turkish empire and be no less stranger in Egypt then other place they be cunning in Iron-work and cheat fortune-teller some esteem they walachian but lest I shall also impose too cruel a task on my more willing reader I will proceed to other observation I have here in this egyptian relation of their rite manner and mystery be the large both because author be herein plentiful and especial because Egypt have be a old storer and treasurer of these mystical rite for that late upstart the mystical Babylon in the west which as she be spiritual call Sodom and Egypt so like that strumpet mention s s prou. 7.10 by Solomon have not a little deck her bed with the ornament carpet and lace of Egypt wise be the roman t t Dion Cass l. 54. of old which make diverse law to expel the egyptian rite out of their city which the late pope entertain chap. v. of the manifold alteration of state and religion in Egypt by the persian grecian roman christian saracen and turk @. i. of the persian and grecian act in Egypt and the famous university and library at Alexandria the last egyptian Pharaoh be psammenitus vanquish by Cambyses son of Cyrus the persian who quite extinguish that egyptian government and much eclipse their superstitious solemnity for a a Herod l. 3. Cambyses proclaim defiance not to the person only of the egyptian but to their god also yea he set their sacred beast in the forefront of his battle that be thus shield by their own devotion he may easy ruinate the kingdom such a disadvantage be superstition to her follower be indeed but a lifeless carcase of true religion which always breed true fortitude joseph antiq. as Ptolomey and the roman use the like stratagem against the jew on their sabbath which in itself a divine commandment they construe to a superstitious rest a sacrifice without mercy wherein they may help their beast but suffer themselves like beast to be lead to the slaughter Cambyses have pull down their temple in Egypt intend b b justin l. 1. as much to the oracle of jupiter Ammon in which exploit he employ fifty thousand man which as the ammonian report be overwhelm with a tempest of Sand other news of they be never hear himself meanwhile mean provide of victual for such a enterprise make a expedition against the ethiopian in which famine make herself purveyor for the army feed they with the flesh of each other every ten man be allot to this bloody service thus with a double discomfiture altogether discomfort he retire to Memphis where he find they observe their festival solemnity of the new-found Apis and interpret this joy to have proceed from his loss he slay the magistrate whip the priest command to kill the citizen that be find feast and wound their Apis with his sword unto death he practise no less hostility upon their obelisk sepulcher and temple the sepulcher they esteem sacred as their eternal habitation and no great security can any egyptian give unto his creditor than the dead body of their parent the c c Strab. l. 17. describe the form of their temple temple every where account holy here be many and those magnificent at Memphis they have the temple of serapis Apis Venus and the most ancient of they all of Vulcan with the pigmy-image of Vulcan in it which Cambyses deride of serapis at Canopus where pilgrim by dream receive oracle at Heraclium Sai and butis to Latona at mendes to pan at momemphis to Venus a Necropolis Nicopolis and other place to other suppose deity Cambyses also burn the image of the cabyrians and the temple of Anubis at Heliopilis who stately building and spacious circuit Strabo describe as likewise at Thebes they write that after as he be take horse his sword fall out of the scabbard wound he in the thigh where he before have wound Apis and slay he in d d Thucid l. 1. the time while the persian enjoy Egypt the athenian by instigation of Inarus king of Libya invade Egypt win Nilus and Memphis but after six year lose all again Ochas one of his successor call of the egyptian ass kill their Apis Aelian var. hist l. 6. c. 8. and place a ass in his room which kindle such indignation in bagoas a egyptian one of his eunuch that he murder ochus who he hurl to be rend and tear of cat that this beast sacred to Isis may revenge the indignity offer to Apis. but this eclipse of the egyptian superstition cause by this persian imposition have a end together with that monarchy for Alexander e e curt. lib. 4. Arrian l. 3. do not only leave they to their wont rite himself f f Adrichom theat t. san. sacrifice to their Apis and solemnize game in his honour but add further glory to their country by erection of that famous city name of himself Alexandria g g see auson clar urb whereas some think h h Lydyat emb. temp. the city no have before stand destroy by nabuchodonoser second in reputation to Rome the i i herodian l. 7. receptacle of jewish grecian and egyptian religion adorn with many temple and palace his successor Ptolomaeus Lagi of who the follow king be all call Ptolomaei and k k legidarum imperium series stra. l. 17. Niceph. patr Eutrop. l. 6. and 7. ir. patrit panarch l. 9 l. 16. Lagidae Philadelphus euergetes philopator Epiphanes Philomator euergetes the second physcon Lathurus Auletes the father of Cleopatra who julius Caesar make queen of Egypt the price of her honesty and Anthony his wife who together with herself her ambition overthrow add to the greatness of Alexandria Plato philosophy be not only first borrow of the egyptian but be public read at Alexandria as well as at Athens which continue many age six hundred year after his death Ammonius surname of his former occupation be a porter saccus seem to have light on the book of Hermes l l some learned man be of opinion that these pretence book of Hermes as also the oracle of sibyl which be extant be but counterfeit of some christian seek to win heathen by such proof worse than heathenish l. 16. and thence learned the doctrine of the trinity of who his disciple Plotinus and Aurelius write and after they their scholar Porphyry and Theodorus asinaeus and their auditor jamblichus and syrianus to this last succeed at Athens Proclus lycius and after he the last of the great Platonic damascius which have write many thing of the three beginning the same Ammonius with like philosophical happiness be say to have find the oracle of Zoroaster which the two julian the father and the son chaldaean translate out of their tongue into greek in the time of m. Aurelius the philosopher Pythagoras have before learned it of Zabratus in Assiria which it seem Plato hear of the young Architas and disperse close the seed thereof in his book so that the elder Interpreter conceive he not till the time of this Ammonius the porter from who here as from Socrates a statuary in Athens flow this divine wisdom he teach at Alexandria in the day of Clemens alexandrinus about two hundred year after Christ Origen be his hearer jamblichus comprehend these oracle of Zoroaster in thirty book or thereabouts for damascius cite the eight and twenty the wealth of the Ptolemy m m Strab. l. 17. reign in Egypt appear by Strabo report of Auletes his revenue to be twelve thousand five hundred talent which yet be count dissolute and unthrifty this by master n n brer pond cap. 10. she Thal. Brerewood be sum two million three hundred forty three thousand and seven hundred and fifty pound of our money whereas the revenue of Darius Hystaspis account a hard man be by Herodotus reckon fourteen thousand five hundred and sixty euboike talent which make 1820000. pound a great deal less sum from that great empire but they have other improvement Alexander o o Arrian lib. 6. plut. pomp. bud. de ass be say to spend more than this on hephestion funeral by fifty five thousand pound yea the roman revenue be by Plutarch @ sum at eight thousand five hundred myriad which in our money be two million six hundred fifty six thousand and two hundred and fifty pound not huge exceed the egyptian @. 2 of the school and library at Alexandria have mention the study and learned man at Alexandria and wealth of their king I hold it not amiss to entertain your eye in long view of that alexandrian school and library Simandius or osymandua a a diod. sic. c. 1. be the first in any history mention that erect a library set this inscription in the frontispiece thereof (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the medicinary or physic-shop of the mind some accuse Homer to have steal his iliad and b b naucrates ap. eustat in Praefat. odyss odysseus out of Vulcan temple at Memphis be the work of phantasia a woman the work of a womanish fantasy so to deceive or receive of that almost more than man but the second Ptolomey son of Ptolomeus Lagi be author of that famous library at Alexandria follow say c c Strab. l. 1. Strabo the example of Aristotle d d athen. l. 1. Atheneus add the book of Aristotle also buy by Ptolomey of neleus which succeed Theophrastus in this legacy bequeath to he from the philosopher himself josephus tell we of the translation of the law by the e e joseph ant. lib. 12. c. 2. aristaeus seventie or seventie two interpreter procure by Demetrius Phalareus at the king charge who also obtain the like translation of other f f Epiph. ponder cedren chaldaean egyptian and roman monument the number of which translate book cedrenus number one hundred thousand Seneca * * sen. Tranq cap. 9 speak of four hundred thousand josephus of five hundred thousand in the whole which by the succeed care of this king successor do after amount it be g g gel. l. 6. c. ult. am. l. 22. Isid. 70. 700. Gellius ammianus and isidore testimony to seven hundred thousand volume all which by cruel disaster in the civil war of Caesar perish by fire he fire the ship and they the adjoin library which neither he in his commentary nor Hirtius as Caesar most dismal fate once mention but Plutarch Dio Livy Seneca ammianus and Gellius forget not these manifold memorial thus bury at once and for ever in forgetfulness this library be in the temple of serapis as both marcellinus and after he Tertullian testify but that in tertullian day be another famous library of Cleopatra sound call for the likeness ptolemey which in likelihood continue till that glorious fabric be ruin in the day of Theodosius as Ruffinus Socrates and Sozomen have write most of the book of this latter be bring from Pergamus chief city of the lesser Asia seat of the Attalic king one of which Eumenes there collect two hundred thousand volume (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) not reckon as u u lip Bibliothec c. 4. Lipsius interpret the place that volume for more than one which contain diverse treatise give by Antonius unto Cleopatra as 10 10 plut. anton. Plutarch have relate Ptolemey the five then live deny Eumenes in envious emulation the egyptian paper the cause that parchment be then invent at Pergamus by Eumenes his industry for the use of his library as not only Pliny and Varro but the name of these skin call Pergamena of that city sufficient witness the egyptian paper of which we make of rag have still the name be make of a sedgy reed grow in the marsh of Egypt call which easy divide itself into thin flake these lay on a table and moisten with the glutinous water of Nilus be press together and dry in the sun the greek and roman have their many famous library which will here trouble our egyptian traveller who in Lipsius his book of that argument may better satisfy himself as also touch their furniture of marble ivory glass and many many curious artificial invention beside the y y sueton. in Tiber plin. in Epist. and sit. Ital. etc. image of the body of learned man there place of gold silver or brass near to more precious image of their learned mind in their write monument these indeed be the best man best image in which their z z plin. l 35. c. 2. immortal soul speak immortal yea immortality to themselves and other they be dead yet speak and never deny their wise counsel and familiar company to the t studious who by this mean be never * * cic. ossic l. 3. Alphons Hisp less alone then when alone and as king Alphonsus sometime say never find better counsellor than these dead and ever let their name flourish that bestow care and cost to keep those learned name ever flourish and in redeem these monument from worm mouse and putrefaction erect unto themselves monument far beyond the stupendous pyramid and other monstrous birth of artificial vanity Cheops be scarce remember nor worthy to be name with this Ptolemey that fire not be able to consume the honour of his name that devour his book whereas Cheops his very name be doubt and his memorial rot not withstan his pyramid still continue the remembrance of his active and passive forgetfulness and let my body want a sepulchre if my soul do not more honour that a a sir tho. Bodley founder of the famous library at Oxford I may also here mention the honourable care of d. king L.B. of London for that of Christ church and many many other worthy benefactor in both university but their memorial be there every book every page every stone be more complete panegyrike of their praise than the complemental oration of the best orator bodleian monument than all triumphal chariot of the live than the mausolaean Mogoll or memphian magnificence for the dead or any other regal or imperial interment there the stone be mute or speak the architect praise or have inscribe a few verse verbal flourish perhaps of the poet wit but here every book have a epitaph nay the whole book be a epitaph and real testimony of the founder worth so many thousand dead author quicken by such care to speak his deserve praise so many live student have their mind daily feast by such bounty and the unborn posterity have a better inheritance purchase and provide to their mind than their careful parent can for their body but how do this likeness transport we from Alexandria to Oxford in both a admirable library in both provision of maintenance for collegiate and Academike student both necessary companion for what else be store of book stately fabrike and costly furniture without student but carcase without soul and what they without book and maintenance but walk shadow and wander ghost the one be it be Senecas sentence a b b studiosa studious luxury the other a riotous study divine then be that heroic care of such who at once both client and patron of art and learning by live and livelihood seem to join and give life to soul and body together and such be this Ptolemey who make part of his palace a school have convenient place for sit and walk they be the word of c c Strab. l. 17. athen l. 1. Strabo and a great house or college in which the learned converse and diet together this college have rent in common and a priest also rector of the school appoint first by the king and after by Caesar so careful be these king of learned neighbourhood that they assign part of the palace to this employment that all the choice learn in the kingdom as d d Philostrat. de Dionys Philostratus speak of Dionysius admit one of they by Adrian affirm be choose fellow into this college not young student but reward public for their former proficience as the best deserve citizen of Athens have their diet in the therein differ from the seminary of divine and human learning among we Claudius enlarge the school and Hadrian use much to dispute and question with the learned therein herein e e athen. l. 15. blame that he bestow this preferment on pancrates a poet which have flatter he in the canonization of Antinous @. 3 of their devotion in those time as for the devotion there f f ruff l. 2. c. 23. theod. l. 5. c. 22. practise we may read in Ruffinus of the temple and image of serapis in his time destroy by Theophilus successor to athanasius bishop of Alexandria this temple be bear up with Vault-work with great light and secret passage the space of a hundred step on the top whereof round about be lofty room in which the keeper of the temple and they which make themselves chaste (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) remain within these be gallery or cloister in square rank and in the midst of all be the temple lift up on costly pillar and build of marble say g g am. Marcel l. 22. Dionys say as much or more serapidis Alexand Vetustiss Memphi hospit Pausan at. another except the Capitol the world have not a stately piece here be the image of serapis reach with his right hand to the wall on one side with his left hand unto the other be frame of all kind of wood and metal it have on the east a little window so fit that when on a solemn day the image of the sun be admit to salute this serapis the juggle priest so observe the time that even then the sunbeam through this window shall seem to kiss serapis they have also another trick by a loadstone place in the roof to draw up the iron image of the sun as if it do then bid serapis farewell the superstitious ethnic have a tradition among they that if ever man hand do offer violence to that image the earth shall present return and resolve itself into the first chaos and the heaven will sudden fall all this notwithstanding a christian soldier dismember the same and burn serapis open the mouse run out of his divide trunk Rome say Ruffinus esteem this serapis to be jupiter and that he wear a measure modius on his head as he which govern all thing in measure or else do liberal feed man with the fruit of the earth other conjecture he to be Nilus other joseph h h Oros l. 1. c. 8. affirm that of Joseph act Egypt be still witness unto his time continue the payment of the five part of their profit to the king that feed Egypt in the seven dear year other think he to be one Apis a king in Memphis who in the time of famine with his own store supply the people want for which benefit they build a temple to he after his death wherein they nourish a ox in remembrance of he who husbandry and tillage have nourish they this beast they call also Apis. he i i story of Tyrannus Saturn priest mention the temple of Saturn who priest call Tyrannus under pretence of Saturn commandment will demand the company of what lady he like to bear the God company at night which the husband do not much stick at esteem it a honour to have a god his corrival but Tyrannus shut the woman into the temple by secret passage convey himself thither into the hollow image of Saturn in which he hold conference a while with the woman and after by a device put out the light satisfy his lust in commit in the dark those work of darkness which after be bring to light cause the temple destruction they have brest-plate of serapis in every house in the wall entry post window in stead whereof they after fasten cross the cross in the egyptian mystery signify life to come they have a tradition that their religion shall continue till there come a sign in which be life k k Socra l. 5. c. 16 and by this occasion many of their priest be convert Sozomen l l soz. l. 7. c. 15. marcellinus report that Theodosius by edict abolish this temple of serapis report the same that in purge of serapis temple at Alexandria the cross be find among other their hieroglyphicke be occasion of the conversion of many unto the christian Faith this m m nicep l. 12. 26 theod. l. 5. 22. hist trip l. 10. cap. 29. temple and the temple of Bacchus be turn into christian church olympius a philosopher with a company of seditious ethnic fortify themselves in serapis temple and cause many by force to sacrifice and when the christian burn their image he answer that the image be but corruptible matter but the virtue or divine power which inhabit they be flee to heaven this I think to mention for their sake who to their image-worship have borrow the like heathenish plaster Ruffinus add that in destroy the temple they find relic of their bloody superstition the head of infant cut off with the lip gild the devotion of Canopus be not inferior to that of Alexandria here through the subtlety of the priest the chaldean be vanquish for whereas they challenge their god fire to be the strong as devour other wooden and mettal-god he convey a earthen pot full of hole which he have stop with wax and fill with water into the image and when the chaldaean make their fiery trial hereof the wax melt the water issue and quench the fire hence it be that they make the image of Canopus with foot and neck short and a belly like a barrel or water-vessel Tacitus m m Cer. Tac. l. 4. c. 35. vid. nat. sir h. savile report certain miracle wrought at Alexandria by the instigation of serapis the cure of a lame and blind man who that God have move to seek this help at vespasian hand which he also perform he consult with this oracle see sudden behind he in the temple one basilides who by present enquiry he find to lie sick fourscore mile thence in his bed the name yet be a ominous sign to he of the whole empire as derive of (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the original of this god be by some impute to Ptolomaeus Lagi who have in Alexandria erect temple and institute religious rite seem in his sleep to see a tall young man warn he to send into Pontus to fetch thence his image sudden after vanish in a flame of fire when the egyptian priest can not satisfy he in the interpretation of these thing Timotheus a athenian who he have send for to be chief master of ceremony will he to send to Sinope wherein be a ancient temple of Pluto have in it the image of Proserpina Ptolomey neglect this and with a second vision terrify send to Scydrothemis king of Sinope n n Dionys call he jupiter of Sinope on which Eustatius comment that Sinopites be the same with Memphites for Sinope be a hill of Memphis or else of this pontic Sinope etc add this story theoph. patriarch of Antioch l. 2. call sarapis Sinopa for the same be in the way further hereunto encourage by the delphian oracle Scydrothemis protract the business be by disease and manifest anger of the god force to assemble and persuade his people to suffer the carry away of their God but while they resist this enterprise the ambitious idol without once take leave convey himself into the ship which also together with he he make to arrive at Alexandria in three day where this temple be build to he in the place wherein sometime have stand Isis chapel some o o athen. l. 1. c. 5. 6. esteem he Aesculapius for his cure some Osiris some jupiter p p achil. stat. 5. some Pluto but serapis be his egyptian appellation q q of Philadelphus incredible pomp and philopator ship read athen. l. 5. c. 5. 6. Ptolomeus Philadelphus his son bestow cost in that famous library at Alexandria before relate by r r a. gel. l. 6. 17. ado. vien Caesar soldier casual burn Cornelius Tacitus s s cor. Tac. an. 2. of Memnon image see ortel in alexandri mag. Dionys eustath juven. sat. 15. tell no less miracle of Memnon stony image at Thebes or as other say at Abydos which be strike with the sunbeam at the sunrising yield a vocal sound this image be half cut off by Cambyses pausanias t t Pausan Attic. say that he see it and large describe it Augustus have destroy Anthony and Cleopatra bring u u Sex aur. victor sueton. tran. aug. Egypt into a province and scour all the trench of Nilus he cause the body of 10 10 this body Ptolom take from Perdiccas and bury it at Alexandria in a golden tomb Strab. l. 17. great Alexander to be bring forth which he crown with a crown of gold and strew with flower worship it he build Nicopolis in memory of his Actium victory institute there Quinquenial game enlarge Apollo temple and consecrate the place where he have pitch his tent to Neptune and Mars adorn it with spoil onias y y Ios. ant. 19.6 one of the jewish priest according to the jewish manner literal interpret esay z z isa 19.13 prophesy of the altar in Egypt build a temple at bubastis in fashion of that at jerusalem but less by the permission of philometor and furnish it with priest and levite after the jewish religion at a a Ios. of it l. 12. 2. Alexandria also the jew be free and have their synagogue as at leontopolis likewise and other place b b Procop. Persico l. 1 Precopius say that Dioclesian the emperor bestow Elephantina and the part adjoin on the Blemi and nobatae who religion be a mongrel of the greekish egyptian and their own but he cause they to cease human sacrifice which they use to offer to the sun and thus be the state of religion in Egypt during the conquest of the persian greek and roman each rather seek to settle here their empire then opinion but when the sun of righteousness the son of God the saviour of man appear to the world he honour Egypt with his infancy as after with a religious conquest by weapon not carnal cast down the hold which these hellish spirit have here so long possess thus fulfil true what Esay have prophesy and Mercury foretell Alexandria become a patriarchal sea the first bishop whereof be saint mark enjoy in Libya Pentapolis and Egypt the same power that the roman bishop have in Italy by decree of the c c con. nic. can. 6. first Nicen council here also live the first hermit the d d hist tripar cap. 11. Paul diac. l. 8. first and chief of which be Anthony a egyptian inventer of this order in the sandy desert by occasion of those bloody persecution wherein many thousand lose their life of these hermit read io. cassianus and Severus Sulpitius de vita Martin l. 3. but when as the mahometan religion and arm begin first to peep into the world Egypt e e Vincent Spec. lib. 4. be make a slave to those superstition under which it groan till this day @. 4 of the modern egyptian of cairo and Alexandria the saracen divide Egypt into three part Errif from cairo to Rosetto Affahid the land part from cairo to Bugia maremma or Bechria as Nilus run to Damiata it be q q leo Afric c. 8. subdue under the conduct of hamrus the son of Hasi general of the arabian force to Homar or Aumar the second caliph he only exact tribute permit freedom of their conscience to all he build upon the bank of Nilus a town call by the arabian fustato that be tabernacle because in the desert place through which he pass he be constrain to lie in tent the common people call this town mesre Hatichi the ancient city for so it be in respect of cairo r r the arabian and turk do call cairo Miszir the revenue whereof amount to above a million and run into the Hasnad or private treasury of the great Turk and not into the public treasury Lazora Soronzo he have under he there sixteen Sanzacki and 100000 Timariot or horseman fee to maintain so many horse for the turk war at their own charge Knolles which be after build two mile from hence by one gehoar who of a dalmatian slave have be advance to be a counsellor unto Elcain the Mahometan Calipha and be general of his army about the four hundred s s g. tyr. say it be built in the year of mah. 358. and make the seat royal 361. year of their Hegira he call it Elchahira which signify a imperious mistress he wall it round and build in it that famous temple call Gemih hashare as hamrus have do before at fustato in this town of fustato stand the sepulchre of a famous saint of their sect call Nafissa of the line of Mahomet who beautiful shrine the schismatical patriarch of Egypt adorn with silver lamp carpet of silk and other precious ornament no mahometan come to cairo either by water or land but he adore this sepulchre and offer thereat insomuch that the yearly oblation and alm here offer for the relief of the poor kindred of Mahomet and maintenance of the priest that keep it which want not their counterfeit miracle to delude the people zeal amount to one hundred thousand saraffi and when Zelim conquer cairo the janissary rifle this sepulchre find in it five hundred thousand saraffi in ready coin beside other riches some report that this Nafissa be a dame of honour yield her body without reward to any that require the same t t pilgrim to Mecca ap. Hak. bestow as she say this alm for the love of the prophet Mahomet lettuce suitable to such lip like prophet like saint but Leo will have you think she a honest woman fustato be reckon as a suburb to cairo contain in Leo time one thousand five hundred twenty six five thousand family beside many sepulcher adore of the fond people which cover the pavement with rich carpet hither resort every Friday great multitude for devotion and bestow liberal alm u u p. mart. leg. bab. l. 3. they here sprinkle cold water with sweet herb and leafy bough Bulach be another suburb of cairo upon the bank of Nilus of like distance and have in it four thousand family with stately temple and college beb Elloch 10 10 perhaps this be that Babylon in Egypt where Sanutus say the merchant remain the sultan with his soldiery in cairo stand a mile from cairo and have about three thousand family Gemeh Tailon be adorn by Tailon sometime governor of Egypt with a sumptuous temple and palace beb Zuala another suburb contain twelve thousand family cairo itself within the wall have not above eight thousand family and be full of stately and magnificent temple here be a hospital build by piperis the first sultan of the mameluke race the yearly revenue whereof amount to two hundred thousand saraffi or as some reckon five hundred ducat a day it be open to all sick and disease person and heir to all that die there the plague be sometime so hot at cairo that there die twelve thousand person daily this be the state of cairo in Leo time Solomon y y Sal. Schu Schuveigher affirm that at his be in cairo a thousand five hundred eighty one there die daily between seven and ten thousand nor be any place more plague with the french disease beside that hospital and nafissa sepulchre be three other famous Zavia della Inachari imamsciafij Giamalazar this be the general university of all Egypt z z Hak. pilgrim to Mecca in this place one thousand five hundred threescore and six in the month of january by misfortune of fire be burn nine thousand write book of great value wrought with gold worth three or four hundred ducat a piece one with another this be interpret as a ominous token of their ruin they think also that Mecca will in short time be conquer by the christian and her devotion shall be remove to Rosetto Neander a a nean. or. par. 3. his conceit be ridiculous that cairo shall hold as much people as all Italy and that there be two and twenty thousand temple John Euesham out of their own register b b baumgarten tell a report but doubt of the truth of 24000. which perhaps be a cipher add to his account for 2400. number but two thousand four hundred and though cairo consider together with these suburb be great yet it be not all the way continue with house and building c c p. mart. but have garden also and orchard between jodocus a meggen report that a man can hardly walk the street by reason of the multitude of people d d w. Lithgow speak of 100000. christian in this city beside Saracen jew and heathen and beast they bring their water from Nilus into the city on camel on mule and horse the chief man ride and on ass the poor neither will they permit a Christian to ride on a horse they sell all by weight even wood for the fire of which be great scarcity and although the temple and some house be fair yet the great part of the town be ill build because they may not by their law drink wine they compound a drink of dry raisin steep in water and other mixture yea and secret will make bold with the former he say that beside other call from their steeple to devotion they ascend at midnight to call that the people may increase and multiply and therewith their religion Benjamin Tudelensis number in cairo 2000 Jew in his time 440. year since in two synagogue and sect of the hellenist and babylonian he say that there then reign in Misraim or cairo Amir Almumanin Eli son of Abitalib all who subject be call moredim or rebel for their difference from the bagdad Caliph his palace be call soan and he come forth but twice a year on their easter solemnity and then when Nilus overflow which extend fifteen day journey when it ascend twelve cubit on their measure pillar and but half that way be water if it ascend but six cubit a officer every day signify the increase with proclamation of praise to God therefore the water of Nilus serve for drink and medicine against repletion old Misraim he say be two league from new Misraim but altogether waste baumgarten think there be in cairo 8000. which live only by carry water and there be diverse which either of their own vow or by some testator charity offer free to all that will drink in silver vessel and sprinkle the street twice a day because of the heat and dust there be more in cairo he report such a rumour which want house to dwell in than Venice have citizen there be esteem to be 15000. Jew 10000 cook which carry their cookery and boil it as they go on * * like such as sell godling etc. in London their head in nine or ten hour one can scarce compass it but you must know that this be in the time of the sultan before the Turk have conquer it now though I have be already tedious yet for the reader full notice of this country and city I have here add some of the late and exact observation of that learned gentleman master George sandys to who we have elsewhere be indebt m. g. sandys he relate that travel from Alexandria to cairo they pay at the gate a a head indifferent for themselves and their ass they pass through a desert produce here and there a few unhusband palm caper and a weed call Kall * * Kali which they use for fuel sell the ash to the venetian who mix they equal with the stone bring from Pavia by the river ticinum make thereof their crystalline glass on the left hand they leave the ruin of Cleopatra palace and beyond that of Bucharis a ancient city and pass a guard of soldier and after that ferry over a creek of the sea they come to a quadrangle arch and build by a Moor for the relief of traveller and there repose themselves on the stone till midnight and then pass alongst the shore before day enter Rosetta Rosetta where they repair to a cave belong to the Frank in a under dark musty room where they be entertain on the hard floor this city stand upon the principal branch of Nile call heretofore Canopus which about three mile thence enter the sea have the entrance cross with a bar of sand as at Damiata changeable with the wind and surge the Jerbies or boat be therefore make without keel flat and round in the bottom a pilot sound all the day to direct for the channel the house be of brick flat-roofed a thing general in these hot country jet over to shadow the narrow street exceed furnish with provision build by a slave of a egyptian chalife near to this stand Canopus that city famous in the worst sense if we believe Iwenal where Famoso iwen s. 15. to eschew vice say Seneca be to incur infamy here have serapis a temple visit in his often festival by a world of luxurious people from Alexandria in paint boat down the artificial channel here hire a jerby the next day but one they come to cairo this arm of Nilus be as broad as the Thames at Tilburie slow often troublesome shallow and ever thick have on each side many mean town seat on hill of mud throw up to preserve they in the overflow ten mile from Rosetto be that cut which run to Alexandria upon the bank along as they pass be infinite number of deep and spacious vault into which they let the river from whence they convey it by trench into their several ground be draw up into high cistern with wheel set round with pitcher turn about by Buffoloes the moor have much labour in draw up the boat wade often above the middle at every strong hale cry Elough think by this name of God to find his assistance and to chase away devil and impediment Moor in Egypt many of these moor be break by reason of their hard labour and weak food they be descend of the arabian and understand their language a devout ignorant laborious people tawny mean stature nimble-footed shrill tongue spare of diet repute base by the turk not suffer to wear weapon in town not admit to soldiery or magistracy in city they practise merchandise little differ in habit from turk there dwell also in Egypt arabian jew christian both greek armenian and the true egyptian the copty the country people follow husbandry be wrap in a ruffet mantle both man and woman these hide their face with beastly clout with hole for their eye have easy travel those which be bear in the eight month live elsewhere deadly to that purpose set a plant in the room which grow in the desert low leafless brown branch like coral and set in water do then strange display itself a nasty people crust with dirt and soot with smoke by reason of their fuel and want of chimney in their base cottage the woman think it a great comeliness to be fat and therefore in the city be wrap from the crown of the head to the foot in linen robe they spread their arm underneath to appear more corpulent they cover their face with black cypress bespot with red the better sort wear hoop of gold and silver about their arm and above their ankle other of copper with piece of coin half cover their forehead and plate about their neck both man and woman brand their arm for the love of each other diverse woman stain their chin with knot and flower of blue make by prick of the skin with needle and rub it over with ink and the juice of a herb which will never out cairo cairo which we have almost forget in this general view of the modern egyptian be seat on the east side of the river represent the form of a crescent stretch south and north with the adjoin suburb five italian mile in breadth scarce one and a half where broad the wall if it be wall rather seem to belong to private house the street narrow the house high build more fair without then inward commodious and most of stone near to the top at the end almost of each street a gate which shoot as every night they be make they defensive as so many castle their lock and key be of wood even to door plait with iron the mosque their mosque be magnificent the stone of many be carve without support with pillar of marble adorn with what art can devise and their religion tolerate yet differ they in form from those of Constantinople some be square with open roof in the middle of a huge proportion the cover circle terrace above other stretch out in length and many fit unto the place where they stand adjoin to which be lodging for santon fool and mad man who their devotion honour here be also diverse goodly hospital both for building revenue and attendance next to these in beauty be the great man seraglio by which if a christian ride they will put he from his ass with indignation and contumely the street be unpaved and exceed dirty after a shower for here it rain sometime in winter rain in cairo and then most subject to plague over which many beam be lay athwart on the top of house and cover with mat to shelter they from the sun the like coverture there be between two high mosque in the principal street under which when any great man pass they shoot up arrow that stick there in abundance a stately palace the Nile a mile distant in the time of the inundation flow in by sundry channel which grow empty or corrupt they have it bring on camel their well water be good for no other use but to wash house or cleanse the street in the midst of the town be a spacious cave call the Besestan in which be sell all fine ware a stately palace and old thing as at outcry by the call who give more there be three principal gate near to the northermost of which sometime stand that stately palace of dultibe wife to Caitbeus the sultan which have the door and jawme of ivory the wall and pavement chequer with discolour marble column of Porphyre alabaster and serpentine feeling flourish with gold and azure inlay with ebony but ruin by Zelim the Turk and the stone and ornament transport to Constantinople near to this be the lake Esbiky square and large then only a lake when Nilus overflow frequent with barge of pleasure at other time as profitable as then pleasant afford five harvest in a year orchard in cairo within and without the city be a number of delicate orchard water as they do their field in which grow variety of excellent fruit as orange lemon pomegranate apple of paradise Sicamor fig and another kind grow on tree as big as oak bore full of hole the fruit not grow among the leaf but out of the bowl and branch date almond cassia fistula leave like a ash the fruit hang down like sausage apple no big than berry gall grow on tamariske plantain that have a broad flaggy leaf grow in cluster and shape like cucumber the rind like a pease-cod solid within without stone or kernel to the taste very delicious hold by the mahometans the forbid fruit in paradise and many other tree some bear fruit all the year tree natural and common even in the desert of Egypt and almost all their leaf to these add whole field of palm and yet no prejudice to the under grow corn these be natural other plant and only orchard pleasant in form in fruit profitable of body straight high round and slender yet unfit for building crest about and therefore easy climb the branch like sedge slit on the neat her side and ever green grow only on the top as plume of feather yearly prune and the bowl at the top bare there be male and female both bear cod but this only fruitful yet not without the male neighbourhood towards who upright growth she incline her crown have in the begin of march her seed commix with he their date grow like finger whence they have their name ripe in the end of December which begin to cod in February the top of such as be fruitless they open and take out the brain which they sell for a salad better than a artichoke of the branch they make bedsted etc. of the web of the leaf basket mat fan and the like of the outward husk of the cod good cordage of the inward brush all this they yearly afford without impair the tree at the south end of the city stand the castle castle of cairo once the mansion of the Mamaluke sultan ascend unto by one way only and that hew out of the rock by the easy steep on horseback to be ascend from the top the city and country yield a delightful prospect it be so great that it seem a city of itself immure with high wall divide into partition and enter by door of iron wherein be many spacious court in time past the place of exercise the ruin testify a qucudam sumptuousness many pillar of solid marble yet remain so huge that they cause lust wonder how they be thither convey here have the bassa his residence and herein the Divan be keep on sunday monday and tuesday the chause as advocate prefer the suit of their client the bassa command as absolute sovereign have under he sixteen sanziack and a hundred thousand Spacheis the revenue of this little country amount to three million of shariffe one to the great Turk the second to the bassa the three for pay and send forth the caravan to Mecca the present bassa be Mahomet a man well in year and of severe condition he cut off the head of four thousand Spacheis at his first entrance for insolence and send the great man to Constantinople strangle such as refuse use the arabian which hate the other in his execution drunkenness be punish with death if a robbery be commit they which be appoint to guard that quarter suffer for it which make they to save themselves sometime apprehend innocent who with hole bore through their arm stretch wide on staff in which be candle stock burn down to the flesh be lead to execution his rigour make he confine himself to the castle yet so approve of the grand signior that he have give he his daughter in marriage a child of four year solemnize with all possible ceremony he will hardly suffer a Christian to turn mahometan think perhaps they do it rather for preferment then devotion no city can be more populous nor better serve with provision of all sort than cairo the fair city in Turkey yet now as it be wither by age and sickness in comparison of her young and more flourish time most of the inhabitant be merchant or artificer all of a trade keep their shop in one place which they shut about five a clock except cook solace themselves the rest of the day few but such as have great family dress meat in their house which the man buy ready dress the woman be too fine finger to meddle with housewifery these ride abroad upon pleasure on easy-going ass and tie their husband to due benevolence otherwise procure a divorcement many physician be in cairo by reason of the many simple bring hither they have a kind of roe wherewith they perfume themselves in the morning as a preservative against both infection and devil there be many which get their living by show feat with bird and beast which teach raven to use their throat and tongue together so that they will make a man admire at their speech dog and goat to go and turn on the top of little pillar not above the breadth of a man hand camel teach to dance when they be young by set they on a hot hearth play meanwhile on a instrument the heat then and music after cause this motion ass be not ass but beyond bank his horse in trick teach by their subtle master but cairo have carry we too far a imperious mistress indeed to our reader patience yet will we further add this short note out of the two Maronite translator of the nubian geographer Metsr be the name of cairo and all Egypt so call of Mesraim the son of Noa cairo gab. Sionita and io. Hesronita salt of Nilus balsam as say Mohamed Sirazita this city be govern by a bascia and twenty five thousand spahy and janissary it be rich in cassia tree sugar cane and corn many land adjoin yield harvest twice a year hay four time herb and pulse in manner always green add store of salt very white the water of Nilus enclose in pit and by the only heat of the sun in three day be turn into it in former time it be famous for balsam plant now remove to Mecca by command of the othoman and none be find in all Egypt but seven shrub * * master sandys say there be now but one l. 6. c. 8. @. 2. in the bassa garden keep with great diligence the leaf be like to wild marjoram the juice be take by a little incision in the trunk or branch abu-chalil-ben-aali write that from the fifteen to the two and twenty of there fall a dew which leave no token thereof in the earth yet by vulgar * * Vid. sup. pag 897. experience be find by weigh the sand or earth of Nilus bank and be a evident token of the increase of Nilus the air also be then make more wholesome plague and fever cease and those which be sick a a this be in Syria and ascribe to the sun entrance into leo. of they recover Alexandria b b of the egyptian city see Marmolius his 11. book the late part of alexan. see the discourse and description of g. braun and f. Hogenberg in C.O.T. lib. 2. cap. 56 be very unwholesome as the grave of that Alexandria we before mention under the foundation be great habitation as if they be two alexandria build one upon another under the house of the city be cistern sustain with mighty arch to receive the inundation of Nilus belong say g. braun to every house the cause of much sickness to the inhabitant especial since the diminish and decay of the city most of the cistern now be fenny for want of use when the saracen have spoil it it remain long desolate until a subtle caliph proclaim that Mahomet have leave great indulgence to such as will here inhabit and thus he replenish the city with inhabitant build house for they as he do college for the student and monastery for the religious here yet remain a little chapel wherein they say that the high prophet and king Alexander c c Philippi etc. luc. the great lie bury to which resort many piigrime that adore the same and bestow there their alm the arabian and their Alcoran also call Alexander two-horned the reason whereof seem to be that his ambitious seek to be account the son of jupiter Ammon neither do the vulgar arabian know he by the name Alexander but by that title of two-horned and such be his image in the cyrenaike coin this body be take from Perdiccas by Ptolemaeus Lagi and there entomb in gold which cybiosarte take away it be cover with glass so remain till the time of the saracen in old time they have a custom mention by d d Galen Galen of execute condemn person which they will quick dispatch to apply to the breast a asp and then cause he to walk a few pase and sudden he be at his long home this he there see a practice not much unlike the athenian draught of hemlock there be in Alexandria as master Enesham relate a pillar of marble call by the turk king pharao needle four square in height ninety foot master sandys say there lie another by it like unto it half bury in rubbish both hieroglyphical obelisk of theban marble almost as hard and of a deep red than Porphyr in the same place where Alexander palace stand and without the say city four hundred pase another round call Pompey pillar stand on a square stone fifteen foot high the compass of the pillar be seven and thirty foot the height a hundred and one cause no small wonder how it shall be erect on that stone this happy be set up in memory of great Pompey who by the egyptian treachery be slay at Pelusium almost in the sight of jerusalem as e e pa. Eberus hist judaica 52.53 Eberus note and that country of the jew which he have unjust wrong and subdue to roman servitude although his hand be pure touch the holy place and treasure which his curious eye will needs behold than those of perjure Crassus which before have suffer deserve vengeance by parthian execution jodocus a meggen f f Peregr c. 15. say that the channel which bring water from Nilus continue fifty mile the cistern which receive it be as you have hear and it be think as this our author affirm that those part of Alexandria which the ground hide cost more than that which be open to the view yet do these cistern now much decay the city show fair without but within they be Baumgarten g g lib. 1. cap. 14. word like a heap of stone few house be whole the custom be farm by the jew at two hundred thousand madein a day a coin of silver treble the value of a Asper thirty of they amount to a rial of eight the port be free to friend and enemy ten in the hundred be pay in kind of all thing for custom only money pay but one and a half whereof they take a exact account that they may guess at the value of return commodity then pay eleven in the hundred more even for such good as be in property unalter the place ancient famous in Alexandria beside the and serapium before mention as their university and library be the Isaeum and other their temple which with the palace be say to take up the four part of their city Benjamin Tudelensis speak of a fair building without the wall in his time call Aristotle school wherein be twenty school and between they marble pillar sometime much frequent as he say but I think deceive h h this error grow from the school of Aristotelical philosophy whereof anatolius be here professor euseb lib. 7. cap. 32. Niceph. l. 6. c. 36. to hear Aristotle read he mention vault a mile long he find there three thousand jew Thebes that sometime be so famous a city contain not now above three hundred family and still retain some bone of the carcase of old Thebes many pillar wall inscription in latin greek and egyptian character Memphis her next successor be utter ruinate @. v. of the saracen their act and sect of the mameluke and cophty the Mahometan enter Egypt about 637. after their state sink under the weight of itself which be the ordinary sickness of greatness they grow to dissension and sect as be say in our saracen history for the seat of the saracenicall Caliphas be by macamat remove to Bagdat which he have build the first succession of the Aegyptian calipha uncertain there arise new caliph in Damascus in Egypt who seat be after at Cayro in cayroan to who the african yield subjection and after at Morocco but in Elcain time while he seek to win the east from the caliph of Bagdat his lieutenant rebel against he and he be fain to live in Egypt where Gehoar have build Cayro the sect of Hali have before also prevail in Egypt for which case Nafissus father be force to flee the country yet this sect after be restore by Asmulinus and Solinus his son first caliph of Egypt but when the western force under Godfrey of Bullen grow terrible to the east d d car. chron. l. 4 c. 10. 11. 53. the egyptian pay tribute to the christian which dargan the sultan detain be by Almericus king of jerusalem overthrow in battle e e Knolls T.H. Noradine of Damascus send Saracon his son to help Sanar the sultan against this dargan which Saracon be by the caliph appoint sultan who before have slay the sultan and Saladine his successor slay f f jac. Vitriaco or hist c. 8. the caliph for come to he with pretence of do he reverence he smite he to the ground with a iron mace and root out his posterity to settle his own this history be diverse report Peucerus g g peuc car. Chro. make the egyptian caliph to be schismatical from their first entrance which be as he say in 703. which reign in Egypt four hundred forty and seven year of the profession of hali. Curio write otherwise as h h Read l. 3. c. 1^ in their history we have show so also do Leo dissent from they both a man learn in his own religion he say that the caliph of Cayro have contmue two hundred and thirty year when as Saladine slay he and subject himself to the caliph of Bagdet the only caliph then remain this Saladine be nephew to Saracon who chase the christian out of Syria his child reign after he of which Melechsala be last who first invent the order of the mameluke which be Cireassian slave buy in their youth and train up to arm art and religion of the saracen who he make of his Guard but they slay their master and usurp the kingdom to themselves always elect one of their company the first of which Mamaluke king be Turquemenius who be slay of his fellow Cothus and he of Bendocader who be also poison etc. Leo say that saladine family reign a hundred and fifty year and piperis be say he the first Mamaluke king Campson gaurus and Tomumbeius the last of these king be overthrow by Zelim the Turk 1517. who successor still hold Egypt and have a bassa resident at Cayro from whence be carry by water many ornament to Constantinople the caliph be at Bagdet so here retain some spiritual pre-eminence much like the i i l. fenestella de sacerd. rom. among the roman who title be royal and his office in their superstitious ceremony to perform those rite which the king have use personal to do but this titular king be subject to high power of the pontifex people and senate baumgarten see he in white attire with a fork diadem or mitre mart. Baum lib. 1. cap. 17. a black and long beard with a great retinue come to salute Tongobardinus a great Mamaluke which sometime have be a deacon in Spain and now have embrace the world and the world he possess honour wealth and five and thirty wife in Cayro Peter martyr say that the k k leg. bab. 3. caliph sell the sultan this dignity at a price and ascend the throne do give and commit unto the sultan there stand on foot the absolute power of life and death and then descend difrobe himself attire the sultan with the same robe so it appear that the name and power of the caliph all the time of the mameluke as the ghost of itself have some almost breathless shadow leave the life and substance be in the sultan there be say Leo in Cayro and in all Egypt four sect differ from each other in canon and civil law all mahometans he which profess one of these sect can at his pleasure betake he to another except be learn he show reason therefore each of these sect have his peculiar judge from who yet lie a appeal to a high judge be governor of the sect call Essafichia whosoever attempt aught against the precept of his own sect be secret punish by the judge thereof and although the priest of these several sect use differ liturgy and rite l l example for Christian in end controversy of religion yet do they not take one the other for enemy with hatred or mutiny but if any question arise learned man by conference debate the same no man upon pain of grievous punishment may reproach any of the four doctor first author of those four sect there be one sect of religious man in Cayro call Chenesia which live upon horseflesh therefore be lame jade buy and set up a fatten and sell to these chenesians which sect be rise in all Asia there go certain woman up and down the city cry who office be to excise or circumcise the woman which be observe in Egypt and Syria both by the mahometans and Iacobite-Christian neither have the turk although in superstition by themselves acknowledge short of the arabian and egyptian be altogether idle in their devotion which they testify by their pilgrimage and m m good work among turk alms-work bellonius tell of one Turk that cause water to be bring daily on camel back for the ease of traveller in that desert space between Alexandria and Rosetto Egypt have in it many jewish synagogue who speak the spanish italian turkish arabian and greek language and be great merchant thus we see the judgement of God by the persian grecian and roman for their pristine idolatry and a great judgement for their heresy hatch by arrius punish by a saracenicall apostasy among the differ sect of the mahometans of which we have speak in the three book Africa and especial Egypt and herein Cayro must of all be pester n n Leo lib. 3. with they which may be call the naked or the wicked sect rogue up and down naked and practise their fleshly villainy in the open fight of the people who yet hold they for saint the just hand of divine justice that when man forsake God not religion and truth alone but reason but sense shall also forsake they before we leave those sultan of Cayro or rather because you have stay so long here let we bestow some spectacle on you worthy the sight as a refresh to your weary eye they be the same which the sultan in ostentation of his magnificence make to the turkish ambassador mar. ba. l. 1. c. 20 1507. from Baumgarten relation which be a eyewitness thereof there be assemble threescore thousand mameluke all in like habit the sultan himself all in white Vertomannus also mention this activity of the mameluke with a mitre diadem and not far from he their pope or Calipha in a low seat and beneath he the turkish ambassador the place be a spacious plain in which be three heap of sand fifty pace distant and in each a spear erect with a mark to shoot at and the like over against they with space between for six horse to run a breast here do the young mameluke gallant adorn upon their horse run a full career yield strange experiment of their skill not one miss the mark first with cast dart and after with their arrow as they run and last try their slave other after this in the like race of their run horse shoot with like dexterity diverse arrow backward and forward other in the midst of their race alight three time and their horse still run mount again and hit the mark nevertheless other do hit the same stand on their horse thus swift run other three time unbend their bow and thrice again bend they whiles their horse run and miss not the mark neither do other which amidst their race light down on either side and again mount themselves no nor they which in their swift course leap and turn themselves backward on their horse and then their horse still run turn themselves forward there be which while their horse run ungirt their saddle thrice at each time shoot and then again gird their saddle and never miss the mark some sit in their saddle leap backward out of they and turn over their head settle themselves again in their saddle and shot the former three time other lay themselves backward on their run horse and take their tail put they into their mouth and yet forget not their aim in shoot some after every shot draw out their sword and flourish they about their head and again sheathe they other sit betwixt three sword on the right side and as many on the left thin clothe that without great care every motion will make way for death yet before and behind they touch the mark one stand upon two horse run very swift his foot loose and shoot also at once three arrow before and again three behind he another sit on a horse neither bridle nor saddle as he come at every mark arise and stand upon his foot and on both hand hit the mark sit down again three time a three sit on the bare horse when he come to the mark lay upon his back and lift up his leg and yet miss not his shoot after all this they run with like swiftness for all these thing which where be the vaulter that can do on his imaginary horse stand still these do run and with their slave carry away those mark as triumph over their innocent enemy one of they be kill with a fall and two fore wound in these their feat of activity they have a old grave man which be their teacher if I have long detain thou in this spectacle remember that the race of mameluke shall not be forget the rather because their name be now raze out of the world and this may seem a epitaph on their sepulchre after who none perhaps be leave able to do the like nor in all Franciscus modius his triumphal pandect to be parelel as for the christian in Egypt you may read in the history a a hist sar. g. tyr. fox act and Mon. Vitriac sanut etc. of the Holy-land-war what attempt be often make by the western christian against these unbeliever concern the present state of christianity there Leo Boterus b b g. bot. ben. pory in leon. Chytr chron. and master pory in his addition to his english Leo may acquaint you and better than other master George sandys beside the foreign christian which resort to these part for traffic there be think to be fifty thousand native of the country which have church and monastery whereof there be three christian church at Alexandria they be call cofti and christian from the girdle because of their circumcision which together with baptism they admit in their liturgy they use the chaldaean language but they read the gospel again in the arabian they be account of Eutiches heresy their patriarchal sea be Alexandria which c c abdias fab. dorotheus Baron. lib. 6. whit. 55.2 from saint mark to this day have have a continue succession as appear by the late letter of Gabriel to the pope call himself the fourscore and seventeen of the patriarch from saint mark thus write Baronius with a great many swell word which may puff up his roman sea but how credulous be superstition and that never-erring sea have how often be gull this way or seek to gull and cozen other with such Jesuitical fiction of I know not what conversion and submission as Baronius will make you believe of this Gabriel thus have Mahomet his Gabriel and thus our age have another Gabriel obtrude upon the vulgar simplicity far fetch belike be good for their lady-mother but Alexandria have know no Gabriel in these time patriarch there George Dousa hold good acquaintance with meletius and his predecessor be Silvester so that this romish Gabriel which ascribe so much to that sea be a roman Gabriel indeed which Alexandria never know neither do meletius the patriarch know any such papal supremacy but write learned against the same as in a epistle of he to John Dousa wherein he make mention of our english d d m. Edward barton ambassador extant with George Dousas journal may appear how christian religion be first plant in Egypt by saint mark and the apostle and their successor and how persecute by the Ethnic after by the arrian and how ethnic religion be again by Valens permit to all that will embrace it the forenamed ecclesiastical history make mention how it be persecute by the persian invasion and after by the saracen in time bring to this present pass and how it now continue we may read in many both old e e Baron. annal papaeus Edagr pantaleon etc. and new author Zaga Zabo a ethiopian bishop say that the Patriach of Alexandria reside at cairo where their ethiopian metropolitan f receive of he his confirmation and in their ethiopian liturgy they mention they both in this sort pray for our prince the prince of our archbishop d d damn a go fran. Aluares c. 98. hemingij catechismus in fine catholicae Tradig the lord Gabriel and the chief of the church of Alexandria and for the chief of our country our venerable archbishop mark etc. and thus much of this egyptian prelate as a taste of that which be to be declare in our christian relation adrianus Romanus g g theat and Sandys in his say that beside the patriarch of the coptite here be also a patriarch of the greek and arabian which have their liturgy in greek but scarce understand the same the Coptite patriarch have his title of Alexandria but his residence in Cayro but it be more than time to leave this the first and worst of nation in superstition zealous in all but not according to knowledge as elsewhere shall appear in their christianity fold in manifold jewish ceremony and here have be manifest in their present mahometan and ancient ethnic bloody beastly stink devotion so eager pursue let this be our conclusion that h h Iwen. Sa^ 1 Inuenal in his time write of a religious quarrel irreligious bandy between the combite and tentyrite at the end of a seven day festival observe day and night after many wound and blow one in flight fall down and so into the enemy hand be present pluck in piece and eat raw that even their sacrifice of man in respect of this be mild as morsel to their god but this in despite of devotion or despiteful devotion become a human sacrifice to inhuman beastly devilish men. only let we observe the egyptian chronology and so make a end chap. 5 the egyptian chronology out of manetho high priest of the egyptian and other after this so long a history of egyptian affair I have here add the order of time wherein those thing happen that this our relation may be the more complete although perhaps it may seem to some more than tedious already Varro divide time into three sort the first he call uncertain the second fabulous the three historical joseph Scaliger a man happy more studious in this subject of time than all time before have yield we reckon the two former for one as not easy to be distinguish he have also publish to the world not only his own learned observation on Eusebius chronicle but such fragment a a Barbaro-Lat Manusc chron. Causab collectanea hist etc. as out of cedrenus syncellus and other he can find both of Eusebius chronicle in greek for before we have only the latin translation of Jerome much whereof also be utter lose as also of Africanus from who store-house Eusebius take his chronicle both for matter and word almost by wholesale and whereas annius have before cozen the world with counterfeit of Berosus manetho Metasthenes with other fabulous tale false father on the ancient he have help likewise to some relic of those history which other have insert into their work the very bone of such carcase be worthy of admiration if not of veneration the true manetho therefore in three tome write the egyptian history unto Ptolomeus Philadelphus his greek epistle dedicatory be but short I have thus translate to the greek king Ptolomeus Philadelphus b b (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 1. venerable appropriate after to Augustus and his successor Augustus manetho high priest and scribe of the sacred sanctuary throughout Egypt of the sebennite family a heliopolitan to my lord Ptolomeus greeting it behove we mighty king to give account of all those thing which you counsel we to search out the sacred book write by our forefather Trismegistus Hermes which I have learn according as you inquire what thing shall come to pass in the world have command i shall be declare farewell my lord king hence appear the time of manetho and his pontifical dignity with the original of his antiquity borrow of Hermes and the occasion of his writing in the greek as to a grecian king he c c Patricius out of a holy book set down this genealogy horus the son of Osiris he of Chus and he of cham or Chamephes first set down the year of the reign of their god Vulcan Sol Agothodamon Saturn Osiris and Isis Typhon then of the demigod orus who reign five and twenty year Mars three and twenty Anubis seventeen Hercules fourteen Apollo four and twenty Ammon thirty Tithoes seven and twenty sosus two and thirty jupiter twenty thing both false in themselves and in the copy imperfect after these he reckon in order two and thirty d d egyptian dynasty lordship or government in Egypt 1 the first of the thinites of eight king who name and year of reign be menes threescore and two he be slay of a or river-horse Athothis his son seven and fifty he build a palace in Memphis and write of anatomy cenicenes his son one and thirty Enephes his son three and twenty in his time be a great famine he build the pyramid in cochon Saphaedus his son twenty Semempsis his son eighteen bieneche his son six and twenty sum. tot two hundred threescore and three of menes the first of these it be report e e cal. calcag reb. aeg. that he first invent the use of money for which long after he be solemn curse by a council of priest in the time of Cnephatus and at Thebes a pillar be erect in the temple to testify the same 2 the second dynasty of the thinites under nine king who name and year of their reign be in order as follow boethus eight and thirty year Catechos nine and thirty in his time be ordain the worship of Apis at Memphis and Mnevis at heliopolis Binothris seven and forty Tlas seventeen Sethenes one and forty chaere seventeen nephercherae five and twenty in his time Nilus be say to have have his water mix with honey Sesochris eight and forty ceneres thirty sum three hundred and two 3 the three of the memphite echerophe eight and twenty Tosorthros nine and twenty he be suppose to be aefculapius for his skill in physic studious of paint and architecture Tyris seven Mesochris seventeen Zoyphis sixteen tesertasis nineteen ache two and forty Siphuris thirty herphere six and twenty 4 the four dynasty of the memphite Soris nine and twenty Suphis threescore and three he make the great pyramid Suphes threescore and six menchere threescore and three Ratoeses five and twenty bichere two and twenty zeberchere seven Tamphthis nine Sesochris eight and forty 5 the five of the elephantine userchere eight and twenty Sephres thirteen nepherchere twenty Sisiris seven echere twenty Rathuris one and forty merchere nine tachere forty and four unos three and thirty 6 the six of the memphite Othoes thirty phios three Methusuphis seven Phiops a hundred Menthesuphis one Nitochris twelve she build the three pyramid 7 the seven of seventy king that reign so many day apiece 8 the eight of seven and twenty king which reign a hundred forty and eight year their name be not express 9 the nine dynasty be of the heracleopolitans of which be nineteen king that reign four hundred and nine year the first of they be Achthoes a cruel tyrant devour by a crocodile 10 the ten be of nineteen king who reign endure a hundred fourscore and five year 11 the eleven of the diospolitans who sixteen king reign three and forty year here end the first tome of manetho who second tome contain the twelve dynasty of the diospolitans the first of which be cesongose six and forty dynast 12. Ammamenes eight and thirty Sesostris the great conqueror eight and forty lachares eight Ammares eight ammenene eight Semiophris four 13 the thirteen of threescore king which reign four hundred fifty and three year 14 the fourteen of threescore and seventeen king contain a hundred fourscore and four 15 the fifteen of phoenician shepherd the first of which be Saites nineteen anon three and forty Pachnan threescore and one Staan eight Arcles forty nine Aphobis threescore and one in all two hundred forty and two and the total sum of the year of these fifteen dynasty be three thousand three hundred and seventeen 16 the sixteen dynasty be of other shepherd who thirty two king reign five hundred and eighteen year 17 the seventeen be of other shepherd under thirty three king and the theban Diosophites a hundred fifty and one year 18 the eighteen of the diospolite Amos five and twenty chebros thirteen Amenophthis four and twenty amersis two and twenty Misphris thirteen misphragmuthosis six and twenty Thuthmosis nine Amenophthis one and thirty this be suppose to be Memnon and the speak statue Oros seven and thirty Acherres two and thirty Rathos six Chebres twelve Acherres twelve amerse five Rammeses one Ammenoph nineteen in all two hundred fourscore and seven 19 the nineteenth Sethos one and twenty Raphsaces threescore and one ammenophthe twenty Rameses threescore Ammenemes five thuoris six 20 in the three tome the twenty dynasty last one hundred and five and twenty year the king be twelve 21 the one and twenty of the tanite Smerdes six and twenty Psusennes two and forty mephelchere four Amenophtis nine Opsochon six psineche nine Susennes fourteen call Sesac in scripture in all one hundred and ten 22 the two and twenty of the bubashte Sesonchis one and twenty Usorthon fifteen the three four and five be not name to they be ascribe five and twenty year in this space zara the ethiopian overrun these part Tokellothis thirteen his successor two and forty in all one hundred and sixteen 23 the three and twenty of the tanite Petubastes forty Osorchos eight psammus ten see one and thirty in all fourscore and nine 24 the four and twenty of Bocchoris the saite who reign four and forty year be take and burn of Sabbacon 25 the five and twenty of the ethiopian Sabbacon eight Sevech fourteen Tarach eighteen in all forty this tarach perhaps be he which build Tarracona in Spain if we believe tarapha n n f. tarap de reg. Hisp. collection out of Eusebius 26 the six and twenty of the Saites stephinate seven nechepsos six thus far out of manetho here follow out of Herodotus Psammeticus forty four nechao seventeen he slay josias psammis sixteen Vaphres five and twenty with he Zedekiah enter league Herodotus call he apnes the maforite by their hebrew point through ignorance of foreign history as scaligor say have make it Hophra of who Jeremy o o jer. 44.30 prophesy that destruction which amasis execute as Herodotus report who reign four and forty year the sum of the year of this dynasty be one hundred fifty and nine 27 here follow again out of manetho the seven and twenty dynasty of the persian Cambyses four Darius hystaspes six and thirty Xerxes twenty artabanus seven month Artaxerxes longimanus forty Xerxes two month sogdianus seven Darius nothus eleven in all one hundred and thirteen 28. the eight and twenty of the mendesian Amyrtaeus Saites six 29 the nine and twenty nepherite six Achoris twelve Psammites one nepherite two month 30 the thirty of the sebennite Nectanebis eighteen teos two Nectanebos eighteen 31 the one and thirty of the persian Artaxerxes ochus ten he recover Egypt in the seventeen year of his reign Arsos four Darius codomannus six subdue by Alexander hitherto manetho the whole sum of who one and thirty dynasty amount to five thousand three hundred fifty and five year 32 the two and thirty dynasty of the macedonian Alexander mag. five Ptolemeus Lagi forty ptol. Philadelphus eight and thirty ptol. euergetes six and twenty ptol. philopator seventeen ptol. Epiphanes four and twenty ptol. philometor five and thirty ptol. euergetes 2. nine and twenty ptol. physcon seventeen ptol. Alexander ten ptol. Cleopatra eight ptol. Dionysius thirty Cleopatra two and twenty in all three hundred and one sen in cla. Caes vid. Turneb l. 18. c. 13. and b. rhen. some of these ptolemey make incestuous marriage with their own sister which it seem be not unusual in Alexandria whereupon Seneca scoff athenis Alexandria whereupon Turncb affirm that at Athens they may marry their own sister by their father as Lycurgus permit only the sister by mother side and forbid to marry with the father daughter but at Alexandria all sister be permit to their licentious bed thus Cleopatra be wife to Ptolemey philometor her elder brother and after that to her young brother by who she be cast off and her daughter take in her stead if the former catalogue do not agree with the relation of josephus cont. ap. theoph. l. 3. * Theophilus or other who have cite some part of manetho in their work it be not much marvel the grecian be always audacious ready to pervert author to their own purpose beside the oversight of writer through negligence or ignorance in foreign name neither be Manetho word a oracle who reckon so long time before any time be but either it be to be ascribe to the arrogancy of the egyptian priest desirous to be account no less ancient than the chaldean for Berosus and manetho as if they have be agree derive their history from the like antiquity say Scaliger out of syncellus which will better appear if we have the entire body and not a few scatter bone of their history or else we may ascribe it to their confound of history apply to a order of succession the diverse reign of several dynasty which happy govern at the same time in several part of Egypt as in so small a region as Canaan joshua destroy 31. king this Scaliger a a can. Isag. l. 3. conjecture Lydiat b b l. de Emen. t. some suppose the first of these dynasty be soon after the creation and soon after the flood Genebrard chron. l. 1. affirm neither yet be Scaliger to be blame for acquaint the world with these fragment of manetho consider that the middle part thereof hold not only likelihood in itself but in great part correspondence with the scripture if the egyptian devise otherwise to Herodotus and Diodorus it be easy for they to deceive stranger or be deceive themselves the like history of prodigious antiquity Augustine c c de civit. lib. 12 cap. 10. relate of a egyptian priest that tell Alexander of the continuance of the macedonian kingdom eight thousand year whereas the grecian account but four hundred and fourscore yea the scripture themselves have not escape that mis-reckoning of time almost all antiquity be carry down the stream of the seventy interpreter which add many hundred year to the Hebrew text either of purpose as some d d Broughton consent suppose or as Augustine e e ciu. l. 15. c. 13. think by error of he that first copy the scripture out of Ptolemy library sir Walter f f l. 1. c. 8. @. 11. see also the chronology at the end of his book and other egyptian antiquity in that history Raleigh in that his laborious and learned work call the history of the world suppose that Egypt first take that name at such time as Aegyptus or Ramesses chase thence his brother Danaus into Peloponnesus which some reckon 877. year after the flood some more as for the prodigious antiquity which they challenge have refute mercator and Pererius he incline to this opinion touch their ancient dynasty that they be not altogether fabulous but that Egypt be people before the flood two hundred year after Adam there may remain to the son of Mizraim some monument in pillar or altar of stone or metal of their former king or governor which the egyptian have add to the list and roll of their king after the flood in succeed time out of the vanity of glory or by some corruption in their priest something beyond the truth may be insert Petrus alexandrinus late set forth in greek and latin by Raderus write that Mizraim have give beginning to the egyptian nation do after go into the east to the persian and bactrian and be the same that be call Zoroastres by the greek inventer of judicial astrology and magic he have give order for the keep of the ash of his burn body as the pledge of the empire so long to continue with they call upon Orion which he say be Nimrod by the persian superstition believe thus honour after his death and be consume with lightning the persian reserve his ash to this day the cause say the note on that place why the persian worship the fire yet the author mention another cause from Perseus which kindle fire by lightning and preserve the same build a temple to it he say also that Picus or jupitar his father teach Perseus to divine by a cup like to that which be mention of joseph in Egypt and the same Picus be father to Hermes or Mercury king of Egypt with other legend too long for this place this Mercury he make the same with Faunus the first finder he say of gold and that in a golden vesture he foretell diverse thing and that the egyptian worship he have before make he their king which place he hold thirty nine year after he reign Vulcan 1680. day for at that time the egyptian know not to number by year he first make a law against adultery and that the egyptian woman shall have but one husband he be inventor of iron and armour stone and club be before that time the only weapon his son sol succeed a great philosopher after he sosis and next Osiris then orus Thules conqueror of Africa and after that Sesostris of the race of cham the same as he suppose with Trismegistus thus much I have think here to add out of he where the reader may further satisfy himself if that can satisfy any which can nothing certify or make certain in these antiquity wherein we may find many opinion scarce any truth but in the word of truth the scripture that which we read of the dynasty of shepherd Scaliger interpret of that base servile sort which Moses g g genes 46 34 say be abominable to the egyptian and seem to have be stranger that inhabit some fenny place which nature have fortify if we believe heliodorus h h hist Aeth l 1 Achilles stat. lib 3 and thence make forage into the country the custom of borderer and be call therefore robber these it seem drive to their shift by the hard and tyrannous usage of the egyptian procure as we read of the tartar their own freedom and thraldom of their lord the roman in their time be force to maintain a garrison against they therefore call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and Jerome mention i i in Hiiar the Bucolia where no christian dwell but only a fierce nation josephus k k Ios. count ap. euseb chron. and Eusebius think they to be the israelite which be unlikely because they live in servitude and never reign there Lydiat suppose the Philistine under Abimelech and Phicol to be the man nothing be more obscure in the egyptian chronology than the time of the departure of israelite thence under Moses who justin l l Paraen genes martyr affirm out of Diodorus to have be the first that write the egyptian law tatianus m m orat. graec. Assyrus who after become a heretic say and allege Ptolemey Mendesius a priest for his author that this departure be in the day of amasis king of Egypt who live in the time of Inachus Theophilus and josephus n n theoph. l. 3. out of manetho in the reign of Tethmoses Eusebius o o eus Niceph. pat. in the reign of cenchre cedrenus say petisonius other otherwise according to the diverse interpretation of manetho the scripture show it be four hundred and thirty year from the promise first make to Abraham as all that I know both elder and late greeke and latin p p ado. funct beroal perk. Bunt Codom more pont. phrigio Wolph epit. chron. gr Dogli Munst Herman contract lamb. Schaf marian. Scotus petr. Alexandr rader etc. chronographer except Genebrard and Adriehomius reckon it Lydiat think that the drown of the egyptian Pharo be the cause of those tumult in Egypt about succession which be ascribe to Egyptus and Danaus orosius q q orosius l. 18 cap. 10. report that the print of the chariot-wheel of the egyptian then pursue the israelite through the sea do yet in his time remain in the sand on the shore and under-water which no curiosity or casualty can so disorder but that divine providence do re-imprint they in their wont form hard it be to apply the year of the r r of the egyptian king etc. see marmol eleven book to the 12. chapter of Daniel Angelo lib. 2. egyptian chronology to the true account of the world generation by reason of the disagreement of author touch the egyptian king until sesac time which after lydiat be in the year of the world 3029. although even from hence we have but slippery foot Augustus after the same author make Egypt a province in the year 3975. under which Roman government it continue until the saracen conquer it in the time of Omar the three Chalipha who begin his reign after scaliger computation in his catalogue s s Ios. Scalig. can. Isag. l. 2. of the caliph in the year of Christ 643. the name of the caesar belong to another place and it be tedious here to relate the year of their several reign otman the four Chalipha begin in the year of Christ 645. who the rest succeed in order until the year 869. and then the caliph be divide mutamed reign in bagde t t among all the 13. province subject to the Chalipha of Bagdet Egypt have the second place as constantinus porphyrogenitus show out of theophanes Constant imp. c. 25. and tolon in Egypt who die in the year of Christ 883. and of the Hegeira 270. who succeed Hamaria his son and after he his son Aharun who muchtaphi the Bagdet Chalipha slay about the year 907. afterwards about the year 943. achishid muhamid son of tangi reign in Egypt to who a few year after succeed his son abigud who Meaz Ledin Illahi of the posterity of Phetima Mahomet daughter deprive in the year of our lord 971. to who succeed his son Aziz 975. u u Leo call he Elcain Elhacham in the year 996. Etaher Laazizdin Illahi 1030. musteratzor Billahi 1035. musteale 1095. Elamir Bahacam Illahi 1101. he be but five year old the protector of the kingdom be Aphtzala wizir elhaphit Ladin illahi 1135. Ettaphar succeed and he be slay Elphaiz who die in the year 1160. and Etxar Ledin illahi his son be the last of the Phetimaan race to he succeed Asareddin Shirachoch of the family of Ainb which be Curdi after his death jusaph tzelat Eddin be constitute king by the Chalipha and the bagded caliph be again acknowledge in Egypt this be that Saladine that take jerusalem in the year of Christ 1190. Heg. 586 he conquer Mesopotamia etc. he die in the year of our lord 1193. and as cardinal Vitriaco * * see Vitriaco his three book of the greatness of this Saladine and of Saffadin his brother which slay his ten nephew son of sal. and succeed in this exceed monarchy of many many kingdom affirm reduce the schismatical sect in Egypt to uniformity with the Baldac Chalipha Elaphtzal succeed he in the kingdom of Damascus Melich Elaziz in Egypt Taher Giazi in Halep or Aleppo Melich elaziz exchange Egypt for Damascus with his uncle etadel the egyptian make Aphtzal their king in the year of our lord 1202. after eladel succeed elchamel 1219. who die in the year of our lord 1237. Heg. 635. Essaloch follow and after he elmutam 1242. the turkman conspire against he he flee into a tower of wood which they fire and half burn he leap into a stream that pass by and there perish Tureoman Azeddin Ibib be make king in his place in the year of our lord 1245. here begin the reign of the mameluke or slave he be slay another slave succeed who they call Melich Elmutaphar this seem to be he that Leo call Piperitis thus far out of Scaliger collect by he out of Abraham Zacuthi which add much light to the egyptian history of these time wherein I can never before satisfy myself concern the erection and alteration of the schismatical egyptian caliph which with much labour little avail I have seek jacobus Vitriaco bishop of Accon or Ptolemais above four hundred year since and a roman cardinal in his oriental history 10 10 orient hist cap. 5. affirm that Haly disdain to be account the successor of Mahomet who he think inferior to himself begin a new sect of his own which he establish in Egypt the other mahometans erect another at Baldac but Baldac be of a late erection and these thing have no probability these king be not call caliph as the posterity of Phetima or fatima but sultan a certain catalogue of the name time and affair of these mamaluke-sultan I can perfect exhibit Peucerus y y Peuc. chron. l. 4 name in order these name Turquemenius Cathus Bendocader Melechsait Elpis Melechseraph Melechnasar Melechadal and after many other Caithbeius a stout enemy of the turk z z p. mart. leg. bab. lib. 3. this Caithbeius be choose sultan in the year of our lord 1465. and reign three and thirty year two of his principal mameluke Achardin and Campsous full of emulation be a principal cause of the ruin of that dynasty for whereas the sultan be always choose out of the mameluke by most voice among themselves Campsous fear lest Achardin shall have succeed after Caithbeius feign that his master have take order on his deathbed that his son Mahomet shall obtain the room and use mean to effect it both by the voice of those mameluke he can suborn and confirmation of their Chalipha who horn these sultan have shorten abridge his power as before be say this Mahomet prove so cruel a tyrant and those two mameluke so band themselves in faction that all become confuse and within six year after Caithbeius his death the sultan throne be five time vacant Tomumbeius kill Mahomet Campsous Ciarchesius be choose Zauballat precedent of Damascus rebel and by Temumbeius mean imprison he and usurp the sceptre but for his cruelty soon after be deprive and captive by Tomumbevis and after strangle he also succeed in authority tyranny and destiny after Tomumbeius be elect Campson gaurus who Zelim a a joac camerar narrat. tur. etc. the Turk overthrow and slay in battle in who place another Tomumbeius be choose but soon together with his whole state come into the turk power thus be divide in many faction among themselves and exercise all cruelty and pillage upon the people b b of the egyptian misery in these time read Vertoman and mart. eye witness they make themselves a prey to their neighbour who like Aesop vulture watch this opportunity to seize on these lion have now bleed out their strength in mutual and civil conflict in the year of our lord 1517. the egyptian affirm c c treasury of ancient and modern time l. 5. c. 31. that a little before Selim besiege cairo for the space of eight day together a great number of crocodile be see in all part on the bank of Nilus and much disperse abroad in the field take and tear great store of prey as a presage of this turkish servitude Solyman succeed in the year of our lord 1519. or 1520. as other say Selim the second 1566. Amurat the three 1574. and in the year 1595. Mahomet the three to who achmet who now be the egyptian and turkish sultan of these you may be more full inform in m. Knolles his turkish history as also in our former relation chap. 7 of the oracle of JUPITER Ammon and of Cyrene and diverse people adjoin mention by the ancient all that lie between Africa Minor and Egypt a a lib. 1. c. 8. Pomponius Mela do call cyrenaica include under that title marmarica which Plinio b b plin. l. 5. c. 5. reckon by itself who also call the former Pentapolitana and say it be renown by the oracle of Hammon which be fifty mile distant from Cyrene by the fountain of the sun and those five city Berenice Arsinoe Ptolemais apollonia c c Cyrene be build as tzetzes affirm by Battus Cyrene this region be now call barca and Mesrata d d Leo lib. 6. io. Boem. Drus ob. lib. 11. c. 15. hier. in jer. 3.2 of which this be inhabit and rich the other it mostwhat desert and poor their religion be like the egyptian in time past the arabian that live there now attend on their purchase be the great thief in Africa but this be usual to the arabian in all place of their abode or wander rather for which cause it seem Jerome say the word Arabi signify thief and be therefore tax of Drusius in his observation no otherwise signify thief than Chananeus a merchant or Chaldaeus a mathematician because such common be their study and course Berenice e e dom. nig. be sometime sacred famous for the garden of the hesperide near to which be that river of Lethe so much chant by the poet nigh to this place also be the psylli a people terrible to serpent and medicinable against their poison both by touch the wound party and by suck out the poison and by enchant the serpent the oracle of jupiter Ammon be famous among the ancient the place where this temple be have on every side vast and sandy desert in which they which travel as we find in arrianus f f arrian lib. 3. curt. lib. 4. and Curtius seem to war with nature for the earth be cover with sand which yield a unstable foot and sometime be blow about with the windy motion of the air water be hence banish neither cloud nor spring ordinary afford it a fiery heat do possess and tyrannize over the place which the sand and sun much increase neither be here tree or hill or other mark for traveller to discern their way but the star in the middle of this desert be that sacred grove which Silius italicus call g g the fortune-telling grove lucus fatidicus not above fifty furlong in circuit full of fruitbearing tree water with wholesome spring season with temperate air and a continual spring the inhabitant call ammonian h h Lucan call they garamantes lib. 9 inculit gacamantes etc. be disperse in cottage and have the midst of the grove fortify with a triple wall the first munition contain the king palace the second the Serail or lodging for his woman where be also the oracle the three the courtier inhabit before the oracle be a fountain in which the offering be wash before they be offer the form of this god be deform with Rams-horn crooked as some paint he according to Curtius without form of any creature but like a i i umbilicus round boss beset with jewel this when they consult with the oracle be carry by the priest in a gild ship with many silver bell on both side of the ship the matron follow and the virgin sing their distuned procession by which they provoke their god to manifest what they seek these priest be about fourscore in number Alexander ambitious pilgrimage to this oracle be sufficient know by the relation of Curtius and arrianus this we may add out of Scaliger k k scal. e. t. lib. 5. pag. 401. that after that the cyrenaean to soothe this proud king which will needs be take for the son of Ammon stamp his shape in their coin with two horn of a ram and without a beard whereas before they have use the form of jupiter with a beard and horn wherein the other eastern people follow they the syrian use the like stamp with the name of king Lysimachus which Scaliger who have give we the picture of these coin think to be Alexander Rams-horn be say to be ascribe to he because Bacchus wander in these desert with his army be guide to this place by a silly ram likewise pausanias l l Pausan lib 4. in his Messenica say that one Ammon which build the temple a shepherd be author of this name to their God Plutarch m m de os and be supr. cap. 3. reason of we have before show other n n Pliny Choul etc. derive this name from (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the sand which may well agree with all idol devotion as be a sandy foundation although it be here intend to the situation o o Drusius add another reason of the name Hammon the egyptian name of the sun say Arnobius and Minutius foelix quaest. heb. lib. 3. but that which I have before note of Ham the son of Noah sound more probable as be progenitor of all these nation and of this mind also be p p Peucer de divinat Peucerus this q q Strab. 17. Strabo in his time say be not in request as no other oracle beside for the roman content themselves with their sibyl and other divination this oracle be not give by word but by sign this defect of oracle in general and especial of this occasion that treatise of Plutarch r r plut. orac. of this subject inquire the cause of the oracle fail never have he read that s s jerem. 10.11 the god which have not make heaven and earth shall perish out of the earth nor have he eye to see that sun of righteousness the light of the world who pure beam chase and disperse these mist of darkness and therefore be his conjecture so far from the mark as not able with a natural eye to see the thing of God the t t diod. sic. lib. 3. cap. 5. antiquity of this oracle appear in that Semiramis come to it and inquire of her death after which the oracle promise to her divine honour Perseus also and Hercules be report to have consult the same in their adventure against Gorgon and Busiris beside this grove u u curt. Pompon mela. plin. Solin etc. there be another of Ammon which have in the midst a well they call it the fountain of the sun who water at sunrising be lukewarm and cool more and more till noon at which time it be very cold and from thence till midnight by degree exchange that coldness with heat hold a kind of natural antipathy with the son 10 10 our bath in England as some affirm be hot in the night then in the day hot in his further absence cold in his near presence Pliny and Solinus place this fountain in Debris a town not very far from those part among the garamant Lucretius mention it and philosophical dispute the cause thereof lucret. lib. 6. etc. the substance whereof be that the fire under that subtle earth by cold vapour of the night be press and force to that watery refuge but by the sun beam receive new encouragement forsake those hold and hole and for a little while take repossession of his challenge land the ammonian woman have such great breast that they suckle their child over their shoulder their breast not less if junenal be believe than the child in Meroe the monstrous pap be big than the child in lap pausanias y y Pausan lib. 3. reckon a ammonian juno among the libyan city as well as this jupiter he add the lacedaemonian have this Ammon in much request and build to he diverse temple as at gytheum one which have no roof and the aphytaeans do he 40 less worship than the libyan Ortelius z z in Typo al. mag. who have bestow a description of this temple suppose that his image be paint with horn but that umbilicus be account the deity itself or the sign of his presence which shapeless shape he sample by many like in other nation the ship he conjecture to signify that the religion be bring from some other place but if Ammon be that son of Noah it may rather be a memorial of the ark wherein Noah and his son be preserve as that also of janus who be imagine to be Noah may more fit be interpret then according to the poet gloss a a pub. ovid. so well-disposed posterity do frame a ship to show which way their strange God come the ancient frugality of the cyrenian be commend in author b b seu. Sulpit. Dialog. Filesaecus de paroec Orig. cap. 4. Sulpitius bring in postumianus in his dialogue tell that land there by force of weather he go with the priest unto the church which be very homely cover with base twig or bough not much better than the priest their host his tent in which a man may not stand upright inquire after the disposition of the people they learn that they be utter ignorant of buy and sell of fraud and steal they neither have nor care to have gold or silver and when he offer ten piece of gold to the priest he refuse it only be content to accept a little raiment the hammientes be not much distant in place or differ in name from the ammonian which build their house of salt dig the salt-stone out of the mountain which they with mortar apply to their building Mela join to these aforesaid the atlantes which curse the sun at the set and rise as bring damage to they and their field a practice not unlike to the woman of angola at this day who as Andrew battle which live there testify salute the new moon when they first see she by hold up their hinder part naked against she as the cause of their troublesome menstruous purgation these atlantes have no proper name nor feed of such thing as have life he affirm of the garamantes that they have no wife but live in a beastly community the augila acknowledge no other god but ghost or soul depart by which they swear with which they consult as oracle to which they pray at their tomb receive answer by dream the woman the first night of marriage be prostitute to all that will see they the more the great honour but after must observe their own husband the Trogleditae dwell in cave and feed on serpent and rather make a sound or noise then human voice they use circumcision they name not their child by their parent name but by the name of sheep or other beast which yield they nourishment their wife and child say agatharchides be common only the king wife be proper yet if any have lie with she his punishment be but the loss of a sheep in their winter they live on blood and milk which be mix and heat together at the fire in their summer they kill the scab and disease of their cattle they entitle none with the name of parent but the bull and cow the ram and ewe and the male and female of the goat because of these they receive their nourishment and not from their parent they go naked all but the buttock such as want that skin which other circumcise (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) they deprive of the whole flesh so far as the circumcision shall have extend their funeral rite be to tie the neck of the dead to their leg and cover they with heap of stone set a goat horn on the top with laughter rather than mourn their old man which can follow the flock no long they strangle with a Ox-taile which medicine they minister likewise to those that have grievous disease or maim and unto these do Pliny add the blemmyae with face in their breast the satyr aegypane Himantopodes and other monster scarce worthy relation or credit these part I have thus join in one discourse as live for the most part a wild life as the arabian and tartar do at this day and for religion have nothing notable that I find but as you have hear Procopius c c procop bel. Pers. lib. 1^ write of the blemyes and nobatae that justinian place they in Egypt about Elephantina that they before observe the greek devotion Isis also and Osiris and Priapus and sacrifice to the sun which rite the emperor prohibit but he mention no such monster the arabian which under Elcain about the four hundred year of their Hegeira give a Ducat a man to pass into Africa be lord and inhabitant of the desert to this day live as we say a dog life in hunger and ease profess Mahomet sect. the Adrimachidae d d io. Boem. g Draudius in Solinum Caelius rhod. lib. 18. cap. 38 live near to the egyptian both in situation and custom the nasamones have many wife with which they have company public the first night of the marriage all the guest have deal with the bride and reward she with some gift the Guidanes have a more beastly custom who woman glory in their shame beware so many frindge of leather as they have find lover the Malchyes wear the hair on the hinder part of their head as the japonian now do the ause use the contrary who virgin in the yearly feast of Minerva divide themselves into two company and skirmish with staff and stone if any virgin die of the wound they account they false maid the most martial virago of the company they arm and crown and place in a chariot with great solemnity they use not marriage but have woman in common the child be reckon his with who she choose to live to add a word of the cyrenian they hold it unlawful to smite a cow in honour of Isis who fast and feast they solemn observe and in barca they abstain both from beef and hog flesh they sear e e the like do Villamont report of the turk the crown or temple of their child to prevent the distil of the rheum in their sacrifice they first cut off the ear of the beast as first fruit and hurl it over the house their god be the sun and moon the max shave the left side of their head leave the hair on the right side the Zigantes feed on ape whereof they have plenty the megavares make no account of sepulcher in stead whereof they cover the corpse with stone and set up a goat horn on the stone heap they have many skirmish for their pasture which be end by the mediation of old woman who may safe interpose themselves and end the fray or battle if you will so call it when man be so old that they can no long follow the herd they strangle he with a cow tail if he will not prevent they by do it himself the like medicine they administer to such as be dangerous sick of the macae Caelius think the roman priest borrow their shave crown other thing which our author add of these people and other adjoin as seem too fabulous I listen not to express Silius italicus in his poem b. Aldrete ant. var. lib. 4. and Aldrete in his antiquity of Spain and Africa express diverse of their ancient rite and name and that which seem to we most fit shall in this history be insert this part of the world as least know to the ancient yield both poet and historian most matter of their fable in explain whereof Aldrete have write in spanish very learned as also of the late time when the roman vandal and since the arabian have prevail chap. 8 of that part of Barbary now call the kingdom of Tunis and Tripoli @. i. the name Barbary the kingdom of Tunis and antiquity of Carthage all the tract of land between Atlas and the sea stretch in length from Egypt to the strait be * * leo. lib. 1. call Barbaria either of barber which signify to murmur because such seem the speech of the inhabitant to the arabian or of the word Bar which signify a desert double it comprehend * * maginus both mauritania Africa minor Libya exterior beside Cyreniaca and marmarica whereof we have speak the inhabitant some fetch from Palestina some from Arabia it be conquer by the roman and take from the greek emperor by the vandal and from they again by the saracen and arabian and be now partly subject to the Turk partly to the xeriffe it be usual divide into four kingdom Morocco Fez Tremisen and Tunis for of barca be say already the city of Barbary it be Ios. Scaliger * * Ios. scal. ep. ad Casaub his testimony speak Arabic but not pure nor yet so degenerate as the italian be from the latin but the country people use the old african tongue nothing like the other HONDIUS his map of Barbary Barbaria the kingdom of Tunis contain all that which the ancient call Africa propria or Minor and Numidia antiqua the roman perhaps vainglorious vaunt or ambitious aim at the empire of the universe still their first footing and possession in Asia and Africa by the name of the whole which other have be force to distinguish by add propria or Minor so they call Attalus his legacy Asia and this province yea Carthage itself have that name Africa the soil be fertile especial the west-part the inhabitant be sound and healthful seldom vex with any sickness hereof be reckon five part Bugia Constantina Tunis Tripoli and Ezzab this Ezzab be the most easterly part have many town and region among which some account Mesrata from these part unto cape be the tripolitan Region the chief town be Tripoli wherein the great Turk have his bassa or viceroy a receptacle of the pirate nic. nic. be there present which rove and rob in those sea in the year 1551. win from the knight of Malta by Sinan Bassa from cape to guadilbarbar be the tunetan territory from thence unto the mountain of Constantina be that region hereof bear name and from thence b b Leo lib. 5. to the river Maior about a hundred and fifty mile space do Bugia extend itself so call of Bugia c c Bugia a university the principal city sometime adorn with temple hospital monastery and college of student in the Mahometan Law here be also Necaus a very pleasant city and Chollo very rich Constantina be a ancient city contain eight thousand family and many sumptuous building a great d d suidas Aldrete Dion l. 43. temple two college and three or four monastery much resort to by merchant every trade have their peculiar street a little from the city be a hot bath have in it abundance of crabfish or little tortoise which the woman take for evil spirit and ascribe unto they the cause of their sickness or ague if any befall and therefore kill white hen and set they on a earthen vessel with their feather environ the same with little wax-candle and so leave they near to this bath or fountain how ever it fare with their fever their meat shall not stay long but some or other that see the woman devotion will envy the evil spirit so good cheer and for that time will be the spirit themselves to dress and eat their provision not far hence be a marble building with image grave therein the people have a conceit that it be sometime a school and those statue the scholar by divine judgement so transform for their wickedness in this region be situate Bona sometime call Hippo famous through our christian world for the most famous of the father that since the apostle day have leave we their writing Aurelius augustinus a name fit to he which indeed be aureus and Augustissimus bishop of the see while he live and yet live in his work a bishop not of Hippo but of the western church witty learned wise and holy father that have with thou carry these title from Hippo where after thou the arrian vandal and since the saracen have live and lord and at this day be possess of such as have no possession of Wit learning wisdom or holiness but have testify their banishment of all these by ascribe they to fool and mad man who they honour and admire as saint e e nic. nicolay lib. 1. this Bona then brook this name better contain now three hundred Herthes and a sumptuous mosque to which be adjoin the house of the cadi Tunis be now a great city since the ruin of Carthage near unto which it stand Carthage f f carthago Isthmus quo africae 25. Utica in Tunis Polyb. hist ib. 1. cap. 37. as the more ancient deserve first relation of which we may yet say with g g bell. jugurth we may not say much and a little will be too little for such greatness it be build threescore and twelve year before Rome as the common account go by Dido and her h h poeni phoeni. phoenician a emulous competitor with Rome for the empire of the World it contain say i i p. Oros l. 4. cap. 22. orosius in the circuit of the wall twenty mile Linier epitome say four and twenty all engird with the sea except three mile space which have a wall of square stone thirty foot broad and forty cubit high the tower Byrsa environ above two mile and have in it the temple of juno Aesculapius and k k there be in Carthage the temple of juno memoria Apollo Silius add of Elisa and of or Urania the phoenician Astroarche and Syria dea. Belus of the greatness of their name and power those three punic war be witness in the second of which Hannibal who his father hamilcar than general in Spain have cause to swear at the altar of jupiter never to hold friendship with the roman he then be but nine year old as Aemilius probus or as other will have it cornelius nepos report he I say pass over the pyrenaean mountain through France and over the Alpes into Italy with a army of a hundred thousand footman and thirty thousand horse the river ticinus and Trebia the lake trasimenus run with roman blood by three overthrow of Scipio Sempronius and flaminius the roman consul witness the punic l l of the punic war and greatness the roman history be full so also Polybius and other among the greek carthaginensium africae syrtis herculis 16000 hispaniae Polyb. hist lib 3. cap. 39 might but the victory at Cannae against Varro do pierce the breast and have rend the heart of Rome have Hannibal know to have use the victory as well as to have get it there do Rome seem to breathe her last the sun the wind the dust help the carthaginian with nature force yea the river Gellus against nature stay itself as congeal indeed whether with wonder fear of necessity accept a bridge or dam rather of roman body for a passage to the african army these be golden day to Carthage when three c c modii bushel of goldring take from the finger of the slay enemy be send hither as a d d Polyb. l. 3. c. 11 and seq (@) Casauboni and romani histo present a swoon meanwhile do Rome sustain and easy in five day might Hannibal have dine in the Capitol and poor help can she find when she revive have not Capua with feast the conqueror detain Rome from conquest when they despoil the temple for armour arm their slave and bestow their private state on the public treasury all which can not make Fabius e e cunctator fight with annibal but by not fight he learn to overcome know that a shield be better weapon than a sword in that case scarce f f Stad in in seventeen year can Italy shake off this burden till Scipio by new policy war against Hannibal not in g g Hannibal in Italia superior aemil. probus in Hannibale Italy where he be but in Africa and Carthage whence his force be thereby procure annibal return as the outward member be force to yield their blood to succour any sudden oppression of the heart but how be my heart oppress with sudden passion thus to transport the reader with myself from Africa into Spain France Italy there to behold this tragedy let the matter itself answer and now we be return to Carthage and find the tragedy here for in the three punic war the roman say h h lib. 2. cap. 15. Florus rather fight with the city itself then with men. and alas what can that Hermophrodite-army do wherein be five and twenty thousand arm i i Osor l. 4 c. 23. woman yet have woman then the great courage hasdrubal the king yield his wife with her two child and much people burn themselves in the temple of Aesculapius that can not cure this disease of his city and suppliant the like fate befall the first and last queen of Carthage seventeen day together do Carthage burn k k carthago August civit. li 3. c. 21. seven hundred year after the first building in this last war after they have deliver up their navy and weapon be command to remove ten mile from thence anger kindle new force and teach they to supply the want of iron with silver and gold in make weapon with pull down their house to build a navy the matron give their hair the feminine ornament to make band for their manly and warlike engine their private glory for public necessity all which serve but to augment the pomp of this funeral of Carthage Caesar do after restore it with a ronian colony never attain the tyrian l l leo lib. 5. glory afflict with vandal and goth and by the saracen make desolate until the time of Elmahdi a heretical Calipha who procure the inhabit hereof but not above the twenty part be inhabit the rest remain as scatter ruin disperse bone of the carcase of old Carthage master pountesse a friend of i tell i that he have be row in his boat over the wall of Carthage or their ruin the sea have make the last conquest by eat into the land the conduit be whole say Leo which bring water from a hill thirty mile from Carthage twelve mile under the earth the rest above and now say he be not above five and twenty shop and five hundred house therein one fair temple one college but without scholar the inhabitant poor proud and superstitious master m m ap. Hak. Euesham say that this city be now ruinate and destroy he mention those arch wherein water be hither convey and one street three mile long as for the sea-discovery attempt by the carthaginian Hanno compass n n Ramus show by a comment also of a Portugal pilot that this be but coast the west part of Africa etc. all Africa from the spanish to the arabian strait and commit his discovery to writing Himilco at the same time be employ in the search of Europe Diodorus siculus o o dio. sic. l. 5. c. 7 write a whole chapter of their discovery of a pleasant and fertile island westward in the ocean which can more fit agree with any other region than some part of the west-indies as may seem at the first view but a man shall have much to do to find that island a hard discovery now than it be then to the finder at least as the story lie and some p p gen. chron. think that the indian of America be a colony of the carthaginian Aristotle have also the like relation in his book in the begin of the war q q dom. nig. they have three hundred city in Libya and seven hundred thousand person in their city the carthaginian as all acknowledge and their very name paeni do prove be Phaenician which country we have before show to be famous as for many other thing so for the first letter and the first that be the Hebrew language the letter which the hebrew since the babylonian captivity have use postellus r r Postel originib will have to be the first but secret till those time and then by ezra make common but s s scal eus chron. Brere Pond. scal. proleg em. t. ed. ult. other more probable hold the phoenician or samaritan the first and that the present Hebrew be the assyrian or chaldaean character which the jew bring thence with they now for proof that their ancient language be phoenician and consequent hebrew Dido be but the feminine say Scaliger to David and Elisa be the Hebrew elisha josephus relate out of Theophrastus that the tyrian and sydonian may not use other but their own country oath of which he reckon Corban which the scripture also mention and Scaliger say that the punic scene in although they have then much decline from the Hebrew purity be near the Hebrew than the Syriac and that he can for the most part restore it to the right punic which also have happy be attempt by master Selden in his Dis Syris and by Bernardo Aldrete a Spaniard in his Espauna Africa lib. 2. cap. 2. where he in a large catalogue compare the Hebrew Syriac phoenician and punic term together of their baalsaman and other note of this language we have speak before in our first book the name carthago as Genebrard and Aldrete observe in Syriac signify the middle city Kartha a city go middle Solinus say new city we have allege the testimony of Procopius for the chanaanite flee before joshua and the punike say * * Exposinch at rom. Sallust jugurth Augustine call themselves even in his time Chanani Sallust ascribe to the phaenician Hippo hadrumetus leptis and other city on the sea-coast beside Carthage which they build either to enlarge their empire or to prevent a fullness at home concern the religion of the african in ancient time Leo say that they worship the fire and the sun as do the persian erect in honour of each of these fair and sumptuous temple in which the fire be continual keep burn as in the temple of Vesta at Rome the numidian and libyan sacrifice to the planet and some of the negro worship Guighimo which signify the lord of heaven these afterward he say be of the jewish religion and after that of the christian till the 268. year of the Hegira that some negro kingdom become Mahometan although there remain some christian to this day those which be jewish both by the christian and Mahometan be utter destroy but those of Barbary whereof we especial entreat remain say he idolater till two hundred and fifty year before Mahomet birth when they become christian this must be interpret of the universal and public profession about the time of Constantine for otherwise Africa have in it christian before Dorothaeus in Synopsi say that Epaeneius one of the seventy disciple be a bishop of Carthage and that Simon the apostle preach in Mauritania and among the african as Mathias also in Aethiopia but the goth soon corrupt christian religion with Arrianisme the forerunner of Mahumetanisme both here and elsewhere the moor say a a alex. alex. gen. dier. l. 6. c. 4 another worship juba as a god and the poeni Uranus the libyan Psaphon this Psaphan otherwise a base fellow have teach bird to sing Psaphon be a great God and let they fly into the wood where chant their lesson they enchant the rude people with this superstition Aelianus b b Aelian l. 14. c. 25. tell the like history of anon a carthaginian who bird at liberty in the wood forget this their master lesson the paeni c c dom. Niger poeni proverb see l. 1. c. 18. be as be say Phoeni or phoenician bring in all likelihood the phoenician religion with they from thence you may read in our first book of moloch whence come the carthaginian name of milicus Imilce Amilcar Bomilcar yea athenodoros report of Amilcas a carthaginian deity which be like to be this moloch or Milcom in a little differ dialect some be of opinion that these sacrifice have their beginning from a diabolical imitation of Abraham offer his only son Isaac for so porphyrius and philo Biblius relate out of the phoenician annal that a ancient king call Israel in great danger of war offer his only son porphyrius call he jeud as Moses also gen. 22.2 jehid that be which he have by Anobreta who Scaliger interpret Sara neither be it any great marvel that the name and story shall be thus pervert to any that read what relation justin Strabo and other write of the jew or how the devil be the great seducer of the world bring darkness out of light itself Silius mention these their damnable rite of human sacrifice Carthage to appease the offend deity be wont to offer human sacrifice and tender babe abominable shame be make the fuel of the altar flame so Ennius in that verse of he cite by d d Marcel in verb. Puell vid. lactant. l 1. c. 21 Cyrill jul. l. 4. euseb praep. l. 4 tert. Apologet. write that this custom continue till the time of Tiberius who be proconsul crucify the priest author of this villainy on the very tree which shadow the temple in this bloody grove yet this continue to tertullian day but more close these be the word of Tertullian to Saturn say e e sar. l. 3. sardus be human sacrifice offer by the rhodian phoenician curetes and carthaginian the Sardi their f f Suidas colony offer the fair of their captive and such as be above threescore and ten year old who to show their courage laugh whence grow the proverb Sardonius risus this be do also to Saturn the carthaginian in time of plague offer their child to Saturn which Gelo cause they to leave yea such be their zeal in this superstition that if they have no child of their own they buy for this purpose of the poor the mother assist this butcherly sacrifice without once sigh or weep for than she have lose the price and her child nevertheless and lest the cry of the child shall be hear all resound with instrument of music thus Plutarch in his treatise of superstition be overcome by Agathocles they sacrifice two hundred of the chief man child to Saturn Clitarchus and other write cite by suidas that in their solemn supplication at Carthage they put a child into the arm of Saturn brazen image under which be set a furnace or oven which be kindle the child in his burn seem to laugh this custom may haply be the occasion of that desperate act before speak of in the destruction of Carthage by the roman so many perish in Aesculapius temple other their rite be likely to be the same with those which we have report of the phoenician somewhat perhaps in time incline also to the greekish superstition their devotion to Venus the phoenician goddess Augustine g g aug. in psal. 98. mention in these word h h see ortel in parergo Carthage be call justiniana of justinian junonia of Gracchus hadrianopolis of Hadrian and of Commodus Alexandria Commodiana togata it be sack the second time of Capellianus precedent of Mauritania three under gensericus of the vandal four of the maurusian five of the persian six of the egyptian last of the Mahometan Tunis i i George Braun have describe this and Algiers etc. in civit. Orb. ter. be a small town till after the destruction of Carthage it grow in some reckon as before be say it have in it about ten thousand household Abdul Mumen join it to his kingdom of Morocco and when that kingdom decline k k leo. l. 5. the viceroy which before be subject to Morocco now usurp the state to himself call himself king of Africa in our father l l Sleid. com. l. 9 fr. sur. com. Doglioni day muleass son of Mahomet king of Tunis by murder of his elder brother Maimon and either kill or put out the eye of twenty other his brethren obtain the crown but rosette the only brother remain when with his arabian he can not gain the kingdom he go with Barbarossa to Solyman the Turk who so use the matter that muleass be chase out of his kingdom and Tunis subject itself to Solyman but muleass crave and obtain aid of Charles the five who in the year 1535. pass m m joan. Etrobius with a army into Africa and repossess muleass of his kingdom who become the emperor vassal our history tell of Edward the first his arrival at Tunis and Henry the four with english archer at both which time the tunetanes be force to composition it be before either of they be king Froissart for Henry have his son John de Beaufort muleass about the year 1544. cross over the sea into Sicily leave his son amida in the government n n Surius com. the costliness of his diet be admirable and of his perfume one peacock and two pheasant dress after his order be observe to amount to a hundred dukat and more he be a superstitious observer of his religion and of the star which portend to he the loss of his kingdom and a miserable end to avoid this he depart out of Africa for fear of Barbarossa but so fall into the danger a rumour be spread at Tunis that he be dead whereupon amida possess himself of the kingdom muleass haste home to recover it and lose himself for he be take captive and after both his eye put out with a burn knife and of his two son Nahasar and Abdalas he be commit to prison but Abdamelech his brother get the kingdom from amida and soon after die to who succeed Mahomet his soon a child who tutor be so tyrannical that amida be again send for by the tunetans and muleass be bring to sanctuary whence by the spaniard mean he be convey to Guletta and thence to Sicilia where he be maintain at the emperor charge o o Knolles p. 902 he derive his pedigree from the chorean family in right line from Homar Mahomet disciple amida obtain the kingdom thus toss betwixt moor turk and christian but be after take and send prisoner to Sicilia Mahomet brother of amida now a slave in Sicilia be make king of Tunis under the Spaniard 1573. by don John of Austria but the next year after Selym the Turk take Guletta hold by the spaniard almost forty year and at last take Tunis also Mahomet the new king be send to Constantinople prisoner it have say i i leo l. 5. Leo many temple especial one of singular beauty and greatness furnish with store of priest and revenue also many college of scholar and monastery of religious person to which the people yield liberal alm they be so befool that they esteem fool saint and while I be at Tunis the king build a fair monastery for one sidi el Dahi which go up and down with his head and foot bare hurl stone and cry like mad man endow the same with great revenue for he and all his kindred biserta be a ancient city suppose k k maginus by some to be Utica where Cato slay himself @. 2 of cairaoan and the kingdom of Tripoli CAiraoan have be a city famous build by Hucba general of the war of ozman or otman the three Calipha thirty six mile from the sea and from Tunis one hundred to secure themselves from any sudden invasion which the commodity of the sea may cause they he build therein a admirable temple on pirate of marble to Hucba in this government succeed a a Mucas or Muza muse to who julianus earl of cepta offer his service b b io. Vasaeus chron. Hispan rod. Tolet l. 3. 19 for the conquest of Spain and be find faithful unfaithful with some few soldier lend he be after employ with Tarif of who the hill be call Gehel Tarif now Gibraltar who with a army of twelve thousand take Seville and after that overthrow king rodericus and be enrich with spoil be dispossess thereof by muse who by this news of his success be move to follow he into Spain as the spanish writer c c rod. lantius hist hi. p. 2. c. 37. alfon Carthagena c. 44. fr. Tarapa Magorn etc. though not altogether agree herein declare and subdue the same in thirty month space when muse or Muza depart with Tarif out of Spain the moor there fall into such contention that in twenty year space there be no less than fifteen king and one of they settle his throne in the blood of three hundred competitor jezul the son of Muza and after he his brother and nephew succeed each other in this government which Elagleb that follow they turn into a independent and free signory by occasion as be say of the chalifa leave Damascus and remove the seat royal or popedom to Bagdat this house here rule a hundred and seventy year at which time Mahdi a heretical Chalifa deprive they these saracen win Sicilia in those time to the cairaoan dominion about the four hundred year of the Hegira Elcain be Chalifa in Cairaoan who captain gehoar conquer unto he Barbary Numidia and as far as Sus westward and after be employ in the east subdue Egypt and Syria he for secure himself and his army build cairo after this he send to his lord Elcain to come thither in person assure he that the Calipha of Bagdat be not able to abide his presence and puissance Elcain listen to gehoar appoint a lieutenant in Cairaoan and go to cairo but his lieutenant of Cairaoan rebel and offer his obedience to the Chalifa of Bagdat who therefore give he large privilege and make he king of all Africa Elcain in these strait know not which way to turn he till by counsel of his secretary he take this course the arabian at that time be exceed multiply insomuch that the country otherwise barren can not sustain they and their cattle to these he give leave to pass into Africa pay for every poll a ducat and take a oath of they to be enemy to his rebel these in short time sack Tripoli and Cabis and after eight month siege cairaoan also and remain lord of Africa till joseph the first king of Morocco who give aid to the kinsman of that rebel win the city from the arabian which still keep possession of the field the lord of Cairaoan flee westward and reign in Bugia and the part adjoin and other of his kindred rule in Tunis till the king of Morocco swallow all that city be build present after the arabian have destroy this in the year four hundred twenty four of their Hegira as Leo d d leo l. 2 reckon Cairaoan e e Surius comment have in it a ancient temple and college of priest hither the great man among the moor and numidian be bring to be bury hope by the prayer of those priest to climb to heaven for this cause Boterus say they enter into this city unshod with great reverence the arabian have fill Africa with themselves their arm art and language Arabic letter as f f Pofiel Orig. postellus affirm be borrow of the chaldee and first with Mahomet and his law begin to be call Arabic he find in the same I know not what cabalistical mystery yield more certain prediction then from the heaven or orracle and be much study he say in Tunis Morocco and cairo Tripoli of Barbary for there be another of that a a Plin. l. 5. c. 20. name in Syria so call because the arcadian tyrian and sidonian inhabit it be so name of three city who colony plant it Abratonum and Tophia and leptis magna or as b b Solin c. 36. Draudius Martin del rio. other Cesa or Taphra or oea sabrada and leptis it be build by the roman conquer by the goth and after by the saracen and after the destruction thereof the african build a new Tripoli wherein be many fair temple college for student and hospital corn be always dear because their field be Sand c c io. Leo l. 5. it be subject unto the king of Tunis till the king of Fez carry away the king of Tunis prisoner at which time the genovese fleet of twenty sail take Tripoli and sell it to the fezan for fifty thousand ducat but the king of Tunis recover it after zacharias be king play the tyrant and therefore be expel and a certain citizen be advance to the throne who at first govern modest but decline to tyranny be murder and a courtier of prince Abubacer who have make himself a eremite be force to be their king who rule Tripoli till Ferdinando send Peter Navarre who come thither in the evening and the next day take it and the king remain captive till Charles the five free he Charles give the city to the knight of Malta who the turk d d nic. nicolay l. 1. c. 18. g. Bot ben. of Tripoli read t. sanders in Hak. to 2. p. 1. dispossess by force 1551. and there have their Beglerbeg or viceroy to this day this be one and forty year after Navarre have take it the king of Tunis live in great delicacy among their woman musician player and such like commit the government to the munafid or high steward and other officer when he call for a musician he be bring in hoodwink like a hawk the inhabitant be exceed prodigal in perfume they have a compound call e e Lhasis lhasis one ounce whereof be eat cause laugh dalliance and make one as it be drunken and marvellous provoke to lust in the kingdom of Tunis be place the lake Tritonia where Minerva be say to have show herself the inventer of spin and of oil and therefore worship Ezzab be the most easterly part of the tunetan kingdom the chief province whereof be Mesrata the inhabitant be rich and pay no tribute there grow date and olive and they traffic with the numidian to who they carry the ware which they buy of the venetian the great Turk sway with his ottoman sceptre at this present this kingdom of Tunis and all Africa from to the red sea except that little which the Spaniard have at this day they f f leo. l. 1. be mahometan and have be about these nine hundred year past from the time of Hucba the inhabitant of the city differ much from the mountaineer and rude rustic for they be studious especial in matter of their law as in time past they be also in philosophy and the mathematics but these last five hundred year their prince and doctor have prohibit many science as astrology and philosophy according to the mahometan custom they use much wash and resort to the temple they be very faithful in their promise and exceed jealous they go through the world as merchant and in many place be entertain as reader and master in diverse science and be well esteem in Egypt Aethiopia Arabia Persia India Turkey the young sort yield much reverence to their elder and parent and will not hold discourse of love or sing lovesong in their presence but these citizen be very proud and revengeful the lord esteem more of their beast then of their common people the country people in the field and mountain live hardly in labour and want they be beastly thievish ignorant unfaithful their woman before they be marry may live as wanton as they listen yea the father make hateful love to the daughter and the brother be g g (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Bas ep. unlove love to the sister the numidian be traitorous homicide thief and for reward will do any thing such also be the libyan without any kind of letter faith or law without heaven or earth live if that may be call a life like wild beast for ignorance like devil for wickedness like dog for poverty these thing report Leo of they who live among they which may provoke we to thankfulness to that great God who have give we such abundance for body and soul in thing present and future temporal and eternal chap. 9 of the kingdom of Tremisen Algiers and other place ancienty call Mauritania caesariensis @. i. of Tremisen and of the ancient maurusij the kingdom of Telensin or Tremisen a a io. leo. l. 4. maginus boter dom. Niger Strab. l. 17. begin westward from the river of Zha and Muluia eastward it border on the great river southward upon the desert of Numidia and northward upon the Mediterran sea it be by the roman call Mauritania caesariensis the name come of the inhabitant call mauri and of the greek (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) some say b b (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) of their colour because it be obscure and dark they be suppose to come hither first with Hercules out of India more likely it be that they c c Aria mont. in Tremel and jun. descend of phut the son of cham gen. 10.6 Pliny mention a river name fut in these part descend from Atlas Sallust say d d Sallust bell jugurth they come with Hercules who be dead in Spain as the african report his army be gather of many nation be diverse divide the mede armenian and persian of that number sail into Africa of which the persian dwell near the sea their ship with the keel turn upward serve they for house and mix themselves with the Getuli entitle themselves numidian the libyan adjoin themselves to the armenian and to the medi who by corruption of language they call mauri these getulian and libyan he say be before very rude wander up and down without law or civility live like beast lie and feed on the ground which testimony of Sallust Mela in like word confirm but of these and other african people let they which please learn of that author and of such as have write note upon he as Gruterus Glarianus Rivius Ciacconius Putschius and other vitrwius e e vitrwius l. 8 cap. 2. name Mauritania Maurusia Ortelius f f ortel Thesaur testify that in ancient coin it be read mauretania and so g g cornel. tacit. hist l. 2. Tacitus read Ptolemey divide it into Mauritania caesariensis which h h victor persecutionis l. 3. victor Uticensis call maior and Tingitania i i plin. l. 5. c. 1. and 2. Pliny ascribe this division to Caligula Dion to claudius Caesar of who it be surname Casariensis of the mother city Caesarea where he plant a roman colony before call jol the royal seat of juba a man famous for that he first reign over both these mauritania but more famous for his learning whereby he still live in the learned monument of Pliny and other author of much of our african report he in his childhood be lead in triumph at Rome his father k k Caesar Comm. africano l. 5. Oresius l. 6. c. 16. r. volater l. 12. juba the successor of Bechus have before slay himself in the civil war Augustus restore he to his father kingdom to which he leave his son Ptolomey bear of the daughter of Antonius and Cleopatra who Caligula slay and then divide Mauritania into two province whereof this be call as be say caesariensis of the colony of Claudius Caesar that which Procopius l l Procop. Persico and Vandilico l. 4. have write of the original of these maurusij as he term they although in our first book mention here also so may seem to deserve relation when josua or jesus the son of nun or Nane have invade the land of Canaan the people flee into Egypt and there multiply pierce into Africa replenish with people all that coast unto the pillar of Hercules use a semi-Phoenician dialect for all the sea-coast from Sidon to Egypt be ancient call Phoenicia they build the town Tinge in Numidia where they erect two pillar of white stone near a great fountain wherein be engrave in phoenician letter we flee from the face of jesus the thief the son of Nane these be suppose the first inhabitant of Africa and for that cause Antaeus their king which encounter in single combat with Hercules be say to be the son of the earth afterward when the phoenician come hither with Dido they be here receive for kindred sake and permit to build Carthage which after grow so mighty that it subdue and expel the maurusij themselves the roman make the carthaginian and other african tributary and cause the maurusij to inhabit the further part of Africa but in process of time they obtain many victory against the vandal seat themselves in Mauritania till justinian remove they thus far Procopius Paulus diaconus m m pauli diaconi Iustianus record also the same history save that he say the egyptian will not receive they and therefore they pass into Africa the maurusij in the time of justinian be destroy and captive in such multitude that a maurusian slave be value at the price of a sheep the author of this be Solomon a eunuch according to a prophecy which they have among they that one without a beard shall destroy they but captivity can not much empare their happiness who very freedom be misery o o Procop. coelius Rhodig l. 18. b. 38. suidas say that they be bold and fight flee and return upon advantage like as we read of the parthian for they live in small base cottage expose to the summer sun and winter snow sleep except a few of the better sort on the bare ground always wear the same garment howsoever the season differ and that tear and ragged want bread and all other necessary neither grind nor boil that corn they have thus miserable be their body and their soul more for they have neither fear of God nor reverence of man nor respect of pledge nor regard of oath nor peace with any but where fear constrain they they have their woman prophetess which divine by their sacrifice a thing unlawful for their man to attempt of the number of their wife they brag that p p in epistola solomonem the christian which have but one wife may fear the loss of their child they which may have fifty wife need not misdoubt issue and posterity and yet they be by many war bring to small number and a few tribe or family q q leo l. 4. Leo say that after the roman be expel the ancient governor call beni Habdalguad of the family of Magrava repossess these part who be after dipossess by ghamrazen son of Zeijen who posterity reign here almost three hundred and eighty year but they be much vex by the king of Fez and Tunis it be in late time call the kingdom of Telensin or of Tremisen stretch in length from east to west three hundred and eighty mile in breadth not above five and twenty the king can never satisfy the numidian covetise who friendship they have with great cost seek it have two frequent Haven-town Oram and Mersalcabir both take and hold by the spaniard they be take in the time of Ferdinando king of Spain for which cause Abuchemmen the Telensin king be expel by his own subject and Abuzeijen place in his room which he can scarce warm before he be slay by Barbarussa the Turk who conquer this kingdom r r 1515. but Abuchemmen seek to Charles the five for aid by who help he recover his kingdom and pay a tribute to the emperor but Habdulla his successor detain the tribute and submit himself unto Soliman the great Turk Algiers remain to Barbarussa @. 2 of BARBARUSSA of Algiers and the part adjoin this s s monst cosmog lib. 6. Barbarussa or Barbarossa be a mean fellow of base condition who in his youth sell cheese in Spain for his live and by his industry attain to great matter there be t t Knolls pawn 625. of they two brethren bear at Mytilene in Lesbos their mother a Christian their father a renegade Grecian Horucius Barbarussa and this Hariadenus Barbarussa they first steal a Galliot and so commit themselves to sea by piracy under camales a turkish pirate they grow rich and from one galley come to have a navy of their own with which they scour the coast of Barbary at the same time u u surij Comm. in 1534 p. jovius lib. 33. two brethren contend for the kingdom of Algiers one of which request aid of Horucius who so help he against his brother that he help himself to the kingdom by the murder of the king his patron and alley which he do not long enjoy be take and slay of the spaniard and his head send into Spain but Iris brother Hariadenus succeed he become mighty both by sea and land to the great damage both of the More and christian and Soliman move by his fame send for he and make he admiral of all the turkish sea and sea force under who he grow dreadful not to these part of Barbary alone which he subject to the Turk but to those country of Christendom which be wash with the Mediterran even Rome itself quake for fear of a second Hannibal who after so many age shall by sea from Africa avenge the angry ghost of old Carthage in the year 1538. the pope emperor and venetian have with joint force set forth a navy of above two hundred and fifty sail against he but by mutual discord the wont advantage of the turk against the christian they make themselves both sport and spoil to this turkish pirate the sea can no long endure the success of this barbarian but mad to see the christian unchristian madness and unwilling to submit his proud wave to the base thraldom of this base Turk swell with indignation conspire with the neighbour element which pretend equal quarrel for so often darken his light and poison his breath with those hellish smoke and for usurp those thunder which have wont to be the airy privilege of his middle region these both agree in their disagree with tempestuous fury to spoil the spoiler the wind from the Acroceraunian hill and the sea on the dalmatian shore so gird in the turk with their equal unequal siege that twenty thousand of they be captive and shut up in Neptune prison to become food to his family and the new conqueror on every shore make their market of turkish commodity and by wrack testify to the earth that they have wreck themselves on she and their enemy and yet do Barbarussa recover himself by new force and have win rhegium come to Ostia where he ride three day the roman tremble meanwhile and ready to leave saint Peter alone to lock out the turk if they come so much more fortunate be his proceed then of Haly Bassa who in the fight at Lepanto lose his life and navy whereof * * Knolls say forty sink a hundred threescore and one galley and sixty Galliot take pag. 883. Michael isselt come in an. 1571 eighty fall to the sea share and a hundred and thirty sail to don John and his partner the great blow that ever the Turk at sea receive and have the great a a king james in his poem of Lepanto Homer to sing it but i think I feel some Cynthius pull i by the ear and ask if the pirate have rob i of my religion the most proper subject of my discourse true that irreligious crew while they seek to win other thing care not to lose that but this Algiers have be of old and still continue a receptacle of turkish rover can not be pass over especial in these piratical time without some observation be also the gate whereby the turkish force first enter into Barbary b b io. Leo l. 4. John Leo write a little otherwise of Barbaussa and Algiers the moor call this city Gezeir the spaniard Algiers and of old be call Mesgana of that african family which found it it contain c c it have now eighty thousand person as Boterus affirm and by report now exceed about four thousand family the building very sumptuous inn bath-stone and temple very beautiful every occupation have a several place by itself it have adjoin plain very pleasant and fertile one whereof be five and forty mile long and almost thirty broad for many year it be subject to the kingdom of Telensin but hear that Bugia be govern by a king they submit themselves to he pay he a tribute otherwise in manner free then do they build themselves galley and molest with piracy the spanish island of Majorica minorica and jeviza Ferdinando therefore provide a armada against they and build a fort within shot of the town whereupon they request peace and promise tribute but Barbarussa when Ferdinando be dead be send for by the citizen and make captain over all their force he soon after murder a arabian prince which have be create governor of Algiers when Bugia be take by the spaniard and possess himself of the government and there coin money call himself king the neighbour people yield he obedience and tribute this be the beginning of barbarussa greatness and at the most part hereof Leo be present and lodge in his house which have be ambassador from Algiers to Spain from whence he have bring three thousand book write in Arabic and while I be at Tunis I hear that Barbarussa be slay at Telensin and his brother d d this be Hariaden the turkish admiral Cairadin succeed it be tell i also that the emperor Charles the five have send two army to surprise Algiers the first whereof be destroy in the plain the second slay and make slave by Babarussa in the year of the Hegira 922. thus far Leo in the year 1541. e e nic. Villagagnon surii Comm. in 1541. of Charles his african exploit see jovius Etropius caluetus stella nic. Mameranus etc. Charles himself with his imperial navy pass the sea to like both purpose and effect more overcome himself in the patient bear his loss than his enemy who he seek to assail he be move to this expedition by the complaint of his subject against the turkish pirate which under Asanaga barbarussa lieutenant infest all those sea but the tempestuous weather both at land and sea disappoint he and after the loss of many both man and ship be force to return and to make room for his soldier cause his horse their gallant breed notwithstanding to be cast overboard thus do Algiers f f Algiers be describe by G.B. in his ciu. urb ter. still continue a sink of pirate and now say maginus there be in it not many less than five and twenty thousand christian slave which in likelihood at this time be increase Tripoli be also a seat of a turkish viceroy or Beglerbeg and of turkish rover in the kingdom of Telensin be the desert of Angad wherein be store of roe dear and ostrich arabian thief and lion the castle of Izli be sometime store with inhabitant and stately wall since it be inhabit with religious person much reverence by the king of Telensin and the arabian which give free entertainment for three day unto all traveller a little off run a river out of which they water their field which else will yield they no fruit Guagida betwixt two stool have unquiet sit pay tribute both to the king of Telensin and the arabian Ned Roma be build by the roman as the name testify for Ned signify like and like it be if historiographer fail not unto Rome here and at Tebecrit dwell great store of weaver Haresgonl be sometime famous but be destroy by a king and patriarch of Cairaoan it bequeath as it seem the greatness thereof to Telensin which after grow in renown this town give name to this kingdom when Abu Tesfin reign it have in it sixteen thousand family joseph king of Fez besiege it seven year together and almost famish they but he be slay by treason they find victual enough in their enemy camp which they assail and spoil for their relief forty year after abulhesen king of Fez after thirty month siege take it and behead their king here be many and beautiful temple have their mahometan priest and preacher likewise here be five college most sumptuous built by the king of Telensin and Fez curious wrought with work for the arabian muse and student which have their maintenance there their bath and inn I omit a great part of this city be inhabit with jew distinguish by their yellow turban from the other citizen which be very rich in the year of the Hegira 923. be rob and bring to beggary the turk g g gi. bot. ben. be now lord thereof between who and Charles the five who have undertake their protection the city be much impair as also by the war betwixt the seriffe and the Turk Barbarussa subject it Batha be a great city or rather be such now ruin by war not far hence in Leo time keep a famous much esteem for his holiness who in short time grow so rich in horse and other cattle that none in that region be comparable to he he pay nothing nor any of he to the king or to the arabian because they suppose he a saint I be tell by his disciple say Leo that the ten of his corn be eight thousand bushel a year d d a rich eremite he have five hundred horse and mare ten thousand small cattle and two thousand ox beside that he have yearly send he from diverse part of the world of alm and offering between four and five thousand ducat his fame be spread over Asia and Africa his disciple be five hundred which dwell with he and live at his charge to who he enjoin neither penance nor labour but to read ordinary prayer and give they some name of God to observe in their prayer which they be to mumble so many time a day for which cause multitude resort to he to be his disciple which after such instruction he send home again he have a hundred tent some for stranger some for shepherd and other for his family this good and lusty hermit have four wife and many slave and by they many son and daughter gallant attire his child also have wife and child in so much that the whole family of this and his son exceed five hundred he be honour of the arabian and the king of Telensin be afraid of he ay be desirous to know he be entertain of he three day and sup with he every night in secret room where he show i among other thing book of magic and alchemy and will have prove to i that magic be a true science whereby I think he to be a magician because I see he so much honour and yet use neither say nor do but those invocation of God by certain name thus far Leo lib. 4. oran be subject i i oran to Spain take by Peter Navarre 1509. it have ten thousand family the turk in vain assault it an. 2563. their piracy procure this spanish thraldom unto which Mersalcabir a most famous haven be also subject tegdemt k k tegdemt be as the arabian name signify ancient it sometime be famous and abound with man of learning and poet but he which will further be inform of the city of this kingdom let he read leo. the people of Bresch use to paint a black cross on their cheek and another upon the palm of their hand the same be observe of diverse other which yet know not the reason thereof be mahumetan the story say that the goth invade and rule these part proclaim freedom from tribute to all such as will become christian a badge of which christianity be this cross still keep now their religion be lose concern their marriage in these part we read l l Cateches. mystagogic p. g. that the bride be carry not on her foot but in the arm of two young man with her eye close and be marry be in like sort without stir her eye or foot convey to the bridegroom house where she enter first with the right foot in token of prosperity the left foot first touch ground will portend sinister success as proceed from a certain constellation and inevitable destiny with music she be entertain and conduct to the bride-chamber where she sit down as take possession of her house all the other woman stand about she after which she be lead with great pomp by woman to the hall the man accompany the bridegroom to another room the bride be set on a bed cover with a white veil the woman stand by and many gift and present be offer to she two woman be her instructer in the rite and ceremony which she be to observe call magitae to who the bride give the money which be offer the man which offer if they be of near kin may upon request see her face her eye still close neither may she speak but by those magitae be shift and gallant adorn and bring to banquet with the woman they have a dinner and a supper furnish with exceed variety of dish of honey and raisin diverse compound their flesh be not taste before oil be pour on it there be near as many pot boil as guest and much superstition be observe in kill their flesh towards the sun with pronounce certain word or else all be cast on the dunghill the bride be convey to bed may not signify any grief for smart or loss there sustain the next morning before day the husband rise not salute his wife and take a pot for water and a vessel for meat at his return beat upon the door with a stone many time till she then first speak to he and order the say meat and water begin to look to her houshold-charge the magitae present come and congratulate she last night dalliance and desire issue thereof and then cut her hair hang down on her back even with her neck that it shall not hinder her husband embrace the government of these part be as be say turkish the Boglerbog have chief title but the Divano have chief power of judgement and jurisdiction the Corasan or captain of the janissary be in many matter as great as the Beglerbeg the beglorbeg of Algiers and Tunis make their principal profit of their place which they hold three year have first buy they at a dear rate by their piracy which with joint consent they exercise on these sea all in manner be fish that come to net if they meet they convenient notwithstanding any league or peace hold with the grand signior they also give entertainment to such pirate of other place as resort to they either to sell their ill-gotten good or to join their strength with they as of late m m pirate of these two pirate there be a special treatise set forth 1609. dansker and warde have be famous in this infamy the first after his service with they and for they receive his reward by they sudden kill at Tunis where he be know notwithstanding his disguise himself with purpose to have surprise their fleet the other a shame to our country of which he be grow so rich by his piracy that he show at one time to the author of these report John pountesse a bag of jewel contain almost half a bushel beside his other purchase and at last that the end may manifest the wickedness of these proceed n n many english christian unworthy either of these name turn from that faith which they never have but in profession to profess themselves for hell Turkish he become a and renegado from his faith and soon after as some have report for other say he be still alive and captain of the turk galley die at Tunis leave his good for his goodness he have leave before unto the turk his body unto a foreign sepulchre and his soul let pirate and robber if they think they have any soul say whither Algiers be by Barbarussa subject to the Turk about the year 1534. Tunis an. 1574. three and twenty year after that Tripoli in Barbary another cage of like bird and seat of a Boglerbeg be take from the knight of Malta by Sinan Bassa these kingdom the Turk have in Africa beside the great kingdom of Egypt and what he have take from Prester John in Egypt o o Knolls be say to be a hundred thousand Timariot or horseman fee which for that tenure of their land without any charge to the great Turk be to serve where it please he to employ they in this kingdom of Algiers be forty thousand chap. x. of the kingdom of Fez part of Mauritania Tingitana @. i. of the poetical and historical antiquity and part of Temesma MAuritania Tingitana so call of tingis now Tanger at the mouth of the straits be by Ptolemey a a ptol. l 4. c. 8. bound on the west with the western and atlantike on the north with the Mediterran sea on the east with the river b b Pliny call this river Maluana Muluia or malua which divide it from Casariensis on the south with the inner nation of Libya Niger c c dom. nig. aph. com. 1. say it be after call Setinensis of the city setia more true sitiphensis of Sitiphis which Procopius say be the mother city of Tingitana in this province be now the famous kingdom of Fez and Morocco d d gi. bot. ben. the ancient inhabitant beside the maurusij of which we have speak be e e plin. l. 5. c. 2 the Massaessuli autololes Bannurri and the gaetulian which live here and in other part of Africa as the tartar do in Asia and the arabian in Africa remove their dwelling if tent-wandring may be so call as their pasture fail they so Silius write of they f f Silius lib. 1 House they have none but wander still in wane they cart their household-god about the plain the westerly point of Mauritania pomponius begin at the promontory call of their store of vine ampelusia g g Pompon Mela lib. 1. cap. 5. Olivarii annot. now cabo de Cantero as olivarius affirm in it be a cave sacred to Hercules and beyond the same tingi suppose to be build by Antaeus for proof whereof they show his target make of a elephant hide too huge and unwieldy for any man of late time and hold in great veneration next to this tingi which give name to the country after by Claudius Caesar who send a colony thither call traducta julia be a high mountain call abyla to which on the spanish coast be oppose Calpe which two hill bear the name of Hercules pillar Hercules himself if we believe fabulous antiquity make there a passage to the ocean and Mediterran sea for mutual view and entertainment they be now call Seuta on that side and Gibraltar on this side a little hence be julia Constantia a colony of Augustus and lixus a colony of Claudius in this h h Natal come Mythol l. 7. c. 2. be Antaeus his palace and his combat with Hercules and the garden of the hesperide which some as be say place near Bernice Antaeus if his legend be true be i i some say threescore and ten and that Sertorius find he in his sepulchre of that length I can easy believe both alike threescore and four cubit long a cruel and inhospitall tyrant who in his encounter with Hercules be three time hurl dead to the earth and so many time by his mother the earth revive which Hercules perceive hold he up in the air till he have strangle he whereby they intend that the sun revive the earth signify by Antaeus and Hercules but with his excessive heat do kill it the hesperides be the daughter of Hesperus brother of Atlas Aegle Arethusa Hespertusa in their garden grow those golden apple the dowry of juno to jupiter keep by a dragon engender of Typhon and echidnae which have a hundred head and many voice attend by the priest of the hesperide these Hercules fetch away this be the poetical tale the truth whereof be say to be that the daughter of Atlas be by pirate and thief send from Busiris king of Egypt steal and redeem by Hercules who slay those thief these be bear to Atlas of Hesperia daughter of Hesperus his brother call therefore Atlantides and Hesperides six in number Atlas have a excellent kind of sheep with yellow fleece which for this exploit he bestow on Hercules and teach he also the knowledge of astronomy in regard of which science Atlas be say to have bear up the heaven with his shoulder and Hercules to have undertake his burden whereas Natalis k k lib. 7. cap. 7. come place these garden with Pliny near to lixus and yet nigh to Meroe and the red sea betwixt which place be such a world of distance it argue how great error great scholar may fall into by want of that so-much-neglected study of geography without which history that delectable study be sick of a half-dead palsy one cause that have move i to join in my study and in this work the history of time l l chronology and Geographie be the two eye of history Chytraeus with her manifold change and chance and of place together beside the altar of Hercules and wild olive there remain nothing in Pliny day of that hesperian garden Niger m m dom. Niger com. aph. 1. find there a tree mallow twenty foot high and above a fathom about of mount Atlas they tell wonderful tale of the self-fertility thereof the inhabitant never see by day the desart-like silence the fire therein shine by night the music and misrule of the aegypane and satyr and the labour of Hercules and Perseus there John Leo shall better acquaint we with the truth than those fable of credulous antiquity out of he therefore and other late writer we will take view of the present face of Africa there be little that can be say of their ancient rite more than be already observe the roman bring hither their language and religion the vandal under gensericus pass out of Spain make conquest of all in manner which the roman have in Africa of who cruelty victor n n vict. Uticensis persecutionis vand. Uticensis a eyewitness have write three book the manifold battle and alteration of estate betwixt they the roman maurusian and other Procopius o o Procop. vand. have diligent record it will be harsh and tedious here to relate the soil say Mela be more noble than the people of the miraculous fertility whereof Dionysius p p Dion halicar lib. 1. muust cousin l. 6. Halicarnasseus Munster Boemus and other have write I know not how true that their corn yield a hundred fold increase and in some place a hundred and fifty that there be see vine as great as two man can fathom and grape-cluster a cubit long etc. it be q q arnoldi think that christian religion be here preach in the apostle time leave those thing of more age and uncertainty we will come now to the kingdom of Fez and Morocco which have be of saracenicall erection in this province of Tingitana r r io. Leo lib. 3. gi. bot. ben. maginus that of Fez stretch from Azamor to Tanger and from the atlantike ocean to Muluia this river be the eastern border on the north it be wash with the sea on the south be the kingdom of Morocco on the west the river Ommirabih the river subu Luccus and other water it therein be number seven province Temesna the territory of Fez Azgar elhabet or Habat Errif garet and chaus or Elchauz every of which say Leo have in old time a several governor neither be the city of Fez the royal seat but be build by a schismatical rebel in who family the government continue 150. year and then the marin family prevail give it first the title of a kingdom settle their abode and strength therein Temesna begin at Ommirabih thence stretch eastward to buragrag between Atlas and the ocean it be a plain country eighty mile in length contain in it forty great town beside three hundred castle in the year of the Hegira 323. Chemim the son of Menol a heremitical preacher persuade they to pay no tribute nor yield subjection to Fez because the lord thereof be unjust he bear himself for a prophet in small time gate into his hand the spiritual and temporal sword hold the same by force and arm but after that joseph have build Morocco he seek by catholic doctor of the Mahometan religion to reduce they from their heresy but they slay they and with a army of fifty thousand march towards Morocco to expel thence the house of Luntuna but by this mean bring destruction to themselves joseph get the better and spoil their country ten month together with great cruelty it be think that a million of people by famine sword rock and river be consume and Temesna be leave to be inhabit of wolf lion and civit-cat a hundred and fifty year at which time king Mansor give the possession of Temesna to certain arabian who fifty year after be expel by the luntune family recover the kingdom from the house of Mansor and after the marin family prevail give it to the people of Zenete and Haora in meed of their service which they have do to the marin against the king and patriarch of Morocco from which time they have enjoy the same almost two hundred year anfa be a town of great trade with the english and portugal and by these utter raze and so the arabian serve the next city Mansora Nuchaila sometime famous for their plenty of corn of which it be record that they will give a camel burden for a pair of shoe have now but a few bone leave of her carcase namely a piece of the wall and one high steeple where the arabian after they have end their tilth lay up their instrument of husbandry none dare to steal his neighbour tool in reverence of a saint of they there bury rebat be a town furnish with college and temple the model of Morocco at sella be king Mansor bury where he have build a stately hospital and palace a beautiful temple and a hall of marble cut in mosaic work with glass-window of diverse colour wherein he and his posterity be bury I see say Leo the sepulchre and copy out the epitaph of thirty of they Madur Auvan by the ruin testify she sometime proud building hospital inn and temple in Thagia be visit the sepulchre of a holy man which live in the time of habdul Mumen the Calif or Patriarch who wrought great miracle against the lion wherewith the town be much molest ettedle a Mahometan doctor write a legend of his miracle which Leo say he have read and suppose that they be do either by natural or devilish magic the Fessans after their easter yearly resort to his tomb with such number of man woman and child and their tent that they seem a army it stand from Fez a hundred and twenty mile so that their go and return in this pilgrimage last fifteen day my father carry i yearly thither when I be a child and since I have be there many time by reason of many vow which I make be in danger of lion where Zarfa stand the arabian now m m sedge troia sow corn the territory of Fez have on the west the river Buragard the east Inaven on the north subu and Atlas on the south sella be build by the roman sack by the goth subject since to Fez the building be of mosaic work support with marble pillar even the shop be under fair and large porch and there be arch to part occupation all the temple be beautiful in this town the genoese english Fleming and venetian use to trade the spaniard take it in the 670 of the but lose it again within ten day Fanzara be destroy by Sahid who with certain arabian besiege Fez seven year together and destroy all the village in the country about Mahmora be make famous by the slaughter of the portugal who blood die the sea three day together blush to see the barbarous barbarian spill so much christian blood Leo be there present and number the slay christian at ten thousand beside the loss of their ship and ordnance whereof the moor take up four hundred great brass piece out of the sea in the year of the Heg. 921. HONDIUS his map of the kingdom of Fez FESSAE regnum @. 2 of the city of Fez as it be in leo day and the custom of the inhabitant the city Fez or Fez be build in the time of aron the caliph in the 185. year of the Hegira or Mahumetical computation it have this a a Fez signify gold in Arabic and so do Phaz in hebrew leo Sanut etc. golden title because on the first day of the foundation there be find some quantity of Gold Gasper Varerius and Aldrete be of opinion that the river phut so call of the son of cham before mention be this river of Fez by the arabian thus alter and that this river give name to the region and the city which opinion be also recite by leo. the founder be name idris Aaron near kinsman to who the caliphaship be more due for he be nephew of Hali Mahomet cousin who marry b b elsewhere call fatima falerna daughter of Mahumet and therefore both by father and mother of that kindred whereas aron be but in the half-blood be nephew to habbus the uncle of Mahumet howbeit both these family be deprive of the Caliphate and aron by deceit c c of this read our three book the difference seem to be more in name then truth usurp for Aaron grandfather feign himself willing to transfer that dignity to Hali and cause the house of Umene to lose it and Habdulla Seffec become the first caliph who persecute the house of hals open chase some into Asia and some into India but one of they remain in Elmadina of who because he be old and religious he have no great fear his two son grow in such favour with the people that they be force to flee and one be take and strangle the other which be this idris escape into Mauritania where he grow in such reputation that in short time he get both sword into his hand and dwell in the hill Zaron thirty mile from Fez and all Mauritania pay he tribute he die without issue only he leave his slave with child she be a Goth become mahometan and have a son which after his father be call idris he succeed in the principality and be bring up under the discipline of a valiant captain name Rasid and begin to show great prowess at fifteen year he afterward increase in power build on the east side of the river a small city of three thousand family after his death one of his son build another city on the west side both which city so increase that there be small distance between they and a hundred and eighty year after there arise civil war betwixt those two city which continue a hundred year and as Aesop kite serve the mouse and Frog so joseph of the luntune family apprehend this advantage take both their lord and slay they and thirty thousand of the citizen he break down the wall which part the two city and cause many bridge to be make and bring they both to be one city which he divide into twelve ward the sweet situation of Fez the city be now or at least in leos time be both great and strong it seem that nature and art have play the wanton and have bring forth this city the fruit of their dalliance or else they seem corrival both by all kind office seek to win her love so do the earth seem to dance in little hillock and pretty valley diversify the soil so do the river disperse itself into manifold channel no soon enter the city but it be divide into two arm wherewith it embrace this lovely nymph and these subdivide as it be into many finger in variety of watercourse insinuate itself unto every street and member thereof and not content thus in public to testify affection find mean of secret intelligence with his love by conduit-pipe close visit every temple college inn hospital the special chamber of his spouse yea and almost every private house from whence with a officious service he carry the filth that may offend either sight or send of his bride which still enjoy he woo and ever woo enjoy only in hot season he have a cold suit for the river be dry but then he have six hundred fountain to speak for he in his absence neither be art behind in his proffer courtesy but still present she with mosaic work as chain and jewel to adorn she with fine brick and stone frame into most artificial fabric both lovely for delight and stately for admiration the roof of their house be adorn with gold azure and other excellent colour which be make flat for the inhabitant use and pleasure who house be rich furnish every chamber with a press curious paint and varnish and who can tell the exquisiteness of the portal pillar cistern and other part of this city furniture which if they be not now so excellent as when Leo live here yet it be worth the sight to look upon it with his eye as than it flourish before the court be remove thence to Morocco or the devour belly of time and war have impair her beauty once let the temple therein a while detain your eye whereof there be in Fez together with small chapel or mosque about seven hundred fifty of which great and fair adorn with marble pillar and other ornament the chapter thereof wrought with mosaic and carve work every one have his fountain of marble or other stone not know in Italy the floor be cover with mat close join and so be the wall a man height line therewith every temple have his steeple after the mahometan manner whereon they who office it be ascend and call the people at the appoint hour to prayer there be but one priest thereunto who say their service there and have charge of the revenue of his church take account thereof to bestow it on the minister of the say temple namely those which keep the lamp light in the night the porter and they which cry in the nighttime to call they to church for he which cry in the daytime be only free from ten and other payment otherwise have no salary or stipend there be one principal and if we may so term it cathedral church call the temple of caruven so great that it contain in a a this compass be to be understand of all the building circuit about a mile and half it have one and thirty gate great and high the roof be a hundred and fifty tuscan b b Braccia di Toscania yard long and little less than eighty broad the steeple be exceed high the roof hereof be support with eight and thirty arch in length and twenty in breadth roundabout be certain porch on the east west and north every one in length forty yard and in breadth thirty under which porch or gallery be magazine or score-house wherein be keep lamp oil mat and other necessary every night be light nine hundred lamp for every arch have his lamp especial that row of arch which extend through the mid-quire which alone have a hundred and fifty lamp in which rank be some great light make of brass every of which have socket for one thousand five hundred lamp and these be bell c c bell be first find and found 870. by Vrsus duke of Venice Plon^ and Vagetii of certain city of christian conquer by Fessan king about the wall of the say temple within be pulpit of diverse sort wherein mnay learned master read to the people such thing as pertain to their faith and spiritual Law they begin a little after break of day and end at d d one hour of the day in summer they read not but after four and twenty hour or sunset and continue till a hour and half within night they teach as well moral philosophy as the law of Mahomet private man read the summer-lecture only great clerk may read the other which have therefore a large stipend and book and candle be give they the priest of this temple be tie to nothing but his Mumpsimus or service also he take charge of the money and good which be offer in the temple of orphan and dispense the revenue that be leave for the poor every holiday he deal to the poor of the city money and corn according as their necessity be more or less the treasurer of this church be allow a ducat a day he have under he eight notary each of which have six ducat a month other six clerk gather the rent of house and shop which belong to the church retain the twenty part thereof for their wage moreover there be twenty bailiff of the husbandry that oversee the labourer not far from the city be twenty Lyme-kilns and as many Brick-Kiln serve for the reparation of the temple and the house thereto belong the revenue of the temple be * * this may be reckon as old rent with we which now may be exceed improve for Leo write this an. 1526. two hundred ducat a day the better half be lay out on the premise and if any temple of the city or Moschee be without revenue they be hence furnish with many thing that which remain go to the common good of the city in the city be two principal and most stately college of scholar adorn with Mosaikes and carve work pave with marble and stone of Majorica in each of they be many chamber in some college be a hundred in some more and in some less they be all build by diverse king of the marin family one be most beautiful found by king Abu Henon it be adorn with a goodly fountain of marble and a stream continual run there be three cloister or gallery of incredible beauty support with eight square pillar of diverse colour the arch adorn with mosaic of gold and fine azure the roof be of carve work about the wall be inscription in verse express the year of the foundation and praise of the founder the gate of the college be of brass fair wrought and the door of the chamber carve in the great hall where they say their prayer be a pulpit that have nine stair to it all of ivory and ebony this college cost the founder 480000. ducat all the other college in Fez hold some resemblance with this and in every of they be reader or professor in diverse science prohibit by the founder in old time the student be wont to have their diet and raiment allow for seven year but now they be allow only their chamber for the war * * Bellona enemy to the muse of Sahid consume their possession so that now there remain but little wherewith they maintain their reader and of they some have two hundred ducat some a hundred yearly and some less and there abide in the say college only a few stranger maintain by the alm of the citizen when they will read one of the auditor read a text and the reader than read his comment and bring some exposition of his own and explain the difficulty and sometime in his presence the student dispute of that argument which he handle there be many hospital in Fez not inferior in building to the college aforesaid in they stranger be entertain three day at the common charge but in the time of sahid war the king sell their revenue now only learned man and gentleman receive entertainment and poor person relief there be another hospital for disease stranger which have their diet but no physic allow they here also madman be provide for in this hospital Leo in his youth have be a notary there be in Fez a hundred bathstove well build with four hall in each and certain gallery without in which they put off their clothes the most part of they pertain to the temple and college yield they a great rent they have a yearly festival wherein all the servant of the bath with trumpet and great solemnity go forth of the town and gather a wild onion which they put in a brazen vessel and bring it solemn to the hothouse door and there hang it up in token of good luck this Leo think to be some sacrifice observe by the ancient moor yet remain every african town have sometime their peculiar feast which the christian abolish inn here be almost two hundred build three story high and have a hundred and twenty chamber a piece with gallery afore all the door but here be no provision of bed or board for stranger the innkeeper of Fez in Leo day be all of one family call Elchena attire like woman shave their beard become womanish in their speech yea degenerate even to the wheel and spindle they be so * * infamous innkeeper odious except to base villain that resort thither that the better sort of people will not speak to they and may not enter the temple burse or bath nor into those inn next the great temple where merchant be entertain there be thousand of mill all almost pertain to the temple and college revenue each trade in Fez have a peculiar place allot thereto the principal whereof be next the great temple as scrivener bookseller etc. every trade by themselves the christian captive rest only upon friday and eight other day in the year festival to the moor there be six hundred fountain wall about the water whereof be convey by conduit to the temple or other place because the river be sometime dry they have in Fez a judge for criminal cause and another for question of religion a three that deal in matrimonial case from these there lie a appeal to the high advocate the judge of Mahomet law in matter of conscience have no allowance for the same their marriage be thus when the father of the maid have espouse she to her a a the man never see his bride before marriage but send his mother or some other woman to see she and upon that report agree with the father lover they go with their friend to church and have with they two notary which draw the covenant agree betwixt they into write the father bestow a dowry or portion of money apparel and such like seldom of land when the bridegroom fetch she home she be set in a cabinet cover with silk and carry by porter accompany with her kinsfolk and much minstrelsy and the Bridegroom friend go before with torch and her kinsman after towards the great church then he haste home expect his bride in his chamber who her father brother and uncle bring and deliver to his mother and he set his foot on she shue the chamber door at which a woman stand and receive of he a napkin stain which she show to the assembly as a testimony of the bride virginity but if she be not find a maid she be return to he friend with shame and the guest go home without their feast they hold great feast also at the circumcision of their male-child which be the seven day after they be bear the barber or circumciser be present with gift of all the invite guest then follow mirth and jollity they use dance but the woman apart by themselves without man there be a remainder of holiday institute by the christian which themselves understand not on Christmas even they eat a salad make of diverse herb and seethe all kind of pulse which they feed upon on newyear day the child go with mask on their face to the house of gentleman and have fruit give they for sing certain song on the feast of saint John Baptist they use to make bonfire they make a feast call Dentista when their child tooth begin to grow unto other child when a man die the woman put on sackcloth and defile their face with dirt they call to they those wicked man in woman attire which have foursquare drum to the sound whereof they sing mournful ditty in praise of the dead party at the end of every verse the woman utter most hideous shriek and out-cry tear their hair and beat their breast and cheek till they be all imbrue with blood and thus they continue seven day and then intermit their mourn forty day after which space they resume the same for three day as before but the better sort behave themselves more modest at this time all the widow friend come about she to comfort she and send her diverse kind of meat for in the mourning-house they may dress no meat at all till the dead be carry out the woman which lose her father brother or husband never go forth with the funeral at some festival the youth of one street will fight with club against the boy of another street and sometime betake they to other weapon and kill one another sometime they use these bloody fray without the city the officer force they to better order there be many poet which pen amorous sonnet and on Mahomet birthday make verse in his commendation resort early to the palace and there ascend the tribunal read their verse to the people and he who verse be best be pronounce that year prince of poet the marin king on that day use to entertain the learned man and to reward the best poet with a hundred ducat a horse a woman-slave and the king robe which he wear that day in Fez be two hundred grammar school build like great hals every day they learn one lesson of the Alcoran they read and write not in book but in great b b these table be board like Horn-book when one lesson be learn that be wipe out and another write and so throughout the Alcoran till all be learned table in seven year they learn the whole Alcoran by heart and then the father invite his son schoolfellow to a banquet and his son ride through the street in costly apparel both which be lend by the governor the other boy ride and sing song in praise of God and Mahumet on Mahomet birthday every boy must carry a torch to school curious wrought some weigh thirty pound which they light before day and let they burn till sunrising sing all the while the praise of Mahumet the schoolmaster have the remnant of the wax which sometime they sell for a hundred ducat they be free school ancient build in the school and also in the college they have two day of recreation every week wherein they neither teach nor study @. 3 of their diviner and sect and other part of the fezan Territorie there be three kind of fortune-teller or diviner one of which use Geomantical figure other pour a drop of oil into a glass of water which become clear as a Seeing-glass in which they say they see strange sight rank of devil like army some travel some pass over a river etc. when the divine seethe they quiet he demand such question of they as he will and the devil with gesture return answer the three sort be women-witche which make the people believe that they be acquaint with devil of diverse sort red white black and when they will tell any man fortune they perfume themselves with certain odour whereby as they say the devil enter into they and their voice be present alter as if the devil speak within they and then they that come to inquire ask their question and so have leave their present for the devil depart these a a a female filthiness woman use unlawful lust between themselves in mutual filthiness and if fair woman come to they they will demand the devil fee that they may have such deal with they yea some addict themselves to these abominable practice will feign themselves sick and send to one of these witch which will affirm that she be possess with a devil and can be cure except she become one of their society the foolish husband believe consent and make a sumptuous feast at her devilish admission other will conjure this devil with a cudgel out of their wife other feign themselves to be possess with a devil will deceive the witch as they have deceive their wife there be exorcist or diviner call Muhazzimi which cast out devil or if they can they excuse themselves and say it be a airy spirit they write character and frame circle on a ash-heap or some other place then they make certain sign on the hand or forehead of the possess party and perfume he after a strange manner then they make their enchantment and demand of the spirit which way he enter what he be and his name and then command he to come forth other there be that work by a cabalistical rule call Zairagia and be very hard for he that do this must be a perfect ginger and cabalist myself it be Leo report have see a whole day spend in describe one figure only it be too tedious here to express the manner howbeit Mahomet law forbid all divination and therefore the mahometan inquisitor imprison the professor thereof there be also in Fez some learned man which give themselves the surname of wiseman and moral philosopher which observe law not prescribe by Mahumet some account they catholic other not but the vulgar hold they for saint the law forbid lovesong which they say may be use they have many rule and order all which have their defender and doctor this sect spring up fourscore year after Mahumet the first author thereof be Elhesen Ibun Abilhasen who give rule to his disciple but leave nothing in writing about a hundred year after come Elharit Ibnu ese from Bagadet who leave volume of write unto his disciple but by the lawyer be condemn fourscore year after under another famous professor that law revive who have many disciple and preach open but by the patriarch and lawyer they be all condemn to lose their head the giddy receptacle of such fantastical devotion but he obtain leave of their chaliph or patriarch that he may try his assertion by disputation with the lawyer who he put to silence and therefore the sentence be revoke and many college build for his follower a hundred year after Malicsach the Turk destroy all the maintainer thereof some fly into cairo some into Arabia not long after Elgazzuli a learned man compound the controversy so reconcile these and the lawyer that the one shall be call conserver the other reformer of the Law after the tartar have sack Bagdat in the year of the Hegeira 656. these sectary swarm all over Asia and Africa they will admit none into their society but such as be learn and can defend their opinion but now they admit all affirm b b Anabaptistical fancy in Fez learning to be needless for the holy teach they that have a clean heart therefore they addict themselves to nothing but pleasure feast and sing sometime they will rend their garment say they be then ravish with a fit of divine love I think rather superfluity of belly-cheer be the cause for one of they will eat as much as will serve three or else it be through wicked lust for sometime one of the principal with all his disciple be invite to some marriage-feast at the beginning whereof they will rehearse their devout orison and song but after they be rise from table the elder begin a dance and tear their garment and if through immoderate drink any catch a fall one of the youth present take he up and wanton kiss he whereupon arise the proverb the hermit banquet signify that the scholar become his master minion for none of they may marry and they be call hermit among these sect in Fez be some rule esteem heretical of both sort of doctor some hold that a man by good work fast and abstinence may attain to the nature of a angel the understanding and heart be thereby so purify say they that a man can sin though he will but to this height be ascend by fifty step of discipline and though they fall into sin before they come into the fifty degree yet will not God impute it they use strange and incredible fast in the beginning but after take all the pleasure of the World they have a severe form of live set down in four book by a by a certain learned man call Essebraver de schravard in Corasan likewise another of their author call ibnul Farid write all his learning in witty verse full of allegory seem to treat of Loue wherefore one Elfargano comment on the same and thence gather the rule and the degree aforesaid in three hundred year none have write more elegant verse which therefore they use in all their banquet they hold that the heaven element planet and star be one God and that no religion be erroneous because every one take that which he worship for God they think that all knowledge of God be contain in one man call Elcorb elect by God and wise as he forty among they be call Elauted which signify block of these be elcoth or Elcorb elect when the former be dead threescore and ten elector make the choice there be seven hundred threescore and five other out of who those threescore and ten elector be choose the rule of their order bind they to range unknown through the world either in manner of fool or of great sinner or of the vile man that be thus some wicked person of they go up and down naked shameful show their shame and like brute beast will sometime have carnal deal with woman in the open street repute nevertheless by the common people for saint c c l. 3. c. 7. as we have show elsewhere there be another sort call cabalist which fast strange eat not the flesh of any live creature but have certain meat and habit appoint for every hour of the day and of the night and certain set prayer according to the day and month strict observe the number of they and carry square table with character and number engrave in they they say that good spirit appear to they and talk with they instruct they in the knowledge of all thing there be among they a famous doctor call boni which compose their rule and order who book I have see seem more to savour of magic than the cabal their notable work be eight the first call demonstration of light contain fast and prayer the second their square table the three fourscore and nineteen virtue in the name of God contain etc. they have another rule among these sect call Sunab the rule of hermit the professor whereof inhabit wood and solitary place without any other sustenance than those desert afford none can describe their life because they be estrange from all human society he that will see more of these thing let he read the book of one Elefacni who write at large of the mahometan sect whereof be threescore and twelve principal each maintain his own for truth and the way to salvation two be most predominant in these day that of Leshari in Africa Egypt Syria Arabia and Turkey and the other of Imamia in Persia and Corasan more late broach although I have speak before of the saracen sect yet can I not but follow Leo in his report of they here as for those d d gold-finder and alchemist conjurer which by art magic profess to find gold which indeed lose gold to find it and the alchemist which seek to turn other metal into gold turn their gold into other metal and the book that both these have of their science likewise the snake-charmer and other base people I pass over in the suburb of Fez be a hundred and fifty cave hew out of excellent marble the least of which will hold a thousand measure of corn this be the sink of Fez where every one may be a vintner and a bawd another suburb have two hundred family of leper which be there provide for and all of that quality force to keep there in new Fez the jew have a street wherein they have their house shop and synagogue and be marvellous increase since they be drive out of Spain they be goldsmith for the mahometans may not be of that trade a note for usurer because they say it be usury to sell thing make of gold or silver for more than their weight which yet be permit to the jew they live in exceed contempt not be permit to wear shoe but in stead thereof use sock make of rush they wear a black turban and if any will wear a cap he must fasten a red cloth thereunto they pay to the king of Fez monthly in Leo time one thousand and four hundred ducat the mahometan temporal lord be not by their law to hold any other revenue then of every subject which possess a hundred ducat two and a half for tribute and of corn the ten measure yearly yea this be to be pay into the patriarch or calif hand who shall bestow that which remain over and above the prince necessity on the common profit as for the poor and maintenance of war but now the prince have tyrannize further especial in Africa where they have not leave the people sufficient for their needment and therefore courtier be odious no less than the publican sometime among the jew no man of credit vouchsafe to invite they to their table or receive gift from they esteem all their good theft and bribery nor may any mahometan prince wear a diadem which yet it seem be now break in Gualili a town of mount Zarhon be idris of who before be speak bury all Barbary religious visit his sepulchre Pharaoh be the name of a town by the vulgar suppose the work of Pharaoh which fond conceit grow from a book entitle the book of the word of Mahomet take out of a author call Elealbi which say with Mahomet testimony that there be four king which rule all the world two faithful and two unfaithful the two former Solomon and Alexander Magnus the two late Nimrod and Pharaoh the latin inscription there see show it be the work of the roman Tame lion in Piatra Rossa a town by the lion be so tame that they will gather up bone in the street the people not fear they the like lion be in guraigura where one may drive they away with a staff at Agla the lion be so fearful that they will flee at the voice of a child whence a coward braggart be proverbial call a lion of Agla shame be the name of a castle so call of their shameful covetousness which when they once request the king then entertain among they to change he consent but the next morning when they have bring he vessel of milk half fill up with water hope the king will not perceive it he say that none can alter nature and so leave they and their name to they @. 4 of the five other province of this kingdom and some late observation we have now pass two province of the kingdom of Fez the three be name azgar which have the river buragrag on the west Bunasar on the south the ocean on the north and eastward the mountain here stand Caesar Elcabir which king Mansor give to a poor fisher who have give he kind entertainment in his cottage one night when he have lose his company in hunt in it be many temple one college of student and a stately hospital habat the four province or shire of this kingdom be next hereunto and contain almost a hundred mile in length and fourscore in breadth ezaggen a town of Fez be permit by a ancient privilege of the king of Fez to drink wine not withstand Mahomet prohibition Arzilla say Leo be take by the english than worshipper of Idol about nine hundred year after Christ the religion I think deceive he he add that the town remain without habitation thirty year and then one of the mahometan patriarch of Cordova than lord of Mauritania re-edify it of the act of the english be not unworthy the rehearse m m t. Walsingham hist hen. c. 5. that seut or Ceuta there write be take by the portugal through the assistance of english merchant 1415. julian the earl of Seut bring the moor first into Spain in the year of the Hegesra 92. in it be many temple college and learned man Errif begin at the strait of Gibraltar and stretch eastward to the river nocer a 140. mile the inhabitant be valiant but be excessive drinker mezemme and bedis or velles de Gumera be chief town in it on mount beni jerso be build a fair college and the mahometan law public teach therein the inhabitant therefore free from all exaction a tyrant destroy this college and slay the learned man the book therein be value worth four thousand ducat this be 1509. in mount beni Guazeval be a hole that perpetual cast up fire wood cast in be sudden consume to ash some think it hel-mouth in mount beni Mesgalda be maintain many mahometan doctor and student which will persuade the people to drink no wine which themselves will not abstain from garet the six shire of this kingdom lie between the river Melulo and Muluia the seven be Chauz repute the three part of the kingdom between the river Zha and Guruigara herein stand Tezza adorn with college temple and palace a little river spring out of Atlas run through the chief temple which be great than that at Fez there be three college and many bath and hospital each trade dwell by themselves as at Fez I be acquaint say Leo with a age sire in this city repute a saint and enrich exceed with the people offering from Fez do the people resort to visit he with their offering which be fifty mile he seem to i to be a deceiver in mount beni jesseten be many iron mine and the woman in great bravery wear iron ring on their finger and ear Ham Lisnan be build by the african and borrow the name from the fountain of a idol who temple be near the town to which at certain time in the year resort man and woman in the night where after sacrifice the candle be put out and each man lie with the woman he first touch those woman be forbid to lie with any other for a year after the child beget in this adultery be bring up by priest of the temple the moor destroy this holy-stew and the town not leave any mention thereof in mount Centopozzi be ancient building and near thereto a spacious hole or dry pit with many room therein they let man down into the same by rope with light which if they go out they perish in the pit therein be many bat which strike out their light in the mountain of Ziz there be serpent so tame that at dinner time they will come like dog and cat and gather up the crumb not offer to hurt any thus much of the kingdom of Fez out of Leo a learned citizen of Fez and great traveller both in the place and author of Africa who Ortelius maginus Boterus follow commend by a a bodiu method cap. 4. ant. Poss hist aoparat lib. 16. ser. 7. cap. 2. and other as the most exact writer of those part and translate into english by master Poris from who if I swerve in diverse thing impute it to the italian copy of ramusius which differ not a little especial in these thing I have here set down from the english I think good here also to add out of other some such custom and rite as they observe in Fez and other part of this kingdom b b history of Barbary ro. c. their circumcision be use in their private house woman may not enter the Moschee for their often uncleanness and because Eve first sin the eight day after a child be bear the parent send for a talby or priest and some old man and woman where after a few prayer say the woman wash the child all over with water and give the name make a banquet but sometime the circumcision be defer diverse year after this ceremony as the father think their fast they observe very strict not so much as taste water till the star appear yea diverse have be see by their rigour in this superstition to faint and some to die a certain Moor in the time of their lent which continue thirty day in the company of a english gentleman be thirsty with heat and travel go to a conduit in Morocco where the same religion be profess as in Fez and there drink be so revile of the people that in a desperate anguish he slay himself with his dagger yet do their law allow a exchange some day of this lent with other day in the year follow if travel then hinder their feast and fast be at the same time and in the same manner that the turk observe of which be before speak their easter they call Rumedan their Whitsuntide Lidlaber their Michaelmas Lashour their Candlemas Lidshemaw if it be lawful thus to parallel those vain superstition with christian observation in this last feast which seem to be the same which Leo call Mahomet birthday every one must have a candle for himself and for every son in his house the king have that day candle carry to he some like maypole other like castle six or eight man carry one of they so artificial compose that some be in make six month that night the king do hear all the law read the like be do in all other church the talby that can read all their law in a night be hold insufficient for his place they go say my author six time in four and twenty hour which be once often than be write of the turk except on their sabbath to their prayer first wash themselves as they do also after the office of nature and after company with their wife think thereby to be wash from their sin their time of prayer be two hour before day the first when the Monden or sexton cry in the steeple as you may read in our turkish relation and then may no man touch his wife but prepare himself to pray with wash or other devotion either in his own house or at church after their public prayer the talby sit down and spend half a hour in resolve the doubt of such as shall move any question in matter of their Law the second time of prayer be two hour after when it be day the three at noon the four at four of the clock in the afternoon the five at the twilight the last two hour after in the first of these they pray for the day in the second they give thanks for it in the three time they give thanks for that it be half pass in the four they desire the sun may well set on they at twilight they give thanks after their daily labour the last time they desire a good night they think it unseemly to eat meat with their left hand and hold it unclean and do all with their right hand their sabbath or Friday be not exempt from work only they be then more devout in go to church their church be not so fair general as in Christendom nor have seat in they ornament or bell only the floor be mat they be also poor for the most part as be their church man their liturgy be very short not so long as the and creed other set form they have not but every one pray after his own pleasure although the Moor may have four wife and as many concubine as he can purchase yet few marry four because the wife friend will have a sufficient bill of dowry for her maintenance which none but rich man can perform and again the wife challenge his night company and that in course if any be neglect she complain to the magistrate and he force the husband to his duty or else to send she home with her dower and a bill of divorce the concubine be embrace with more steal pleasure that bill of dower hold the husband in awe which else will make a slave of his wife or still change for young flesh the bride be beside before her husband see she and if he find she not a virgin he may turn she home and keep her portion by Law for their funeral rite when one be dead they present wash he and speedy put he into ground the heat so require and after that the woman at convenient time have a custom to meet and make memorial of their decease friend with remembrance of their virtue which they think cause man to have more respect to their good name their other obsequy be before declare the king use to sit in judgement on friday in the afternoon and the mufti sit with he at other time in judgement but on the Friday he sit alone by himself of these mufti be three one at Morocco another at Fez the three at taradant in Sus another part of this Seriffian kingdom other judge sit all the year long two hour before noon and as many after before these every one plead his own cause and if the witness can be prove to be infamous of life or not to say their prayer six time a day their testimony be disable the scrivano be talbie which assist the judge and in his absence supply his place the foker or saint Leo before call they hermit dwell in the best place of the country keep great hospitality for all traveller whither any man may come for a night and be go in the morning they give great example of moral live and alm to the needy comprimise matter of difference betwixt party and repress disorder they be much love and respect and their house be hold sanctuary who privilege the king will not break but upon weighty reason chap. 11 of the kingdom of Morocco with a discourse of the king thereof and of the seriffe Xarif or jarif and his posterity now reign in Barbary @. i. of the kingdom king and city of Morocco the kingdom be situate * * boter part 1. maginus Sanutus lib. 3. between Atlas and the atlantike ocean bear name of the chief city thereof fruitful of corn oil grape sugar honey and cattle they make fine cloth of goat hair and of their hide that leather a a Cordovan leather of Moracco which hence be call marocchine this kingdom be divide into seven province through which we intend our next perambulation take Leo b b Leo part. 2. for our guide beginning at hea which on the north and west have the ocean Atlas on the south and the river esifnual on the east the people feed on cake of barley and on a pap or hasty-pudding of barley-meal which be set in a platter all the family compass about and rude with nature spoon claw forth those dainty they use none a Mat lay on the ground serve for table and cloth and stool too cap be the privilege of age and learning linen shirt be almost banish their country and so be art liberal and mechanical except some simple lawyer which can make some shift to read and a surgeon to circumcise their child their physic be cauterize as man deal with beast they be always in mutual war one with another yet will not they injury a stranger who if he will travel among they must take some harlot or wife or religious man of the adverse part with he at tedn one of their city such respect be have to stranger that if a merchant come hither and have no acquaintance the gentleman of the city cast lot who shall be his host and they use he kind look only for some present at his departure in token of thankfulness and if he be a mean person he may choose his host without any recompense at all in the midst of the city be a great and ancient temple with many priest attend their devotion beside other mean oratory this city have since be ruin and desolate in tecule be a thousand household four hospital one beautiful temple and a house of religious person destroy it be by the portugal an. 1514. as Hadecchis have be the year before Ileusugaghen be another town of have or of hell rather so full be it of confusion blood and murder beside the want of learning civility judge priest or whatsoever else may detain those man from a beastly or devilish metamorphosis the seriff be make a prince of have bring i thither to be a judge but for fear of treason among they we be glad to leave they how far off in manner be their near neighbour Tesegdelt where a guard be set at the gate not so much to keep out enemy as to entertain stranger who at his first come they ask if he have any friend in the city if not they must provide he entertainment at freecost they have a most beautiful temple furnish with priest tagless the next town be a den of thief and murderer when I be there such a swarm of locust overspread the country that scarce may a man see the earth eat up their fruit Culeihat be build of a certain sectary in our time first a preacher attend with troop of disciple after a cruel and merciless tyrant murder at last by one of his wife for lie with her daughter and then his villainy be manifest the people put all his follower to the sword only a nephew of his fortify himself in a castle which he hold maugre all their might and bury his grandfather cause he to be adore as a saint Homar seijf be the name of that rebel the other part of hea be like the former Homar a preacher tyrant and saint some exceedihg hospital and courteous some brutish without divine or human learning or live great store of jew live here and in mount Demensera be of those jew which be call * * Karraim Scripture-Jew Carraum of the rest account sectary these reject the tradition and hold they only to the write scripture as in our jewish relation you have read in mount Gebelel have in be many hermit which live on fruit of tree and water so repute of the simple people that all their do be account miracle Sus sus. be the second region of this kingdom lie southward from hence on the other side of Atlas so call of that river which be the eastern border thereof otherwhere bound with the sea and the desert at messa near the sea side be a temple hold in great veneration many historian affirm that from this temple shall come that just Califa of who Mahumet prophesy there also they say the whale vomit up jonas the rafter and beam of the temple be of whale bone which usual be leave there dead on the shore this the common people esteem to proceed from some divinity of that temple but the true cause be certain sharp rock a little off in the sea I myself be invite by a gentleman who show i a whale rib so huge that lie on the ground in manner of a arch under it as it be through a gate we ride on our camel our head not reach to touch it it have be there keep a hundred year for a wonder amber be there find in abundance which some think proceed from the whale as either the ordure huge whalebone or the sperm and seed thereof Teijent be a city of Sus wherein be a great temple and a arm of a river pass through the same there be many judge and priest who in their ecclesiastical affair they obey tarodant have three thousand family sometime the place where the king lieutenant or deputy reside Tedsi be much great adorn also with a temple and furnish with priest and minister judge and lecturer pay at the common charge in mount Hanchisa it snow in all season of the year and yet the inhabitant go thin clothe in the sharp winter the region of Marocco Morocco be threesquare confine with the mountain Nefisa on the west and Hadimeus on the east between the river tensift and Esifinual the country in fertility of soil resemble Lombardie Morocco which some think to be Bocanus hemerus of Ptolemey be build say Leo by joseph son of Tesfin king of the people of Lontuna by the advice of excellent architect and cunning workman in the time of Hali son of joseph there be in it ten thousand fire or family and more it have four and twenty gate be strong wall furnish with temple bath college inn after the african manner one most stately temple be build by Hali and call by his name but a successor of that kingdom call Abdul Mumen cause it to be raze and build again and call after his own name howbeit the name of Hali be still continue in the title all that his cost notwithstanding this Abdul Mumen who be the second that by rebellion succeed in the kingdom build another temple which Mansor enlarge fifty yard or else on every side adorn it with many pillar fetch out of Spain he make a cistern or vault build under it as large as the temple itself and cover the temple with lead with leaden pipe from the roof to convey the rainwater that fall thereon into the cistern he build thereon a steeple like the Coliseo or amphitheatre at Rome of great hew stone the compass of this steeple or tower be a hundred tuscan yard or else high than the steeple of Asenelli at Bononia there be seven loft one above another very fair and lightsome upon the top of this tower be build a little turret the top whereof be as a needle or spire and it contain five and twenty yard in compass and be as high as two great lance with three loft therein one high than the other on the top of this spire be a broach with three globe of silver one under another the great below and the least high from the top hereof the mountain of Azafi may be easy see a hundred and thirty mile off and a tall man on the ground seem as little as a child of a year old the plain country fifty mile about be hence discern it be one of the great temple in the world and yet not frequent the people assemble thither to their devotion but on friday the city itself near this temple be ruinate so that the passage be difficult by the ruin of house under the porch or gallery of this temple be sometime a hundred shop of bookseller and as many over-against they but now * * an. dom. 1526. there be not one in all Morocco scarce be the three part of the city inhabit understand it of the time when Leo write this for since that time Morocco by residence of the king there have flourish as Fez have contrariwise decay the rest be plant with vine and tree the arabian not suffer they to exercise any husbandry without the wall it be build an. 424. of the Hegira after joseph the founder and Hali his son Abraham succeed in who time a rebellious preacher call Elmaheli bear and bring up in the mountain rebel and with a army encounter king Abraham and overthrow he the king flee and be so hardly pursue by Abdul Mumen who Elmaheli have send after he while himself besiege Morocco that the poor king in danger to be surprise at Oram mount on his horse and take his wife behind he set spur to his horse and so come all three down together on the merciless rock Abdul Mumen return victorious find this addition to his happiness that Elmaheli be dead and himself be choose king and prelate or Chalipha by the forty disciple and ten secretary of Elmaheli a new custom in the mahometan Law he maintain the siege and at the year end enter by force and take Isaac the little and only son of Abraham and stab he with his own hand kill most of the soldier he there find and many of the citizen his posterity reign after he from an. 516. of the Hegeira to the 668. at which time the family of marin deprive they in which the kingdom continue till the 785. year then the same decrease in power Morocco become subject to certain lord of the old hill near to the city but of none receive they so much damage as of the marin family which hold their court in Fez and have a lieutenant only in Morocco Fez be make chief city of Mauritania let i borrow of caeli sec. * * cael. sec. Curio mar. p. 356. Curio in his history of the kingdom of Morocco which for the most part be take out of leo. he say that Abdul Mumen subject to his empire all Barbary from messa to Tripoli his empire in Africa comprehend fourscore and ten day journey in length and fifteen in breath he also possess the kingdom of Granada in Spain sometime call Betica and from Tariffa to Tarracon and a great part of Castilia and Portugal neither have he alone this large empire but his a a Leo reckon they in this order Abdul joseph Mansor jacob Mansor and this Mahomet Enasir whereas Curio-seems to insinuate a long line of posterity these be all direct and immediate succeed son josippus after he jacobus Mansor his nephew and their posterity till Mahumet Enasir who 1212. in the kingdom of valencia be overthrow of Alphonsus as I take it the nine king of Castille in that place which be call las navas di tolosa lose in the battle threescore thousand man in memory or which battle and victory that Alphonsus adorn his scutcheon with a castle or in a field purple which custom his successor do still observe because that day that golden kingdom as a strong castle confirm to he by the blood of his enemy be deliver from those miscreant and thereupon that kingdom of the bastitane so it be before that time style be entitle Castille moreover he institute that knightly order of saint james who have in their habit purtray a purple sword in token of blood this Mahumet our historian call Miramulinus for Abdul Mumen entitle himself miralmumim the name signify the prince of believer which other corrupt call miramulus as they do he abed ramon howsoever it stand for the name and arm of Castille certain Curio be not curious nor careful enough in add that this Abdul Mumen be in the time of rodericus the goatish king about seven hundred year after Christ as also in his saracenicall history he relate and we before have observe see that Morocco be long after build and diverse hundred of year be interpose betwixt rodericus and this Abdul Mumen Curio herein b b curios fault arise from confound the history of abed ramon and Abdul Mumen which live ome century or year after the former differ not only from Leo his best guide in the rest of his history but from himself as will easy appear to any that listen to compare his saracenicall history with the marochian and for that notable victory against the moor rodericus archbishop of Toledo be there present c c rod tol de rob hispan lib. 8. cap. 10 and s in the field and say that the king wear a black cap which have belong to Abdul Mumen the first of the almohade and have by he the Alcoran this Abdelmon or Abdel Mumen be he write the son of a potter to who Auentumerth a great astronomer foretell his royalty to this Auentumerth d d lib 7. cap 6. do one Almehadi join himself who interpret the Alcoran contrary to the Bagdat catholocisme and the interpretation of the Almoranides which then rule in Africa who help Abdel use to obtain the kingdom both of Africa and Spain he bury Almohadi being dead very royal not far from Morocco where he be have in great veneration and prayer make to he and the follower of his sect call of he Almohadis to Abdel Mumen succeed his son auen jacob who be slay in Portugal his brother Aveniuseph succeed and then his son this auen Mahomath with who e e lib. 8. cap. 10 he say be slay two hundred thousand moor the carcase lie so thick that they can scarce ride over they and yet in all the field no sign of blood to be see for two day space the spanish army burn no wood for any use but the arrow lance and pike of the moor burn of purpose and not only for necessity and yet scarce consume half with he perish the almohade thus far rodericus a eyewitness not much differ from leo. I can omit that which Matthew Paris f f Mat par. in Ichan p 2 3. have write of John king of England about these time and in his own day he send say he Thomas Herdinton and Radulph Fitz Nicolas knight and Robert of London Clarke to admiral Murmelius king of Morocco Africa and Spain who they common call miramumelius to make offer unto he of his vassalage and that he will not only hold the land of he with payment of tribute but will also change his religion and accept the mahometan the ambassador have declare their message the king or Emire Elmumenin to call he right shut up the book whereon they find he read and after a little deliberation thus answer I be now read a greek book of a certain wise man and a christian call Paul who word and deed well please i this only I like not that he forsake the religion wherein he be bear and unconstant embrace another and the same I say of your master god almighty know that if I be without the law and now to choose this above all other shall be my choice and then by diverse question inform himself better of the state of the kingdom and of the king he grow into great passion and indignation against the king protest that he think he unworthy to be his confederate and command the ambassador never more to see his face the author hear Robert of London one of those which be send relate these thing HONDIUS his map of the kingdom of Morocco marocchi regnum @. 2 of the king of the Seriffian family about the year 1508 begin to grow in name through Numidia a certain Alsaique bear in tigumedet in the province of dara be a subtle man and no less ambitious in mind then learned in those science whereunto the Mahometan be most addict he by confidence of his blood descend of their prophet and of the division of the state of Africa and the exploit there daily achieve by the portugal attempt to make himself lord of Mauritania Tingitana for this cause he send his three son Abdel Abnet and Mahomet to visit the sepulchre of Mahomet much be the reverence and reputation of holiness which they hereby acquire among that superstitious people which now behold they as saint and kiss their garment as most holy relic these fail not in their part of the play to act as much devotion as high contemplative look deep fetch sigh and other passionate interjection of holiness can express be their yearnful note their food be the people alm the old father join to see his project thus far proceed and mind to strike while the iron be hot send two of they to Fez amet and Mahumet where one of they be make reader in the Amodonaccia the most famous college of Fez and the young be make tutor to the king young son advance thus in fauour of the king and people by their father advice they apprehend the present occasion of the harm sustain by the arabian and moor under the portugal ensign they demand licence of the king to display a banner against the christian put he in hope easy to draw those moor to he and so to secure the province of Morocco in vain be muley Nazer the king brother his allegation not to arm this name of sanctity which be once victorious may grow insolent and forget duty in mind a kingdom they obtain their desire and with a drum and banner with letter of commendation to the arabian and people of Barbary they be so attend with force and fortune that Ducala and all as far as cape de Guer stoop to their command the people willing yield their ten to this holy war against the portugal enemy of their Faith hereunto be add the overthrow which they give to Lopes barriga a famous Portugal captain the brightness of that sunshine be somewhat eclipse with the loss of their elder brother if rather a monarchy be not hereby further by fair word they enter into Morocco the arabian of Ducala and Xarquia about this time try their quarrel by dint of sword in mutual conflict present a fit occasion to the seriff to prey upon they both their strength have make they weak and their weakness make the other strong and now do they begin to usurp sovereignty present their Fessan king with six horse and six camel and those but simple who before they have acknowledge their sovereign with payment of the fifth of their spoil the king of Fez before applaud his own victory in they begin now to distaste and to distrust he send to they to demand his fifth and the tribute also former pay he by the king of Morocco death the common enemy of mankind here interpose herself on the Seriffian part and take the king of Fez out of the world the sceptre descend to his son amet the scholar of the young seriff who not only proceed not in his father demand but confirm amet in the signiory of Morocco so that in some small matter he will acknowledge the sovereignty of Fez but now the seriff who heart continual increase with their fortune send he word that be lawful successor to Mahomet they owe no man tribute and have more right in Africa then he if he will respect they as his friend and ally so it be if otherwise they which have power to offend the Christian shall not be destitute in defend themselves the sword the unequalle starbiter of equity be now make umpire the Fessan proclaim war besiege Morocco be dislodge and in his return vanquish thus have the seriff acquit themselves of that yoke and now intend new conquest on the other side of Atlas and in Numidia and in the mountain which happy they achieve yea the portugal weary with the war which they be force to maintain in defence of those place they hold in Africa the expense so much surmount the revenue abandon they to the seriff and now the want of enemy procure enmity betwixt the brethren who try that valour against each other which before they have exercise joint against their enemy the issue be that the young in two battle have overcome the elder and at the second which be 1544. have take he prisoner confine he to Tafilete he now sole monarch of Morocco convert his force against the king of Fez to try if he can be his master in the field as he sometime have be in the school and fail not of his attempt but have once take and free he the second time because he have break promise he deprive he and his son of estate and a a the end of the reign of marin life he also by mean of his son take tremizen which soon after be recover from they by sal araes viceroy of Algiers and Fez also add by a overthrow of the seriff to the turk conquest who give the government of Fez to Buasson prince of Veles but he in a unfortunate battle with the seriff lose his life and state Mahomet go after to taradant be by the way slay in his pavilion by the treason of some turk suborn thereunto by the king of Algiers of who all but five in their return be slay by the people 1559. muley Abdala the seriff son be proclaim king some b b Ro. c. his history of Barbary cap. 1. write that by occasion of a rebellion in Sus he send to the border turk for aid who first help after murder he and have sack taradant and overrun the country two month together be in their return by the mountainer cut off mulai Abdala have reign fifteen year die leave behind he thirteen son the elder Abdala command the rest to be kill but Abdelmelech the second brother escape into c c the turk finger have itch to be deal with these part ever since Soliman time and have therefore willing entertain all occasion to effect their ambitious design nic. Honiger Turkey and Muley Hamet the three brother esteem of a simple and quiet spirit not any way dangerous to the state be spare the other ten be put to death in one day at taradant where they have be bring up this Abdela die leave behind he three son Muley Mahomet Muley Sheck Muley Nassar the two young escape into Spain where Sheck be yet live and turn christian Nassar return in the fourteen year of Muley hamet reign and have almost drive Muley Sheck than governor of Fez under his father to his heel have not superstition more prevail with nassar follower than allegiance for when Lent come his soldier will needs home to keep their easter at their own house for fear whereof Nassar hasty give bat be there slay Abdelmelech before flee into Turkey now come back with turkish force and get the kingdom from Mahomet who flee or as other write send for succour to Sebastian king of Portugal obtain it in the year d d Michal ab Isselt in an. 1575. and 1578. 1578. five thousand german be entertain in the Portugal pay for the expedition and great force be levy the pope send Stukely that english traitor false term marquess of Ireland with fix hundred italian to Sebastian e e Io. thom. Freigius hist Sebast who the four and twenty of june take sea and the next day with a fleet of one thousand and three hundred sail or as Doglioni f f Nic Doglioni Hist. part. 6. have it set in order his armada of five hundred sail and blessing his royal standard with thirty six thousand footman and four thousand horse set forth towards Africa where Abdelmelech be sickly have assemble a army of fifteen thousand footman and four and forty thousand horse man on the four day of August they join battle and the duke of Avero with his portugal make a great impression into the moor host which abdelmelich labour beyond his natural force to withstand save his people but lose his life not by the sword of the enemy but by the weakness of his body deliver up to death his brother Hamet g g g. Wilkins call he mulai Mahomet rule the army as yet ignorant of what have befall and make such slaughter of the portugal that the duke of Avero the king of Portugal and other great personage there fall and Mahomet himself be drown in flee over a river thus remain Hamet victorious and at one time have the dead corpse of three king in his tent such be the fury of waire the force of death trample under foot the mean and triumph over the great Stukely among the rest receive due wage for his treachery and disloyalty to his country slay out of his country by the barbarous barbarian to Abadelmelech h h Edmund hogan in Makluyt tom. 2. part. 2. be master Edmund hogan employ in embassage by the majesty of our late sovereign one thousand five hundred seventy seven and with all good office entertain to Hament his successor be from the same sacred majesty send ambassador * * Henry Roberts Hak. ih p. 119. master Henry Roberts one thousand five hundred eighty five who be there lieger three year this Muley Hamet in a letter to the earl of Leicester thus begin in the name of the merciful and pitiful God the blessing of God light upon our lord and prophet Mahomet and those that be obedient unto he the servant of God both mighty in war and mighty exalt by the grace of God myra Momanyn the son of myra Momanyn the jarif the Hozeni who kingdom God maintain unto the right famous etc. in a edict publish in behalf of the english he style himself the servant of the supreme God the conqueror in his cause the successor advance by God etc. he flay off the skin from the carcase of Mahomet drown in the battle as be say and fill it full of straw and send it through all province of his kingdom for a spectacle he reign seven and twenty year he send a embassage into England b b ro. c. his history of barb. a thousand six hundred and one perform by Abdala Waecad anowne his people do so fear he that Abdala c c g. w. creme his customer have one only son who in a idle business and busy idleness will needs feed his curious eye with the light of the palace where the king concubine be cause he to be strangle before his face he govern the alarbe which be suppose to be of arabian race and say to use the Arabic language inhabitant of the plain and champain country of Morocco Fez and Sus in peace and subjection receive their tent due pay the Berber or mountainer be the native and ancient inhabitant chase by the former into strong city and the natural fort of hill as our progenitor serve the Britain force they to the mountain of Wales and Cornwall a people of another language call tamaset and disposition who he can not so easy tame and therefore in policy he draw they into foreign expedition especial against the negro thereby extend his empire so far that way as by camel it be six month journey from Morocco to the extreme bound likewise he use they to go with the d d caravan be a company of merchant go together with their good and beast caravans to Gago to fetch home his yearly tribute he conquer Tombuto and Gago about the year 1594. as appear by the letter of e e Madoc hack. Laurence Madoc who see thirty mule lade with gold come from thence to Morocco and say that Tombuto rent threescore quintal of Gold he be much delight in astronomy as m. Thomas bernhere have write in a letter f f bern. let Morocco 1600. to master Edward Wright to who he send for mathematical instrument to be use in that yearly voyage to Gago over the sandy sea where they use needle and compass his provision for his ingenewe or sugar-garden for his building maintenance of his woman rather for the pomp than the sin I let pass for pass they be now and go together with himself his three son by civillwarre leave scarce hope of good or place for worse state than be now in Barbary and have be these many year he die of the plague which be so violent in these part that by Wilkins g g g. Wilk misery of Barbary report there die above four thousand and seven hundred in one day and night thereof in Morocco and in one year seven hundred thousand moor and seven thousand seven hundred jew in the city of Farneze I think he mean Fez die the same year five hundred thousand beside those which perish in the country and other place so many say he as if Barbary have be the common burial place of the world and the live be not able to bury the dead neither do the earth cover and bury they but they bury and cover the earth the highway be strew with dead infect and infectious carcase a plentiful harvest find not labourer to inn it but shed itself on the ground and the cattle mourn for want of milker here be no want of store and soon after the plague cease no store but of want pamine succeed in place and exceed the other cruelty and lest a three fury shall be want the war between the late hamet son follow the former at the heel that as with a threefold cord Barbary be welhigh strangle and dead @. 3 of the civil war in Barbary and of some other part of that kingdom the son of Hame be Mahomet common call Sheck a title proper to the king elder son bofere his brotherly the whole blood Sidan by another woman as Nassar and Abadela Muley be a title of honour give to the king child and all of the blood royal Muley Sheck be make governor of Fez in his father life time bofere of svi and Sidan of Tedula in the midway between Fez and Morocco Muley Sheck so displease his father by his unbridled course that he go with a army to Fez to displace he and to see thing there in order leave bofere late return from Sus because of the plague in the government of Morocco Sheck take sanctuary with five hundred of his best soldier from whence his father cause he to be bring by force and send he prisoner to mickane but before he can finish his purpose the fourteen of August 1603. he die Sidan have follow his father in this expedition and take advantage of his presence I dize on the treasure and proclaim himself king of Barbary and heir to his father what Sidan have do at Fez the like do bofere at Morocco and at taradant Nassar make some stir but soon after die of the plague bofere send Bashar Indar to encounter with Sidan who be now come with his force against he and because himself have not the heart to hazard his person in battle know that it will be no small discouragement if there be none his equal in blood he on certain condition free his elder brother Muley Sheck who the six of january 1604. chase Sidan out of the field hence all old quarrel and feud and robbery and a world of other mischief now * * of these war and the genealogy of this Seriffian family see laur. Bayerlincki chron. to. 2. in an. 1603. begin to fill all the part of Barbay Muley Sheck in Fez proclaim himself king thus be all invert many king and few subject none now in his uncertainty pay their accustom ten intend rather mutual feud and battle betwixt their several tribe and kindred then common fidelity and allegiance Sidan by aid of the great foquere or eremite obtain Sus the people yield obedience to none but who that religious person shall appoint they by mean of he also a peace be conclude betwixt bofere and Sidan in August 1604. thus be the war continue between Sheck and bofere Abdela sheck son drive bofere out of Morocco in the latter end of the year 1606. use his victory with bloody cruelty beside the rifle and pillage of the good in the city blood be a slippery foundation and pillage a peel wall so fall it out to Abdela who soon lose the city to Sidan which he have take from bofere after a bloody field fight betwixt they in April after here Sidan put to the sword three thousand Fessans which have take sanctuary and come forth disarm upon promise of pardon which bofere after with like perfidiousness and breach of promise require on three thousand morochians the shracy which be mountaineer near to Algiers but no more respect the turk there than the Berber do the serif fall at variance and begin to mutiny in the army of Sidan who they serve and cut off the bassa head who be their general which cause Sidan to execute unjust cruelty against all of that tribe in Morocco give the shracy good to the murderer whosoever on the twenty six of November 1607. Abdela join in battle with Sidan provoke by those shracy who thirst for revenge of sidan tyranny where many english under captain giffard and other captain be slay Sidan chase and Morocco recover but while these brethren contend Muley Hamet Bosonne their cousin rich in treasure rich in hope think it fit time to take up that kingdom which these with war for it lose he gather together whatsoever force he can make and come towards Morocco Abdela hear and fear and have spy a man upon a hill with a spear in his hand with white linen like a flag upon it his fear a untrusty messenger tell he that all bosonne army be behind the hill although it be then a full day march from thence and send he wing to fly to Fez the man be but a silly Moor which have wash his linen and dry it on his spear point Bosonne enter Morocco and proclaim himself king but lose both city and kingdom in April follow 1608. and after a second overthrow receive by Sidan now master of Morocco he be by Alkeid Azus his mean poison Muley Sheck loath to leave Morocco to Sidan send Etina a italian merchant into Spain with promise to the catholic king of allaroche Saly Alcazar and other town to turn spanish if he will help he to his right in Africa this negotiation be well entertain and the Spaniard now have a a he have also diverse other city Tanger Sevia etc. in those part allaroche since this time rare accident have happen by certain religious person after the moor account which history be thus report a certain foquere Talbie eremite or saint name give by diverse to the same call side Hamet Ben Abdela live in wed sour forty day journey beyond Morocco eastward where sometime he entertain Sidan to his great content flee then to his b b the moor call their protection or defence a horn as be usual in the scripture horn or defence in time of distress this man the moor report to be a great magician that he can feed three hundred horse at one pit of barley and the same no whit diminish that he have foretell of plenty the last year which come according to pass that he can by his art secure man from the danger of gunshot he be of great reputation for wealth learning c c the letter of r. s. since print may 10. and holiness gather a band of man and conduct they to Morocco Sidan with a army of sixteen thousand give he battle at Morocco thou ten of may 1612 and be ovethrowne for he go himself and lead his company on the mouth of the ordnance without that i he cause as the moor report that the bullet shall still remain in the piece when they be discharge d d r. s. say that he foretell three shall go off without harm the rest shall take six but not go off and so it fall out as he have often for the confirmation of his people make trial before set forty gunner to shoot at as many other without harm by the like Art thus he lose none of his own and many of the other be slay Sidan flee to Safia and embark his two hundred woman in a Fleming his riches in a Marsilian this be take by don livy the spanish admiral wherein be thirteen chest of gold or as masten joseph keble then at Saphia report to i fifty fardel of Arabic book value at a million of treasure he see ten of those fardel the other ship at Santa Cruz meet Sidan and deliver he his woman man be more necessary which he want and yet worse than their want some offer their service for pay and receive it forsake he whereby he be force to flee into the mountain where he be say yet to remain side Hamet now call mulai Hamet Ben Abdela place a governor in Morocco another at taradant the chief city of sus. since I publish these e e in the first edition of this book see of this king a. jansen Gaellobelg. 1612. relation certain letter have be print and entitle news from Barbary which more large discourse of this saint that he be about thirty six year very civil and plain in habit his turban of course calico his Alheik or loose gown of lile grogram a plain sword by his side hang with a plain leather thong a man of great wisdom and learning a ginger and politician he have draw to he Alcaid Azus aforesaid the principal counsellor of the land and many other saint and principal man and since his come have marry the widow of Muley Boferis he allege certain prophecy which foretell these his proceed in revive their law root out the xeriffe and establish peace in his reign which shall continue forty year after which Christ as he say shall come to judgement the talby and learned man do confess that they find these prophecy of he in their book to wit both his name his beginning at missa his course and certain bodily character as a wart above his right eye a black or gray tooth before which master keble say he see a ring in the palm of his right hand and a spur in his right foot a bunch of hair between his shoulder and other to the number of seven all which agree to he at his beginning he put forth only one tent and a kitchen and then resort to he the shroky a saintish people in their law but otherwise in behaviour very savage of which a hundred and fifty or two hundred serve he without pay with who he break alhadge Lemiere his force servant to Sidan be five hundred strong his shrokis increase to five hundred with who and other that add themselves by the way he overthrow sidan force three time before the battle then do he subdue certain mountaineer which Sidan nor his father can never bring under by the way to Morocco he be to pass a river and warn his people that none shall take up water in their hand to drink which some do anon after die come to Dets where he find a great power to withstand he he comfort his fearful follower with promise that to morrow they shall see more with he then against he and remove his tent that night there seem another army great than they till they come at Dets and then vanish the enemy first with sight thereof have flee and leave all to the spoil this say our author f f r. s. sasi who be with he four day our countryman M.W. with diverse other swear they have see if any credit or the name of our countryman be to be give to a renegado he himself with some other of our nation go to see he and receive kind entertainment with promise of favour to the english will they to take knowledge that he be send by God appointment to relieve all of all sort and to advertise what they have see say they shall see more strange matter come to pass meaning as they guess the conquest of Spain France and Italy with which opinion he possess the foolish moor for when he have set peace in those part he tell they of a bridge record in their write to have be in former time which shall appear in the mouth of the strait to carry they over but what will be the issue be uncertain the people soon after beginning to disobey the shabenite and Berber rob to the gate of Morocco another g g g. b. letter report that every day they flee from he more and more and Muley Sidan be expect again he you last leave at sancta cruz from whence as by late intelligence h h janson Gallob m. Fanister and principal m. joseph keble then in Barbary I have receive he go to side Hia another famous foquere in the mountain of Atlas at who zowia or religious house be arrive he sit down on a stone nor will enter till he have obtain conference where they agree on condition that Sidan shall leave his tyranny and proclaim pardon to the adverse party Hia promise according his best assistance this the next year 1613. be perform Sida i i side be as much as dominus lord or master a title give to their religious Hia gather a army of 50000. man most of which be Berber of the country of have or haha with which he march towards Morocco mulai Sydan in the mean while have give diverse battle or slight skirmish to mulai Hamet with loss to himself notwithstanding his promise of seven day sack of Morocco to his soldier if they can recover it mulai Hamet be near Azamor k k fifty mile from Morocco at this approach of Hia from whence he make more haste than speed be then about fifteen thousand strong with a thousand horse ride before and leave the rest of his army to follow with it his handful of man and heart full of manly courage he set upon the great army of side Hia three time pervayl but at last with multitude be overthrow his horse first and himself after be slay with a shot his wont devil or imposture now fail Hia fall and many of his follower upon he till a certain alcayde know he cry that Bomobali that be the king of clout or rag be slay whereupon all forsake he and flee his other troop now also come to the flight which before his indiscretion and impatience will not suffer he to use in the fight thus die this glorious vainglorious saint a man of great valour which he have try in thirty several f f they fight be slight in Barbary they discharge not their piece above twice and then the great cry Hyrla etc. make the other side run away battle and skirmish in which he obtain the better both against Sidan and the mountaineer who Corn-field he burn destroy their vineyard and in two or three day have cut down sixty thousand olive-tree the place of this battle betwixt Hamet and Hia be in or near the garden which be say to extend four mile from Morocco the time in October 1613. alcuid Azus be then in Morocco with the son of Hamet both which upon this disaster flee with abundance of treasure but by the larbies be take and Azus his head present smite off as the suppose contriver of many policy to their detriment hamet son be carry to Morocco and present to Sidan where after diverse contumely opprobrious carry on a ass diverse day he be at last slay when side Hia have slay Hamet he grow suspect to Sidan because he do not then present proclaim he nor dare he adventure to the city till Hia have remove his force further the city mean while sustain diverse abuse by the soldier as before by the usurper in so much that Sidan weep when he enter and see the beauty of his palace deface which some say be comparable in greatness and stateliness to the best in Christendom and keep within door three month or more after this come forth he break his covenant with Hia and those which before he have pardon be now put to death and some also grievous a a hang up by the hand and weight hang at their privy member also Limon peele dip in oil and fire then drop on their naked back etc. 1616. torture whereupon Hia take arm again and come near to Morocco with a great power which sudden he be force to disperse and to return home for fear of treason by side Lassan a great man in his army which be report to hold intelligence with Sidan and to have write to he thus barbarous and miserable be the present state of Barbary Sidan the only suruiver of the brethren possess Morocco Fez acknowledge no sovereign but the city govern by the magistrate thereof and in the country each cast or tribe by itself mulai Abdela the son of mulai Shek live sometime at micane sometime at Alcazar little respect maintain himself by spoil and robbery and side Hia enjoy the royal profit of the kingdom of sus. he live common at taradant hold the country subject but arrogate not the title of king his word be Lanserel side Hia that be let the truth live and side Hia flourish a late letter from thence signify the fear that Sidan have of hia three approach to Morocco in which respect he send two thousand soldier into the country of Draa thence to enter into Sus if such invasion happen but we have be too tedious actor of this barbarian tragedy we must forward on our pilgrimage and now have glut our eye with blood let we take more quiet view of the other part of this kingdom Agmet be sometime call a second Morocco b b leo l. 2. from whence it stand four and twenty mile the hill and valley about it adorn with garden and vineyard a fair river and fertile field yield fifty fold increase have assemble nature force to join with art if magic may be so term and the history write true for the common good of Agmet and Morocco the river run as be think to Morocco under the ground which secret passage be attribute to the wizard of joseph founder of Morocco lest the water course shall be cut off from the city this fruitful agmet in Leo time be people only with fox and wild beast save that a certain eremite hold the castle with a hundred of his disciple the c c the mountain of Morocco mountain be very rude according to their rough and cold place of habitation many of they cover continual with snow in Nififa they gaze and wonder at stranger in seem they force Leo to play the judge and notary accept no excuse eight day and then set he in a church-porch and after a certain prayer present themselves with their present before he cock hen nut garlic and some of the better sort a goat which all he give his host money they have none for he in Secsina there be at all time of the year snow there be many great cave wherein they winter their beast in November january and February they wear no shoe but certain sandal and be lusty man at ninety or a hundred year old Temnella be a heretical hill and town which have a fair temple they be of Elmaheli his sect and challenge any stranger which come among they to dispute in Hantera be many jew of the d d Carraim jew Carraim Sect the four region of this kingdom be Guzzula confine with the hill Ilda on the west Atlas on the north have on the east they have no wall town but great village neither have they king or governor the cause of civil war among they yet do they observe three day in a week truce when every man may travel or batter safe a certain eremite who be repute a saint be author of this three day truce in each week he have but one eye I myself say Leo see he and find he to be trusty courteous and liberal Duccala the five region lie between tensift and the ocean Habib and Omirabih at Azaphi the prince be in Leo time murder at church while he be in his devotion by a subject who be choose governor but the portugal obtain the place azamur a city exceed addict to sodomy be also punish with Portugal slavery and most of the country thereabouts in the hill call greene-hill live many hermit of the fruit only there grow here be many altar and saint after the mahometan fashion Mahumet king of Fez in the year of our lord 1512. pass this way with his army and at every altar make a stand and there kneel will thus say my god thou know that my intent of come to this wild place be only to help and free the people of Duccala from the wicked and rebellious arabian and from our cruel enemy the christian and if thou do not approve it let thy scourge light only on my person for these people that follow i deserve not to be punish hence he send i ambassador to Morocco leo a ambassador hascora the six region of Morocco be situate between the river tensift and quadelhabid Alemdio in Hascora be conquer to the king of Fez by a merchant who paramour the prince have take away for which adultery he be by the judge condemn to be stone the prince of temcene be so addict to arabian poetry that he give Leo than a youth of sixteen year old fifty ducat for certain verse he have make in his praise and twice as much he send to his uncle for the same with a horse and three slave tedle be the seven province of this kingdom lie between guadelhabid and Ommitabih Tefza the chief town be beautify with many temple and have store of priest the town wall be build of a kind of marble call Tefza which give name to the town mount deed be in this province where the people for the most part dwell in cave under the ground they have neither judge nor priest nor honest man among they for other place if any think we not more than tedious already let they resort to Leo who all follow in their relation of these part when any christian * * g. Wilk misery of Barbary will turn Moor it be their custom to signify it to the christian in those part and in place and time appoint a equal number of both sort be assemble and fit the one over against the other the party in the middle and presence of both be demand of which he will be and the christian may use what argument they can to dissuade he which be do three several time thus do one of our nation who have thus kill his own soul after murder another body and be therefore adjudge to wander like Cain none relieve he in which state he pine and die chap. 12 of the arabian population and depopulation in Africa and of the natural african and of the beginning and proceed of the mahometan superstition in Africa of the portugal force and exploit therein have often mention the arabian in our former chapter it seem fit to speak somewhat of the come of that nation and their religion into Africa from the east as also of the arm of the portugal before often speak of which from the west have make some impression in these part the arabian Mahometism even almost in the infancy thereof pierce into Africa in the year * * Chronol. aug. p. diacon and Zonar Constant p. diac. Leont g b. b. 3. part lib. 2. of our lord 637. Omar invade Egypt and odman in the year 650. pass further with fourscore thousand fight man and defeat gregorius Patricius and impose a tribute on the african depart in Leontius time in the year 698. they invade and possess Africa and appoint governor of their own in the year 710. they pierce into Numidia and Libya and overthrow the Azanaghi and the people of galata oden and Tombuto in 973. have pass Gamben they infect the negro and the first that drink of their poison be those of melli. in the year 1067. jasaia son of ababequer enter into the low Ethiopia and by little and little infect those people which confine upon the desert of Libya and the rest and pierce into Nubia and Guinea constantinus the emperor * * const Parphyrogenitus administr theophanis cap. 25. among the province or great amera-ship subject to the saracen number Africa for one the number and order whereof he have transcribe from theophanes and I here from he the first of these be Persia or Chorassan the second Egypt the three Africa the four philistiem or rhamble the five Damascus the six chemp or Emessa the seven Chalep the eight Antiochia the nine Charan the ten emet the eleven esipe the twelve Musel the thirteen Ticrit but when as Africa shake off the yoke of the amera of bagdad and have a of her own afterward by occasion of the weakness of the of bagdad the of Persia or Choralan free himself also and call himself amerumne wear the Alcoran hang down his neck in table like a chain and say he be of the kindred of alem and the of Egypt to who the of Arabia foelix have always be subject become also his own man call himself amerumne and derive his pedigree from Alem. this as it give light to the saracen history in general so it show the greatness of the arabian or Saracenical power in Africa where first they make head against their master in the time as it say before of Elagleb then deputy or Amera in Cairaoan who example become a precedent to the amera of Persia and egypt and which be more to our present purpose be occasion of further spread their superstition through Africa the fountain or sink thereof be now not far off in Damascus or bagdad but in the heart of Africa Satan there choose his throne for these his vicar or calipha for so the word say * * Ios. Scal can. Isagog l 3 Chalipha Vicarius Muhammedem and do u Scaliger signify which as you have hear be too faithful in that their infidelity and because I have mention scaliger interpretation of the word Chalipha it shall not be amiss to add out of the same place that the first governor or general after Mahumet or as he call he Muhammed be call Emir elmumenin that be captain of the orthodox or right believer afterward because under colour of religion they seek not only a priestly primacy but a tyrannical monarchy they choose rather to be call Chalipha the first Emir elmumenin be abubecher when his successor send their lieutenant into Africa and Spain they govern a while under they do all in the name of the Emir elmumenin although nothing in a manner but a title be want of the fullness of power to themselves but after they entitle themselves Emire Elmumenin and of deputy become king which be do by the king of Spain and the governor of Africa and now the king of Morocco and Fez use it for it be not a proper name but as the french king be call christianissimus and the spanish Catholicius thus far Scaliger which serve as a gloss for those former name of Amera Amerumne Chalipha Miramuldinus and many other hence corrupt the mean of these and other saracen enlarge their sect have be principal by arm and where they be not of force by traffic and preach * * about two hundred year after the death of Mahomet all Barbary be infect with that pestilence Leo lib. 1. as on the other side of Ethiopia even to cabo de lor Gorientes in the kingdom of Megadazo Melinde Mombazza Quiloa and Mosambique beside the island of saint Laurence and other but the great mischief that happen to Africa by the arabian be about the four hundred year of the Hegeira for before that time the mahometan chalipha or amera have forbid the arabian to pass over Nilus with their tent and family that so the country be still people by the ancient inhabitant howsoever it be govern by they for such multitude of unbridled and barbarous nation be not likely to prove dutiful subject to the empire about that time one Elcain the schismatical Califa of Cairaoan as be before in part show have by his general geboar conquer all the western part as far as Sus employ the same man valour for the conquest of the east and Egypt be now together with Syria subdue Elcain himself see the Calipha of Bagdet make no preparation to withstand he by the advice of Gehoar which at that time found cairo pass into Egypt think to invest himself with the saracenicall sovereignty commit the government of Barbary to a prince of the tribe Zanhagia who in this absence of his lord compact with the Chalipha of Bagdet and acknowledge his title in Barbary receive in reward of his treason from that Bagdet prelate the kingdom of Africa Elcain have lose this morsel to snatch at a shodow be in great perplexity what course to take till a counsellor of his persuade he that he may gather great sum of gold if he will let the arabian have free liberty to pass through Egypt into Africa which though he know that they will so waste it by their spoil as it shall remain unprofitable both to himself and his enemy yet incite by two vehement orator covetousness and revenge at last he grant and permit all arabian which will pay he ducat a piece free to pass receive their promise that they will become deadly enemy to the rebel of Cairaoan whereupon ten tribe or kindred of the arabian half the people of Arabia and a multitude also out of Arabia foelix as write Ibuu Rarbu a famous historian out of who Leo have draw a great part of his african history accept the condition and pass the desert they take Tripoli sack cape and after eight month siege enter into cairaoan fill with blood and empty with spoil all the place where they prevail thus do those kindred of arabian settle themselves in these part force the province adjacent to tribute and remain lord of Africa till joseph found Morocco who aid the posterity of the rebel against they and break their yoke from the tributary city but Mansor the four king and Calipha of the sect of Muoachedin begin as be say by Elmabesi and Abdul Mumen prefer the arabian and induce they to make war upon those their enemy who easy they conquer he also bring all the chief and principal of the arabian into the western kingdom and assign they more noble place for habitation to wit the province of Duccala and Azgar to those of mean condition he appoint Numidia which at first be as it be slave to the numidian but after recover their liberty and obtain the dominion of that part of Numidia assign they every day increase in power those which inhabit Azgara and other place in Mauritania be all bring into servitude for the arabian out of the desert be as fish out of the water Atlas on the one side and the other arabian on the other side suffer they not to pass into the desert and therefore they lay down their pride and apply themselves to husbandry dwell in their tent and pay yearly tribute to the king of Mauritania from which those of Duccala by reason of their multitude be free many arabian remain still in Tunis which after mansor death they take and make themselves lord of the region adjoin where some of they bare great sway till Leo time the other deprive of their wont pay at Tunis commit great robbery and slaughter of merchant and traveller the arabian which inhabit Africa be divide into three people Hilel and Chachin which be say to descend of Ishmael therefore by the mahometans esteem more noble the three be term Machil derive from Saba and come thither out of Arabia foelix the division and subdivision of these into their several tribe and family which Leo have do will perhaps to our nice reader seem but a harsh heap of strange name and for their sake I will refer the studious hereof to that our author the tribe Etheg which Mansor place in Duccala and in the plain of tedle in late time suffer much damage by the portugal on the one side and the king of Fez on the other they be about one hundred thousand man of war half horseman the sumaite in the desert near Tripoli can arm fourscore thousand man sahid in the desert of Libya can bring into the field almost a hundred and fifty thousand of their tribe the ruche be not rich but in agility of body miraculous and account it a shame if one of their footman be vanquish of two horseman nor be any among they so slow that he will not out-go any the swift horse be the journey never so long the Vode dwell between Gualata and guade and be esteem about threescore thousand warrior the other kindred of they be exceed many disperse through Africa somewhere command otherwhere subject and as they live in diverse place so do they observe differ custom those which dwell between Numidia and Libya live miserable they make merchandise of their camel with the negro and many horse which be sell into Europe term horse of Barbary they be much addict to poetry and make long poem of their war hunt and love with great elegance and that in rhythm like the vulgar italian sonnet they be the destiny of poet courteous but poor the arabian inhabitant between Atlas and the sea be more rich in corn and cattle but more base and barbarous in condition among the arabian near Tunis a good poet be high esteem and ample reward of their great man neither can the neatness and grace of their verse easy be express when they go to war they carry their wife with they on camel and that to make up the wonder to encourage they the arabian between Barbary and Egypt lead a wretched life in those barren desert force not only to exchange their cattle for corn but to pawn their son in great number to the sicilian who if they break day make slave of they and therefore they exercise all robbery and sell any stranger they can lay hold on to the sicilian for corn now for the natural and native inhabitant of Africa the white man so they be in comparison of the negro be divide into five people Sanhagia Musmuda Zeneta Haoara and Gumera the Musmuda inhabit the region of have Sus Guzula and Morocco Gumera inhabit the mountain alongst the mediterranean from the straits to tremizen these two dwell sever from the other and maintain continual war one with another as author say they be wont to have tent and the wide field for their habitation and those that be conquer be send to inhabit city the conqueror be lord of the field the tribe or people Zeneta Haoara and Sanhagia inhabit Temesne the zeneti chase the family of idris from the dominion of Africa and Fez and be again themselves after that deprive by the zanhagian family of Luntuna and of Abdul Mumen the Benemarini a zenetan family recover the empire long after they be in these time * * ro. c. history of Barbary divide into Berber and alarbies the Berber inhabit the mountain the alarbies the plain both of they maintain deadly feud and will fight sore battle in such quarrel then in service of their king insomuch that upon loss of any great man cruel battle have be fight and ten thousand man slay at a time the alarbies have their fair virgin ride on a camel with a flag in her hand deck in all pomp to solicit her kindred to revenge and go foremost in the field encourage they to follow the kindred spare no blood to save their virgin which the other side strive to win hold that a continual glory to the seven generation when a man be kill his tribe seek not revenge on the murderer only but on the first man of the tribe he meet with the Berber do likewise their woman follow they in their battle with a certain colour in their hand call hanna which will stain and therefore they throw it upon such as offer to run out of the field the base ignominy that can befall they the Larbie and Breber do differ as much in language as welsh and english the one be give to husbandry the other very much to robbery mulai Sidan in these late war see the larbee also become robber cause the next dwarre a town of tent belong to that tribe which herein have fault to be destroy man woman child kine sheep and whatsoever belong to they by his soldier but after he have lose the field in the battle with Mulai Sheck they forage up to Morocco gate trust to the strength which that tribe can make be fifteen thousand horse this tribe or kindred be call wele entid in Africa they be much subject to the cough insomuch b b Leo lib. 1. that on the friday when they be in their mahometan sermon if one fall a cough another follow and so from hand to hand all take it up and hold on in that sort till the end of their sermon no man hear what have be say for their moral c c the general vice of the african cha 8. condition Leo thus describe they as we have somewhat mention before the inhabitant of the city in Barbary be poor and proud ireful and write all injury Marble untractable and unfriendly to stranger simple and credulous of impossibility the vulgar be ignorant of nature and esteem all work thereof divine and miraculous they be irregular in their life and action exceed subject to choler speak aloft and proud and be often at buffet in the street thus base be their disposition and no less be their estimation with their lord who make better account of their beast they have no chief man or officer to rule or counsel they they be ignorant of merchandise be destitute of banker and money-changer and every merchant be constrain to attend his ware himself no people under heaven more covetous few among they which for love of God or man will entertain a stranger or requite a good turn always encumber with melancholy they addict themselves to no pleasure the reason whereof be their great poverty and small gain the shepherd both in the mountain and field live a laboursome and miserable life a beastly thievish ignorant kind of people never repay any thing commit to they the young woman before they marry may have their lover in all filthiness none of they bestow her virginity on her husband if they be once marry their lover do no more follow after they but betake they to some other the brutish father make this odious love to his daughter and the beastly brother to his whorish sister the most of they be neither mahometans jew nor christian but without faith and without so much as a shadow of religion neither make any prayer nor have any church but live like beast and if any have any smack of devotion yet have no law priest nor any rule to follow he be force to live like the other many of they both in city and field be find savour of better thing both for art merchandise and devotion as the same Leo show but thus be the most incline now to add somewhat further of the mahometan religion in Africa 714. as some * * ant guevara Epistol. io. de barras Asiae dec. 1. lib. 1. do reckon the saracen by the incitement of julius earl of suta as in our three book be relate invade and conquer Spain Leo in his five book attribute this to muse governor of Africa under d d some will have this qualid or Vlit to be the Miralmuminin of Africa a Maraunian who Leo make the Eastern Calipha qualid the Calipha of Damascus who next successor deprive muse and send jezul to cairaoan to succeed in his room who posterity there govern till that house be deprive of the caliphship and the seat thereof remove from Damascus to Bagdet then be Elagleb make lieutenant of Africa and hold it with his posterity after he 170. year after which time el Mahdi a heretical Calipha dispossess they of this el Mahdi and Elcain and their suppose heresy I have no certain history certain it be that the Mahometan from the beginning be divide as appear of idris in our history of Fez and more full in the catalogue of Mahomet next successor which be the next not in blood but in power so do Bubac or Abubacer challenge it and after he Homar and ottoman contrary to the testament of Mahomet who appoint Hali his heir muavias also murder Hali and his son to obtain the sovereignty Thus be they divide about the true successor of their false prophet which fire be not yet extinct another division be about the interpretation of their Law e e g. b.b hist sar. lib. 1. Abubacer give foundation to the sect Melchia or Melici embrace by the african Homar be author of the sect Anesia which the turk and Zaharan in Africa receive odman or Ottoman leave behind he the Banesiae which have also his follower Hali be head of the Imemia which be follow by the persian indian many arabian and gelbine of Africa Curio call these sect embrace of the african Melici and as he affirm asuphij of the syrian and arabian Alambeli of the persian and Buanifi of the alexandrian and assyrian foreign name can scarce be translate but withal be traduce and of diverse diverse call of these four grow threescore and eight sect of name beside other more obscure among the rest be the morabite who lead their life for the most part in hermitage and make profession of moral philosophy with certain principle differ from the Alcoran one of these be that Moabite which certain year past show Mahomet name imprint in his breast be do with or some such thing raise up a great number of arabian in Africa and lay siege to Tripoli where be betray by his captain he remain the turk prisoner who send his skin to the grand seigenior these morabite affirm that when awl or Hali fight he kill ten thousand christian with one blow of his sword which they say be a hundred cubit long one write a a see 3. part th. pol. pag. 163 that these moabite devote themselves to a solitary life and strict penance for certain year which be expire by the merit thereof they may after loosen the reins of their lust to all impurity without any impurity as be beyond possibility of sin the like we have observe before of the indian gymnosophist and then to enable nature to unnatural degree of beastly lust they eat certain herb which may melt the heart in and into those flame for which purpose they use also in Barbary a composition call Lafis the Cobtini be as foolish a sect one of which show himself not many year since at Algiers mount on a reed with a bridle and reins of leather affirm that he have ride a hundred mile on that horse in one night and be therefore high reverence somewhat also be say before of these african sect in our chapter of Fez another occasion divide Africa from other of the Mahometan superstition for when Muavia and jezid his son be dead one Maruan seize on the pontificality but Abdalan the son of jezid expel he he also have slay Holem the son of Halea a little before who the arabian have proclaim caliph and therefore make the Maraunian stock of which he descend odious to the arabian they therefore at Cufa choose abdimely for the saracenicall sovereign who be of hali posterity which they call the abazian stock or family he send Ciafa against Abdalan who flee and be slay Ciafa exercise all cruelty against all that Maraunian kindred draw jezid out of his sepulchre and burn his carcase and slay all of that house cast their body to the beast and fowl to be devour whereupon one abed ramon of that family some suppose he the son of muavias flee into Africa with great troop of follower and partaker where the saracen receive he very honourable barrius b b dec. 1. l. 1. Asia tell that Ciafa himself be caliph and that he descend of Abaz of who that stock be call Abazian and that he take a oath at his election to destroy the maraunian which he execute in manner as aforesaid by Abidela his kinsman and general to abed ramon resort the mahometans in Africa who equal his heart to his fortune call himself Miralmuminin which be mispronounce Miramulim and signify the prince of the believer which he do in disgrace of the abazian some attribute the building of Morocco to he which other ascribe to joseph as before be say and some to some other prince build as they say in emulation of c c Bagdet be build long after this time badget which the eastern Calipha build for the metropolitan city of their law and empire barrius add that he become a Nabuchodonosor to whip and scourge Spain which ulit his son by Musa his captain whole conquer in the time of rhodericus but Pelagius soon after which his spanish force begin to make head against the moor and recover from they some town which d d in two year space it be say that there perish in those spanish war 700000. people war be continue with diversity of chance and change three hundred year and more till e e an. do. 1110. Alphonsus the six take Toledo from they and for diverse good service which don Henry f f don. Henry earl of Lorraine l. ma. siculus l. 7. Hisp l. and. ressend ant. lusic l. 4 he in a proem to k. Sebast.. entitle he Africus Atlaticus Aethiopicus Arabicus perficus indicus Taeprobanicus etc. have do he in these war give he his Daughter in marriage and for her portion those part which he have take from the moor in Lusitania since call the kingdom of Portugal with all that he or he can conquer from they thus be the kingdom of Portugal plant in the blood of the moor whereby it have be so fatten and have so batn ever since that all their greatness have rise from the other loss for they not only clear those part of that kingdom of they by a hereditary war but pursue they also into Africa where John the first take scuta from they so make way to his posterity to pierce further which happy they perform Alphonsus the five Portugal g g Osor reb. Emanuel take from they Tanger Arzila and Alcasare and other especial Emanuel win from they many h h Tutuan Asaphi castellum regale Azamor titium mazagam etc. deam gate city and a great part of Mauritania the arabian not refuse the portugal service till the seriff arise in Africa as even now be show and chase the portugal thence thus Spain have revenge herself of the mahometan injury by her two arm of castle which at last drive they out of Granada and take diverse town in the main of Africa from they and king Philip now in our day have expel the remainder of that race quite out of Spain and Portugal which thus free itself and burden they by another course do yet more harm to the mahometan profession for Henry son of John the first set forth fleet to discover the coast of Africa and the island adjacent diverse of which be by the portugal possess and make way to the further discovery and conquest of that nation in Africa and India to these our day where they have take diverse kingdom and city from the moor of which other place of this history in part and the large relation of i i barrius Osorius Maffaeus l. Marmol l. 9 Arthus dantiscanus p. Gatric lib. 3. barrius in his decade of Osorius Maffaeus Marmol Arthus jarrie and other be ample witness chap. 13 of Biledulgerid and sarra otherwise call Numidia and Libya we have now I suppose weary you with so long discourse of that part of Africa on this side Atlas but such be the difference of the mind weariness from that of the body that this be weary with one long journey if the same be continue with a second it be more than tire the other after a tedious and irksome way when another of another nature present itself be thereby refresh and the former weariness be with this variety abate yea although it be as this be from a better to a worse even the mount up this cold hill and thence to view the atlantike ocean on the west southward and eastward the desert will neither make the soul breathless with the steep ascent nor faint with so wide prospect of manifold wilderness this of barren earth and that of bare water a three seem to be mix of both a sea without water a earth without solidity a sand not to hazard ship with her privy ambushment but with open violence swallow man and disdain to hold a foot-print as a testimony of subjection a wind not breathe air but sometime the high element in fiery heat and sometime the low in sandy shower once a nature mock nature a order without order a constant inconstancy where it be nature pastime to do and undo to make mountain and valley and mountain of valley at pleasure strange be the composition of these place but stranger be that of the mind which feed itself with the cruel hunger and thirst with insatiable thirstiness of these desert and whereas the body fear to be drown even there where it as much fear to want water in this sandy journey the soul model of divinity life of humanity fear no such accident to itself but in a sweetness of variety delight to survey all that her first and ancient inheritance howsoever since by sin mortgage and confiscate and be sequester from all society of man can here discourse with GOD and nature in the desert hither now after so long a preamble we bring you and at first present unto your view Numidia where you shall be feast with date which have give the name Biledulgerid that be date-region thereunto and before be make one entire part of seven in our k k lib. 6. cap. 1. division of Africa Ludonicus l l l. Marmolius Sanutus one of the exact divider of Africa l. 1. part Libya into 7. desert and Numidia into the 4. land of tesset Segelmes Zel and Biledulgerid Marmolius write it Biledel Gerid observe by the way with Aldrete that this Numidia be that of the ancient which be part of Barbary but more southerly nor have this Libya of Leo the same bound with that of the ancient geographer the eastern border be ehoacat a city distant one hundred mile from Egypt the western be the atlantike ocean the northern Atlas the southern Libya this be the base part of Africa m m leo lib. 1. the cosmographer not deign it the name of a kingdom the inhabitant thereof be in many place so far distant from any other as for example Tesset a city of four hundred household be separate from all other habitation three hundred mile some place thereof be better people the Numidia describe by n n ptol. l. 4. plin. l. 5. c. 3. p. Mela l. 1. c. 6. olivarius melam cael. rhod. l. 18. c. 38. Ptolomey Mela and Pliny be of a far less bound and be rather a part of Barbary then of this which we here describe call say Pliny Metagonitis and famous for nothing but marble and wild beast the Numidae call Nomades of their pastoral life and change of pasture carry their house on their cart the city whereof be Cyrtha call now Constantina and jol now as some write Bugia the numidian be notorious for excessive venery for the religion of these who Leo term numidian he say that in old time they worship certain planet and sacrifice to they and be like to the persian in worship of the sun and the fire to both which they build temple and like the vestal in Rome keep the fire continual burn Christian religion begin to quench this fire as be * * Mermannis think in the apostle day which after be pervert by Arrianisme subvert by Mahometisme jewish religion have here some foot also before that Christianity be preach to they the numidian live long but lose their tooth betimes sour sauce for their sweet date and their eye also pay untimely tribute to the sand which the wind very busy and often send as their searcher and customer till at last they can see to pay they no more in all Numidia the french disease as we term it be unknown and in Libya I have know say Leo a hundred person that have be cure of that malady only by pass over Atlas and breathe this air this disease be not hear of in Africa till king Ferdinand expel the jew out of Spain and the moor by lie with the Jew wife get the same and general infect Barbary call it therefore the spanish disease the plague also infect Barbary once in ten fifteen or five and twenty year and destroy great multitude because they have little regard or remedy for it in Numidia it be scarce know once to happen in a hundred year and in the land of negro never worse disease than pox or plague possess the numidian namely ignorance of divine moral and natural knowledge treason murder robbery without all respect of any thing if any of they be hire in Barbary they be employ in base office scullion dung-farmer and what not neither be the libyan or Negro much better of the numidian and libyan be five people Zenaga Guenzaga terga Lemta and Berdeva and live all after the same manner and order that be without manner or order at all there garment of base cloth scarce cover half their body the gentleman gentleman must pardon i the abase of the name to be distinguish from the rest wear a jacket of blue Cotton with wide sleeve their steed be camel on which they ride without stirrup or saddle and use a goad in stead of spur and a leather fasten in a hole bore through the gristle of the camel nose serve they for a bridle mat make of rush be their bed and wool grow on their date-tree yield matter for their tent their food be oftentime patience with a empty belly which when they fill bread or meat after any sort be absent only they have their camel milk whereof they drink a dish-full next their heart and certain dry flesh sod in butter and milk every one with his hand rake out his share of these dainty after drink the broth and then drink up a cup of milk and supper be do while milk last they care not for water especial in the springtime all which season some never wash hand or face because they never go to the place where they may have water and the camel have join with their master in this nearness not regard water while they may feed on grass all their life or that space rather before they die not worthy the name of life be spend in hunt and rob their enemy not stay above three or four day in a place as long as the grass will serve their camel they have over every tribe one in manner of a king who they honour and obey very rare be a judge find among they and to he such as be litigious ride sometime five or six day journey he will they ample reward with a thousand ducat more or less by the year as for letter art virtue they dwell not in these desert they be very jealous which be the death of many yet be they liberal after their manner to stranger as I myself it be leos report can testify for go over the desert with a caravan of merchant the prince of Zanaga encounter we with five hundred man on camel and cause we to pay our custom and then invite we to his tent there do he kill many camel to feast we both young and old and as many geld and ostrich which they have take in the way and when the merchant show themselves loath that he shall make such slaughter of they he say that it be shame to entertain they with small cattle only be stranger so we have roast and boil and bread of Panike very fine and date great plenty he honour our company with his presence but he eat together with his noble separate from we and have with he certain religious and learned man to sit with he which all the meale-time touch no bread but only flesh and milk the reason the prince give we because they be bear in the desert where no corn grow only they eat bread on certain solemn feast as at easter and day of sacrifice thus do this liberal prince spend on we ten time the value of his custom after this manner also live the african call Soana the tract of a a leo lib. 6. see of the palm more full sup. c. 5. Numidia most in name be these which extend itself two hundred and fifty mile in length where be great store of date-tree whereof some be male and some female the first bring forth only flower the other Fruit and they take a flower bough of the male and engraft it in the female otherwise the date prove nought and almost all stone they feed their goat with the stone of the date beat and therewith they grow fat and yield store of milk segelmesse be build if any list to believe b b Bicri an african cosmographer his error Bicri a african cosmogropher by Alexander the great here be certain college and temple the people of the country live on date they have no flea a small privilege for they have infinite store of scorpion Fighig have industrious and witty people whereof some become merchant other student and go to Fez where have obtain the degree of doctor they return into Numidia and be make priest and preacher and so become rich Tegorarin have traffic with the negro they water their Corn-field with wellwater and therefore be force to lay on much soil in which respect they will let stranger have their house rent-free only the dung of themselves and their beast except they will expostulate with that stranger which shall in some nice humour go out or door to that business and ask he if he know not the place appoint thereunto here be many rich jew which by mean of a preacher of Telensin be spoil and most of they slay at the same time that Ferdinand chase they out of Spain techort be a numidian town exceed courteous to stranger who they entertain at freecost and marry their daughter to they rather than to the native Pescara be exceed infest with scorpion who sting be present death wherefore the inhabitant in summer time forsake their city and stay in their country-possession till November Libya extend itself from the confine of Eloachat unto the atlantike betwixt the numidian and Negro it be one other of the seven part into which we have divide Africa the arabian call it sarra that be a desert Pliny c c plin. lib. 5. in the begin of his five book say that all Africa by the grecian be call Libya take in a more proper sense it be diverse d d Strab. l. 17. ortel thesaurus bound by the ancient and therefore we will here hold we to Leo description the name Libya be derive from lib a mauritanian king as some e e l. corvino geograph affirm Herodotus f f Herodot l. 3. say of a woman name Libya among the libyan be reckon g g Niger aph. com. 3 the and diverse other nation even of the h h Isid. Orig. l. 6. ancient accuse for want of inward and outward good thing cunning only in spoil and robbery the libyan worship one Psaphon i i alexand. alex. l. 6. c. 4. for their god induce thereunto by his subtlety for he have teach bird to sing PSAPHON be a great God which be set at liberty chant this note in the wood and easy persuade the wild people to this devotion which Aelian say anon have endeavour in vain it be the custom of woman to howl in their temple k k Coel. Rhodig l. 12. c. 2. whence some of the bacchanal rite be borrow by the grecian unto the libyan be reckon those nation who barbarous rite be before relate in the seven chapter of this book we will now come to late observation l l g. bot. ben. p. 1 lib. 3. maginus man may travel eight day or more in the libyan desert ordinary without find any water the desert be of diverse shape some cover with gravel other with sand both without water here and there be a lake sometime a shrub or a little grass their water be draw out of deep pit and be brackish and sometime the sand cover those pit and then the traveller perish for thirst the merchant that travel to Tombuto or other place this way carry water with they on camel and if water fail they m m Leo lib. 1. they kill their camel and drink water which they wring out of their gut their camel be of great ability to sustain thirst sometime travel without drink twelve day or more otherwise they be never able to travel through those desert in the desert of azaoad there be two sepulcher of stone wherein certain letter engrave testify that two man be there bury one a very rich merchant who torment with thirst buy of the other which be a carrier or transporter of ware a cup of water for ten thousand ducat and die nevertheless both buyer and seller with thirst their life for lewdness resemble the numidian before mention but for length come much short of they few attain to threescore year n n a. Cadamosto they be as little need as they have thereof often plague with those cloud of grasshopper which cover the air and destroy the earth the libyan desert of Zanhaga beginning at the western ocean extend itself far and wide between the negro and the numidian to the salt-pit of Tegaza from the well of azaoad to the well of Araoan a hundred and fifty mile space be no water for lack whereof many both man and beast there perish likewise in the desert gogdem for nine day journey no drop of water be find in the desert of Targa be manna find which the inhabitant gather in little vessel and carry to Agadez to sell they mingle it with their drink and with their pottage it be very wholesome Tegaza be a inhabit place where be many vein of salt which resemble marble they dig it out of pit and sell it to merchant of Tombuto who bring they victual for they be twenty day journey from any habitation the cause that sometime they all die of famine they be much molest with the southeast wind which make many of they to lose their sight Bardeoa be find out late by one hamar a guide unto a caravan of merchant who lose his way by reason of a malady that fall into his eye yet blind as he be he ride on a camel none else be able to guide they and at every mile end cause some sand to be give unto he whereon he smell and thereby at last tell they of a inhabit place forty mile before he come at it where when they come they be deny water and be force by force to obtain it the river that arise out of Atlas and by the unkindness of their kind fall this way find these thirsty wilderness to yield they the ready channel be train alongst by the allurement of the sand stoop and crouch to they till be further from witness they be either swallow up on great lake or else while they hold on their pursuit for the ocean lose themselves in the search and while they be liberal to the thirsty sand in the way at last die themselves I can say dive themselves as else where in the world for thirst in the desert and yet through these wayless way do covetousness carry both the arabian in their rove and merchant with their caravans to the negro for wealth whither I think at last you expect the come of this our also chap. 14 of the land of Negro @. i. of the river NIGER Gualata Senaga and Guinea or the land of Negro a a Maginus gi. bot. ben. either be so call of the river Niger or of the black colour of the inhabitant some think the river be name Niger of the people it have on the north those desert which we last leave on the south the Aethiopic ocean and the kingdom of congo on the east Nilus on the west the atlantike Leo make Gaogo in the east and Gualata in the west the limit thereof on the side of the river Canaga it be sandy and desert beyond it be plentiful be water with Niger which run through the midst of it there be no hill near the bank of Niger but woody place diverse receptacle of elephant rain do neither good nor harm only Niger minister they plenty as Nilus in Egypt their increase be likewise alike forty day together after the midst of june do Niger increase at which time the negro town be island and the way to they by boat and as many it decease the merchant in july August and September trade in boat make of a hollow tree like the indian canoas b b io. Leo lib. 7. this river some think arise out of a desert call Sen from a great lake some with less likelihood think it a arm of Nilus c c Cadamosto and some with no truth think it to be derive from paradise it be by geographer d d ortel ramusius etc. bring from a lake which they call Niger within two degree of the equinoctial and run thence northwards hide himself from the violence of the sun fury under a mantle of earth sixty mile together and then the earth discover he he run not far but in revenge he cover a great part of the earth and drown the same in a lake call borneo till the earth again with her strong arm clasp he in straight bank and force he to turn his stream westward in which way have get fresh help of some other stream that send in their succour he again prevail and overthrow the earth in the lake Guber but she get up again make he flee to the ocean for aid with who tide-force assist he rend the earth into many island which he hold as captive between his watery e e Ortelius and other in their map make Senaga and Gambra to be arm or mouth of Niger Sanutus think it to be Rio grande leo the the opinion of some which think it to come from Nilus by some under-earth passage The truth be uncertain the angry desert not admit due search arm of Senaga Gambra and diverse other which ever let slip their hold and yet ever hold they in everlasting captivity in this combat while both part sweat in contention a fat excrement be leave behind which all this way hearten the earth with admirable fertility especial then when the cloud in the summer time take niger part and daily marshal their mighty shower to the river aid shoot off continual in their march their airy ordnance with dreadful lightning whereat the amaze earth shrink in herself and the insult water for three month space trample over all and send colony of fish to inhabit the soil engirt meanwhile all the town with a strait siege but when the sun in his autumn progress send forth the wind to summon the cloud to attend on his fiery chariot the earth by degree look up with her dirty face bemit with wash and make use of the slime which can run away with the fleet water to serve she all the year after as treasurer of her plenty and abundance richri and Meshudi ancient african writer know little of these part m m leo lib. 7. but a mahometan preacher in the 380. year of the Hegeira make the people of Luntona and Libya of his faithless faith and after that they be discover they live say Leo like beast without king lord commonwealth or any government scarce know to sow their ground clad in skin of beast not have any peculiar wife but lie ten or twlue man together each man choose which he best like War they wage with no other nation nor be desirous to travel out of their country some worship the sun at the rise other as the people of Gualata the fire and those of Gaoga be Christian like the egyptian joseph king of Morocco subdue they and after that the five people of Libya of who they learn the Mahometan law and other art and the merchant of Barbary frequent those part the libyan divide they into fifteen part each three part of those five people possess one but the n n 1526. present king of Tombuto Abuaci Izchia be make general of the force of Soni Heli the former king which be a libyan after his death slay his son and bring the kingdom to the negro conquer many province after which he go to Mecca on pilgrimage and thereby let himself in debt a hundred and fifty thousand ducat a great part of those part by their difference of language and religion be yet unknown to we Gualata be subdue by the king of Tombuto a beggarly country this region adjoin to cape blanco the portugal when they discover these coast for Henry the infanta trade here for slave as far as Canaga or Senaga to which our nation o o ric. Rainolds hack. have since trade and be a arm as be say of Niger here begin the country of Guinea or ginny in which we will first give description of the kingdom and nation alongst the coast next we will set down some observation of former time in the three place those of the dutch and last of the jesuit jarric thes. rer. Indic tom. 3. l. 1. c. 44. the portugal reckon all to Guinea from Sanaga in sixteen degree to the north and the Angolan limit in thirteen degree of southerly latitude so call of Genus situate on the say river all the kingdom of congo and angola they term the Lower the northerly part the high Guinea Senaga Sanaga or Zanaga the ancient call Stachiris or Darat from hence southward be cape verd or the green cape ancient call Arsinarium against which be twelve island which bear name of this cape which be desert be first inhabit by the portugal 1446. on the coast for we must leave these island to their due place the first kingdom be that of the jaloph jalophi or jaloeses bound with Zanaga on the north the sea on the west on the east the black jaloeses call Fulli Gasalli on the south the berbecine a region contain a hundred and five and twenty league in length the country be rich in fruit and gold whereof in p p Tombuto Tubucato be great store in these part be many portugal turn wild and barbarous after the fashion of the native have in manner put off all christianity in nakedness in figure their skin with indelible character and form of diverse creature and in like behaviour conform themselves to the negro they be call Tangos maos Tangos maos and through all Guinea procure such commodity as they may sell to european merchant southwards from hence be the kingdom of ala and Brocal ala and Brocal inhabit by the berbecine these worship the new moon and sacrifice to certain tree which they imbrue with the blood of the slay sacrifice and with meal of Rice when the king of ala go to war man mutire nefas Pers. sat. 1. he assemble his chief man into a grove near the palace where they dig a ditch in a round circle and there every man declare his opinion after this consultation the ditch be close and under pain of treason all which have be speak must be conceal and as it be thus bury the maiden beautify themselves with such skin-figure as you have hear on their body and face cut and pounce with the juice of herb make to endure they also bear their lip especial the low insert in the hole bone and piece of wood and weighty thing to make it hang from the upper lip opinion can give lothsomeness the prize of beauty the kingdom of Brocal extend to Gambea which river be so great deep and strong that the sea in thirty league from the mouth which open itself five league in disgorge his full stomach can scarce subdue it unto his salt quality some think it proceed from the same fountain with Niger whence these people be call negro some that this and Zanaga proceed from the same head midway betwixt both be the Greene cape along both side of this river dwell the Mandingae Madingae a perfidious and idolatrous nation which have certain enchanter call Bexerini to perform their priestly holy the river be sail up a hundred and threescore league horrible precipice and cataract forbid further passage by water they call this fall a bow for the obliquity of the fall suffer man to pass under without wet many fertile and pleasant island be contain in the divide arm of this stream the inhabitant have ship of good bigness and strength not far hence to the south be cape saint Marie from which to the river of Dominico be thirty league people by the Arriari and Falopi here be also the river casamanqua inhabit on the north by the jabundi on the south the Benhuni to who on the east adjoin the Casangae Casangae the king be subject to the king of jarem and he to another more within land and so in degree unto the monarch of Mandinga who chief city be Songus songu imperial city of Negro above a hundred league eastward from the cape of palm to this king the most of the former be subject the Casangae worship a idol call China which be nothing else but a bundle of staff or pole pitch into the ground and fasten together with paste make of the meal of rice and millet which they sprinkle with the blood of sacrifice kine and goat some hang on the top thereof two or three skull of dog the temple to this goodly deity be some shady tree and there they offer also millet and the wine of palm to secure their seed they stick one of these pole in the ground the portugal buy slave in these part sell by reason of the king unreasonable tyranny the Burami Burami adjoin to the Casangae on both side the river jarim or Dominico as far as Rio grand here also they buy slave the man and woman file their tooth the woman to keep their tongue in order every morning take a draught of water into their mouth and there hold it till dinner or breakfast time meanwhile do their household business not spit eat or talk the chief town of the Burami be eight league from the haven where the chief king to who the rest be subject reside their house be of earth cover with leaf the bijag Bijagi inhabit near the great river a fierce warlike rob people possess also seventeen isle the portugal have there the town of the cross the beafare beafare also in these part be disperse of who the king of Guinala Guinala carry the great state and pomp at who death all his wife and servant and dear client and the king horse be slay and entomb with he to serve he in the other life the like usage be in very many of these guinean kingdom to which they add further cruelty in the manner for they cut off their toe and finger and beat their bone as it be in a mortar three hour long than which they can not outlive this torture and then in the sight of those which be to undergo the like fate thrust they into the neck with a sharp stake so finish their blind martyrdom on the other side the river be Biguba Biguba a Portugal town the best they have in these part the native be beafare who king be dead the strong be his heir the cause of much war between this and cape Sierra Liona so call of the lion-like roar make there by the wave if not of the thunder and dreadful storm be the mallusians bagasians and cozoline in these part grape and sugarcane grow wild store also of Cotton Brasill wood of seven colour grain call Malegetta of the name of the region long pepper millet beside wax and ivory out of their palm they draw wine and oil and a certain excellent soap forbid as be also the long pepper for the excellence to be carry into Portugal they have ape call baris exceed great and so industrious that be bring up in the house they supply the room of a servant go on their hinder foot beat thing in the mortar fetch water home in vessel which yet if none be ready to take from they they will cast down and break and then howl here be store of iron better than we but their best commodity be gold but no foreigner know the mine whence they have it the portugal call their castle here m m mina 1485. build saint George of the mine in the five degree of northerly latitude in Sierra Liona be thirteen river which fall into the sea on the river Das Piedrus the portugal have a town capor and tambassire two other river fall from the hill machamala in which be a great rock of most pure crystal two of these river Tagaris on the north and Bangua on the south of this lion-hill make it a Peninsula in some place so near that they carry their boat by land from one to the other the inhabitant be the cumbae and the native call capi capi. these more ingenious than other guinean they have their king which administer law have to that purpose round gallery not far from their palace call funke where be a high throne for the king and low seat on both side for his counsellor call solatequis their lawyer or advocate they call troen which wear particoloured garment weave with feather hold staff in their hand whereon they lean while they plead and have vizor to hide their a a Some need vizor to hide (@) not blush blush if any such cause happen in the king presence who have hear the plead of these and the advice of the counsellor pronounce sentence in the creation of a the rite observe be this they place the person to be create in a fair seat of wood and then the king strike his face with the innards of a goat that the blood and filth run down his breast then sprinkle he with meal and after put a cap on his head when the king die his son brother or next kinsman succeed but before his full regality they bind he at his house and lead he bind to the palace there whip he after this they loosen he attire and lead he to the judgement seat where the elder counsellor make a oration concern his right and duty which end he put a hatchet into his hand which they use in execution and after this all acknowledge subjection no less strange be their custom for their maiden in every city or village they have a house sever like a monastical cloister from the rest in which all the marriageable virgin be keep and instruct a year space by some old man of best estimation this do they be bring forth well apparel with music and dance there the young man make their choice and bargain with the father pay also the old man for his year school sorcerer be behead and their body cast to the beast and fowl for other offence they be sell and make slave they wear gold ring hang at their nose weigh twenty or thirty crown these with their earring and bracelet be bury with they the cumbae cumbae be not of the ancient native but be barbarous and devourer of man flesh continual war on the former these about the year one thousand five hundred and fifty waste all the country and at last seat themselves here drive the capi from their habitation if they take any chief man they devour they the mean they sell for slave to the portugal reserve the young for souldiory they will sell they more than dog-cheap yea some of the native will sell themselves slave to avoid this barbarous enemy but now be here settle they be grow more mild and gentle of these be descend as some think the giachi or jag of which we shall speak b b lib. 7. c. 10. elsewhere call by this name in congo in angola gindae in Abassia gallae in Mombaza zimbae or Imbiae and here cumbae and Manes by themselves Imbangolae a nationless nation breed without generation and uncertain of what monstrous human-inhuman devilish original @. 2 observation of those part out of CADAMOSTA and other ancient navigator now for further particular of the guinean nation we will begin with the navigation of former time the people inhabit on the river Sanaga Aloise c c Cadomosto di Codimosti a Venetiani call Azanaghi and say that when first the portugal sail thither their simplicity be such have never before see a ship that they take the ship for great bird with white wing out of some strange place come thither but when they see they strike sail they change their opinion and think they to be fish see they afar off but when they see they the next day so far off from that place they take they for night-gobling or spirit this do he learn of diverse of the Azanaghi slave in Portugal they hide their face no less than the privity esteem the mouth unmeet to be see whence they belch such sour breath they have a kind of muffler to hide it and part of the nose only discover the same at meat other governor they then have not only more reverence be do to the most rich a beggarly thievish lie treacherous nation as any in the World they aniont their hair every day with fat of fish for great gallantry whereof they stink exceed and lest you shall think better of their eye then of their nose their woman esteem it the great part of goodly feature to have large breast which by art and industrious stretch of they they enlarge and some of they have they hang to their navel near unto those be certain negro which suffer not themselves to be see of any nor to be hear speak but have excellent gold which they exchange with other negro which bring unto they salt such as the mineral salt of tagazza and leave the same they go away from thence half a day journey the negro come down in certain bark and lay at every heap of salt a quantity of gold and go their way when the salt-merchant return if they like the sum they take it if not they leave the gold still with the salt and go their way and then the other return and what heap of salt they find without gold they take for their own the other either they leave more gold for or else leave altogether this seem hard to believe but many of the arabian and Azanhagi testify it to our author for truth the merchant of melli affirm to i that their prince have once by a plot take one of they think to have learn the condition of that people but either of idleness or because he can not he neither eat nor speak and within three day die their stature they which have take he affirm to be a hand high than themselves and that their nether lip be thick and red and so great that it hang down to their breast and it together with their gum bloody their tooth great and on each side one very large their eye stand out terrible they be to look upon and because they have apprehend this man by their ambushment they return not in three year but after force by the need of salt to cure their disease whence haply that deformity proceed they renew that traffic to leave these far within land and come to the a a barrius dec^^ l. 3. c. 8. and Maffaeus hist. ind. l. 1. say that Senaga and Gambea be by the ancient call Stachiris and Daranus this name Senaga be give by reason that the prince be so call river Senaga Cadamosto just marvel at the partition which that river cause for on the one side the inhabitant be well proportion very black and the soil very fertile on the other side the inhabitant meagre small swart and the ground barren the people that dwell on the bank of Niger be call Gilofi the king name in my time which be b b 1455. almost a hundred and threescore year since be Zuchali he have thirty wife when Richard c c Hak. tom. 2. Rainolds be there 1591. the king name be Amar melik all that region betwixt Sanaga and Gambea be call by one general name Gia Lef of which Maffaeus d d Maff lib. 1. bar. dec. 1. l. 1. C 6 7 8. and barrius write that in a accident of civil war bemoin come to the king of Portugal for aid and be there royal entertain and baptize with his follower of which some be of such admirable dexterity and nimbleness of body that they will leap upon a horse as he gallop and will stand upright in the saddle when he run fast and turn themselves about and sudden sit down and in the same race will take up stone lay in order on the ground and leap down and up at pleasure this bemoin be shameful murder by Peter Vaz the Portugal general and the hope of Christianity in those part disappoint this be 1489. from thence e e al. cadam Cadamosto go to Budomel the prince whereof be have in great respect by his people which when they come into his presence kneel on both their knee and bow their head to the ground cast sand over their shoulder and on their head with both hand and then to go towards he on their knee and when they speak to he cast sand over their shoulder still with their head bow down the prince scarce deign they a look or word for every light offence he will sell their wife and child he suffer our author to go into his Moschee where his arabian chaplain after their manner mumble their matin ten or twelve time in half a hour all the company rise and fall again to the earth and kiss it he also hear he willing confute the mahometan and approve the christian faith but say he think it be hard for a Christian to be save then a negro because God be a just God and lord who have give to we many good thing in this world to they nothing in comparison who shall therefore in the other world have their paradise which here they want easy may he have be turn to Christianity but for fear of lose his State his wife provide he his diet as it be usual among the negro and none but his priest and some principal man eat with he which be after a beastly sort lie on the ground the dish set in the midst and all take out the meat with their hand they eat little at once but eat often four or five time a day from October to june it rain not there they have great serpent and many which they use to charm and the prince when he will poison his weapon do as be report make a great circle and enchant by his charm all the serpent thereabouts thereinto and then kill that which seem to he most venomous let the rest go with the blood thereof and the seed of a certain tree he temper a poison for that purpose with which a weapon infect draw never so little blood do kill in a quarter of a hour they have great store of parrot which be instruct by a marvelous natural cunning to prevent the serpent which will else destroy their nest they build therefore on high tree and on the end of some tender bough thereof they fasten a bulrush which hang down two span thereunto weave and work their nest in such sort that the serpent for fear of fall dare not adventure to deal therewith the negro come about Cadamosto with wonder to see his apparel and the whiteness of his colour never before have they see any Christian and some of they with spital rub his skin to see whether his whiteness be natural or no which perceive it to be no tincture they be out of measure astonish they will then give nine or sometime fourteen slave for a horse furnish and when they buy a horse they will bring some of their enchanter which make a fire of herb and set the horse over the smoke utter certain word and after that anoint he with a thin ointment and shut he up twenty day that none may see he hang certain trumpery about his neck think that hereby they be more secure in battle gun seem to they for their hideous noise to be of the devil lag-pipe they think to be a live creature that thus sing in variable accent but when they be suffer to handle they they think they to be some heavenly thing that God have make with his own hand to sound so sweet they behold the ship with great curiosity and eye that be carve in the prow of the ship they take to be eye indeed by which it see how to direct the course at sea they say the christian that can thus make voyage by sea be great enchanter and comparable to the devil themselves have enough to do to travel by land see a candle burn in the night they which know not to make any light but their fire esteem it wonderful honey they have which they suck out of the comb but the wax they hurl away till they be instruct how to make candle thereof Senega Boterus say come from the lake chelonidi Sanutus affirm that Senega be the same which Ptolemey call darandus Gambea or Gambra that which he call Stachie and Rio grande be Niger Cadamosto double the promontory call cape verde or the green cape because of the green tree which the portugal which have first discover it in the year before find there grow in abundance as h h likewise cape Sierra Liona be so call of the lion-like terror thereof always cover on the top with cloud which yield dreadful thunder and lightning it seem to be the same that Ptolemie and Hanno call the chariot of the god g. bot. ben. cape blanco or the white cape be so call of the white sand there the inhabitant they find be of two sort Barbacini and Sereri they have no prince they be great idolater and have no law but be very cruel they poison their arrow with which and the situation of their country they have preserve themselves from the king of Senega in Gambra they be some idolater of diverse sort some mahometans they be also great enchanter their live as at Senega save that they eat dog flesh here the prince hunt a elephant and give they to eat the flesh be strong and unsavoury the elephant delight in mire like swine they hunt they in the wood for in the plain a elephant will without run soon take and kill the swift man who yet they hurt not except they be first provoke if with come and often turn he be not disappoint here be a kind of fish Cadomosto i i Cademosto ramus etc. pag. 47. call it cavallo and his latin interpreter piscis Caballinus I take it for the Hippopotamus or river-horse which be say he as big as a cow his leg short with tusk like to a boar but so great that I have see one of two span and long clovenfooted and head like a horse he live on both element sometime in the water otherwhiles on the land the woman upon their breast neck and arm have certain work do with a needle point heat in the fire in manner as with we they work handkerchief this be do in their youth will never out the like flesh-branded work they use at cape Sagres as Pietro k k Pietro de Sintra de Sintra a Portugal observe upon their body and face the inhabitant there be idolater and worship image of wood to who they offer some of their meat and drink when they go to their meal the go naked cover their privy part with the bark of tree this be l l the hollander be entertain of a king in Guinea but very miserable a old woman naked three time go about the captain with certain murmur word and cast ash on his clothes the noble about the king be naked hol. Nauig. 1599 in Guinea a little from thence they find man who use as great bravery in their ear which they bore full of hole and wear therein ring of gold in row or rank they wear one great ring in another hole bore through their nose like to buffle in Italy which when they eat their meat they take away the man and woman of sort wear such ring also in their lip in like sort as in their ear a ensign of their nobility and greatness which they put in and out at pleasure beyond the river of palm they find other thus beringe and for great gallantry wear about their neck certain chain of tooth seem to be the tooth of man they take a negro who they carry into Portugal who affirm if a woman which only can understand he do interpret he right that in his country be unicorn HONDIUS his map of Guinea GVINEA @. 3 other observation of late time by englishman and other and these country have since be seek to u u the guinean esteem well of the french ill of the flemish and not well of the portugal Arthus hist ind. or. c. 9 by french flemish and many of our english merchant in the year 1553. 10 10 th. windham anto. Pinteado see Hak. voyages tom. 2. part. 2. Thomas windham and Anthony Pindeado a Portugal in two english ship trade alongst those coast as far as benin where they present themselves to the king who sit in a great hall the wall whereof be make of earth without window the roof of thin board open in diverse place his noble about he never look he in the face but sit cower upon their buttock with their elbow upon their knee and their hand before their face not look up till the king command they and when they depart out of his presence they turn not their back upon he such reverend regard do that negro king receive of they the next year 10 10 th. windham anto. Pinteado see Hak. voyages tom. 2. part. 2. master John lock go for captain into those part to trade for gold grain and elephant tooth and after that diverse voyages be thither make by William y y John lock Towerson z z w. Towerson who observe at the river of saint Vincent strange tree with great leaf like great docke long than that a man can reach the top of they and a kind of pease by the seaside grow on the sand like tree with stalk seven and twenty pace long diverse of the woman have breast exceed long at the cape tres puntas they make he swear by the water of the sea that he will not hurt they before they will trade with he king Abaan a negro entertain our man kind he cause to be bring a pot of wine of palm or Coco which they draw forth of tree as we have elsewhere observe but their ceremony in drink be thus first they bring forth their pot of drink and then make a hole in the ground and put some of the drink into it and after that cast in the earth again and thereon set their pot and with a little thing make of a gourd take out of the same drink and put it upon the ground in three place and in diverse place they have certain bunch of the pill of palmtree set in the ground before they and there they put in some drink do great reverence in all place to the same palmtree all these ceremony do the king take a cup of gold in which they put wine and while he drink all the people cry Abaan Abaan with certain other word and then they give drink to every one the like ceremony they use in all the country in benin a a james welsh the people go naked till they be marry and then be clothe from the waste to the knee their bread be a kind of root call Inamia which when it be well sodden may be prefer before we they have here great spout of water fall out of the air which if they light on a ship do endanger the same they fall like the pillar of church as for those voyage to those part make by b b Will Rutter George Fenner Anthony ingram Rutter Fenner ingram or other I refer they to master hackluyt collection one write c c description of benin by D.R. that the king of benin have six hundred wife with all which twice a year he go in pomp the gentleman have some of they fourscore some fourscore and ten the mean ten or twelve at cape de lope Gonsalues some pray to the sun other to the moon or to certain tree or to the earth esteem it a great sin to spit upon it from whence they receive their food man and woman inke their body put thereon grease mix with colour they will not drink before they put out some and drink not when they eat they offer their wife to stranger the king keep his daughter when they be grow for wife and the queen with like incestuous abomination use their son they paint their body red use banana dry in stead of bread and lay all their meat in a dish together about the castle of mina they be subject to such worm as master jenkinson d d ant. jenkinson Hak. to. 1. Those worm come out of their leg or some fleshy part have observe to grow upon man at Bognar in Bactria by drink the water of the river there which be a ell long and must be pull out by degree every day a little if they break by the way it be very dangerous the torture they cause be unspeakable they breed in the arm and leg yea sometime in the yard and cod one man have have ten of they at one time the inhabitant of benin e e gotard arth. dant hist Ind. cap. 9. Ind. orient part. 6. de bry. observe circumcision and some other superstition which may seem mahometan but be more likely to be ancient ethnic rite for many country of Africa admit circumcision and yet know not or acknowledge not Mahometism but be either christian as the cophti abassine or gentile they cut or raze the skin with three line draw to their navel esteem it necessary to salvation they will not easy do injury to any especial a stranger they have bird in such respect that it be deadly to any that shall hurt they and some be appoint to have a peculiar care of they and to provide they food which they do in high mountain where they lay meat for they which they come and eat Arthus write that the inhabitant of Guinea f f got. Art. c. 10. 11 12 13. give religious respect unto certain tree and in the year one thousand five hundred ninety eight certain hollander cut they and not cease at the persuasion of negro who superstition in that case they deride it pass from word to blow betwixt they and the dutchman be force to get they to their ship one of their company be slay in the chase but the murderer be offer to the hollander to be punish which they refuse his countryman cut off his head and quarter his body bestow the one as a monument of revenge over the slay party grave the other on the fowl unbury their g g description of Guinea tree be always green some have leaf twice a year they seldom see the sun either rise or go down by the space of half of a hour their winter begin in April which yet be their time of harvest maize be bring thither out of America in April May and june they have much rain and the same very dangerous to the body and rot the clothes if it be not present dry the creature in Guinea it be often as warm as if it be sodden they have some snake thirty foot long as much as six man can carry they have also a beast like a crocodile call Lanhadi we have speak of the like about Pegu and Bengala which never go into the water spider as big as the palm of one hand which do not spin store of cameleon dog woolly with sharp snout of diverse colour which can bark drive to the market as sheep tie one to another blue parrot many sort of ape black fly which seem to burn in Senega some snake have mouth so wide that they a whole sheep without tear they have wing dragon with tail and long mouth with many tooth be blue and green which some negro worship they boar a hole in the Palm-wine tree whence issue a white juice first sweet and after by stand it become sour and after by stand it become sour it be somewhat like the coco-tree the Palmita be without branch the fruit grow on the top which within be like pomegranate full of grain without of a golden colour they buy gentility with gift a dog a sheep a cow in their creation be observe much solemnity they know not how to number their year but seem to live long in their winter they have much sickness and mortality the good of the decease descend not to his child but to the brethren if he have any otherwise to his father if it be a woman her husband deliver her marriage good to her brethren when the king die the sepulchre be make like a house and as well furnish as if they be alive be guard night and day by arm man to bring he any thing which he shall need their nose be flat not natural but by press they down in their infancy esteem it a great part of beauty their hot stomach can digest raw flesh and therefore * * alex. problem lib. 1. and 2 Coel. l. 16. c. 15. Alexander Aphrodisicus and coelius rhodiginus that think their natural heat extract to the outward part to be the cause of their blackness be deceive they eat the enemy which be slay in the war which be very rife among those nation and those which be take be everlasting prisoner and in some more important war which they undertake they will burn their dwelling before they go lest either the enemy may possess they by conquest or themselves become too mindful of a return in these war they provide themselves of some good light armour wear at such time no other apparel their woman be unfaithful secretary in nature most hide secret use in the sight of man woman boy and girl to be deliver of their child who after they circumcise whether they be of the male or female sex @. 4 of the marriage manner religion funeral government and other rite of the guinean collect out of a late dutch author and if we may leave to follow a dutch guide well acquaint in these part whereof he have write a very large a a a description of Guinea 1600. in a ducth book treatise you may feast with they at their spousal and again after a view of their life at their funeral at the marriage of their daughter they give half a ounce of gold to buy wine for the bridal the king himself give no other portion the bride in the presence of her friend swear to be true to her husband which the man do not for adultery he may divorce she and the adulterer pay to the king four and twenty Pesos of gold and the husband also may drive he out of town but the dutchman pay no fine therefore the woman only be blame and pay four Pesos if the husband suspect his wife he make trial of her honesty by cause she to eat salt with diverse Fetisso b b fetisso be the name of their idol etc. ceremony hereafter mention the fear whereof make she confess they have many wife if they can buy and keep they each dwell in a house by herself though there be ten of they they eat and lodge asunder sometime they will bring their cheer together the husband close take which he will have lie with he to his room where their bed be a mat. the woman after travel wash themselves and acccompany not with their husband for three month after the child new bear have a clean cloth wrap about the middle and be lay down on a mat the mother use to bear their child at their back and so travel with they none prove lame notwithstanding that shake of their body they give they the breast over their shoulder when it be a month old they hang a net about the body like a shirt education of their child make of the bark of a tree hang full of fetish to secure it from the devil who otherwise will they think carry it away they hang the hair full of shell and coral about the neck arm and leg apply fetish or wreathe with superstitious fancy that one be good against vomit a second for fall a three for bleed a four to make it sleep a five against wild beast and so on in the rest give to each Fetisso a several name they quick learn they to eat and then leave they about the house like dog they soon learn to go to speak to swim when they be first bear they be not black but reddish as the brasilian each woman bring up her own they teach they no civility and beat they sometime cruel with staff when they be eight or ten or twelve year old they learn they to spin bark-threed and make net after that they go with their father to fish at eighteen year old they begin to set up for themselves two or three of they together hire a house and Canoa and then they cover their privity grow amorous and their father look out wife for they they have little hair on their face at thirty they wear nail as long as the joint of a man finger as a token of gentility which be also observe by merchant they keep they very clean and as white as ivory they be great in flesh beyond man of these part at threescoore and ten or fourscore their blackness decay and they grow yellow they have small belly long leg broad foot long toe sharp sight quick wit ostrich maw be spiteful curious neat drunkard thief lecherous and subject to the pock whereof they be not ashamed as neither of show their nakedness yet it be hold shame with they to let a fart which they wonder at in the hollander esteem it a contempt their woman in Guinea the woman go long naked be libidinous and will boast of their filthiness if they can have their pleasure with the dutch deck themselves of purpose they wear bead about their neck and straw fetish about their foot the Mulato woman in mina cut their hair short for bravery their ornament they cut three gash on their forehead a inch long and likewise on their cheek near their ear which they suffer to swell and colour it with paint they make also white streak under their eye they curl and fold the hair of their head make a hill in the midst like a hat with frizzle round about they use long comb with two tooth only each a finger length these they use also for salutation pluck they out and in as here man put off or on their hat they make also white spot on their face which afar off show like pearl they raze their arm and breast with diverse cut on which every morning they lay colour which cause they to show like black silk doublet cut and pink they have earing and bracelet of copper the unmarried maid wear thirty or forty on each arm of iron the common quean wear copper ring with bell on their leg these woman be strong nimble well proportion good housewife home-keeper and cook not very fruitful the riches of the guinean be store of wife and child they take great pride of white tooth which therefore they rub with a certain wood they show like ivory their garment be a fathom or more of linen cloth which they wear about their body from beneath the breast to the knee upon which they gird a piece of blue or yellow cloth whereon hang their knife and key and diverse wispe of straw or fetish when they go to market they wash they from top to toe and put on other clothes they buy no more but for that day or meal they stamp their Milia as we do spice fan it in a wooden dish steep it overnight with a little maize and in the morning lay it on a stone and as painter their colour grind it with another stone till it be down which they temper with fresh water and salt and make roll thereof twice as big as a man fist and bake it a little on the hearth this be their bread their bread their diet their diet be strange as raw flesh handful of grain large draught of aquavitae dog cat buffle elephant though stink like carrion and a thousand maggot creep in they there be little bird like bulfinche which make their nest on small end of twig for fear of snake these they eat alive with their feather the moor say that within land they eat dry snake and these will eat dog gut raw which our author have see and a boy leave in pawn on shipbord for debt which have meat enough yet will secret kill the hen that he may eat their raw gut they will eat old stink fish dry in the sun yet can they be dainty if they may have it some make a kind of ale of maize and water sod together call poitou sometime four or five together will buy a pot of Palm-wine which they pour into a great Cabas which grow on tree and some of they be half as big as a kilderkin drink round about which they sit to drink each send a little potful to his best wife when they first drink they take it out with a small Cabas and lay their hand on the head of he which first drink cry aloud Tautosi Tautosi he drink not all off but leave a little to throw on the ground to the Fetisso say 1. spout out some on their fetish on their arm and leg otherwise think they can not drink in quiet they be great drinker and feed as unmannerly as swine sit on the ground and cram not stay till the morsel in the mouth be swallow but tear their meat in piece with the three mid-finger cast it into their mouth ready gape to receive it they be always hungry and will eat all day long yea the dutchman have great stomach while they be there he that get most must be most liberal industrious to get and as prodigal in spend upon their liquor before the portugal trade they have no merchandise but go naked and the people within land be afraid of they because they be white and apparel they come to trade in the ship in the morning see wind for about noon the wind before blow from land come from sea and they be not able to endure the roughness thereof they believe that man when they die go into another world where they shall have like need of many thing as here they have and therefore use to put with the dead corpse some part of household and if they lose any thing they think that some of their friend which in the other world have need thereof come thence and steal it of * * the religion of the guinean God be ask they say he be black and evil and do then much harm their good they have by their own labour and not by his goodness circumcision they use and some other turkish rite they hold it unmeet and irreligious to spit on the ground they have no letter nor book they observe a sabbath Tuesday Sabbath they call it dio fetish herein agree and yet disagree with Turk jew and Christian for they observe Tuesday rest from their fish and husbandry the wine of the palmtree which be that day gather may not be sell but be offer to the king who bestow it on his courtier to drink at night in the midst of the marketplace they have a table stand on four pillar two elf high who flat cover be make straw and reed weave together hereon be set many straw ring call fetish or God and therein wheat with water and oil for their god which they think eat the same their priest they call Fetissero who every festival day place a seat on that table and sit thereon preach to the people the content whereof I can never learn which do the woman offer he their infant and he sprinkle they with water in which a newt or snake do swim and then besprinkle the table aforesaid with the same water and so utter certain word very loud and stroke the child with certain colour as give they his blessing he drink of that water the people clap their hand and cry 1. i. and so he dismiss his devout assembly many wear such ring of straw next their body as preservative from those danger which else their angry god may inflict on they in honour of the same deity or devil as it seem they conceive he to be they bechalke themselves with a kind of chalkey earth and this be unto they in stead of their morning matin the first bit at meal and first draught be consecrate to their idol and therefore they besprinkle therewith those ring which I say they wear on their body if fisher can speed at sea they give a piece of gold to the Fetissero to reconcile their frown saint he therefore with his wife walk a kind of procession through the city smite his breast and clap his hand with a mighty noise till he come at the shore and there they cut down certain bough from the tree and hang they on their neck and play on a timbrel then do the Fetissero turn to his wife and expostulate with they and withal hurl into the sea wheat and other thing as a offering to Fetisso to appease his displeasure towards the fisherman when the king will sacrifice to Fetisso he command the Fetissero to inquire of a tree whereto he ascribe divinity what he will demand he with his wife come to the tree and in a heap of ash there provide prick in a branch pluck off the tree and drink water out of a basin spout it out on the branch and then daubeth his face with the ash which do he declare the king question and the devil out of the tree make answer the noble also adore certain tree and esteem they oracle and the devil sometime appear unto they in the same in form of a black dog and other while answer without any visible apparition there be which worship a certain bird * * the Bird pittoie which be spot and paint as it be with star and resemble the low of a bull in her voice to hear this bird low in their journey be to they a lucky bode say Fetisso make they good promise and therefore let he in that place where they hear it a vessel of water and wheat and as the earth and air yield they deity so the sea be not behind in his liberality but yield certain fish to their canonization in this respect they take not the tunny at all the swordfish they take but eat not till his sword be cut off which be dry and hold in great veneration the mountain will bend their sullen brow if they shall not have some red letter in their calendar to which their top aspire threaten to scale heaven or overwhelm the earth if the Fetissan portion do not pacify their angry mood by daily present of meat and drink set thereon neither can nature alone usurp this pravilege but art in other thing her emulous corrival and far unequal competitor in this matter of god-making common get the upper hand and therefore they with their ceremonious art can make they fetish ' or god at pleasure principal in their funeral they observe it for when one be dead funeral rite they make a new Fetisso or ring of straw and pray it to bear the dead party company and protect he in his journey into the other World they lay the dead body on a Matte on the ground wind it in a woollen cloth set a stool under the head which be cover with a goat skin the body be straw over with ash his arm lay by his side his eye open and so continue half a day his best-beloved wife sit by as the husband do also at the death of his wife cry aury and wipe her face with a wisp of straw woman go round about the house sing and beat on basin and about the corpse likewise and then again about the house the elder Morimi or gentleman go about from house to house with a basin wherein each put the value of twelvepence in gold with which they buy a cow with who blood the Fetissero appease the Fetisso the friend and kinsfolk assemble prepare a hen and then set themselves in a corner of the dead man house they place all his fetisso on a row the great in the midst adorn the same with garland of pease and beanes like to the popish praying-bead then they sprinkle the same with the blood of the hen and hang a chain or garland of herb about their neck after this the woman set the hen now sodden in the midst of the fetisso and the Fetissera take water in his mouth which amidst his exorcism and charm he spout on those fetisso and take two or three herb from his neck he roll the same in form of a ball which after certain ceremony he lay down and so do till all his herb-garland be spend and then make they all into one great ball and therewith besmear his face and thus be it make a Fetisso and the party decease be now at rest in the mean time the dear of his wife fill all the house with mourn the neighbour and friend with song and music such as they have and dance and at last they take up the corpse and carry it to the grave which be four foot deep and cover it with stake that nothing may fall therein the woman creep about the sepulchre expostulate with he why he will leave they then do they hurl on earth so that none can get in to the corpse for he have with he his household armour and whatsoever he use in his life time wine also if before he love it to drink in the other World last they cover the sepulchre with a roof to defend all from rain if the king die not only great solemnity be use but the noble think it necessary for so great a personage to have attendant offer unto he one a servant another a wife a three his son or daughter till there be many of both sex in that other life to attend he all which be sudden slay at unaware and their bloody carcase bury together with the king yea the king wife which love he best refuse not this last and everlasting service as they suppose but yield themselves to die that they may live with he the head of all these thus slay be set upon pole round about the sepulchre meat drink raiment arm and other utensil be add for their use and bury with they after the burial they go to the sea or river and there observe other rite some wash while other play on basin and instrument the widow or widower be lay backward on the water with diverse word of complaint at last they clothe they return to the deadman house make great cheer and drink themselves drink they in uncertainty of criminal accusation as of adultery murder and such like have a certain water a a this drink they call Enchienbenou offer they to drink by the Fetissero make of those herb whereof their Bal Fetisso be make and in effect like the curse water Numb. 5. none dare to drink for fear of sudden death thereby if he be guilty they dare not come out of their house in thunder for then they say many of they be carry away by the devil and throw dead on the ground when they pray for rain they wash themselves and cast water over their head with diverse word and spit in the water their king their king be elective and must be liberal or else be expel once a year he make a great feast for the common people buy to that end all the Palm-wine and many kine the head of which be paint and hang in the king chamber in testimony of his bounty he invite also his neighbour-king captain and gentleman and then pray and sacrifice to his Fetisso which be the high tree in the town the man with fence drum sing leap the woman with dance honour this feast every king hold his feast apart one soon after another in the summertime the king come little abroad in the morning and evening his slave blow or sound certain trumpet make of elephant tooth his wife do then wash and anoint his body he have also his Guard he sit b b his throne and sceptre in state on a stool hold in his hand the tail of a horse or elephant to drive away fly gallant adorn with ring of gold on his arm and leg and neck with coral bead also wherewith likewise he make diverse knot on his beard his child c c his child if they will have any thing when they be of age must get it the common people will not like that he shall maintain they idle only he bestow on they their marriage gift and a slave they choose by most voice d d successor a successor in another kindred who inherit the treasure of the dead king and not his own child controversy be try e e their trial in Law by the fetisseros pot as be say if it be for murder he may redeem his life with money one moiety to the king the other to the courtier if he can the executioner f f execution bind his hand behind he cover his face lead he to a place alone and cause he to kneel down thrust he through and then for before they think he not dead cut off his head and quarter the body leave it to the fowl and beast his head be boil by his friend and the broth eat and then they hang it by the Fetisso they make solemn oath and promise promise or oath on this manner they wipe their face shoulder breast and all their body on the sole of your foot thrice say jau jau jau stamp kiss the fetish on their arm and leg the land be all the king and therefore they first till his land and then by composition for themselves they begin on a Tuesday and when the king work be do have a feast in honour of their Fetisso to prosper their husbandry @. v. observation of the coast and inland country out of barreriv' and LEO and of the cause of the negro blackness 1604. certain jesuit be send into these part the chief of which be Balthasar barrerius Barrer Epist. who convert some of those negro to the romish christian profession one of which be the king at Sierra Liona christen with the name Philip his father a man of a hundred and thirty year about the fain time finish his life a letter of this Philip unto king Philip of Spain Phillippi Leonia lit. feb. 5. 1606 be publish by jarrie in which he desire more priest to be send into those part offer he to build a castle at the cape and conclude with wish he as many year as the heaven have star and the sea Sands the king of Bena give great hope of his conversion which be sudden dash by mean of a certain mahometan for so far have that pestilence a a at the first come of the portugal all these part be ethnic with some little saracenicall aspersion among the jaloph berbecine Mandingae which now be all mahometans infect who make a flatter oration of two hour long incline the king to his faithless Faith this king dominion extend nine day journey and contain seven of their petty kingdom we have before speak of the Mandingae near to Gambea these have of late year embrace Mahomet and by arm and merchandise the usual mean seek to propagate it to other be excellent horseman and courageous usual place in the forefront their priest be call Bexerini which write arabic annulet to secure such as wear they in battle these preach to the people and draw forth parchment roll spread they with great devotion on the pulpit and stand a while with eye fix to heaven as it be in divine conference present will they to thank GOD and his prophet for the pardon of all their sin then read he his scroll the people tend two hour together without once stir their body or turn away their eye one of they be chief over the rest who have teach the king of Bena a certain enchantment or witchcraft to make the devil the instrument of his revenge upon any offender which make he dreadful to all two of the portugal confess the experiment thereof upon themselves the like appear in a huge serpent which they call the king of serpent of most beautiful dolour as big as a man thigh which the king play withal without any harm the jesuite speak of one man which have threescore and twelve son and fifty daughter which multiply beyond credit all the kindred mourn at the death of the great man assemble to the corpse and offer of which offering one three be the king the second the near kinsman which be charge with the funeral the three be put into the grave together withal that gold which they have treasure for this purpose through their whole life hide it close from the knowledge of all so that if they die sudden their gold be perish with they yea their sepulcher the jesuit report be keep secret and make in the channel of river divert the stream till it be make to preserve these treasure to the use of the dead at the year end they renew the memory of the decease with mourn and festival solemnity the more drunkenness the great honour they have idol of wood and straw and their china before mention make of pole in form of a pyramid within which be many white pismire that come not forth and it be uncertain what they eat before these they will adjure their servant to fidelity wish that serpent lizard or tiger may tear they if they run away which they fear with religious awe and dare not flee upon any hard usage every kingdom have a place sacred to the devil such a one be the island Camasson a league from the shore where all that sail by offer rice oil or some other thing the king once a year sacrifice goat and hen which be there keep there be no fear of steal they where none dare adventure to set foot on land and now leave the coast of Guinea benin Melegete and the other region of the negro adjoin to the sea we will look back again into the inland country whereof Gualata be a hundred mile distant from the ocean and have already be mention the next thereunto in * * Leo lib. 7. leos relation be Gheneoa which be not the same with Guinea before mention if Leo have true intelligence but be situate betwixt Gualata Tombuto and melli and in one place border on the ocean where Niger fall into the sea they have great traffic with the merchant of Barbary they have gold uncoin and use also iron money there be neither town nor castle but one where the prince with priest doctor and merchant reside those priest and doctor go apparel in white the rest in black or blue Cotton in july August and September Niger over-floweth it Izchia the king of Tombuto conquer it and keep the king rat Gago till his death be the head city of a kingdom which hence take name and have in it great store of temple priest and reader or professor which read in the temple because they have no college they be more ingenious than other negro and be the first that embrace the mahometan Law Izchia also subdue they Tombuto be found in the year of the Hegeira 610. and it be situate within twelve mile of a branch of Niger there be many well to receive the overflow water of that river salt dear salt be bring they five hundred mile from tagazza and be very dear ay at my be there say Leo see a camel burden sell for fourscore ducat the king have many plate and sceptre of gold some whereof weigh thirteen hundred pound they which speak to he cast sand over their head as Cadamosto observe at Budomel the king will admit no jew into his city and hate they so extreme that he will confiscate the good of such merchant as hold traffic with they he great honour man of learning and no Merchandize yield more gain than book there be many judge doctor and priest to who he allow their stipend the people use much dance in the street from ten to one of clock at night they mingle fish milk butter and flesh together in their gallimaufry kind of diet neither toothsome nor wholesome Hamet king of Morocco b b pory in translat. ro. c. history of Barbary conquer the same kingdom 1589. and also Gago and other country of the negro extend his empire six month journey from Morocco by camel who riches thereby acquire appear in the letter of Laurence c c Hak Tom 2. Madoc Madoc and we before have touch Gago be much frequent by merchant and thing be sell at excessive rate in a hundred mile space you shall scarce find one in those part that can read or write and the king according oppress they with taxation in Guber they sow their corn on the water which Niger with his overflow bring upon the country and have abundant recompense Izchia king of Tombuto d d Leo lib. 7. conquer the king of Guber of Agadez also and of cano which have great store of merchant likewise of Casena and zegzeg and Zanfara in which I find little worth the remembrance cano have some relic of christianity and they be name by the apostle name Guangara be not only oppress by the say Izchia of Tombuto but by Abraham king of Borno Borno confine with Guangara on the west and extend eastward five hundred mile the people have no religion neither Christian jewish nor Mahometan but like beast live with their wife and chrildren in common and as a merchant which live long among they and learn their language tell Leo they have no proper e e even our ancestor the saxon have no surn but by some accident as white Long short etc. and the norman bring over their custom of name man by the place of their habitation as the town oak Style or their occupation And in ancient write few proper name but their christian may be find so the roman Crassi Nasones etc. vid. camb. Versteg antiq. lamb peramb of Kent name as in other nation but as they give he some name on distinction by his height fatness or other peculiar accident the king war with his neighbour he be descend of the libyan people Bardoa for maintenance of his war he will give great price for horse exchange fifteen or twenty slave for one which slave he take from his enemy when I be in this kingdom I find there many merchant that be weary of this traffic because they stay for their slave till the king return from his war yet the king teem to be rich all his horse-furniture stirrup spur bridle bit be all of gold and his dish platter or whatsoever he do eat or drink in yea his chain for his dog be for the most part or most fine Gold he have many both white and black people subject to he Gaoga border westward on Borno and thence trend to Nubia between the desert of serta on the north and another desert confine on a wind crook of Nilus about five hundred mile square it have neither civility letter nor government the inhabitant have no understanding especial they which dwell in the mountain who go naked in the summertime their privity except their house be make of bough which easy take fire they have store of cattle a hundred year before Leo time they be bring in subjection by a negro slave who first slay his master and by help of his good make prey in the next region exchange his captive for horse of Egypt and so become king of Gaoga his nephew son Homara then reign and be much respect by the sultan of cairo Leo be at his court and find he a man pass liberal he much honour all that be of the lineage of Mahomet the nubae in old time be many kingdom as * * Strab. l. 17. Strabo affirm not subject to the aethiopian and be then Nomades or Wanderer and robber as it be now take John Leo be our author Nubia stretch from Gaoga unto Nilus have the egyptian confine on the north and the desert of goran on the south they can sail out of this kingdom into Egypt for the river Nilus while it be covetous of largeness lose his deepness and cover certain plain become so shallow that both man and beast may wade over Dangala be their chief town and have ten thousand family but ill build their house be chalk and straw the inhabitant with their traffic to cairo become rich there be in this kingdom great store of corn and sugar civet sandall and ivory they have strong poison one grain whereof give to ten person will kill they all in a quarter of a hour and one man if he alone take it present a ounce hereof be sell for a hundred ducat it be not sell but to stranger which first take their oath that they will not use it in their country and if any sell thereof secret it cost he his life for the king have as much for custom as the merchant for price c c f. Aluare cap. 30. and 137. some b b g Bot ben. portugal travel through Nubia see many church ruin by the arabian and some image the jewish and mahometan superstition have there almost prevail in old time they have bishop send they from Rome which by mean of the arabian be after hinder the nubian king war with the inhabitant of goran call Zingani who speak a language that none else understand and with other in the desert on the other side of Nilus towards the red sea who language seem to be mix with the chaldaean and resemble the speech of Suachen in the country of Prester John they be call Bugiha and live very miserable they have once a town on the red sea call zibid who port answer direct to that of zidem which be forty mile from Mecca this zibid for their robbery be destroy by the sultan Ortelius c c ortel theat say that in Nubia they be sometime Christian and now be scarce of any religion at all they send into Prester john country for priest when aluares @ be there to repair their almost ruin christianity but without effect Sanutus e e Sanutus lib. 7. reckon here other kingdom Gothan Medra Dauma whereof because we have little but the name I can write nothing now if any will look that we shall here in our discourse of the negro assign some cause of that their black colour I answer that I can well answer this question as be in itself difficult and make more by the variety of f f theodect strabonem l. 15. plin lib. 2. c. 78. macrob. in some Scip lib. 2. c. 10. Alexan Probl. 2 say that the heat of the sun bring the natural heat into the outward part and thereby make they black of hue and fearful of heart and more easy die of a fever than other lib. 1. Caelius rhod. have a long disputation thereof lib. 10. ca. 15. but all his reason may as well conclude of America which yet be not black odoardo Lopez and p. Pigofetta in the story of congo deny the sun to be the cause ramusius in his discourse of the red sea attribute the colour of the people to the differ of place as of mountain low wet dry etc. some tell a tale of Cham know his wife in the ark whereupon by divine curse his son Chus be black with all his posterity answer that other give hereunto some allege the heat of this torrid region proceed from the direct beam of the sun and why then shall all the west indies which stretch from the one tropic to the other have no black people except a few in Quareca which haply be not natural of the place and if this be the cause why shall Africa yield white people in Melinde and near the line black at the cape of good hope in five and thirty then in Brasill under the line some leave the hot impression in the air attribute it to the dryness of the earth as though the libyan desert be not more dry and yet the people no negro and as though Niger be here dry up some to the hide quality of the soil and why then be the portugal child and generation white or Mulatos at most that be tawny in saint Thomee and other place among they as also the inhabitant of Melinde Madagascar and other place in the same height in and adjoin to Africa some ascribe it as Herodotus to the blackness of the parent sperm or seed and how make they the search to know the colour thereof which if it have a thing by other deny by what reason shall it imprint this colour on the skin and how come it that they be reddish at their birth yellowish in age some ascend above the moon to call some heavenly constellation and influence into this consistory of nature and there will I leave they yea I will send they further to he that have reserve many secret of nature to himself and have will we to content ourselves with thing reveal as for secret thing both in heaven and earth they belong to the lord our god who holy name be bless for ever for that he have reveal to we thing most necessary both for body and soul in the thing of this life and that which be to come his incomprehensible unity which the angel with cover face in their holy holy Holy-hymn resound and laud in Trinity have please in this variety to diversify his work all serve one human nature infinite multiply in person exceed vary in accident that we also may serve that h h Vnus and Bernard one-most God that the i i vid. poly. olb tawny Moor black negro dusky libyan ash-coloured Indian olive-coloured american shall with the white european become one sheep-fold under one great shepherd till this mortality be swallow up of life we may all k k John 17.22 be one as he and the father be one and all this variety swallow up into a ineffable unity only the language of Canaan be hear only the father name write in their forehead the lamb song in their mouth the victorious palm in their hand their long robe be make white in the blood of the lamb who they follow whither soever he go fill heaven and earth with their everlasting hallelujah without any more distinction of colour nation language sex condition l l Apoc. 7. and 14. all may be one in he that be one and only bless for ever amen relation of the region and religion in Africa of AETHIOPIA and the african island and of their religion the seven book chap. i. of Aethiopia superior and the antiquity thereof @. i. of the name and division of Aethiopia out of Nubia we need neither Palinurus help nor Charon to set we on the aethiopian territory the sea be far distant and the river Nilus which part they whether loath to mix his fresh water with the sea saltness or fear to fall down those dreadful a a the fall of Nilus down from steep rock cataract or dread the multitude of pit which the egyptian make in his way to entrap he here show his unwillingness to pass further forward and distract with these passion have almost lose his channel diffuse himself in such linger and heartless manner as man and beast dare here insult on his water and I also have adventure to take the advantage of these shallows and wade over into this ancient renown Aethiopia the name Aehiopia come from aethiop b b Aethiopia coryneta Aethiope Unicani f. n come l. 2. the son of Vulcan before it have be call aetheria and after that Atlantia c c Lydiat in emend temp. Lydiat derive Aethiopia of ai and thebet the land of or beyond Thebais which be call Aegyptus superior next to Aethiopia Chytraeus say it be derive of (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) of the sun burn presence two Aethiopia be find in Africa as Pliny d d plin. l. 5. c. 8. witness out of Homer so ancient be the division the eastern and western and this partition be by some still follow as namely by e e Osor gest emanuelis lib. 4. Osorius other divide the same into the asiatike and african author hereof be Herodotus f f Herod l. 7. in his Pocyhimnia which reckon two sort of aethiopian in Xerxes huge army the eastern muster under the indian standard the other of Africa by themselves differ from the former in language and their curl hair Eusebius g g euseb chron. in A.M. 3580. mention aethiopian near the river Indus and to let pass pausanias h h Pausan l. 6. in fine his search among the seres or Philostratus i i Philostrat. l. 3. vit. ap. at Ganges for some asian aethiopian the scripture seem to mention a Aethiopia in Asia for cush the son of cham of who josephus k k io. ant. l. 1. c. 6 say the aethiopian call themselves and be call by other Chusaei be author not only of the aethiopian in Africa but of many people of Arabia also in Asia as Moses l l gen. 10. Annot Tremel and inn. relate and hence perhaps it be that Miriam m m num. 12. and Exod. 2. and Aaron contend with Moses for his wife Zippora because she be a aethiopian and yet be she a Midianite but call a aethiopian in respect of the neighbourhood which midian have to Aethiopia orientalis as Vatablus n n f. Vatablus in num. 12. observe out of the jewish writer or for that midian be also assign to Aethiopia take in a large sense as say o o Genebr Chro. pag 71. Genebrard junius say because the midianite dwell in that region which be assign to cush aethicus in his cosmography p p Aethic. affirm that Tigris bury itself and run under ground in Aethiopia which Simlerus interpret of Arabia for otherwise Tigris wash no part of Africa saint Augustine q q Aug Mirabil l. 1. affirm that the region northwards from the red sea and so even to India be call Aethiopia orientalis this distinction be still acknowledge by late r r f. ribera come in Sophon c. 3. Lyra in gloss num. 12. caluen in comment num. 12. Chytraeus in onomastico writer and therefore it be needless to fetch Moses a wife out of Aethiopia beneath Egypt to interpret that place for so s s Ios. Ant. l. 2. josephus as we shall after see tell of a wife which Moses in his prosperity before his flight marry from thence this observation be very necessary because the scripture often mention Aethiopia when no part of Africa can be t t gibin in gen. 2. q. 6. v. 5. understand as genes 2.13 where one of the river of paradise be say to compass the whole land of cush or Aethiopia and so in other place cush or Aethiopia learned junius u u jun. in gen. 2. Praelectionib. observe that cush be either a proper name as genes 10. or common to the people that come of he it be also a name attribute to the three Arabia to the two african Aethiopia and to all the southern tract by the persian gulf leave that asian Aethiopia which already we have handle under other name we will now proceed in our african journey where we find in 10 10 ptol. l. 4. c. 6. and 7. Ptolemie not so exact description thereof as in late geographer be then in the great part unknown y y maginus maginus make Aethiopia to contain two of those seven part whereinto he divide Africa one of which he call Aethiopia superior and interior which for the most part be subject unto the christian prince call in Europe priest or Prester John the other inferior and exterior be all that southerly part of Africa which be not know to the ancient this do not altogether agree with Homer z z hom. odyss in division who geography a a Strab. l. 1. Strabo have so large traverse and admire for how can Homer or any in his time attain to the knowledge of those remote part neither yet may we reject that renown poet see this partition may serve we now in the better discovery of place where we may reckon all that to the westerly Aethiopia which from Guinea stretch to the cape of good hope and thence to the red sea northwards to the easterly Nilus and a line from the head thereof unto the aforesaid cape be the arbiter in this division but to let pass this curiosity in carve when all be like to be eat we will begin at Aethiopia under Egypt and so take the country in our way go from the red sea till have double the cape we come from the abassine christian to those of congo on the aethiopian ocean Aethiopia aegypto so the geographer b b ptol. l. 4. c. 7. dom. Niger Aphric come 4. call this part have on the north Egypt on the west Libya interior on the south Aethiopia Agisimba on the east the red and barbarian sea to the promontory which Ortelius c c ortel Thesau place about Quiloa pory d d mercat tab. pory before leo. call it Quilimanci mercator interpret Magala the abissine empire be by our late e e ortel theat maginus description of the World writer intend further receive for the southern limit the mountain of the moon and for the western the kingdom of congo the river Niger and Nubia and therefore contain Aethiopia aegypto and beside trogloditica Cinnamomifera regio and part of the inner Libya true it be that the great neguz his title comprehend thus much yet rather as a monument of what he have have than a evidence of what he have the turk in the north the More on the west and other otherwhere circumcise this circumcise Abissine and now according to f f g. bot. ben. io Carros Boterus and barrius the lake Barcena be the centre of his dominion but even still friar g g f. Lewis histor Ethiopia Lewis de Urreta give he both all before name and more the name Abissine or abassine which be give to this region Niger h h dom. Niger derive from the egyptian word Abases which Strabo i i Strab. l. 17. report they give to all inhabit place compass with great desert and situate therein in manner as the island in the sea three of which Abases he say be subject to the egyptian Scaliger k k scal. em. t. pag. 638. say that the arabian call these aethiopian Elhabaschi whence they be usual name abassine and this with he be a argument that they be not native of the place but thither derive out of Arabia for the Abaseni be by Uranius in stephanus place in Arabia Thurifera who word be these l l step. in (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) etc. this have I insert out of stephanus for satisfy the more judicious Scaliger add that the language in which their ecclesiastical and sacred book be write be as far from the true ethiopicke as the dutch or italian the tongue be most elegant if care and diligence be add and be call liberty because the arabian conqueror therefore only free do use it the ethiopian themselves call it Chaldee yet be it near the Hebrew than the Chaldee it be only learn by book and of their priest they indeed have other history of themselves from the flood downward but whereto a man must not rash give credit they call themselves ethiopian to take now some exact view of these part leave those m m Munster in fine l. 6. jewish monstrous fable of monster of threescore and ten cubit and their great lie of the little pigmy-christians with such other stuff fit for they to write who be just credulous of n n 2. thes. 2.12 lie because they believe not truth let we see what other have write both of the people and place and first of the first and most ancient relation @. 2 of the nation near the fall of Nilus and of Meroe the cataract or fall of Nilus which separate Ethiopia from Egypt be by the most author reckon two the great and the less stephanus add a three at Bonchis a ethiopian city these be mountain which encroach upon the river and with their lofty look and undermine treachery have draw up the earth which shall afford he a channel into their swell and joint conspiracy as with a mix passion of fear and disdain make the water in their haste and strife overthrow themselves down those steep passage the billow bellow and roar so terrible with the fall that the inhabitant as some o o this report Cicero in some scip. and call these fall Catadupae affirm which dwell near be thereby make deaf and the river amaze and dizzy whirl itself about forget his tribute to Neptune till force by his own follow water he set or rather be set forward on his journey they be p p joan. Bermudesius in Legat. aethiopica now call Catadhi which signify noise of those dreadful and hideous out-cry which there be cause thus say Bermudesius of those fall in the kingdom of Goiame which rush down from a rock almost half a league high and steep sound like thunder betwixt these fall and Meroe Strabo q q Strab. l. 17. place the Troglodytae of which we have already speak and the blemmye nubae and megabari they be Nomades without town or habitation and addict to robbery Procopius r r Procop. de bello Persuo l. 8 testify that these be accustom to do much damage on the roman confine and therefore Dioclesian bring they out of their barren territory and give they Elephantina and the region adjoin for habitation communicate to they the roman rite and superstition and build the city Philas in hope of future friendship they change the soil not the soul but be no less injurious to oasis and other the roman subject they worship some god borrow of the grecian Isis and Osiris of the egyptian and Priapus the blemmye also offer human sacrifice with cruel inhumanity to the sun till justinian time who take away those bloody devotion as for the tale that those blemmye want head and have their eye and mouth in their breast the author have either no eye to see the truth or more head than they shall to devise lie as we may say of other shapeless and monstrous shape of people which s s plin. l. 5. c. 8. and 6. c. 29. Pliny and Solinus out of other author report to inhabit these unknown part some want lip some nostril some tongue or mouth etc. indeed all want truth rather will I counsel the studious of geography to learn the name of the people and nation of these region of Pliny and Solinus which because we have but name of they I forbear to name Meroe do invite i to a long entertainment be a island which Nilus with lovely embrace clasp about according to josephus and cedrenus sometime call Saba as now also the abyssine name it the egyptian call it awl babe the inhabitant Neube our map Guegere to which Thevet add more t t giravae marmolij etc. thesauro if not more than truth the island after u u Heliodor hist. Aethiopica l. 10. heliodorus the bishop of tricca his description be three square each of which triangle limit be make by three river astaboras and Asasoba Strabo call it astapus and Astosabus this from the south that from the east drown their name and water with Nilus in it be in length three thousand furlong in breadth a thousand plentiful of elephant lion rhinocerote corn and tree beside her hide treasure and mine of iron brass silver gold and Salt it have also ebony wood as Lucan 10 10 Lucanus sing laeta Hebeni it receive that name y y Niger come Apb. 4. of Moroe sister of Cambyses or after z z Eusebius Eusebius of merida the mother of Chenephris king of Egypt they worship a barbarian God and beside pan Hercules and Isis a a Strab. l. 17. it be before call Saba say i. Antq. l. 2. they cast their dead into the river other reserve they at home in glass shrine other in earthen receptacle bury they near to their temple they esteem they for god and swear by they they ordain he king who excel in strength or in person or in husbandry of cattle or in wealth their priest enjoy the chief rank of honour who send their herald or messenger enjoin the king his death and set up another in his room at length a certain king abolish this custom and rush with his arm soldier into their temple where be a golden chapel slay all those priest this be at Meroe the head city of the island where pausanias b b Pausan l. 1. say they show the table of the sun and that they be the just man of all the ethiopian concern that table and the expedition of Cambyses into these part Herodotus c c Herod Thalia l. 3. relate that Cambyses design at once three invasion against the carthaginian the ammonian and macrobian all in Africa these last have their name of their long life which they draw forth far beyond the usual course he place they on the south shore of Africa but Mela d d pomp. mel. l. 3. 1. 10. in Meroe Seneca Pliny and Solinus beyond that table of the sun Herodotus and Mela thus describe near to the city be a place always furnish with variety of roast meat there set in the night by the magistrate and eat on the day by such as list and therefore of this open feast call the sun table who the ignorant people also think to be the cater of these dainty Cambyses send a embassage unto the king with present but principal to espy the country who the ethiopian requite with a bow and bid that the persian shall then invade the macrobian when they be able to shoot in such bow thank God that he be content with his own and because he have send he golden chain he ask to what use they be they say for ornament he answer with smile think they to be chain for punishment that he have strong fetters than those the like account he make of his purple robe ointment and wine and ask further what the persian eat and when they tell he bread make of wheat the nature whereof they declare and withal that the old persian exceed not fourscore year he say that it be no marvel of their short life that feed upon dung neither can they live so long be it not for that drink of wine which they use it be not extraordinary e e Valeria max. there to attain to a hundred and twenty year their meat be boil flesh and their drink milk he bring they to a fountain wherein be bathe they smell as of violet it be so subtle that nothing can swim thereon not wood or other light matter this water be suppose to lengthen their life he bring they also to the prison where they see many manacle and bind with chain of Gold last he show they their sepulcher make of glass in this manner after they have embalm the dead corpse they anoint it with a kind of parget mortar and then put it in a case or coffin of glass through which it shine and be apparent without any ill savour this they keep one year in the house offer thereto sacrifice and the first fruit of all thing and then carry it out of the city thus far Herodotus wherein that which some penny-father will most admire their golden setter how common and rife be it in another sort with we every covetous miser manacle fetter strangle himself with his gold in show his ornament in affect his god in effect his devil jailor chain and Hell the macrobij Mela add use brass for honour gold for punishment of the table of the sun before mention thus write friar Lewis de Urreta f f Lewis de ur. hist de la Aethiopia l. 1. c. 2. in that his large history which he have compose in spanish of Ethiopia that the king in a curious bravery and sumptuous vanity cause there to be set by night in a certain field store of white bread and the choice wine hang also on the tree great variety of fowl roast and boil and set on the ground mutton lamb veale beef with many other dainty ready dress traveller and hungry person which come hither and find this abundance see no body which prepare or which keep the same ascribe it to jupiter hospitalis his bounty and hospitality show himself a protector of poor traveller and call this field the table of the sun the report hereof pass through the world and bring many pilgrim from far country to visit the same king Cambyses send his ambassador to see it Plato the prince of philosopher have travel through Asia as far as Caucasus and go also to the Brahmin to see and hear Hiarchas in a throne of gold among a few disciple dispute of nature mystery and discourse of the star and planet return by the persian babylonian arabian and other nation and enter into Aethiopia lead with desire to see this renown table and to eat of those delicacy the aethiopian since their christianity in zealous detestation of idolatry will not so much as name this field and these ancient rite and give in charge to the priest at this day that they handle not or create of the like vanity because they be invention of idolater Caelius g g cael. rbod l. 10 Rbodiginus affirm that this table of the sun grow into a proverb to signify a house well furnish and provide thus far friar Lewis I doubt far than we may safe follow in that of Plato pilgrimage hither of the pillar of Semiramis be before speak out of the relation of Xenophon de aequivocis concern which and his other companion and brethren howsoever Possevinus Goropius and other do reprove annius for abuse the world with those glorious title h h Beros Metasihenes Cato manetho etc. and ancient name and prove they to be counterfeit yet in my mind that of Xenophon seem to favour of some truth whether of antiquity or no I meddle not and that more than other of the same edition in that pillar consecrate to the memory of Ninus the inscription testify that cush or cousin be the aethiopian Saturn as c be the egyptian and Nimrod the babylonian when cush i i f. Lewis l. 1. c. 3 be dead they say Regma his son succeed in the aethiopian kingdom and after he Dodan after who time be no record of certain succession Diodorus say they choose he which be most comely of personage for their king Memnon be chant by Homer and the poet which lose his life at Troy in defence of Priamus and be some say king of Aethiopia of the speak image of Memnon you have see in our egyptian relation as for the wife of Moses whereof josephus k k Ios. of it l. 2. zon annal. to 1. cedren say that the Aethiopian have overrun and almost subdue Egypt and none dare to make head against they mose who Thermutis pharaoh daughter have bring up be choose general of the egyptian army which he conduct into Aethiopia and come to the siege of Saba Tharbis the aethiopian king daughter fall in love with he and send her servant to entreat of a marriage with he which he accept upon condition of deliver the town unto he and that be do marry she all this seem rather to be a jewish fable think thereby to credit their lawgiver then agree to Moses the truth and scripture and may haply arise from that speech that Moses l l num. 12.1 his wife be a aethiopian of which we have speak already neither be it likely that Moses will accept of treason for the dowry with his wife seal with the blood and overthrow of her country and citizen and yet from hence do some derive m m Hector Boet. hist scot. the original of their nation after the father of this suppose Tharbis derianus be say to reign who valiant withstand Bacchus which be think to be Osiris the egyptian king and after their God when he invade Egypt with in army Diodorus mention actisanes a king of Aethiopia Cepheus also be number in that royal catalogue but of all n n suidas Ganges be most famous who with his aethiopian army pass into Asia and conquer all as far as the river Ganges to which he leave that name be before o o plut. flum call Chliaros he conquer as far also to the west unto the atlantike ocean and give name to the country of Guinea which name some p p f. Luys say be corrupt of Gangina the name it have receive of Ganges these thing be write by some and I will not swear for the truth as safe we may do for that which the scripture mention of some of their king in the day of asa and hezekiah king of juda who puissance then be such that q q 2. chron. 14.9 zerah bring into the field a million of man and Tirrhaca be corrival unto proud and r r 2. king 19 blasphemous sennacherib in suit for the monarchy of the World but whether he come out of this Aethiopia or any other part of Asia or Africa be not very certain before that time the aethiopian have war under Shishak king of Egypt who some take s s ribera in soph. 2. for Sesostris the babylonian in nabuchodonosor time conquer Egypt and Aethiopia as t t lavat in ez. 30. Est. 8. some expound the prophecy of Ezechiel and the persian empire extend from India to Aethiopia u u ap. phot. 250. agatharchides write that the inhabitant on both side the river Astabara live on root dry in the sun they be much infest with lion and not less with a less creature but great enemy the gnat which drive they to hide themselves in the water from their fury when the dog-star arise which with these his army of gnat bayt the lion also who their buzz and hum noise chase out of the country he speak of other their neighbour which feed on the top of twig run and leap on the tree and from bough to bough with incredible agility other dwell on tree for fear of wild beast on who flesh and in want thereof on their hide they live as ostrich elephant grasshopper be the daily diet to other to which he add the cynamolgi which be nourish with the milk of bitch of which they have great herd which perhaps our reader will nor believe neither can I force he chap. 2 a continuation of the aethiopian antiquity and of the queen of Saba HEliodorus in his history which although for the substance it be feign as a love discourse yet must hold resemblance with thing do and for the variety and conceit thereof commend by that learned a a phil. melanct. in Epist. german Philip and by our english b b sir p. Sidney Philip the prince of Potsie imitate in his Arcadia tell of Hydaspes his ethiopian king that after his victory at Syene and have there perform his devotion and see their Niloscopium like to that at Memphis and now at cairo and inquire the original of their feast and holy rite do in honour of that river when c c Heliod. histor Aethiop l. 9 and 10. he come to the cataract he sacrifice to Nilus and the god of the border he then send messenger to the wiseman who he call gymnosophist which be the king counsellor at Meroe to certify they of his victory and to call a public assembly wherein to gratify the god for the same with sacrifice and solemn pomp in the field consecrate to the sun the moon and Bacchus Persina the queen deliver those letter to the gymnosophist who dwell by themselves in a grove consecrate to pan and before they will give answer consult with the god by prayer and then Sisimitres the chief of they promise all shall be fulfil the sacrifice be to be do to the sun and moon and therefore except Persina the queen which be Luna priest no woman for fear of contaminate the holy of those pure and bright deity may be present Hydaspes be priest of the sun much preparation be make of beast for their hecatombe and much concourse of people cross the river in those boat of cane or reed there be present the image of their god Memnon Perseus and Andromeda and nigh to they sit the Gymnosophista three altar be erect two joint to the sun and moon a three to Bacchus by himself to he they offer all sort of beast to Sol white chariot-horse to the moon a yoke of oxen. and when all thing be ready the people with shout demand the sacrifice which usual be accustom for the health of their nation that be some of the stranger take in the war to be offer first trial d d our english and the german history mention the like clear of adultery by go with bare foot on burn ploughshare bale be make by spit of gold heat with fire bring out of the temple whether the captive have ever know carnal copulation for tread on the same with their bare foot such as be pure virgin receive no harm other be scorch these be offer in sacrifice to Bacchus the other to those pure deity these thing have I here insert not as do but as like to such thing which among the meroite be use to be do and agree with the general devotion of those aethiopian Philostratus e e Philost apollonque lib. 6. cap. 4. report like matter of their gymnosophist and of the grove where they keep their general consultation otherwise each of they by themselves apart observe their study and holy they worship Nilus intend in their mystical interpretation the earth and the water they entertain stranger in the open air Thesphesion be then in Apollonius his time chief of their society at his command a elm do speak they hold the immortality of the soul the aethiopian sacrifice to Memnon and to the sun Lucian after his scoff manner gratulate the aethiopian that favour which jupiter vouchsafe they in go on feast accompany with the rest of the god and that twelve day together if Homer f f hom. Isiad and Lucian reckon true but more g g Astrologia serious elsewhere he unfold that mystery show that the aethiopian be inventor of astrology help therein by the clearness of the sky in that region and like temperature of the season of they the egyptian learn and further that science in his treatise h h of dance he affirm that the aethiopian use their hair in stead of a quiver and never draw arrow from thence to shoot in battle but with a dance gesture Diodorus i i d. sic. l. 4. c. 1. siculus tell that the aethiopian be account most ancient of all other man and that not only humanity but divinity be bear and breed among they solemnity pomp holy and religious rite be their invention and therefore say he Homer bring in jupiter feast with the aethiopian the reward of their piety be the immunity of their region from foreign conquest k k Macro in somn. scip. l. 2. cap 10. Macrobius interpret Jupiter banquet with the aethiopian of that ocean which antiquity imagine to be under all the torrid zone that the fiery body of the star suppose to be nourish with moisture may there quench their thirst so will those good man drown a great part of the african and american world in hospitality to the star by their imagine middle earth ocean which experience have now sufficient confute Cambyses attempt and lose his army and Semiramis enter but soon return Hercules and Dionysius overrun the rest of the world the aethiopian either for their devotion they will not or for their strength can not conquer the egyptian some say be colony from hence yea Egypt itself the dregs of that soil which Nilus carry out of Aethiopia the egyptian borrow of the ethiopian to esteem their king as god and to have such care of their funeral the use of statue and their hieroglyphical letter Pierius l l Picr and other have write thereof at large their best man they choose for their priest and he among they who when the God be carry about shall be possess with some bacchanal fury be choose king as by divine appointment and be of they worship as a God his government be govern by law they do not put a malefactor to death but a officer be send to he with the sign of death m m the like be use in japan whereupon he go home and slay himself one will have flee out of his country but the mother of the malefactor kill he because he will not after his country manner kill himself the priest in Meroe exercise this authority as be before say over their king and will send they word that the oracle of the god command they to die neither may they reject the divine dispensation and thus with argument not with arm they persuade they to a voluntary death but in the time of Ptolomeus secundus king of Egypt king ergamenes well skill in the greek science and philosophy reject that superstition they say that the custom yet till Diodorus time remain that if the king be maim or by some accident want any member his courtier also will deprive themselves of the same yea when the king die his friend think it good fellowship to die with he esteem that death glorious and the sure testimony of friendship the aethiopian n n Diod sic. Strabo l. 17. dwell near to Arabia arm their woman in their war till they attain to a certain age the most of which wear a ring of brass in their lip they which dwell further up into the country be diverse conceit of the god for some they think immortal as the sun moon and the world some mortal as pan Hercules jupiter for their virtue exalt to that dignity Strabo tell it in the singular number that they think that god to be immortal which be the cause of all thing their mortal God be uncertain and want name but they most common esteem their king and benefactor for Go some that inhabit near the line worship no god and be much offend with the sun and hide themselves in the fen curse he when he do rise these thing you may read gather out of Diodorus and Strabo o o corvino geograph io. Boemus morib Drandius in Solinum fr. thamara in and Thamaia with some other addition sardus say p p sardus morib l. 1. cap. 10. that the aethiopian be circumcise as be also beside the jew egyptian and arabian the Trogloditae macrones creophagi and inhabitant of Thermodoon as we have show of the macrobij or long-lived aethiopian so there be other call brachobij of their short life whereof be reckon two sort the sidonij near to the red sea and the Erembi which some r r plut. Philosoph take for the Trogloditae they live not above forty year Plutarch q q raph. Volaeterranus geograph l. 12. out of Asclepeiades report the like say that they be old man at thirty year the same author s s id. tell that they and the arabian can not endure mouse and that the persian magi do likewise esteem they creature odious to God Alexander t t gen. l. 2. 25. c. 30. ab Alexandro write concern the education of their child that the aethiopian sear their new bear infant in the forehead to prevent the distillation of rheum from the brain and when they be somewhat grow they make trial of their forwardness by set they on the back of certain fowl on which if they sit in their fly without fear they bring they up very careful but if they shrink and quake with fear they expose they as a degenerate issue unworthy education their letter they write not sideways after the greek or Hebrew manner but after the present chinian custom downward they have seven character every of which have four signification what manner of writing they now use appear in u u dam. a go Zaga zabo Damianus a goez or of Zaga Zabo rather a aethiopian bishop in his treatise of their religion do into latin by Damianus but more full in josephus 10 10 Ios. Scalig. de Emend l. 7. see Lyturg. Aethiop in Biblioth. Scaliger who have lend we a long tractate in that language and writing with the same word express in Hebrew and latin character and the interpretation of they also into latin in four several column he that list to read some philosophical speculation of nature in these aethiopian wherein they differ and wherefore from other let he read coelius y y Coel. r. l c. 16. 15. l. 9 23. rhodiginus of that argument he say that they be expert in natural magic Nicephorus z z Niceph. hist Eccles. l. 9 c. 18. write that Alexander the great send assyrian colony into Aethiopia which many age after keep their own language and like enough their religion the nation of Aethiopia which be far distant from Nilus be * * dom. Niger say to live a miserable and beastly life not discern in their lust mother daughter or any other name of kindred of their ancient exploit we have no continue history about the time of Christ it appear that candace be queen of Ethiopia she be a manly virago as Strabo testify who live at the same time and follow Aelius Gallus in this expedition he force candace to send her ambassador to Augustus for peace which she obtain Sextus a a vict. Augustus victor mention this ethiopian ambassage Pliny say the name candace continue to the ethiopian queen many succession whence perhaps Diesserus collect that Ethiopia be govern only by queen Dioclesian relinquish that part of Ethiopia which the roman hold beyond Egypt as not able to bear the charge justinian b b Procop. de bello Persico l. 1. send his ambassador unto hellistan the ethiopian king and to Esimiphaen king of the homerite his arabian neighbour to aid he against the persian this Hellisthaeus have war against the homerite for quarrel of religion because they be many of they jew and other gentile himself be a Christian and because they make many forage into the christian country he so far prevail as he make that Esimiphaeus a christian their king who yoke they shake off soon after and Abram a slave usurp the State he have be servant to a roman at Adulis a city of Ethiopia worthy mention especial in this matter for the ominous prosperity of servant for the city itself be build by fugitive servant which run from their egyptian master and this Abram a servant there obtain to be a king neither can the ethiopian with all his might depose he the like c c pauli diaconi justinus ambassage to Archetas king of Ethiopia be send by justinus for and against the persian both which I mention to show the greatness at that time of his state nothing comparable notwithstanding to that which after befall they among the ethiopian antiquity Plato testify as orosius d d Oros l. 1 c. 9 city he that many plague and uncouth disease infest and almost altogether destroy Ethiopia about that time that Bacchus invade India if any delight himself in such legendary dross as the counterfeit e e abdias bab. hist lib. 7. abdias set forth by Wolfgangus Lazius have in it touch the magician and enchantment and some other ceremony of Ethiopia I be loath to blot my paper with they not because we be not certain of the truth for in other we may be deceive but because we be certain of the error so gross that they may be see and feel marvel that f f Wolfg. Laius Lazius a historian will with his note illustrate such a hotchpotch of darkness and yet our countryman g g jewel and Harding Harding leave the clear water of truth have swallow the same swill as the jewel of our church have teach he the eunuch of candace be the first ethiopian Christian as Luke act. 8. and Eusebius h h euseb eccl. hist lib. 2. papius speak of Thomas matthew and Mathias preach in Ethiopia do show but before we come to their christian conversion we be first to declare their conversion to Judaism if it be true which the ethiopian write in the time of Solomon the ethiopian have live before a vagrant life like the nomad of old and the arabian and other libyan nation not far from they in Asia and Africa at this day Aruc the ethiopian king first fix a settle abode at Axuma and make it the royal city i i Genebr chron pag. 118. after who follow Agab and in the three place Ghedur or sabanut which subdue all Ethiopia and leave the kingdom to his daughter Makeda that reign eighty year 50. of her reign she visit Solomon after she they reckon these king till Christ time melic andedo auda Gigasio Zangua Guasio antet Bahara cavada Chanze Endur Guaza Endrath Chaales Setija Aglaba Anscua Breguas Guase beseclugna baazena in who time they say Christ be bear Genebrard set down the time of their reign which he confess and itself convince to be false this queen of Saba before mention in our discourse of Arabia of which country * * the abassen greatness be unlikely to have come of Cham curse stock which never yield any great monarchy ful. Misc l. 2 c. 1. and 4. thus he yet the Phoenician and carthaginian be more potent than ever be the Abassine I think she then be and these Abassens since that time thence descend and transplant be by k k (@) anti. l. 8 c. 2 josephus call Nicaule the queen say he of Ethiopia and Egypt but Zaga Zabo l l Zaga zabo Episcopus Ethiop in the ethiopian history which he write and cause to be do into latin by Damianus a go call her Maqueda who history the ethiopian have write in a book as big as all Paul epistle the sum of his report be this she be a worshipper of idol as her ancestor have be when as fame fill her ear with the renown of Salomon name and then send a messenger to jerusalem to learn the truth who at his return confirm those former report she go herself to visit he of he beside many other thing she learn the law and the prophet by he she conceive also a son of who she be deliver in her journey homeward and name he Meilech after twenty year education in Ethiopia she send he to Solomon his father to be instruct of he in wisdom desire he to consecrate her son king of Ethiopia before the ark of the covenant she ordain also that woman shall not henceforth inherit as before have be accustom Solomon do this and change his name to David and after long instruction send he back to his mother attend with many noble companion among who be Azarias the son of Zadok the priest this Azarias cause table to be make like to those in the ark and pretend to sacrifice for the good success of his journey go in and steal the table of the law leave in their room these late counterfeit which he reveal not to any till he come to the border of Ethiopia then David be make acquaint with the fact dance for joy as his grandfather David have do before the ark wherein the table be enclose his people make great joy his mother resign to he the empire and from that time to this the kingdom have pass in a right line from male to male circumcision also with the law of Moses have be observe the officer which Solomon appoint his son m m Candac be the name of diverse ethiopian Queen contrary to this report be still continue in the same family and order nor may the emperor choose they out of any other stock than those of the jew this long legend I report not for the truth but for that religious conceit wherewith it be accept in Ethiopia for who know not that none but the high priest and that but once a year enter into that holy place where the ark be that I speak not of nadab and abihu fire with other divine judgement vzzah touch and the bethshemite view the ark at so dear a rate can but make dreadful so damnable a attempt beside we shall have look for our bless saviour out of Ethiopia where Salomon heir still reign if these say true and not go to Salathiel and Zorobabel descend of another brother and therefore further off from the throne of their father David on which Christ be to fit and to which he be bear next and apparent heir even according to the flesh and yet do Genebrard credit these report and Baronius also in part as Lewis de Urreta report this Lewis have write three large book in spanish collect as he say out of don juan de baltasar a ethiopian of great account who have be ambassador from his master Alexander the three the great negus into Persia and other place and come into Spain with his licence to imprint his Ethiopian history out of he Lewis report that the former book whence Zago Zabo the bishop ambassador to the king of Portugal have take those thing be yet so as that it be true concern that report of maqueda conception and the royal descent from thence till these time the steal of the table he deny and affirm that the truth be that Solomon have bestow on the queen of Saba a fragment of the table which Moses break in his zeal for the israelite idolatry with the golden calf for that conception by Solomon he prove it by the ethiopian record the title of their king and his arm which be the same which the tribe of juda give viz. a lion rampant crown in a field or with this inscription the lion of the tribe of Iuda have overcome since they be Christian they have add to this arm a cross which the lion hold in his right foot and in this right they lay challenge to jerusalem for their inheritance now for the fragment of the table which Moses break it be receive for a truth throughout Ethiopia and it be still preserve in the hill amara as the great jewel in the World baltasar have often see and handle it it seem to be of the Chalcedonie stone shine and transparent and be a corner of a square table the break edge yet be manifest with the letter some break some whole much differ from the common Hebrew which Genebrard say the jew invent thereby to differ from the schismatical kingdom of the israelite of the ten tribe the samaritan still retain the former as both he and Scaliger affirm but these letter can be read for he bring a learned n n r. Sedechias from Mecca jew skilful in all the eastern language persian Arabic indian Chinois etc. yet know they not this relic be with such devotion admire of the jew that when they pass but within sight of that hill amara they prostrate themselves on the ground with reverence and for this cause make much of the ethiopian wheresoever they meet they as a people belove of God to who he have impart such a relic they o o Vincent ferrer a popish saint tell also a tale I think so likewise of the former of the queen of Saba that in her journey homeward she have a revelation concern a piece of wood which she see that it shall be the same whereon Christ shall after die for mankind wherefore adore the same with much devotion and tear she write to Solomon thereof who hide it in the earth four p p four time the height of a man Stades where the pool of bethesda be make afterward and by virtue thereof wrought miracle but the ethiopian superstition have fable enough of she own and need not the officious help of romish saint in this kind as for that succession of jewish officer Lewis deny it himself therefore deny by late examiner and say the jew be nowhere more hate then in Ethiopia and Alexander the three late emperor among they banish all jew and More out of all his dominion the officer of the emperor be say he the son of the tributary king his vassal and the noble of his and for the jew which come with Meilech or Meilelec after call David his next successor Lofu so he call he become a reduce idolatry and whereas David his father have give they one of the temple dedicate to the sun in mount amara to make it a house of prayer to the god of Israel cast forth the idol therein now in this josue day some of they return to jerusalem or to other province of Africa and some inhabit the utmost part of Africa near the cape of good hope and desert not before inhabit and the say don juan de baltasar be send by the emperor into the land of Monopopata so he call it and of galofe of barbizin of Mandinga and of zape which be inhabit of idolatrous gentile he find among they some of these jew descend of that exile stock as themselves also hold which have forget their Judaism and all knowledge of the scripture only have retain some relic of it and abstinence from swine flesh differ also from those gentile in worship one God whereas the other acknowledge one great God who they call Caramus but worship also tiger lion fly spider snake lizard and whatsoever first meet they in the morning these gentile q q God curse and man follow the jew every where as the shadow the body call the jew Tabayqueros and will not admit they to purchase house or inheritance but either use they as interpreter or factor for merchant which be the high step they can attain to or else to employ they in base drudgery to be their porter slaughterman and such like that they seem rather slave to those barbarous nation then to enjoy any liberty of freeman right may those nation he call barbarous which seem rather to bark then to speak and yet they scorn that any shall abase they with the base of title in their opinion to call they Tabayquero and revenge it with the death of the wrong doer but I fear i our friar will be find a liar howsoever I be force to relate many thing out of he have write so large of this ethiopian subject with such boldness and pretend such assurance from report of that Balthasar as if no doubt be to be make of his assertion chap. 3 of presbyter JOHN and of the priest-john in Asia whether that descend of these have now declare the antiquity of Ethiopia draw out of ancient author let we near hand behold what near our time other have report thereof wherein first we will here insert out of a a Ios. scal. de Emend temp. lib. 7. scaliger annotation upon the ethiopian ecclesiastical calendar or computation of time somewhat remarkable and fit to our present purpose the name say he of the christian ethiopian be not now first make know to we for their church not only at jerusalem and Constantinople but at Rome also and Venice have have liberty a good while to use their own rite the portugal and Francis Aluares have further discover they before we only hear the name of Ethiopia a wonder it be that some age since b b Castaneda seem also to hold that the negus be that presbyter John of Asia though not of his race lib. 1. cap. 1. their emperor name be make know to we out of Asia rather than out of Ethiopia itself three hundred year ago the ethiopian king reign in Asia especial in drangiana the border of susiana India and China until the tartar dispossess they of the asian empire for Cingis first the first tartar king slay Uncam the ethiopian emperor and his posterity chase the abyssine out of moin and China and force they to flee into Africa often have I marvel that a people of no knowledge in these time of Sea-affair can achieve so mighty exploit as to propagate their empire from Ethiopia to China since that time the knowledge of that emperor have come to vain the name of Prestegiano which in the persian tongue as much now of reckon in Asia as the latin in the west signify c c so with we the french king be call christianissimus the Spaniard catholicus the english defender of the Faith apostolic infer thereby that he be a christian king of the right faith for Prestegan signify apostle and Prestegani apostolical Padescha Prestigiani the king apostolical in arabian Melich in ethiopian Negusch Chawariawi of this greatness of their empire in Asia be witness those ethiopian cross which be see in Giapan China and other place yea the temple of Thomas the apostle in the region of d d maliapur see our history lib. 5. man labar have nothing in it but be ethiopian the cross building and name itself it be call e e in ramusius copy it be Anavia in the latin Auarii Marcus Paulus lib. 2. cap. 27. ram. 20. Hanarija which in ethiopian be as much to say as apostle which Marcus Paulus false expound a holy man this name in the author seem to be give not to the church but to the apostle himself Paulus add that the remainder of the christian subject to Prestegian above in teaduch the neighbour arabian call they now Habassi and we from thence abyssine or abassene they call themselves chaldaean for their ancient and elegant language in which their book be write be near to the chaldaean and assyrian moreover the ecclesiastical history testify and out of the same Nicephorus lib. 9 c. 18. that many colony be send out of Assyria into Ethiopia they be there call Axumitae of their chief city but by themselves as Aluares affirm chaschumo more may we see hereafter of their rite and other thing worthy of knowledge in the institution d d scaliger Ethiopian grammar of that tongue which we have diligent and methodical write these word of Scaliger have make i take some pain in the search of the premise for he differ from the opinion of other which have write any thing of presbyter or priest John as they term he in Asia who the tartar subdue Ortelius e e ortel theat in the map of Tartary p bertias geograph make a presbyter John in Asia and another in Africa if I understand he as for that Uncam William de rubruquis which travel those part in the morning of the Tartar-greatness 1253. report that one Con can reign in kata-catay or black Catay after who death a certain nestorian shepherd a mighty governor of the people call Yayman which be nestorian christian exalt himself to the kingdom and they call he king John report of he ten time more than be true as be the nestorian wont f f Will de rubruquis ap Hak. tom. 1. cap. 19 for notwithstanding all their great boast of this man when I travel along by his territory there be none that know any thing of he but only a few nestorian this John have a brother a mighty shepherd call vut which inhabit three week journey beyond he he be lord of a village call cara carum his subject call critor Merkits be also nestorian but their lord abandon Christianity embrace idol and retain with he priest of the say idol ten or fifteen day journey beyond his pasture be the pasture of moal a beggarly nation and near they the tartar John die this vut become his heir and be call vut can who other call unc can and his drove and flock range unto the pasture of moal about the same time one Cyngis a blacksmith in moal steal many of vut g g this vut or uncam be call Prete or priest as Boterus conjecture because he have the cross bear before he he be say with no great likelihood of truth to have rule 72 kingdom can cattle who in revenge with his force spoil the mole and tartar they aggrieve make Cyngis their captain who sudden break in upon vut and chase he into Cataya take his daughter and marry she and have by her mangu that be then the great can when our author write this these relation savour not of any such monarchy as shall extend from Aethiopia to those part of Asia Marcus @ Paulus tell that the tartar be tributary to this Uncam so he call he which say he after some man opinion signify in our language priest John but through his tyranny provoke to rebellion they under the conduct of Cyngis slay Uncam and afterward he say that a a cap. 52. the latin copy want these thing Tenduc be under the subjection of priest John but all the priest john that there reign after Uncam be tributary to the great can and in his time reign one George who be a priest and a christian as be the inhabitant * * Marcus Paulus lib. 1. cap. 24. but he hold not so much as the b b sir John mandevile story of presbyter John be fabulous priest john have do and the great can do still join in affinity with this family marry their daughter unto these king this George be the four after priest John and be hold a great signior he rule over two nation call by some gog and Magog by the ung c c haply the prince before mention be call Uncam of ung and can for can signify a divine or ruler and mongul where some be Mahometan some heathen other christian it appear by their history that Scaliger be deceive to think that this priest John have so large a empire see rubruquis in the same age or soon after can in his own country hear so little of he and his posterity in Marcus Paulus his time continue tributary king under the Tartar the name priest be give they of that function which he testify George receive and John perhaps of that first shepherd that usurp con khan estate to let pass therefore that presbyter John in the north-east we stumble on another midway betwixt that and Ethiopia for so joannes d d joan de pl. Carp cap. 5. de plano carpini scent ambassador to the great can from pope Innocent 1246. and vincentius e e vincentii beluacensis spec. l 32. c. 10. in his tell of the king of India Major call presbyter John be invade by the tartar under the lead of tossus can son of Cyngis who before have subdue India Minor he by a stratagem acquit his realm of they for make man image of copper he set each of they upon a saddle on horseback and put fire within they place a man with a pair of bellows on the horseback behind every image and so with many image and horse in such sort furnish they march against the tartar and when they be ready to join by kindle a fire in each image they make such a smoke that the indian wound and slay many tartar who can not see to require they through the smoke but be force to leave that country and neuer after return here now we meet with a new presbyter John in India major which whether he be the same with the ethiopian let we a little examine India be by Marcus f f Marcus Paulus lib. 3. cap. 37. Paulus divide into three part the lesser great and middle the first of they he bound from Ciamba to Murfili and say it have in it eight kingdom the middle call abascia have in it seven kingdom three whereof be Saracen the rest christian six of they be subject to the seven it be tell i say he that after their baptism with water they use another baptism with fire brand three mark on their forehead and both their cheek the saracen use one brand from the forehead to the middle of their nose they war with the solden of aden and with the inhabitant of Nubia and be repute the best warrior in India the great g g abdias indiam aethiopiam 1. 8. India extend from malabar to the kingdom of Chesmacoran and have in it thirteen kingdom this abascia by the border enemy of Nubia and aden be apparent to be this Ethiopia where we now be even by their brand we may know they and this the ancient call India for Sidonius h h Sidonius ap. ortel in thesauro call the ethiopian Memnon Indian and Aelianus i i Aelian l. 17. place Indian at astaboras one of the river of Meroe k k Virg Gewg 4. Virgil also bring Nilus out of India which must needs be mean of Ethiopia Nicephorus l l Sabellicus Ennead 10. l. 8. More testimony of this nature see in scal. e. t. pag. 639. reckon the sabean and homerite people of Arabia unto India Sabellicus m m Sabell aen. 10. lib. 8. complain of the confound of these name India and Ethiopia say that most man do think Ethiopia next to Egypt to be that India where Alexander overthrow Porus this confusion of name I think do first grow from confusion of nation for as be before observe out of Eusebius the ethiopian arise from the river Indus and settle their habitation near to Egypt perhaps they bring the indian name also to these part or else the ignorance of these remote country may do it in which respect not only a three part of the old world but another new-found world be now name India therefore acosta and adrianus Turnebus n n Ios. acco hist. Ind lib. 1. c. 14. turn adverse lib. 21. cap. 9 esteem India to be a general name to all country which be far off and strange to we although it be proper attribute to the east indies now if any wonder at such a extravagant discourse of India here let he know that in our search for presbyter John which then be know to withstand the tartar in Asia I can see how he can be the Abessine or aethiopian but rather think that when a mighty christian prince be find in Aethiopia they do imagine he to be that presbyter John of which they have hear in Asia be further in this error by the name India which as be say do general comprehend both the true India and this more true call Ethiopia now for that presbyter John in India I take he for some christian king for at that time there be many christian as appear by venetus in manner disperse throughout Asia and some call saint Thomas christian remain in India to this day why I think it not to agree to the abissine my reason beside the former be the distance of place all that huge tract of Arabia with the wide sea on each side separate India from Ethiopia the unpassable desert by land no mention in history who shall dispossess they of that India maior where the tartar have never any great power the history o o of these indian history touch the same time see Linschoten lib. 1. cap. 12. and 27 and g. b. b. which we have of those indian prince the king of malabar of Decan the Samorin etc. be against it the difference of religion for those indian christian of saint Thomas be not brand with hot p p this brand be common to the morish Christian and idolatrous ethiopian use to prevent rheumatic distillation from the brain superstition have cause some to annex it to their baptism iron nor circumcise nor agree in other rite with the ethiopian the ethiopian history challenge no such large extent to their empire except in Africa where they seat they in a continual descent from the time of Solomon till now whereas those presbyter john have their dwell and abode in Asia as their story signify and further the name q q odoardo Lopez l. 2. ult. priest John be a name unknown in Ethiopia and by ignorant mistake of the europaean apply to that ethiopian emperor when first they hear of he as say Zaga r r Zago Zabo 33. Zabo his ambassador to the king of Portugal who reprove the man of these part say that he be name of they Belul which signify excellent or precious and in the chaldean tongue joannes encos which signify the same Sabellicus say the ethiopian call he Gyan Linschoten affirm Bel Gyan Bel signify the high and Gyan lord but s s Lewis de Urreta hist Ethiop lib. 1. cap 7. friar Lewis out of baltasar the aethiopian show that in the hill amara be ancient record which testify that from the time of that queen that come to Solomon the emperor have be call beldigian the signification whereof be a precious stone or a thing of great value which title have continue to those emperor as Pharaoh to the egyptian and Caesar to the roman some also of the royal blood which be usual keep as after shall appear in the hill amara when they be elect to the empire if there be many of that imperial issue take order and become priest not procreate any child such say he in our time have be Daniel the second paphnutius that succcee to Naum and Alexander the three his successor all which be both priest and king and therefore by the ethiopian which resort to the holy sepulchre at jerusalem and use to speak greek be call priest beldigian this by corruption of the name by merchant and such as know not the signification and also for brevity sake be pronounce priest Gyan or John now for the priest John in Asia he tell that when saint Thomas be martyr in India the three t t matth. 2.1 mag who have visit christ by the lead of a star in his infancy and have after be consecrate bishop over their several kingdom you must not deny their royalty by the apostle choose one among themselves to be priest and king who be call priest John if you believe not Peter de natalibus out of who the friar city this I shall be too much trouble in persuade you he tell also out of Otho Frisingensis that about the year 1145. one John a Christian both king and priest reign in the further part of the east war upon and over-came the mede assyrian and persian and have intend to free jerusalem out of saracenicall servitude but not find passage over Tigris be force to return this be like to be that presbyter John who posterity use that stratagem before mention against the tartar and to he I think may fit agree that title of Prestegian easy deflect and alter to priest John whereof you have hear out of joseph Scaliger I have see a manuscript u u communicate to i by that industrious and learned gentleman master Selden of the inner temple in old french pretend to be a letter from Prester John to the emperor Fredrick wherein be discourse of the site greatness puissance wealth and other rarity of his estate but find so many monster and uncouth relation therein I can not be so prodigal of faith or penurious of judgement as to value his authority at any high rate wherein sir John mandevill seem to have be a lender or borrower so just do they agree in disagree from both probability and possibility of truth yet both in the one and the other we may observe the like situation of Prester john dwelling in these part of Asia near Persia and that such a multitude of fable can not but have some truth for their ground my conclusion be that for that name of Prestegian I like well scaliger interpretation and think that it may agree either to this or some other christian prince at those time in India which be far near to Persia and from whence the indian borrow their royal title both in those time and since as 10 10 Garc. ab hor. lib. 2. cap. 28. Linschot lib. 1. cap. 27. and Linschoten show Idalham or Adelham the title of the king of y y Goa be the seat of the Portugal Vice goa and the country about common call Idalcan be not a proper name but a title of honour signify as Adonizedek Iosh. 10.1 lord or king of justice Nisamaluco the spear of the kingdom and such like Ishmael the sophi which name also be by some interpret elect because they pretend to be or do so and other the reprobate follower of a reprobate religion add the title of Xa or Shakstone to such as embrace his new sect as Nisomoxa etc. if the borrow of name from the persian language so general in those part be still observe no marvel if some christian king in those time may style himself Prestegian or apostolical which other not understand call priest John or Prete janni as be compass with so many saracen the enemy of the apostle beside heretic and heathen at mosul be yet a patriarch who in Paulus z z m. Paul lib. 1 cap. 6. time be of far great jurisdiction and as a eastern pope ordain archbishop and bishop through all the part of India beside cairo and Baldach and therefore no marvel if in India there be some great christian prince able to make a head against the tartar in those time for even in Cranganor * * g bot. ben. part. 3. lib. 2. be yet suppose to he threescore and ten thousand christian beside a great number in Negapatan and in malipur and very many in angamale and fifteen thousand on the north of cochin where the archbishop that depend on the patriarch of Babylon or mosul reside all which have no communion with the greek roman or Ethiopian church and for the ethiopian name or cross either their merchant when their state be great or slave which take from they be even in these time sell dear of any other and mount to great preferment of war under these lord may leave such impression or some other which as they profess one Christ so may have some word and ceremony common with the ethiopian although I must needs acknowledge that many of those cross have not cross my way nor any other ethiopian foot print pardon i gentle reader if I seem tedious in this dispute see it be necessary both for the understanding of the extent of the power and religion of this precious or priest John and Scaliger have ascribe such large bound to his empire I can not but examine the same otherwise profess myself even willing if I must needs err to err with he who have in many tongue and art show himself perhaps the worthy general and general worthy against error that ever we have have the Alpha of learned man in our age as our learned a a d. Morton against brere marton testify of he and a great light of learning acknowledge by b b jumno and scal. jacobus in Vorst royal testimony his authority I will not seem to contemn and therefore have enter this long search but Scaliger himself have since alter his opinion in the last edition of his emendation in which these late edition of this work may have exclude also this long dispute but that it may serve to illustrate both this and other part of our history and therefore do still suffer it to remain HONDIUS his map of the abissine empire regnum chap. 4 relation of the aethiopian empire collect out of ALVARES BERMUDESIUS and other author to come now to the aethiopian greatness of this great aethiopian his title will be a sufficient text for a more sufficient gloss than we can give in a letter a a lit. em. reg. vid. marin l. 10. c. 10. and seq. fin and Sanut lib. 10. cap. 11. to king Emanuel after diverse word concern the trinity follow these letter send atani Tinghill that be the frankincense of the virgin which be his name in baptism but at the begin of his reign b b the king of Ethiopia change their name as the Pope use to do he take to name David the belove of GOD pillar of the faith descend of the tribe of juda son of David son of Solomon son of the pillar of Zion son of the seed of jacob son of the hand of marry son of Nahu c c in a letter to the pope be add son of the holy apostle Peter and Paul according to grace according to the flesh emperor of the great and high Aethiopia and of most large kingdom territory and jurisdiction the king of Xoa caffate Fatigar Angote Baru Baaliganze Adea Vangue and Goiame where Nilus spring of Damaraa Vaguemedri Ambeaa Vagne Tigri-Mahon of Sabaym the country of the queen of Saba of Barnagasso and lord as far as Nubia which confine upon Egypt here be name enough to scar a weak brain a great part whereof be now his as some say in title only for at this present if Barros and Botero be believe his neighbour have much encroach upon he as a little before we have show a thing whole deny by the late relation of friar d d Lewis de Urreta and thes. polit. apost 34 make Prester John the great prince in the world except the king of Spain Lewis de Urreta yet see we be to travel through all these country we will leave the question of dominion to he and his neighbour to try it with the sword our pen shall peaceable point out the place and after that the condition Barnagasso e e g. Botero Benese p. 1. pory his description of place undescribe by leo. a maginus be the nigh to we at least by the near situation of the red sea nigh to our knowledge it stretch from Suachen almost to the mouth of the strait and have Abagni or astapus on the south it have no other port on the red sea but Ercocco neither have the Prete any other port but this in all his dominion be landlocked on all side 1558. f f g. b. b. part 2. lib. 2. the turk commit here great spoil they have since take from the Prete all on the sea side and special that port of Ercocco and the other of Suachen or Suaquem and force the governor or underking of this province to compound for a yearly sum of a thousand ounce of gold beside his tribute to the ethiopian to he be also subject the governmenr of Dafila and Canfila and the Turk have a Basla g g he be call the bassa of Abassia a five bassa or Belgerbeg of the Turk in Africa omit by Knolles at suaquem call by Ptolomey Sebasticum Tigri-Mahon lie between Nilus Marabo two river Angote and the sea Tigrai have in it Cazumo which be suppose the seat-royal of that great queen which visit Solomon Angote be between tiger-mahon and amara here in amara h h fr. Aluares be a steep hil dilate itself in a round form many day journey in compass environ with the steep side and impassable top thereof many fruitful and pleasant valley wherein the kindred of the Prete be sure keep for the avoid of all tumult and sedition Xoa have store of corn and cattle Goiame have plenty of gold as Baguamedri have silver in Fatigar be a lake on the top of a high mountain twelve mile compass abound with great variety of fish and thence run many river store with the same fish damn be ennoble with slavery for the slave that be hence carry captive in Arabia Persia and Egypt prove good soldier the great part of this kingdom be gentile io. Bermudez and the residue christian the ox as Bermudez relate be almost as great as elephant their horn very great and serve for vessel to carry and keep wine and water as barrel or tankard there be find also a kind of unicorn wild and fierce fashion like a horse of the bigness of a ass near hereunto he add a province of amazon who queen know no man and be honour as a goddess they say they be first institute by the queen of Saba both like true as that which follow of griffon the phoenix and fowl so big that they make a shadow like a cloud couch be subject to damur they be gentile the prince call axgugce that be lord of riches he show we say Bermudez a mountain glister in some place like the sun say all that be gold more gold be say there to be then in Peru or in these part iron the head of the Monastery of amara christen he Gradeus the emperor be his godfather and name he Andrew gueguere be sometime call Meroe the inhabitant be confederate with the turk and moor against the abyssine Dancali and dobas be near the red sea inhabit with moor many of these country be diverse place by diverse through ignorance of the exact situation which Aluarez i i fr. Aluares in his so many year travel in those part may well have acquaint we with if he have first acquaint himself with rule of art to have observe by instrument the true site and distance in the kingdom of Angole iron and salt be currant money the moor of doba have a law prohibit marriage to any that have not first slay twelve christian the divorce k k aluar. c. 21. and marry the wife of their brethren decease be here in use much like as with the jew in Bernagasso Aluarez and his company in their travel be encounter with many great ape as big as wether their forepart hairy like lion which go not less than two or three hundred in a company they will climb any rock they dig the earth that it seem as it have be till in the country of the giannamori l l cap. 50. as they travel they cross a certain brook or river that come down from the mountain and find a pleasant place shade with the sallowe there they repose themselves at noon the water of the brook be not sufficient to drive a mill. and while the company stand some on one side the brook some on the other they hear a thunder which seem a far off but see no likelihood of rain or wind when the thunder be do they put their stuff in order to be go and have take up the tent in which they dine when one of the company go by the brook about his business sudden cry out look to yourselves whereupon turn about they see the water come down a spear depth with great fury which carry away part of their stuff and have they not by good hap take up their tent they together with it have be carry away with the stream many of they be force to climb up the sallowe such be the noise of water and the rattle of stone which come tumble down the mountain together that the earth tremble and the sky seem to threaten a down-fall sudden it come and sudden it pass for the same day they pass over and see very many and great stone join to those which they have see there before in the kingdom of goyame d d c. 135. see c. 12. some draw Nilus from certain mountain which be name mountain of the moon but it come first from the lake Zembre or Zaire and pass by this where it be increase berumdez the river Nilus spring it be there call gion and come from two lake which for their greatness may seem to be sea in which report go that mermaid triton or men-fish be see and some have tell i say Aluarez that they have see it Peter covillian a Portugal which have live a great part of his life in those part tell i that he have be in that kingdom by order from queen Helena to build there a altar in a church build by she where she be bury beyond that kingdom I be tell there be jew don John de Castro mention a high hill inhabit of jew in these part which come no man know from whence but they defend the Prete against the moor of the false in goyame before be relate out of Berumdez that they make a noise like thunder he say say that in Dembia Nilus run within thirty or forty league of the red-sea to which the emperor purpose to cut a passage as his predecessor have begin there be a great lake thirty league long and twenty broad with many island inhabit only of religious man Agao be possess of moor and gentile mix he speak of the kingdom of Oghy seven or eight day journey from Doato under which be a province of gentile call Gorague border with Quiloa and Mongalo which be great witch and observe the entrail of sacrifice beast they kill a ox with certain ceremony and anoint themselves with the tallow thereof make a great fire seem to go into it and to sit down in a chair therein thence give divination and answer without burn their tribute be two lion three whelp a ounce of gold melt with certain hen and chicken of the same metal six buff lade with silver a thousand beef and the skin of lion ounce and elke the Goffates be vulgar report to have be jew they be hate in other province the house of the ethiopian e e c. 159. be round all of earth flat roof cover with thatch compass with yard they sleep upon Ox-hides they have neither table nor tablecloth but have their meat serve in on plain wooden platter some eat flesh raw other broil it artillery they have not until they buy some of the turk write be little and scarce a little use among they the officer dispatch matter of justice by messenger and word of mouth there be no wine make of the grape but by stealth except at the pretes and f f Abuna be their patriarch Abunas other use wine make of raisin steep ten day in water and strain which be cordial and strong they have plenty and want of metal gold silver etc. the soil yield but they have not art to take it they have no coin of gold or silver salt be the most current money sugar cane they have but want skill to use they the mountain and wood be full of Basill and other odoriferous plant they have store of bee and honey but their hive be place in chamber where make a little hole in the wall the bee go in and out there be some place very cold the commons be miserable oppress by their superior no man may kill a ox though it be his own without licence from the governor there be no shambles but at the Court the common people seldom speak truth no not upon a oath except they be compel to swear by the head of the king they exceed fear excommunication their oath be in this sort the party to be depose go with two priest carry with they fire and incense to the church-door whereon he lay his hand then the priest adiure he say if thou shall swear false as the lion devour the beast of the forest so let the devil devour thy soul and as corn be ground under the millstone so let he grind thy bone and as the fire burn up the wood so let thy soul burn in hell the party answer to every or these clause amen but if thou speak truth let thy life be prolong with honour and let thy soul enter into paradise with the bless amen then do he give his testimony they have book write in parchment let we now come unto the court of their emperor which be always move and yet the great town that his whole empire contain for there be few which have in they one thousand and six hundred family whereas this movable city have five thousand or six thousand tent and mule for carriage about fifty thousand in his march from one place to another if they pass by a church he and all his company alight and walk on foot till they be pass there be also carry before he a consecrate stone or altar upon the shoulder of certain priest appoint to that office they call he Acegue which signify emperor and negus that be king by commandment of the queen Maqueda which visit Solomon woman c c Strabo lib. 16. tell of circumcise woman in these part characteri circumcisionis any one man may circumcise and it be do without solemnity or ceremony be say they circumcise both sex be circumcise at eight day old and the male forty day after the female fourscore unless sickness hasten the same be baptize as for the rite of their christianity it belong not to this place to express their circumcision Zabo say be not observe as if it make they more worthy than other christian for they think to be save only by Faith they use this and distinction of meat and Mosaical rite yet so as he that eat shall not despise he that eat not and not condemn other that refuse they but yet think that neither Christ nor the apostle nor the primitive church have disannul they interpret also the scripture to their purpose of their agree with other church in the most point of substance the author of the d d catholic tradition catholic tradition have write and when I make a christian visitation of these part it shall be further discover the succession be not tie to the elder but to he who the father appoint for David which send his embassage to Portugal be the three son in order and for modesty in refuse to sit in his father throne which in the same trial his other brethren have accept be prefer to that which he have refuse the other reject for their forward acceptation the king offer e e Eman. the king of Portugal a hundred thousand dam of gold and as many soldier towards the subdue of the moor beside other thing meet for the war it seem the difference of the ethiopian and popish superstition be the chief hindrance in this business neither party be able if willing to reconcile their long-received difference from each other and the truth Eugenius the pope and the king then name the seed of jacob f f have write to each other and Aluarez yield g g obedienza del Prete janni etc. obedience to the pope in the name of the Prete at Bologna in the presence of pope Clement the seven and Charles the five but all this sort to none effect for pope Paul the four send a ambassage to Claudius than the abassine emperor employ in the same thirteen jesuit one of which be make patriarch and two bishop in their hopeful ethiopian hierarchy Ignatius the founder of the jesuit write a long letter also which Maffaeus and h h p. maff. hist judic. lib. 16. jarric have insert at large thus in the year 1555. John the three king of Portugal undertake the charge to convey they thither and send i i Eman. acosta in consaluus Roterigius to prepare they way by a former ambassage to Claudius who ear he find fast close to such motion whereupon the new patriarch stay at goa and ouiedus one of the bishop with a priest or two go thither where when they come they find Claudius slay and his brother k k Ouiedo b. of Hierapolis Adamas a cruel man and a sometime from his faith in the throne he cast the new bishop into band and draw he into the war with he where the emperor be discomfit and he take and strip of all and at last miserable die and with he the hope of Romish Abassia John Nounius Barretus the design patriarch refuse as Maffaeus say the archbishopric of goa where his brother be viceroy and remain subject to the Jesuitical society to his death in the year 1559. joannes Bermudesius l l io. Bermudez relat Legat. atani tinghil return to Lisbon he write a discourse of his ambassage from the ethiopian emperor to John the three king of Portugal and of his adventure in those part befall he in which he relate that Abuna marcos be at the point of death an. 1535. the emperor will he to nominate his successor whereupon he appoint this Bermudez and order he with all sacred order which he accept upon condition of the pope confirmation whereto the emperor consent desire he to go to Rome to give obedience to the pope and from thence to Portugal to conclude Tagazano so he call he his ambassage Paul the three confirm he patriarch of Alexandria he apprehend Tagazano as onadinguel enjoin and clap iron on he his emperor request be a marriage to be have with the king son of Portugal the ethiopian succession to remain his dowry also to send man against Zeila and pioner to cut through a hill thereby to bring Nilus to annoy Egypt four hundred and fifty be send according by garcia of Noronya but onadinguel be dead and Gradeus be emperor who overthrow the moor and slay the king of Zeila and of aden this emperor fall out with the portugal and send to Alexandria for another Abuna who name be joseph so that none acknowledge Bermudez but the portugal Sabellicus m m Sabel en. 10. lib. 8. say he have conference with some ethiopian which say that their lord rule over threescore and two king they call he Gyam which signify mighty they wonder why the italian call he a priest see he never receive order only he bestow benefice and be neither call John nor Janes but Gyam some report of he thing incredible as one web n n web travel a english man in his tale of his travel he have gold enough shut up in a cave to buy the moiety of the world as l. Regius o o l. le roy l. 9 affirm and can raise a army of ten hundred thousand say Sabellicus yet the peasant be not employ in military service but only the which be man bring up thereto they war not in the lent p p Aluarez cap. 113. except against themselves with extremity of fast so weaken their body that the moor q q the moor also use to give assault on the Saturdays and sunday because of a jewish superstition then they refuse to fight make that their harvest of Abissine captive of this their fast Aluares say that they begin their lent ten day before we and after Candlemas fast three day in remembrance of niniveh repentance many friar in that space eat nothing and some woman refuse to suckle their child above once a day their general fast be bread and water for fish be not easy have they be far from sea and ignorant to take it some friar eat no bread all lend long for devotion some not in a whole year or in their whole life but feed on herb without oil or salt that I speak not of their girdle of iron and other their hardship which my pen will willing express if my method forbid i not this fast as expose their state to hostile invasion and insolence may find place and mention here their friar and priest in Lent eat but once in two day and that in the night queen r r lit. Helen em. reg. Portugal Helena that send her ambassador to king Emanuel be report to eat but three time a week on Tuesday Thursday and Saturday on sunday they fast not in Tigray and Tigremahon they fast neither Saturday nor Sunday and they marry because they have two month privilege from fast on Thursday before our Shrovetide they that be rich may there marry three wife and the justice forbid they not only s s Aluarez they be excommunicate from enter the church some t t f. Lewis histor and l. 1. c. 20. brief description of the whole world affirm that the prince of Egypt have time out of mind pay to Prester John a great tribute continue by the turk which Lewis say be three hundred thousand every be sixteen rial and with we eight shilling for that by he the furious spirit of Nilus be slack and cool be detain in the way by many sluice for that purpose make the great Turk deny this u u alfon albuquerque devise to divert Nilus into the red sea f. Lewis say that Pius 5. the pope provoke Menna the Prete to refuse the tribute and to stay it by divert the stream whereupon the Turk send christian out of Greece and other part to dwell there and in cairo place 30000. family which cause there pope and Prete to alter their course the abassine cause those dam to be break and by drown Egypt in uncouth manner force that great monarch to composition Aluarez deny both the mountain of Luna and the melt of snow which be suppose the cause of this river hastiness and ascribe the overflow of Nilus to the extreme rain in Ethiopia who fountain diverse portugal have see he say in goyame the Turk notwithstanding have by war upon he erect a new Beglerbegship in his dominion Aluarez live there six year and be once within thirty mile of Nilus but in all his travel never see that river so little access have the ethiopian bar out by unpassable passage usual to the same Andrea Corsali 10 10 Andrea Corsali litter 2. ap. k. report that the Prete David be of olive colour but show his face but once in the year have at other time his face cover for great state and therefore also speak to none but by a interpreter the inhabitant be brand with fire which they use not for baptism but in observation of a custom of Solomon who so mark his slave as they affirm friar Lewis give another reason thereof say that when the world groan under Arrianisme the abassine emperor cause his subject to brand themselves with a threefold mark or stamp in the forehead to testify their faith of and in the trinity which now since their commerce with the roman christian be in manner whole leave except in the rude and more uncivil part of Barnagasso the border of the empire the same author y y Lewis de Urreta hist de la Ethiopia l. 1. p. 247. and d. say that in Ethiopia be elephant the rhinoceros and beside other beast the unicorn in the kingdom of goyame and in the hill of the moon but seldom see only the horn be find which he cast in manner as the hart. there be also he say bird of paradise and such store and variety of flower all the year long that their eunuch be always deck with they there be one flower not any where else know call Ghoyahula much resemble a marigold but exceed fair in variety and excellency of colour fragrant smell abundance of leaf in the flower and with a more rare quality begin to open at noon and so by little and little open more and more till midnight always the send increase with the open after midnight it shut by little and little till noon deny by the same degree her please office to both sense of send and sight he tell also of a little bird to which nature have commit the tuition of this flower which all the time that it be open fly about it drive away thing offensive sing sweet and spread herself thereon with other thing very strange I dare not affirm very true he mention z z pag. 344. in their language Alicomeinos also a bird call the rhinoceros of the air much big than a eagle and have a bow-fashioned bill or beak four foot long and a horn between the eye with a black line alongst it it be a cruel fowl and attend on battle and camp the portugal have sight of one at the red sea when Soliman the eunuch have his navy in the red sea the horn be of the same property with that of the unicorn and rhinoceros there be fish also call rhinocerote of the sea many of which be pay the Prete for tribute many many other ethiopian rarity we may observe out of this author but if it deserve credit the hill amara after his description may furnish you for and beyond all the rest of Ethiopia as a second earthly paradise chap. v. relation of ethiopian rarity collect out of friar LVYS a spanish author @. i. of the hill amara the hill amara have already be often mention and nothing indeed in all Ethiopia more deserve mention whether we respect the natural site or the employment thereof somewhat be write thereof by geographer e. Aluareza c. 58. 62. and historian especial by Aluarez who we have chief follow in the former relation of this country as a eyewitness of the most thing report but neither they nor he have any thing but by relation save that he pass two day journey along by the say hill and that also have almost cost he his life but John de baltasar say our friar live in the same a long time and therein serve Alexander which be afterward emperor and be often by commandment of the same man when he be emperor send thither out of his relation a a Lewis de vrreta de la Ethiopia l. c. 8. and friar * Lewis say he have borrow that which here we offer you and here we offer you no small favour to conduct you into and about this place where none may come but a ethiopian and that by express licence under pain of leave his hand foot and eye behind in price for his curiosity and not much less be the danger of such as offer to escape from thence Aluarez himself be a eyewitness of some such cruel execution inflict for that offence this hill be situate as the navel of that ethiopian body and centre of their empire under the equinoctial line where the sun may take his best view thereof as not encounter in all his long journey with the like theatre wherein the grace and muse be actor no place more grace with nature store or furnish with such a store-house of book the sun himself so in love with the sight that the first and last thing he view in all those part be this hill and where antiquity consecrate unto he a stately temple the god if you believe Homer b b hom. il. a that they feast in Ethiopia can not there nor in the world find a fit place for entertainment all of they contribute their best store if I may so speak to the banquet Bacchus juno Venus Pomona Ceres and the rest with store of fruit wholesome air pleasant aspect and prospect secure by Mars lest any sinister accident shall interrupt their delight if his garrison of soldier be needful where nature have so strong fortify before only Neptune with his rude sea-deity and Pluto with his blackguard of bark Cerberus and the rest of that dreadful train who unwelcome presence will trouble all that be present be all save Charon who attend on every feast yea now have ferry away those suppose deity with himself perpetual exile from this place once heaven and earth nature and industry have all be corrival to it all present their best present to make it of this so lovely presence some take this for the place of our forefather paradise and yet though thus admire of other as a paradise it be make a prison to some on who nature have bestow the great freedom if their freedom have not be eclipse c c ovid. with greatness and though goodly star yet by the sun brightness be force to hide their light when gross and earthly body be see their nobleness make they prisoner that one sun only may shine in that ethiopian throne it be situate in a great plain large extend itself every way without other hill in the same for the space of 30. league the form thereof round and circular the height such that it be a day work to ascend from the foot to the top round about the rock be cut so smooth and even without any unequal swell that it seem to he that stand beneath like a high wall whereon the heaven be as it be prop and at the top it be overhang with rock jut forth of the side the space of a mile bear out like mushroom so that it be impossible to ascend it or by ram with earth batter with canon scale or otherwise to win it it be above 20. league in circuit compass with a wall on the top well wrought that neither man nor beast in chase may fall down the top be a plain field only towards the south be a rise hil beautify this plain as it be with a watchtower not serve alone to the eye but yield also a pleasant spring which pass through all that plain pay his tribute to every garden that will exact it and make a lake whence issue a river which have from these top espy Nilus never leave seek to find he who he can leave both to seek and find that by his direction and conveyance he may together with he present himself before the father and great king of water the sea the way up to it be cut out within the rook not with stair but ascend by little and little that one may ride up with ease it have also hole cut to let in light and at the foot of this ascend place a fair gate with a guard half way up be a fair and spacious hall cut out of the same rock with three window very large upward the ascent be about the length of a lance and a half and at the top be a gate with another guard the air above be wholesome and delectable and they live there very long and without sickness there be no city on the top but palace stand by themselves in number four and thirty spacious sumptuous and beautiful where the prince of the royal blood have their abode with their family the soldier that guard the place dwell in tent there be two temple build before the reign of the queen of Saba one in honour of the sun the other of the moon the most magnificent in all Ethiopia which by Caudace when she be convert to the christian faith be consecrate in the name of the holy ghost and of the cross at that time they tell Caudace ascend with the eunuch who proper name be to baptize all of the royal blood which be there keep Zachary the elder of they be in his baptism name Philip in remembrance of Philip convert the eunuch which cause all the emperor to be call by that name till John the saint who will be call John because he be crown on saint john day and while they be busy in that holy work of baptise the prince a dove in fiery form come fly with beam of light and light on the high temple dedicate to the Sun whereupon it be afterward consecrate to the holy ghost by saint Matthew the apostle when he preach in Ethiopia those two temple be after that give to the monastical knight of the military order of saint Anthony by Philip the seven with two great and spacious covent build for they I shall lose both you and myself if I shall lead you into their sweet flourish and fruitful garden whereof there be store in this plain curious make and plentiful furnish with fruit both of Europe plant there as pear pippin and such like and of their own as orange citron lemon and the rest cedar palmtree with other tree and variety of herb and flower to satisfy the sight taste and send But I will entertain you only with rarity no where else to be find and such be the Cubayo tree pleasant beyond all comparison in taste and whereunto for the virtue be impute the health and long life of the inhabitant and the balm tree whereof there be great store here and hence it be think * * Ios. ant. l. 8. cap. 2. the queen of Saba carry and give to Solomon who plant they in judaea from whence they be transplant at cairo long after the plenty of grain and corn there grow the charm of bird allure the ear with their warble note and fix the eye on their colour joint agree in beauty by their disagree variety and other creature that adorn this paradise may make i glut you as sweet meat usual do with too much store let we herefore take view of some other thing worthy our admiration in this admire hill take the friar for our guide who credit I leave to your censure @. 2 his liberal report of the library and incredible treasure therein such be the stately building of the two church aforesaid with their monastery the pillar and roof of stone rich and cunning wrought the matter and the workmanship conspire magnificence that of jasper alabaster marble porphety this with paint gild and much curiosity the two monastery contain each of they 1500. religious knight and monk each have also two abbot one of the military knight the other spiritual of the monk inferior to the former in the monastery of the holy cross be two rare piece whereon wonder may just fasten both her eye the treasury and library a a the library of the Prete of the emperor neither of which be think to be marchable in the world that library of Constantinople b b Zonar an. lib. 3. wherein be 120000. book nor that at Pergamus of 200000. nor the alexandrian library wherein Gellius c c Gell. l. 6. c. 17. number 700000. have the fire not be admit too hasty a student to consume they yet have they come short if report overreach not of this whereof we speak their number be in a manner innumerable their price inestimable the queen of Saba they say procure book hither from all part beside many which Solomon give she and from that time to this their emperor have succeed in like care and diligence there be three great hall each above two hundred pace large with book of all science write in fine parchment with much curiosity of golden letter and other work and cost in the writing bind and cover some on the floor some on shelf about the side there be few of paper which be but a new thing in Ethiopia there be the writing of Enoch copy out of the stone wherein they be engrave which entreat of philosophy of the heaven and element other go under the name of No the subject whereof be cosmography mathematics ceremony and prayer some of Abraham which he compose when he dwell in the valley of Mamre and there read public philosophy and the mathematics there be very much of Solomon a great number pass under his name many ascribe to job which he write after the recovery of his prosperity many of esdras the prophet and the high priest and beside the four canonical gospel many other ascribe to Bartholomew Thomas Andrew and other much of the sibelle in verse and prose the work of the queen of Saba the greek father all that have write of which many be not extant with we the writer a a fr. Lewis have a very large catalogue of they l. 1. c. 9 take out as he say of a index which Anthony gricui and l. Cremones make of they be send thither by the pope Gregory 13. at the instance of cardinal garlet which see and admire the variety of they as do many other then in their company of Syria Egypt Africa and the latin father translate with other innumerable in the greek Hebrew Arabic abassine egyptian syrian Chaldee far more author and more of they then we have few in latin yet Titus Livius be there whole which with we imperfect and some of the work of Thomas Aquinas saint Augustine work be in Arabic poet philosopher physician rabbin talmudist cabalist hieroglyphike and other will be too tedious to relate when jerusalem be destroy by Titus when the saracen overranne the christian world many book be convey out of the eastern part into Aethiopia when Ferdinand and Isabel expel the jew out of Spain many of they enter into Aethiopia and for do this without licence enrich the pretes library with their book when Charles the five restore muleass to his kingdom the Prete hear that there be at Tunis a great library send and buy more than three thousand book of diverse art there be above two hundred monk who office be to look to the library to keep they clean and sound each appoint to the book of that language which he understand the abbot have strait charge from the emperor to have care thereof he esteem this library more than his treasure and yet his treasure be such c c David as leave all other of all prince in the world behind quite out of sight it be a sea that every year receive new river never run out the emperor even from the time of the queen of Saba lay up part of their revenue here and therefore d d span David the Prete in letter to king John the second of Portugal say that he have gold as the sand of the sea and the star in the sky b b the treasury of the Prete the first that coin money be Alexander the three which die in the year of our lord 1603. stamp in the one side the figure of saint Matthew the aethiopian patron and on the other the lion and cross which be the arm of Aethiopia his jewel here keep be incomparable topaz amethist saphire diamond and other he have one jewel which be find in the river Niger that bring forth more gem than any river in the world which be one piece of stone or rock diversify with a thousand variety of stone it be square about two palm d d span and a half and thick withal there be in it a hundred and sixty diamond one as large as the palm of one hand other of one two or three finger and some less it have about three hundred emerald ruby the great in the world above fifty saphire Turqueses balaze amethist spinel topaz jacinth chrysolite and all other kind nature here play the jeweller and represent a map of the world gem in one jewel without and infinite beyond all art of man be set in the sun it seem a combine marriage of heavenly and earthly excellence that no mortal eye have see the like nor be able to endure the sight of this when Bernardo Vecheis a jeweller be send thither by Francis de Medicis duke of Florence he account it beyond all estimation or value the emperor keep it in a box of Gold by the persuasion of that Bernardo he have make he table set with thousand of stone in they coral be more esteem in Aethiopia then gold and therefore friar Lewis deny that corral in the bottom of the red sea make it red as some affirm and that which Barros e e Barros dec. y lib. 8. cap. 1. say have be find there be unperfect @. 3 of the prince of the blood there keep and of the election of the emperor but great jewel than those be keep in amara the prince of the blood royal which be send to this hill at eight year old and never return thence except they be choose emperor the first author of this custom be joshua the nephew of Solomon and son of Meilec or Melilec to remove all occasion of civil war about succession and their continue succession in one line without alienation be impute to this some emperor for a time have leave it till Abraham be emperor have or pretend to have a revelation to renew that custom if he will continue the sceptre in the lineage of David the prince which live there be six eight twelve and sometime more an. 1608. they be six every of which live by himself and that in great estate and majesty in royal palace with spacious hals rich hang remove to another palace at pleasure they meet alrogether when they will play hunt walk and on holiday to divine service they take place according to their age each have his ten servant for ordinary attendance which be the son or descend of the tributary king for base office the great master or military abbot employ the soldier that guard at the foot of the hill which without licence may not ascend they have other grave person to instruct they in virtue and learning every city that be every habitation of a thousand house be at their own charge to send thither three man a gentleman a citizen and a plebeian for the guard of the hill which make up the number of seven thousand five hundred there be two thousand and five hundred city in the empire the military abbot order they in their several ward the base at the foot of the hill the citizen at the middle and the gentleman at the top their captain change at every two month end beside the soldier tent be many other of merchant and officer no woman may ascend nor have do since queen candace be here baptize by her eunuch the prince live single and marry not as Aluares have say our friar untrue affirm of they when the emperor be dead many solemn ceremony be observe both religious and civil about the election of another which be in the authority of the two military abbot of st Anthony order in the Mount oath be take both of the elector and elect the first to use sincerity the other to reign just observe and cause in his empire to be observe the law of God christian religion the four first counsel of nice Ephesus chalcedon and Constantinople and if the a a f. Lewis de Ur^^t hist Aethiop friar reach not for in their holy father case I rely not much on their holiness to acknowledge the florentine council and the pope supremacy and last the constitution of John the saint and philip the seven ancient emperor which do in solemn procession of all estate they go to church and have set the emperor in his throne the prince of the blood be bring out of the palace where in the time of the election they have be enclose to kiss his hand and swear fidelity clothe in the habit of the knight of st Anthony the same oath be give also by the king his vassal four of which be present at the election the counsellor prelate and other according to their place after this fire be make on the tower of the mount to give notice of this election which be see by the near city they also by the like fire as it be proclaim the same in a moment through all the empire which be confirm by post send thence on dromedary by the abbot of the abbey of the holy ghost one of the elector and the council unto the city of Saba and the mother of the new-elect if she be live and to his near kindred to come and rejoice with he the next day the emperor go in black habit to the palace where the prince be and salute they with kind embracement one by one with his bonnet in his hand which be do in the next place by the prelate who in honour of their ecclesiastical dignity the prince resalute stand with their head uncover the tributary king follow not with embracement but kiss their hand render their salutation and after they the ambassador the emperor have remain sometime in private talk with they go to the abbey of the holy ghost and put off his black habit be clothe in scarlet and be on horseback attend with his family the abbot and counsellor pass to the abbot of the Holy-cross where the two abbot of that abbey meet he and after oath give to preserve the ancient custom present he with the key of the treasury and library the emperor bestow as much of the say treasure as he please after all other ceremony the counsellor of the court come to the hill with 12000 knight of saint Anthony order which be the emperor guard and the elder son of the king to convey he solemn to Zambra the city where court and council reside where with all solemnity and magnificence he be likewise receive and conduct into the palace and place on his throne of twelve step with acclamation of long life and happiness on all hand five day festival be here pass in all public rejoice he go to Saba to take the oath of all his subject king in person whereof only four have be present at the election and one hold the crown another the scutcheon of the arm of that tributary king he swear on the sceptre which be a golden cross true fidelity and obedience and the emperor put on the crown again on his head and the say scutcheon with his arm he give into his hand and license he to depart to his pavilion without the city these king be true king and succeed in the inheritance of their father receive the tribute of the subject of their several kingdom and be not deputy or viceroy at the mere pleasure of the emperor but if one be upon just cause displace his son succeed and therefore the Prete be call king of king the elder son of every of the king attend always on the emperor and have attend on they ten servant of the son of the noble of their kingdom the emperor be bind by ancient custom to take a wife of the posterity of those three magi which adore Christ in his infancy who the aethiopian and roman tradition call king by the name of Gaspar Melchior Balthasar of which the aethiopian say that Melchior be of Arabia and Balthasar of Persia which be force by persecution of a a when be the arrian of such power in Arabia but especial in Persia arrian come into Aethiopia in the time of John the saint which reign after Philip the 7 and receive of his hand the kingdom of Fatigar and Soa the former give to the posterity of Balthasar the other to the lineage of Melchior the friar add that all the legitimate descendant of these three family be bear with a star on one of their side and that at the jubilee in the time of Gregory the thirteen 1575. there be three of those three family at Rome with that natural ensign of the supernatural and miraculous Star yea the legitimate mahometans in Arabia and Persia remain of those kindred have the same sign as don John swear to he that he have see the council govern according to the 127. statute make by the first Philips and John the saint nothing be punish with death but treason under which name they also comprehend murder and adultery of this mortal sentence the lion be the executioner which in every city be keep for that purpose some italian have be find guilty of the sin against nature a thing for which the aethiopian as some of the b b cic. orat. s. Roscio ancient for parricide have no law as not think any will so far degenerate and therefore know not how to punish they but it be commit to the latin council which adjudge they to be burn a punishment not know before in those part yet fit to those unnatural burn the fault and punishment be of equal strangeness the emperor will not have it execute there but send they to goa to the Portugal viceroy for that purpose heresy and apostasy be likewise punish with death that latin council be institute by Alexander the three for cause and person of Europe to be try and judge by judge of their own resident at the court as the grand council be and choose of each nation two of the venetian florentine and portugal the two former come thither by the way of cairo Andrew Ouiedo a jesuite send thither by the pope with the title of bishop of hierapolis and after Barretus his death his successor in the patriarch-ship of Aethiopia be author and counsellor to the emperor of this institution and by he make precedent of the same this man c c g. bot. part. 3. lib. 2. maff. hist ind. l. 10. Eman. acosta Botero Maffaeus and other say have miserable entertainment with the residue of his society but by friar Lewis from the relation of don John tell that he live and die in great honour among they as he do elsewhere magnify exceed their respect to the roman papacy and religion judeus Apela d d cic. Milone be the rule of my faith to friar and jesuit in their relation in natural and moral history which serve not to the building of Babylon tower I receive they with attention with thanks and if need be with admiration in some thing but when they come with slime in stead of mortar and will get Rome a name I remember their vow and profession and yield no further attendance that Claudius which be then emperor and his successor Adamas be of Scismatical and tyrannical quality as other historian affirm friar Lewis not only deny but extol their good part he which now be emperor be elect an. 1606. and call himself zaraschaureat a sprout or bud of the lineage of David assister of saint Peter and saint Paul he be a man haughty and valorous and be therefore choose because the turkish empire be so full of sedition and the sophi have send his ambassador to they to choose a fit warrior that they may with joint force assault the ottoman @. 4 of their school and city there be in all the city of Aethiopia two school or college for the instruction of youth one for the male sex the other for the female each divide into three part the first for the gentleman child the second for citizen the three for the base vulgar with their several instructer and without communion meddle or converse of the one with the other the seminary or college of boy be a quarter of a league without the city the other within there be they teach letter and religion all even the king themselves be bind to send their child thither to be instruct and the priest resort thither for confession and minister the sacrament to they they may resort home at festival time otherwise they be there detain the virgin from ten to twenty the other from ten to sixteen year of their age they have not only this order in their well order school but in their disorder misorderly stew the devil work-house and suburb of hell which yet in Rome and place of that religion be permit and admit the city and his holiness self be not a little enrich with that which God prohibit a a Deut. 23.18 the price of the dog and of the Whore the ethiopian permit not any to be strange woman but stranger of other country which may not enter into their city nor may the noble enter into the common house which belong to the citizen or these to those of the plebian nor any but to those peculiar design their state under pain of death as adulterer to be cast to lion these woman be hire by certain officer at a common price and be not to take any thing of particular man they go in pale-coloured garment and if they distaste and forsake that beastly trade they send they to some place subject unto the portugal not admit they to converse with their woman for fear of infection but to leave these beast the ethiopian give great respect to their physician which be only of their gentry and that not all that will but only such as certain officer shall choose of every city to be send to their general university of which there be seven in Ethiopia there to be teach natural philosophy logic and other art they know not together with physic and the art of the apothecary and chirurgeon they be there maintain at the public charge of the city that send they when the doctor and instructer see they fit for graduate they go with they to the monk of hallelujah and of plurimanos who with a monk cowl or hood and other Doctorical ensign do invest and inaugurate they in that degree they be great herbarist they make b b make of mummy mummia otherwise then in other part where it be either make of body bury in the sand or take out of ancient sepulcher where they have be lay be inbalm with spice for they take a captive Moor of the best complexion and after long diet and medicine of he cut off his head in his sleep and gash his body full of wound and therein all the best spice and then wrap he up in hay be before cover with a cerecloth after which they bury he in a moist place cover the body with earth five day be pass they take he up again and remove the cerecloth and hay hang he up in the sun whereby the body resolve and drop a substance like pure balm which liquor be of great price the fragrant scent be such while it hang in the sun that it may be smell he say a league off the privilege of physician be that they be free from the common custom of give one in three of their son for the emperor war that they may ride on elephant in the city which be allow only to the emperor prelate and priest that be virgin they may also wear miniver-hood and be free from subsidy and payment Theologie and the Chaldee tongue be teach only among their priest and ecclesiastical person in their church and monastery they read divinity in their native tongue the text be the four first general counsel the scripture they read in Chaldee c c of this Chaldee see sup. c. 1. which be with they as latin with we they handle not question as the schoolman in logical disputation and argue but copious and eloquent interpret the scripture because we have mention their city Saba and Zambra let we take some brief view of they and so leave this Spaniard who discourse have I hope not without some delight thus long hold you beside these two city none have above three thousand house in they but these be populous and magnificent with tower temple triumphant arch obelisk pyramid and the like token of industry antiquity and majesty Saba be found by that queen which visit Solomon and be the mother-city of the empire it have five thousand house great and sumptuous the street spacious with portal or penthouse that man may walk safe from the sun violence it have four chief gate all of alabaster and jasper wrought with Antique-work the Gate-door of cedar curious carve the way that lead to these gate for the space of two league be set with palm plane orange cedar cypress and other tree on both side for shade and fruit the four high street go through the city across and where they meet be a arch or vault erect on high pillar fair wrought and gild with the brazen image of s. Matthew their suppose patron as big as a giant gild also the work of architect send by Francis duke of Florence near to this city be mine of gold garden and other place of pleasure and profit zambra be great contain thirty thousand house and innumerable concourse of people it stand in the kingdom of Cafates and nigh that great lake which hereof be call Zambra where the emperor leave his wont manner of remove up and down in tent have fix his Court-royal and yet without the city be many tent that belong to the Court here the Prete live with two and forty son of king and with his great council and the latin Alexander the three build the palace here 1570. by the duke of Florence his workman if I shall follow the friar further I can lead you on in a delectable way but doubtful like the poet writing and bring you into elysian but fabulous field fertile in all thing but truth wherein let the reader pardon that I have already be so long rather than tedious in this utopian Aethiopia at the first much suspect by i as by many passage in the story be express but since large write against by Godignus a jesuit and by latter relation find either uncertain or false who pain shall help make up another chapter and then will we proceed in our pilgrimage chap. 5 relation of Aethiopia by GODIGNUS and other author late publish seem more credible @. i. the several country of Abassia their situation inhabitant river and lake if I shall have leave out the former chapter for the uncertain truth or certain falsehood therein contain some perhaps will either for the pilgrim word or the friar invention have desire it be it but as a comedy to delight our tire reader for myself have my intelligence so well serve i at first it have be easy then not to have admit then here now to have omit it I have therefore suffer it still to enjoy a place rather for your delight then credit and here will give you those thing that be more likely I hope I can warrant more true such as nicolaus Godignus and other have write some thing be the same which before out of aluares and other be mention beside other thing exact or late and first of the country itself * * joan. Gabriel ap. nic. Godig de abassinerum rebus l. 1. c 4 and p. jarric thes. rer. jud. l. 5. c. 31 and seq this Gabriel be bear in Abassia the issue as be his follower of the portugal which have assist under Christopher gama Claudius the emperor against gradigna the Moor who he slay and be slay himself by those moor an. 1542. joannes Gabriel captain of the Portugal soldier in these part have write that the abassine empire contain six and twenty kingdom in ancient right divide in fourteen region eight of these kingdom lie in successive order from Swachen towards to west the first of which be Tigrai contain seventeen great tract under so many lieutenant or governor which rule all affair of peace and war. the turk possess the sea part the saracen the coast adjoin the inland be inhabit promiscuous by christian and ethnic they be black of hue deform in shape in condition miserable of condition wicked they have goodly river dry up in summer where yet with little dig both water be find and fish call Sagasi the next kingdom to Tigrai be Daneali have the red sea on the east thence extend westward not far nor fertile inhabit by Moor tributary to the abassine Angote amara boam Leca be four kingdom inhabit by christian only the seven kingdom be very large of seventeen tract partly inhabit by ethnic partly Christian it be call Abagamedri Dambea have also ethnic mix with christian be but two tract on the other side of Dancali towards the red sea Aucaguerle trend alongst the coast possess by the moor not subject to the abassine adel follow in twelve degree northerly in which be Zeila sometime call aualites a famous mart the whole kingdom be inhabit by moor unneighbourly neighbour to the abassine whence come Gradagna or Gradamar the mahometan king which have wellnigh subdue all Aethiopia when the portugal oppose themselves who after diverse overthrow take he and cut off his head after this be Dahali which trend towards Membaxas the inhabitant some christian some ethnic pay tribute to the Prete oecie follow more within land the inhabitant moor and ethnic subject to the abassine arium and Fatigaer the next kingdom be christian Zinger ethnic rozanagum the sixteen kingdom be christian but not subject to the abassine empire from hence extend other kingdom towards the north Roxa of ethnic goma of christian and ethnic such be Nerea a large kingdom towards Monomotapa zethe be inhabit by ethnic subject to the emperor the next be conche and Mahaola small and altogether ethnic Goroma a great Kingdomoe of twenty tract christian and heathen almost whole compass by Nilus able for plenty to feed many army with which it be usual infestect the seedman follow the harvest man and present after the reap sow new seed without other tillage the three last kingdom lie towards Egypt Damote sva through this every lend pass great troop of pilgrim to jerusalem the fourteen region or province I forbear to mention of all these kingdom at this day only Tigrai Abagamedri Dambea and Goroma be obedient to the abassine there be four principal river in this Aethiopia Taucea run from the south to the north the sandy earth in the way continual steal and underearth passage rob he of the watery tribute which he intend to the sea near it be high unpassable mountain inhabit by abassine Jew which still observe the Mosaical law fierce and terrible to their neighbour and can never be conquer by the abassine the second river be Oara exceed Nilus in watery store which he bestow in like manner on the country by which he pass into the Zeilan sea the water be pleasant but the abassine christian will not drink thereof because pass through the country of mahumetan it yield they nourishment the three river be Gabea which near to Mombaza visit the ocean the four be Nilus there be as many lake the first aicha in Angote the second Dambeabahar that be the sea of Dambea not far from Gubbai where the emperor in these time reside if they betake themselves out of their tent into the city this lake be sixty mile long and five and twenty broad receive on one side the water of Nilus be full of fish and riverhorse which sometime be dangerous to passenger two jesuit in one of their boat make of rush hardly escape their assault many small island be in this lake in one of which be a tower their treasury and to which Malefactor be confine the three lake be Zella in oecie the four Xacala not far from it @. 2 of the soil fruit creature season and climate ANtonie * * ant. fernand. soc. jesus Fernandes in a epistle date here in june 1610. number above forty province in Abassia but in substance agree in the former the soil he say be hollow and full of deep cliff in the midst of the plain field you shall often see steep and high rock of solid stone which in time of war serve they in stead of fort the whole region be full of metal but neglect partly by the sloth of the inhabitant partly for fear to bring turkish invasion upon they if such bait be discover they take so much iron only as they find without dig on the face of the earth corn herb tree be there in variety but these not excellent in their fruit except one the fruit whereof save their life by the virtue it have against worm whereto this people be much subject by their eat of raw flesh and therefore every month purge themselves with this fruit they have peach pomegranate citron indian fig but not in great plenty they have hare heart goat swine elephant camel buffle lion cantlopardalis panther tiger rhinocerot and other like beast one so huge that a man on horseback may pass upright under his belly feed on leaf from the top of tree and form like a camel Hippopotami their riverhorse do much harm to the fruit of the earth be of vast body and their mouth three quarter of a yard in the open in the night they come forth and if the husbandman do not keep diligent watch will do extreme harm to the corn they feed also on grass in the water they be very fierce and like dog assault man and tear they they be so afraid of fire that one boy with a burn firebrand will chase away thousand of they some there be which hunt these beast with lance and arrow and live on their flesh little differ from beef there be also find in their river and lake the torpedo torpedo or crampfish of strange effect in nature if hold in the hand and not stir it make no alteration but if it move itself the artery joint sinew and all the member of the body suffer a exceed torture and astonishment which present cease with let go the fish the aethiopian have a superstitious conceit Nilus the ethnic near dwelllng offer sacrifice to this spring out of which always issue a gross vapour there be a great heap of bone by reason of these sacrifice beast that it be good to drive away devil out of man think it torment those spirit no less than human body they say I have not make trial thereof myself that if this fish be lay among dead fish and there stir itself it make they also to move as if there be life in they there be many of they in Nilus in the end of the province of Goyama where be a bottomless lake so the Portugal think that can not sound the bottom with his pike whence continuallly spring abundance of water be the head of that river little at the first and after a day journey and a half run to the east and then enter a lake suppose the great in the world pass swift through the midst thereof without mixture of water and cast itself over high rock take free scope but present be swallow of the earth so that it in some place it may be step over after five day journey towards the east it wind itself again to the west and so pass on in his way towards Egypt the aethiopian affirm that it be easy to divert the river course and to famish Egypt but I think it far easy to say then do it low place in Abassia be intemperate hot their winter continue from May to September and then begin in the red sea which I have observe Fernandes report it to flow in all time of the moon increase and to flow continual out all the time of the decrease in their winter it rain and thunder common every afternoon in the kingdom of Zambea in which we now live we may see both the pole the Antarctic high with his Cross-star in this tract of heaven there be as it be a cloud or blot suppose more thin than other part about it be many star less than those which illustrate the other Pole they begin their year with the spring on the first of September number twelve month in each thirty day reckon the odd day between August and September by themselves the abassine express their joy most by eat and drink and therefore on holiday resort to their church which be shade with tree where be set vessel full of a liquor which they use in stead of wine which they make of honey add opium and thereafter their holy they serve their belly drink to drunkenness quarrel fight they have grape but except in the vintage season they strain their dry raisin insomuch that Peter paez a jesuite write from thence 1604. that the emperor desire he to say mass after the roman rite they can find no wine to do it @. 3 of their custom in private life and public government and their late misery they sow little more than they must spend and for their apparel the rich buy it of the moor attire themselves after their fashion the rest both man and woman use a skin or some course piece of linen without adorn by art when they do reverence to any they cast off this cloth from their shoulder to the navel strip themselves half naked they wear their hair long which serve they for a hat or head attire and for great neatness and gallantry they curl it in diverse manner and anoint it with butter which in the sun show like dew on the grass so curious be they herein that for fear of disorder their curl they have a crotch fasten in the earth whereon at night they lay their neck and so sleep with their head hang they brand themselves on the whole body special on the face the nail of their little finger they suffer to grow to the great length imitate as much as may be the spur of cock which also they sometime fasten and fit to their finger their hand and foot which common be bare they die reddish with the juice of a certain bark n. Godig l. 1. c. 12. they be a slothful people scarce provide necessary for life not give themselves to hunt or fish and although the material of woollen linen cotton be at hand yet do the most of they cover their body like beast with rude skin each man common wear a ram skin the end fasten at his hand and foot they lie on the hide of their kine without other bed in stead of table they have great trough rude hollow wherein they take their meat without cloth or napkin their vessel be of black earth few of they be merchant beside the mahometans they have no great city but many unfortified village their great town have scarce sixteen house they use little writing no not in their public judgement they have no book but for their holy and officer for their account and because we have mention their judgement it shall not be amiss to express their form out of Fernandes the emperor have a house call cala low without any upper story to the door all such come as have any suit every one according to their differ language cry lord lord some also imitate the voice of beast whereby be know of what province they be then do the emperor commit their case to the Umbari so be the judge call of the word Umbare which signify a threefooted stool on which each of they sit some on the right other on the left hand in the town the lord be judge where when any one sue the lord send one of his servant to the defendant assign he a time to make his appearance and then the plaintiff and defendant plead each his own case this be the fashion in Barbary also and many other place and after they have both say what they can all that be present give sentence from this they may appeal to the Umbares from they to the azage or supreme judge and from these to the emperor sometime justice itinerant or visitor be send into the province to inquire of crime which place be buy cause justice to be sell and these to be legal thief more dangerous than outlaw in the flourish state of the empire they say the emperor be wont to hold a continual progress in tent esteem it base to live in any city but wheresoever he abide there be present a city of tent have due place assign to all public and private employment church hospital for sick and for the poor victualling-house shop of several trade and the like they say also that this move city be thirty mile about and that many thousand mule beside camel and innumerable porter attend on the baggage at every remove but if these thing be ever true the case be much alter in this last age and every day grow worse and worse those thing which you have hear out of the friar be false neither be there ever any such emperor as Alexander the three by he so often mention but what with the turk on the north side the moor on the east the from other part and intestine rebellion each challenge his right not by election or inheritance so much as by the sword all thing be bring almost to nothing and the aethiopian greatness be now in a great eclipse and for that Balthasar which the friar pretend his author Godignus say that he be examine hereof affirm they to be the friar invention something he confess he have publish not true but such as he think can do no man harm whatsoever therefore in this book be borrow from that Spaniard I do neither in all thing disclaim nor can exact credit thereto this be the liar reward that even in true report he be doubt more full relation of the present state of this empire I refer to our next aethiopian visitation the before mention be a nationless nation either the same or like in condition to the Giacchi or jag of which we shall anon speak which as in congo and other part so here also bring confusion and desolation where they come as for those patriarch Barretus and have bestow on each of they a book in relation of their life and insert epistle of their own to prove the friar a liar Barrettus desire to be rid of that title which he can not make real and Ouiedo have a brief or bull from Pius quintus to free he and send he to japan which he yet refuse upon hope of better success either among the christian see the copy of this bull and Ouiedos answer God l. 3. c. 12. or ethnic in those part many of which in damut and Sinaxis have desire baptism and by the wicked emperor be reject he propound also a overture to send five hundred Portugal soldier into those part by which strength they may succour themselves and their follower a argument of their weakness which can with so small a handful be awe this may be add that these aethiopian have their black colour in such estimation that they paint Christ jarric l. 5. c. 31. the angel and saint black the devil judas Caiphas Pilate and wicked person they paint white they take salt out of mineral in piece of half a foot which serve there instead of money pet. paez jul. 24. 1603. ten or fifteen of those piece be the price of a slave the cause that when paez the jesuit first enter these part his gold can do he little service and when a saracen in his company have dress he a hen yet dare not he taste of it for offend the scrupulous abassine who will eat nothing which a Turk have kill he write that their house be base and little round of earth cover with thatch contain but one room except the palace of great men. in that year 1603. the grasshopper do great harm which eat up all that be green where they come a great misery of civil war accompany the emperor be depose and imprison and another legitimate for the former be a bastard bring out of prison to the throne this new king * * this seem a common appellation to their king paez jul. 1605. Malac cege write kind letter to paez to bring he the law of Portugal and Ouiedos book praise God that after seven year imprisonment the stone which the builder refuse be become the head of the corner he be present assault and much distress by the who at that time he overcome not so other traitor the chief of which be Zezelazeus who slay the emperor savenquil and erect one jacobus who after he relinquish and take part with Sazinosius which overthrow jacobus and after that imprison Zezelazeus who escape the prison but not a traitor reward be slay by husbandman who ox he will have take away this Sazinosius still infest with treason for even a eremite or anachoret which have live a solitary life twenty year together conspire against he aspire to sovereignty beside many many other and the and the effect of both robber and thief through the country devise of a union with the romish church and write letter to the pope date octob. 14. and to the king of Spain for supply of soldier decemb. 10. 1607. the copy of which jarric have insert in his five book so far from truth be that friar which in these time proclaim such felicity in Aethiopia under I know not what Alexander the birth of his crow brain @. 4 of the sabaean and their queen which visit SALOMON let we conclude with Saba and the queen thereof touch which as elsewhere we have a a sup lib. 3. c. 1. show we rather believe that this queen the suppose founder be of the sabaean in Arabia who neighbour the abasenes be and both as it be very probable her subject these after many age it be the conjecture of great b b Ios. scal. E.T. pag. 638 ed. ult. Brerewood c. 23. Enquirie of rel. clerk pass into these part of Africa and seat themselves here by conquest retain their old language in their liturgy to this day this liturgy or canon of their mass which with other their form and rite of baptism confirmation purification etc. be extant in c c to. 4. ed. 1576. Paul a princip @ Benedictia @ and @ s trinitatis S.N. de Sceva etc. do call their church the church of Sceva or sheba and stephanus place the sabaean and abasenes together as before in this first chapter of this book be show tradition may well continue the memory of this queen among they and superstition may easy add where divine and human learning want abundance of error which be not the ethiopian case alone but almost all ecclesiastical history write of thing do long before and deliver only by tradition roll like a snowball by superstition of succeed time have yield such legendary lump that need much lick before any form of truth can appear as therefore I reject not the ethiopian history whole nor deem it a mere changeling in this challenge of the sabaean inheritance so yet I hold it needs judicious examination and censure the most whereof have be obtrude on that simple credulous nation in late time as our monk deal in these part many age Ptolomey call the chief of Ethiopia auxume which stephanus call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) ptol. l. 4. c. 8. in 65. 30. and 11. arianus d d Perip marry Erythraei Axomite Procopius e e Procop. Pers. l. 1. auzomide all of they give it the metropolitan honour it be suppose to be the same which now be call f f Vid. Ramus Chaxumo whereof Barbosa Corsali and aluares have write in witness whereof be many ancient building there yet remain and pillar somewhat resemble the egyptian obelisk admirable for their height g g vid. Aluarez c. 38. and seq of their huge fabric above and beneath ground and workmanship some above threescore yard high full of letter these letter of which be many there see in many ruin not one of all the Abassens can understand which argue a great antiquity than the Abassens and that these be more late plant or ingraft into the ethiopian stock or stem yea for their christianity also howsoever the eunuch of candace be convert and the apostolical labour in ecclesiastical history mention may sort to good effect in this ethiopian harvest yet it seem the conversion of this nation be not general till the day of justinian for so Nicephorus callistus write that David the king of the axumite Indian why he call they Indian you have hear war upon the homerite which profess the jewish religion vow to the god of the christian to become one of his follower if he obtain the victory which according he do for take Danmus the homerite king alive he send to justinian to further he in the performance of his vow who send thither a holy bishop which baptize the whole nation it may be that the ethiopian have before receive the gospel after which time the Abassens out of Arabia may conquer they and retain their heathenish superstition upon occasion of this war may be convert as we read of h h Paul aemil. 150 d. 1. clodoveus the first christen king of France and of the french notwithstanding the Galli have long before receive christianity which may also be parallel in the Britan and saxon inhabitant of this land howsoever it be likely that ever since this nation have continue Christian of Hellesthaeus you have see i i sup. cap. 2. before Procopius his testimony as for their own report of themselves Zaga Zabo tell one tale aluares another friar Lewis a three that we need none other testimony against they their exceed store of zeal and defect of learning with the good intent of fraud to whet devotion by any mean and that self-love which each both person and nation bear k k a virg. to itself have make no doubt ready inventor and receiver of fable ascribe to themselves the story of both the queen mention in the old and new testament the sabaean and ethiopian antiquity and a world of other fancy which never in the world be do whereto the name of late work city temple order and other occurrent have be apply but it be time for our pilgrim to pass further where yet he be like to speed worse and to find little truth of civility or religion chap. 7 of other country between the red sea and Benomotapa @. i. of adel Adea zanzibar and Melinde EThiopia exterior or inferior be that southerly tract of Africa which to Ptolemey and the ancient be unknown it comprehend all that great wedge of land such be the form which beginning in the west at the country above Zaire stretch to five and thirty degree of southerly latitude and from thence northwards to the entrance or mouth of the arabian gulf all this way besiege and environ with the a a g. bot. ben. part. 1. lib. 2. maginus pory before leo. ocean maginus divide it into five part Aian Zanguebar Benomoptapa Cafraria and congo but congo be here take in a very large sense aian after the arabian account contain all that region which lie between the mouth of the red sea and Quilimanci be for the most part on the sea-coast inhabit by the say arabian but in the inland part thereof be people which be a black heathenish nation it comprehend two kingdom adel and Adea the former of which extend from that mouth of the sea before mention to the cape Guardafu by b b ptol. l. 4. c. 7. Ptolemey call aromata south and west it border upon the dominion of Prete janni about the kingdom of Fatigar the chief city be Arar Zeila also before speak of and Berbora pertain to this kingdom city without the strait on the sea much frequent with Merchant Zeila be situate in eleven degree where Ptolemey place the aualites it be store with variety of merchandise and yield some representation of antiquity in the building thereof consist of lime and stone the king be a Moor and esteem a saint among the superstitious mahometans for his continual war with the christian abassine whence he transport innumerable slave to the arabian and turk receive in exchange armour and other help for his war 1541. gradaam the king before mention or Gradagna by the help of some portugal which Claudius the abassine have in his war be slay and his army overthrow but his successor an. 1559. slay Claudius in battle and get as John de Castro affirm the great treasure of the world the Moor acknowledge divine assistance in this victory triumph on a ass Zeila be burn and sack by the portugal an. 1516. as Andrea c c Andrea corsali Adea Corsali who be then present in the action testify Adea be situate between adel Abassia and the sea the inhabitant be moor descend of the arabian who many hundred year ago partly by their rich traffic and especial by force of arm become lord not only of Aian but of all the sea-coast to cape do Corrientes which be somewhat to the south of the southerly tropic in all which space before the Portugal discovery that part of the city which lay open to the sea be open and unfortify but towards the land be wall for fear of the inland people Adea pay tribute to the abassian in this kingdom be Magadazzo be itself a kingdom of the moor which be of a olive colour d d lud. Romanus lib. 7. zanguebar Brava be a free town which with pate and Gogia be take by the portugal under Tristan de cugna all the country adjoin to Prester John as David the emperor in his letter to king Emanuel relate be either moor or gentile of which some worship wood and fire some the sun other serpent etc. zanzibar or zanguebar be a name by the arabian and persian give to that tract extend from the river Qualimanci which Ptolemey call raptus to the border of Benomotapa some in a large extent include Benomotapa and Cafraria Sanutus affirm that it be a low fenny and woody country with many river which by extremity of moisture cause the air to be intemperate from the waste upward they go naked herein be contain the territory of Melinde Mombaza Quiloa Mosambique and other Melinde e e io. di Barros dec. 1. lib. 4. c. 6. say at Melin de Gamma receive kind entertainment and pilot to convey he to India when it be first discover by the portugal Marmol l. 10. c. 1. and seq describe these city and country large be the name of a kingdom and of the chief city thereof the inhabitant especial near to the sea be moor and build their house after the manner of Europe the woman be white and the man of colour incline to white notwithstanding the situation under the line they have black people also which be heathen for the most part of like condition be f f Vascus Gamma 1500. subdue Mombaza and Almeida five year after and after Nonnius acuna Osor reb. Eman Mombaza which be say to have some resemblance with Rhodes but enemy to the christian and be ruinate by Thomas cotigno in the year 1589. for receive Alebech the Turk as Ampaza in the same coast by Alphonso melo a year or two before @. 2 the portugal exploit in Mombaza and of the Imbius this expedition deserve mention because it give light to the knowledge of other part adjoin the portugal hold in manner all these nation jarric thes. ind. l. 3. c. 13. which inhabit from the cape of good hope hitherto either in term of friendship or subjection this Alebech with turkish galley infest these sea and make diverse of the Portugal vassal to waver in their fidelity be of the saracenicall faith or religion whereupon the viceroy send forth a navy under the command of Thomas aforesaid his brother which arrive first at Brava and thence pass alongst the shore to Ampaza still continue almost desolate thence to lamus by the help of the tide pass up the river full of dangerous shold thence they come to Melinde and after that to Mombaza this be a small island of a league circuit the city then compass with a wall the mahometans bid build a castle on the river which enter the city which be take by the portugal and soon after five galley which Alibech the Turk have there at that time not without rich spoil here the turk and the Mombazan inhabitant be now in a double distress by the Portugal force from the sea and a more terrible enemy from the land these be the Imbius Imbius a barbarous nation impious and barbarous monster breed not far from the cape of good hope tall square and strong man addict always to war and rapine and feed on the flesh both of their captive enemy and of their own people in time of sickness hasten their death for the shambles the skull of man serve they for drink pot their weapon be poison arrow and pole burn at the end their shield be little of wood cover with a skin they be suppose destitute of religion give to incantation and sorcery and adore their king with divine honour think he to be lord of the whole land and the portugal of the sea such be his arrogance that he threaten the destruction of all man yea shoot his arrow against the heaven if wet or heat offend he some 80000. follow he in his war destroy town city and beast together with the man in his march drive many troop of beast before he so to break the assault of the enemy and have fire carry before he as menace to boil or roast and eat all such as he shall take it seem that they be either the same or of like condition to the which intest the abassine and the jag in other * * see in his c. 1^ part of africa which also by a near name call themselves Imbangolas compound of Imbius and gallae a terrible rod of God anger whereby he plague and whip the barbarous african with the worst of african barbarian these imbians have at this time approach to Mombaza and the turk with their galley do their best to hinder their entrance the water encompass quench the violence of that fire which the Imbian bear before he wherewith he have now burn a great wood in this war be the mombazan and turk entangle when the portugal fleet come upon they those that escape by flight the portugal fury fall into the belly of the imbians which cause many to yield themselves voluntary to the Portugal as seem the less of two evil many turk be slay other captive christian galleyslave free three and twenty great and as many small piece of ordnance take the city narrow build that scarce two can go together in the street the house of brick build high but with small light both to defend they against the sun fire the wall and mosque raze Mombaza and the navy be ready to depart they be hale by some turk on shore and earnest desire to admit they into their ship as slave and captive Alebech himself be one with thirty other beside two hundred mombazan have scarce escape the devour maw of the imbians which have even then bury the king and the chief magistrate of Mombaza in their bowel and take innumerable captive destine to the like cannibal disaster the king of lamus call Panebaxira the portugal imprison and execute for betray some of they to the turk and convent the neighbour king of Sian patus ampaza before they they raze Mondra and after other thing set in order return to goa they which have desire to acquaint themselves with what antiquity have deliver of these part may resort to arrianus his periplus of the erythraean sea and the labour of * * Stuckius ar. ortel map thereof Stuckius and Ortelius for we to name you the town of ancient trade as aualites malao mundi Mosyllum Apocopon opone rhapta which he reckon on the african shore with other river and promontory will not much further we in this our pilgrimage-mart of religion @. 3 of Quiloa Sofala and Ophir QViloa stand nine degree to the south of the line the name of a city and island which be a kingdom of the moor and extend her dominion far in the c c maff. hist lib. 2. Arthus hist ind. cap. 20. coast it be build as Marmolius affirm about the four hundred year of the hirara so he name it by one Ali son of sultan Hoscen who not agree with his other brethren by reason their mother be persian and his a Abissine seek new adventure in these part and buy this island the history of who and of his successor you may find in that d d Marmol l. 9 c. 39 and 40. author the king grow mighty by the trade of Sofala but it be make tributary to Portugal by 1500. in the year 1505. the portugal for denial of that tribute deprive Abraham the arabian king of his sceptre and build a fort there which the moor soon after destroy together with the new king make by the portugal the people be whitish their woman comely rich in attire their house fair build and rich furnish between Coava and Cuama two river which spring out of the same lake with Nilus be the kingdom of Mombaza Mozimba Macuas embeoe and against they the promontory here be Mosambique e e see Linschot l 1 c. 4. Paludanus ibid. by which name be signify a kingdom in the continent and a island also with a safe harbour which with two other island be in the mouth of the river moghincat in fifteen degree south Mosambique be inhabit by portugal which have there a strong castle here the portugal ship winter in this island be sheep with tail of five and twenty pound weight a beast common in Africa hen black both in feather flesh and bone and sodden look like ink yet sweet than other in taste pork very good but for the dear sauce there be some mahometans as they be all before the portugal arrival there they have trade in the continent in Sena Macurua Sofala Cuama a people for the most part differ in speech and behaviour each village fight with her neighbour captive they and some as at Macurua eat they their chief live be by hunt and by flesh of elephant in every village be a new king the captain of Mosambique in his three year government make three hundred thousand ducat gain especial by gold from Sofala up further within land the people go almost naked and be so simple when first the portugal trade thither f f l. Romanus lib. 7. that Ludovico barthema or Vertomannus for his shirt and another for a razor and a little bell buy fifteen cow of they and then they be ready to fall together by the ear among themselves for the bell who shall have it but they can not enjoy their purchase be drive to their heel by three female elephant which have young one be very fierce and make they leave their kine to save themselves in these sea the moor sail in vessel sow with leather the sail of palmtree leave calk with gum gather off the tree in the wood Sofala Sofala lie between Cuama and Magnice two river here the portugal have on a little island whence the whole kingdom have his name a fort and factory of very rich trade the people bring great quantity of gold whereof they have plentiful mine for their cloth and other commodity it be suppose amount two million yearly Ortelius g g ort. Thesaur be of opinion that this Cephala or Sophala be that which in Salomon time h h 1. reg. 9.28 2. chron. 9.21 be call Ophir from whence so great quantity of gold be bring by his navy josephus i i joseph antiq. seek for it in India eupolemus k k euseb praep. l. 9 c. 4. in the red sea imagine it to be a island there place dom. l l Niger geog. Tremel and jun. Annot. Niger and juniu in aurea chersonesus where malacca stand although we read not of any great quantity of gold find in that soil m m Gaspar Var. de Ophyra Gaspar Varerius be of the same mind but reckon to the chersonesus both Pegu and samotra with all that lie between they and in Somatra they have a tradition that Solomon have his gold from thence and in the letter of the king to his majesty he entitle himself king of the mountain of gold solida Vatablus n n Vat. in 1. re. 9 p. mar. dec. 1. l. 3 with less reason apply it to Spagniola discover by Columbus and by Columbus himself so call Arias o o ar. mont. morn postellus gorop Hispania Montanui Philip moruay postellus Goropius will by their authority much move we to think with they that Ophir be Peru if the ignorance of the loadstone and those huge sea esteem by antiquity unnavigable do not detain we from consent and where shall Peru yield he ivory where never be yet see a elephant doctor dee that famous mathematician have write a very large discourse of that argument which I have see with master hakluyt much illustrate what the ancient have write of those sea and coast and conclude that Havila be the kingdom of avarice subject to Pegu and Ophir be chryse or aurea before mention first possess by Ophir mention genes 10. that golden name eat up the former of Ophir josephus p p Ios. acosta l. 1. cap. 14. acosta make Ophir and Tharsis to signify no certain place but common to be take in a general sense as the word India be now with we a name give to all remote country east and west he think that Salomon gold ivory etc. come from the east-indies but some reason do yield great cause of conjecture for Sofala both because of the plenty of the commodity which Salomon servant be say to bring with they and because of ancient building of stone-work which the q q jo. di Barros dec. 1. l. 10. c. 1. inhabitant call the work of devil suppose it impossible for man guess of other by their own ignorance to have build which also have strange letter that the moor though learned can not read and why may they not be the old Hebrew letter which the phoenician of old and samaritan to this day observe as elsewhere we have show and further Thomas r r some Lopez ap Ramusiam Lopez tell that certain moor relate unto they of the riches of those mine that ship from Mecca and zidem use to trade there and that yearly there be take forth of the mine two million of mittigal every Mittigal be a ducat of gold and a three part that the war in those country at that time have cease the traffic and that they have book and ancient write which testify that these be the mine whence Solomon in his three voyage fetch his gold and that the queen of Saba be natural of the part of India as for India you have s s cap. sup. even now read that it be a name give to many nation and among the test to Aethiopia and if a man consider the small skill which that age of the world have in marine affair still as much as may be hold their course within the sight of land he can scarce think that long navigation can then be perform barrius account all Sofala to the empire of Benomotapa of which we shall speak anon we have now mention the same by reason of the isle which be subject to the portugal these beside gold here have great trade for ivory of which barrius say that in Benomopata be yearly slay four or five thousand and of water-horse who tooth be account ivory also all the great river in Africa be full these feed sometime on the meadow where the mariner have chase they as Lopez t t th. Lopez report and after long chase by land they have take the water where in revenge they have assault the mariner in their boat and bite chip off the same be by the thickness of their hide arm against their pike and have make they afraid that they will overwhelm the Boat @. 4 of Monoemugi the moor baduine caphar in these part within the land behind these part be the kingdom of Monoemugi a a monoemugi which be rich in gold their unfortunate war with Monomotapa have make they know Nilus be their western border and Abassia on the north. they have little red ball make of a kind of clay in Cambaya and resemble glass which they wear for ornament and use for money this king war with the Benomotapa and have terrible soldier call Giacqui or Agab or agog who inhabit between the lake whence Nilus and Zaire take their beginning which live a wander life like the nomad in cottage which they make in the field they be of stature tall and of countenance terrible make line upon their cheek with certain iron instrument and turn their eyelid backward eat their enemy these not long since as b b od. Lopez l. 2. c. 5. some say invade the kingdom of congo and force the king to keep in a small isle where himself be take with a Dropsy and his people famish as after shall follow in due place the amazon of Monomotapa be every way equal unto they in prowess little be know of the religion of these heathenish nation nor of other kingdom whereof we have little but the name to relate Gorova colta Anzuga Moneulo baduis now for those moor which inhabit the seacoast as we have say they be disperse as far as Benomotapa but be not all c c io di bar dic. 1. l. 8. c. 4. catholic mahumetan especial such of they as have converse and take their habitation further within land and the first moores or arabian that come to inhabit those coast be banish person call as the chronicle of Quiloa be reporee Emozaidin of zaide the nephew of hocem the son of Hali who doctrine they follow in some opinion contrary to the Alcoran and therefore esteem heretic long after they come three ship with great multitude of arabian that flee from the king of Laza their enemy under the conduct of seven brethren which build Magadazzo and after that brava which in manner of a commonwealth be till the portugal time govern by twelve alderman or chief governor that descend of the seven brethren baduini these moor and the former differ from each other in their superstition can not agree and therefore the Emozaidin be force up high into the country and thereby marriage mix themselves with the cafer so the arabian call all heathen people and become mongrel in a gallimaufry of devotion who therefore the Sea-coast-moor call by a general name a a Botero baduini which in Arabia and Egypt be the title of the people that live in the champain and inland country and those that live near the sea-coast be call arabian they make no difference of meat don John of Castro b b in a great write book give by sir w ral. to m. Hak. write that badoil signify a man that live only by cattle and that the troglodyte and nation from Melinde and Magadoxa to cape Guardafu and on both side of the strait and on the Arabic sea to Ormuz occupy rather then inhabit the soil be call badoy they be say he savage without truth or civility they be Mahometan but account bad moor thief and robber eat raw flesh drink milk their habit filthy very swift hold war with all man as be prophesy of Ishmael their progenitor from Zeila to Suachen with the abexijs from thence to Alcocer with the nobijs from thence to Soez with the egyptian from Soez to Ormus with the arabian they have no king nor great lord but live in troop and faction permit no town in their field have no certain habitation but wander from place to place with their cattle their Xeque determine suit as he list their lodging be in cave and hole of the most in tent their colour very black their language arabic the heathen in those part be give to augury and witchery and in their high attempt and great resolution yet will leave off if any of these fantasy bode unluckiness the fruit bird beast and seed be in manner like to the people all wild the air be unwholesome but what unhealthsomeness can there be find where gold as find which make man commit themselves no marvel what they commit with other to the most scorch heat to contagious air to tempestuous sea and the dark prison of the disembowelled earth modesty have almost forbid i to recite that which may with some easy obtain a in the last act and finish of this chapter concern the caffare Linschoten c c Linschot c. 41. shall recite it for i they live say he like beast he speak of those which live near Mosambique and those especial more within the land they be black as pitch with flat nose thick lip some have hole both above and under in their lip and as it be other mouth in their cheek wherein they thrust small bone to beautify themselves for which cause they raze and sear their body with iron if they will make a devilish form and picture they represent a white man in his apparel as think nothing more ugly some also file their tooth as sharp as needle they have village wherein they dwell together and in every village a lord or king to who they be subject religion and faith be unknown to they they use mutual war and some eat man flesh when they take prisoner in war or kill their enemy they observe a more than beastly testimony of their great valour which be after this manner they cut off their privy member to deprive they of all hope of generation and then dry they well for preservation after which they come before the king with great reverence in the presence of the principal man of the village and there take these member so dry one by one in their mouth and spit they on the ground at the king foot which the king with great thanks accept and the more to honour they cause they all to be take up and give to they again which be from thenceforth a ensign of their knighthood for they take all those member and tie they on a string like a bracelet or chain and at all solemn meeting as when they marry or go to a wedding or feast the bride or wife of these knight do wear that chain about their neck be say our author among they as great a honour as the golden-fleece or the renown garter with we and their wife as proud thereof as if some crown or sceptre have befall they chap. 8 of Benomotapa and the part adjoin @. i. of the empire of Monomotapa BEnomotapa a a l. Marmol l. 9 c. 31. call also Benomotaxa and Monomotapa be a large empire so entitle after the name of the prince thereof for Benomotapa be with they a title as Caesar or emperor with we the portugal call he emperor of the gold extend after some man reckon almost a thousand league in compass between the great lake whence Nilus spring on the north-east Magnice and Toroa on the south and the sea-coast of Sofala on the east it be between the sea and the fresh water account a huge island between Cuama and Corrientes it be pleasant and wholesome and fruitful and from the cape Corrientes to Magnice it abound with beast but it be cold their principal city be Zimbas haply the same which Ptolomey b b ptol. georg. l. 4. c. 9 call agisymba and Benamataza that one and twenty this fifteen day journey from Sofala of the abundance of elephant in Benomotapa be say before whereof Aethiopia be every where store with manifold herd c c io di Barros dec. 1. l. 10. c. 1. although I dare not subscribe to their opinion that esteem elephant as common there as here we have oxen. it be a creature nine cubit high in their large stature and five cubit thick with long and broad ear little eye short tail and great belly of their disposition be speak already some say five thousand be yearly slay in these part the mine near to Sofala be those of manica Vid. Marmol l. 9 c. 32. and seq see sup. c. 7. which be in wide champain compass with mountain ninety mile in circuit the place where the gold be appear and be know by the dryness and barrenness of the soil as if nature itself can not hoard up gold in her spacious chest but she must needs prove bare and barren of her wont good work and how much less unnatural and degenerate mankind the province be call Matuca the people botonghi which although they be between the line and the tropic yet in winter have such snow in the mountain that if any abide there they die freeze in they and in summertime the air in the top of those hill be so clear and pure that some of our man which be then there see the new-moon the same day that she have kiss her bright and bountiful brother and who can now charge that bright eye of the world with the obscure darkness of this people hue which so cold winter nor pure summer can lessen or lighten yea even in the cold country near the cape of good-hope the aethiopian have no hope or hap of good colour whereas the hot country of Libya and in manner all America notwithstanding the sun straight look and nearness not allow they a shadow to attend they in the great height of his bounty know not this black tincture in the natural thereof but to return and who will not return to the mine there be other mine in the province of Boro and quiticui in which and in the river be find gold not so pure the people be careless and negligent to get and the moor which trade with they be fain to give their ware in trust with promise by such a time to pay they in gold and the people will not fail in their word other mine be in Toroa wherein be those building which barrius attribute to some foreign d d as the portugal have their castle of mina Sofala etc. so some prince master sometime of those mine prince and I for the reason before allege to Solomon it be a square fortress of stone the stone of marvelous greatness without any sign of mortar or other matter to join they the wall five and twenty span thick the height not hold proportion over the gate be letter which learned moores can neither read nor know what letter they be there be other building beside of like fashion the people call they the court for a officer keep it for the Benomotapa and have charge of some of his woman that be there keep they esteem they beyond human power to build and therefore account they the work of devil and the moor which see they say the portugal castle be no way to be compare to they they be five hundred and ten mile from Sofala westward in one and twenty degree of southerly latitude in all which space be not find one building ancient or late the people be rude and dwell in cottage of timber all the people of this region be of curl hair and more ingenious than those which be against Mosambique Quiloa and Melinde among who be many that eat man flesh and let their kine blood to satisfy their thirst these seem prone to receive the faith for they believe in one GOD who they call Mozimo and have no idol nor worship other thing they punish nothing more severe than witchcraft whereunto other negro be exeed addict no such person escape death the like detestation they conceive against adultery and theft every one may have as many wife as they will but the first be principal the other serve she and her child be heir a woman be not marriageable with they till her natural purgation testify for her ability to conception and therefore they entertain the first flux thereof with a great feast in two thing they be religious in observation of day and rite concern their dead of day they observe the first day of the moon the six the seven the eleven the sixteen the seventeen the twenty and the eight and twenty because in that day their king be bear the religion be in the first six and seven all the rest be repetition above ten when any be dead after his body be eat his near kindred or his wife which have have most child by he keep the bone with some sign whereby to know who they be and every seven day they observe Exequies in the same place where they be keep they spread many clothes and set thereon table furnish with bread and sodden flesh which they offer to the dead with prayer and supplication and the principal thing they request of they be the good success of their king affair these prayer they make be clothe in white garment after which the good man and his family eat their offering the Benomotapa must wear clothes of the same country for fear of infection other may wear foreign cloth he be serve on the knee and when he drink or cough all they which be about he make a shout that all the town may know none may cough in his presence also every one must sit in token of reverence to stand be a sign of dignity which he afford the portugal and moor and be the chief honour can be yield any the second honour be to sit on a cloth in his house the three that a man may have a door in his house which be the dignity of great lord for mean person they need not fear to have any thing steal out of their open house see the severity of justice do secure they door be not for necessity but for honour their house be of pyramidal or steeple form all the timber meet in the midst at the top cover with earth and straw some of they be make of timber as long and as big as a great ship mast the great they be the more honourable the Benomotapa have music whithersoever he go with singer and more than five hundred jester which have their captain or master of revel the royal ensign be a little ploughshare with a ivory point which he carry always at his girdle by which be signify peace and husband of the ground he bear likewise one or two a a porta due zagait Boterus say Zapea due a Mattocke and two dart sword in token of justice and defence of his people the country be free and give he no other payment but present when they come to speak with he and certain day service no inferior come before his superior without some present in token of obedience and courtesy the captain of war with all they bestow seven day in thirty in his husbandry or other business he must confirm all sentence of judgement in his own person there need no prison for matter be present dispatch according to the allegation and testimony that be bring and if there be not sufficient testimony than the matter be try by oath in this manner they beat the bark of a certain tree and cast the powder thereof in water b b of such like water see the ten chapter which the party drink and if he do not vomit he be clear if he vomit he be condemn and if the accuser when the accuse party vomit not will drink of the same and do not vomit he be then acquit and the matter dispatch if any sue to he he speed not but by mediation of a three person which also set down the sum that the king must have sometime at so dear a rate that the suitor rather refuse the king grant they have no horse and therefore war on foot the spoil be general share among all when he march in the place where he be to lodge they make a new house of wood and therein must continual fire be keep without ever go out say that in the ash may be wrought some witchery to the indamagement of his person and when they go to the war they never wash their hand nor face till they have obtain victory they have their wife with they which be so love and respect that if the king son meet with one of they in the street he give her way Benomotapa have more than a thousand woman but the first be principal although she be inferior in blood and her son succeed and in seedtime and harvest the queen go to the field and oversee the stuff esteem it a great honour thus far out of barrius b b odd Lopes congo hist. lib. cap. 9 Arthus hist ind. Orient. cap. 19 johannes Boterus c c g bot. ben. pag. 1. tell that his chief warrior be woman namely certain amazon which fear off their left pap as odoardo @ Lopez report lest they shall hinder their shoot after the manner of the ancient amazon they be quick bold courageous and constant in battle and most constant in inconstancy for when they make show of flight they will return espy their advantage with the great fury they dwell in certain country by themselves and at certain time have man to accompany with they for generation to who they send their male reserve all the female child which they have thus we find amazon which the ancient report in Asia and Diodorus in Libya now in these time if this report be true in Aethiopia and Huldericus u u shmidel in am. c 37. shmidel have tell of the like in America other 10 10 a. battle which live near those part deny it and none have yet write of they from his own sight for my part no amazonian have yet conquer my credit in the year 1560. consaluus y y Eman. acosta oriente gest come jarric l 3 c. 9 Silueria with two other jesuit go from goa to the kingdom of inhamban and Monomotapa and come to inhamban they go to Yonge the city royal where they baptize the king and all his people in a short space name the king Constantine the queen Mary thence go consaluus to Monomotapa and so prevail with his image preach and contempt of the world that he win the king and his mother with multitude of other to baptism but soon after the king by suggestion of the moor slay he sebastian in revenge raise a army of sixteen hundred z z Botero part. 2. lib. 3. most of they be gentleman which he send under the conduct of Francis Barretto the Benomotapa fear the portugal force offer reasonable condition which Barretto refuse be discomfit not by the negro but by the air the malignity whereof the sour sauce of all these golden country in Africa consume his people there be other kingdom adjoin to Monomotapa and the mountain of the moon Matana Melemba Quinbebe Berteca Bavagul of which I can give you but the name @. 2 of Caphraria the cape of good hope and Soldania caphraria or the land of the caphar be next to be consider which Maginus bound between Rio di Spirito sancto and cape negro extend to the cape of good hope southwards why he shall call this part the caphar I know not for the arabian of who this word be borrow give that name to all the heathen people in Africa yea both the arabian and all of their religion call all such as receive not that superstition caphar even christian also as master jenkinson * * a. jenkinson in Hak. tom. 1. p. 327. long since tell we and for the heathen in Africa barrius affirm that it be by the moor give to they all signify without law or lawless people Zanguebar be in this respect call Cafraria it shall seem it be appropriate to these the southerly nation of Africa for want of other the more true proper name which be unknown with the name of the cape and other place of note master pory a a pory before leo. have already acquaint his english reader only that notable and famous cape of good hope so name b b Osor reb. Eman. l. 1. this be an. 1487. the discovery thereof be large relate by io. di Barro in his first Decad of Asia l. 3. by John the second king of Portugal for that hope which he conceive of a way to the indies when it be first discover deserve some mention it have three headland the westermost bear name of good hope the middlemost cabo Falso because they have sometime in their return from the indies mistake this for the former between which two cape run into the sea a mighty river call by the portugal Rio which spring out of a lake call gale situate among the mountain of the moon so much celebrate by the ancient geographer the three and eastermost be that of Agulhas or needle about five and twenty league from the first both which seem as two horn wherewith it threaten the ocean which in these part be find oftentimes c c Bartholomeo Dias who first discover this cape call it ca. Tormentoso in regard of the trouble and danger he there sustain call say s. ed. m. the lion of the sea where they find great storm tempestuous and when it can prevail against this rough-faced and horn promontory it wreke the whole malice upon the ship who rib in the enrage fit it will break if they be of iron as Linschoten d d Lins l. 1. c. 93. Navig testify of his own experience true it be that sometime it be pass with more ease but not so usual and Linschoten tell that at his return from India the saint Thomas a new carrack be here cast away e e they find it there in April as cold as with we in winter when it freeze not and yet the people be blackish and their ship wherein he sail in such danger that one while they pray another while murmur another time will return back and the captain profess no small marvel why our lord suffer such good catholic to endure such torment and the english heretic and blasphemer to pass so easy the wave there say he strike against a ship as if they strike against a hill that if it be of stone it will at last be break captain f f sir james Lancaster Hak. to 2. part 2. 1600. Lancaster trade with the people near these part and for two knife buy a ox for one a sheep etc. in good quantity their sheep be great with great tail but hairy not wool their ox great not fat but well flesh the captain kill there a antelope as big as a Colt there be diverse great beast unknown to they when they have pass this cape they lose their admiral captain Raimond and never see they or hear of they more and four day after they find as terrible a enemy from above and encounter with a thunder clap which slay four of their man outright their neck be wring asunder and of fourscore and fourteen man there be not one untouched but some be blind other bruise in their leg and arm or breast other draw out as if they have be rack which all yet God be thank do after recover the same sir james Lancaster be after this send general for the east India company which have make a stock of threescore and twelve thousand pound buy the dragon of six hundred ton the Hector of three hundred the ascension of two hundred and fourscore the Susan of two hundred and threescore and send in they in merchandise and spanish money to the value of seven and twenty thousand pound the scorbute so weaken their man that they be not able to hoist out their boat except in the general ship who man drink every morning three spoonful of the juice of lemon be healthful he buy a thousand sheep in Soldania g g Soldania be a bay in 34 lar. long. 51. of which see the east indian voyage which we new sot out in the journal of sir t. roe John Tatton downton etc. and forty two ox as big as we the sheep great but hairy and may have buy more for old iron the people he say be tawny Cornelius Houtman say olive black black than the brasilian their hair curl and black as in angola not circumcise clock like a brood-hen in speak paint their face with diverse colour strong active swift subject to Monomotapa they slay some fleming for wrong which make the english wary in trade with they sir Edward Michelborne h h sir ed mich. 1604 David middleton say say the like 1606. find here great relief beside great herd of ox and flock of sheep here be abundance of deer Antilopes baboon fox hare ostrich crane pelican heron goose duck pheasant partridge etc. a great bullock they may buy for a old iron hoop not worth two penny a sheep for a piece not worth two good Horse-nail the people live on the gut and filth of the meat which our man cast away not so much as wash the same but cover they over with hot ash before they be through hot pull they out and shake they a little with their hand do eat both gut excrement and ash they live upon raw flesh and certain root sir Henry Middleton i i tho. clayborne a general of the four ship abovenamed find in his return three and fifty man dead in the Hector at this bay and but ten leave the Susan be lose it be think for want of man and long before the trade of the english which be now very much increase in the eastern part Giovanni da Empoli k k 1503. tell that near the cape the country people will give they a kow for a little bell. the man and woman be clothe or rather a little cover with hairy skin the woman beautife this their beastly habit with the tail of the beast hang down before and behind to cover their shame these woman have large and deform pap religion they can observe none among they and think that they eat their flesh raw the hollander also in the year 1595. traffic with these caffre which be valiant but base in apparel cover with ox or sheepskin wrap about their shoulder with the hairy side inward in form of a mantle their privy part cover with a sheep tail fasten before and behind with a girdle but now we see it make a daily matter to the Portugal english and dutch so capable of hope of good that the cape of good hope be nothing fear although at home many take exception as if there be no good hope of public good and wish that they will carry out of Europe less l l for money both portugal and other have find that the indian more esteem it far then merchandise vid. lit. fr. de sagitta in n. orbe and man die much by the change and unwholesomeness of the climate and diet their own intemperance with woman and fruit in the country calmes scorbute etc. see l. 5. c 2. money and bring home more man but of this elsewhere be speak at large I can omit m m Botero that upon the top of this promontory nature have as it be frame herself a delightful bower here to sit and contemplate the great sea which from the south east and west beat upon this shore and therefore have here form a great plain pleasant in situation which with the fragrant herb variety of flower and flourish verdure of all thing seem a terrestrial-paradise it be call the table of the cape that which from hence lie to cape negro have not to our purpose any thing notable this also deserve mention that notwithstanding all the damage of this dreadful promontory and the sea on this side and beyond n n Maffaeno hist ind. l. 11. 1535. james Botellius a Portugal to recover the favour of his prince John the three by the first bring news of a happy accident that then befall in India in a little boat or vessel scarce eighteen foot long and six broad sail from cochin to Dabul and from thence alongst the arabian and african shore double this terrible cape and miss saint Helena come yet safe to Lisbon worthy welcome both for his message and the messenger that dare adventure to encounter Neptune strong force notwithstanding so weak furniture the hollander o o de bry ind. or. part. 3. at the cape of good hope if you will hear other testimony have of the inhabitant two kine for two rusty knife and one much great for a new one two fat bull and three sheep for a bar of iron weigh threescore and ten pound the people make much account of iron they be of short stature darkish colour their arm be adorn with copper and ivory their finger with ring of gold and with bead of bone and wood they brand their body with diverse mark and because they always anoint themselves with grease and fat they yield a rank smell if we kill a beast for our use they will ask the innards and eat they raw the filth be not well cleanse from they at their feast they will seethe a beast in his hide fasten on four stick with fire underneath they live miserable yet for gallantry wear bone and piece of dry flesh about their neck near this cape be weed grow in the sea five and twenty fathom long the ascension p p cap. rob. covert build their pinnace 1608. at Soldania about fifteen or sixteen league from the cape of good hope and there take in for their provision about four hundred head of cattle as ox steer sheep and lamb together with fowl and fresh water they fill their boat with seal at the i will Pengwin a little from thence such be the brutish nature of the inhabitant that when the english have cast out of their ship one of those seal and the same have lie fourteen day and now swarm with crawl maggot they will take they up and eat they as they will also do the gut garbage and paunch of the beast they more esteem iron than gold or silver here the first night after they weigh anchor the ascension lose the union and the good hope their pinnace so near the cape of good hope which i think observe what after befall they seem a ominous presage write in these name of their other loss which follow conclude with the loss of their ship on the coast of Cambaya it be moral true that ascend and aspire mind lose union q q prou. 13.10 for only by pride do man make contention union be go good hope follow and so it befall in this their tragedy after the loss of those vessel which bear such name the ship be lose by the master indiscretion but yet have the honour survive her fate that she be the first english ship that ever sail on those sea although we have be tedious in this cape and the bay of Soldania yet I have think it not amiss to add somewhat out of late relation patt Copland in the dragon 1611. master Copland write that the air here be so wholesome and the earth so fertile as may with help of art become a paradise even nature itself have diversify the soil in a intercourse of mountain plain wood meadow stream as intend so pleasant a variety in a seem artificial order their many sick man expose on shore in tent within twenty day be all one except sound as at first day they buy nine and thirty beef and one hundred and fifteen sheep for a little r r Samuel castleton say that copper be in request with they and not brass brass or copper cut out of two or three old kettle the people be love but be at the first afraid by reason of some unkindness receive from the dutch which have be there to make trane and have kill and steal their cattle they be of of middle size well limbed very nimble and active dance in true measure wear short cloak of sheep or seal sking to their waste with a cap of the same the hair s s it be then june which be their winter the people be say to have their head loathsome as if they be cover with kow dung which be do by the juice of herb inward a rat skin about their privity some of they have sole tie about their foot their neck adorn with chain of greasy tripe or gut also in many double which they will sometime pull off and eat stink and raw they do also eat the entrails by we throw away half raw and will scramble for it like hungry dog loathsome besmear with the blood they wear bracelet of copper or ivory about their arm with ostrich feather and shell the habit of woman be like the former which at our first come seem shamefast but at our return will impudent uncover that which here must be cover with silence their breast hang down to their middle their hair be curl copper with they be gold and iron silver their house little tent in the field make of skin at their pleasure remove on the high hill call the table may be see a hundred mile about some ascend and thence take observation of many bay and Rivers he think these part may be profitable plant with a english colony one say t t Anonim m.s. voyage 1614 of this people that they be idle not so much as have a Canow nor know to take either foul or u u they will strike fish with their dart and then go into the sea for they cap. Saris. nic. withington add they be negro woolly pated flat nosed fish whereof they have store thievish and swift run away with that which they have steal by trade with the dutch and english their price of thing be raise as you here see to some more copper or iron then at the first discovery their beast be large their sheep smooth and short haired not woolly like a young calf with long and broad ear hang like hound their horn short and tender easy break their tail great than any part of a man leg some weigh 40. pound their beef be large and most of they lean the man have but one stone the other be cut away when they be young the reason seem to be some reasonless superstition towards the sun which they point unto be demand thereof the Hector bring thence one of these savage call Cory which be 10 10 Martin bring ben. Bay carry again and there land by the Newyear gift june 21. 1614 in his copper armour but return not to they while the ship continue in the road but at their return in march be twelvemonth after he come and be ready to any service in help they with beef and sheep the wild beast be dangerous in the night as lion Antilopes and other some of which in one night carry away twelve piece of meat lay in the river to water cover with a stone of two hundred weight which be remove also a very great distance the pengwin in the island near to Soldania have stump in stead of wing and with their foot swim fast there be seal a thousand sleep in a herd on the rock mouse and rat and snake innumerable the weather in the midst of winter be there temperate penguin y y m. downton island be north northwest and a half west three league from Soldania and this fourteen league north north-east from cape bona Speranza and ten league north by west from cape Falso which be eastward from the former the habitation of the soldanian seem movable and follow the best pasture there be fallow deer porcupine land tortoise snake adder wild goose duck pelican crow with a white band about their neck pengwin gull pintado alcatrass cormorant whale seal etc. HONDIUS his map of congo CONGI regnum chap. 9 of the kingdom of congo and the other kingdom and nation adjoin @. i. of angola the kingdom a a Maginui gi. boter ben. part 1. Marmol l. 9 c 24. and 25. of congo understand so much by the name as in time past have be subject thereto have on the west the ocean on the south the caphar and mountain of the moon on the east those hill from which the river issue and run into the fountain of Nilus and on the north the kingdom of benin of these country Pigafetta b b od. lop. pigafet translate by A.H. p. du jarric hist ind. Orien l. 3. c. 1. and s from the relation of odoardo Lopez a Portugal have write two book out of who p. du jarric Botero and other have take most of their report and in this we will begin with the most southerly part in which we first come into the kingdom of Matama this be the king proper name who be a gentile rule over diverse province name Quimbebe this be a kingdom c c od. Lopez lib. 1. cap. 7. great and mighty extend from Bravagal to Bagamidri the air thereof be wholesome the earth outward furnish with store of fruit inward with mine of crystal and other metal the signiory towards the sea-coast be very mean and want haven angola sometime a province of the kingdom of congo be now a great kingdom itself and very populous they speak the same language with small difference of dialect that be use in congo who yoke they cast off since the Congois become Christian Diego d d barr. dec. 1. lib. 3. cap. 3. od. Lopez ibid. can first discover these part for the portugal an. 1486. and the portugal use to trade quiet with the Angolans but some of they trade as high into the country as cabazza the royal city which be a hundred and fifty mile from the ocean be there by order from the king put to the sword under pretence of intend treason this be do 1578. Paulo Dias to who the king Sebastian have give the government of these part with licence to conquer three and thirty league alongst the coast to he and his heir to revenge himself for this despite do to his people arm such portugal as he have and with two galley and other vessel which he keep in the river Coanza he go on both side the river conquer and subdue many lord unto he the king of angola raise a mighty army of a million of man e e p. Diaz as some report send a present to Spain of two butt of Negro nose which be slay a. b. jarric have 1200000. as be suppose for they use to leave none at home that be fit to carry a weapon and make no preparation for victual but such as have any carry it upon the shoulder of their servant and therefore no marvel if their food be soon consume their camp be soon dissolve small likewise be their provision of armour for offence and for defence much less diaz send to the king of congo for aid who send he sixty thousand man with which and his own nation he make his party good against the confuse rabble of the Angolans the trade of angola be yet continue and from thence the portugal buy and carry to brasil and other part yearly a world of slave which be buy within the land and be captive take in their war Paulo diaz at his death bequeath to the jesuit as much as may maintain five hundred of that society in these part master Thomas f f thom. Turner turuer one that have live a long time in brasil and have also be at angola report to i that it be suppose eight and twenty thousand slave a number almost incredible yet such as the portugal tell he be yearly ship from angola and congo at the haven of Loanda he name to i a rich Portugal in brasil which have ten thousand of his own work in his ingenio of which he have eighteen and in his other employment his name be John du pavi exile from Portugal and thus enrich in brasil a thousand of his slave at one time enter into conspiracy with nine thousand other slave in the country and barricade themselves for their best defence against their master who have much ado to reduce some of they into their former servitude to return to angola we may add the report of another of our countryman g g Andrew battle be take by the portugal on the coast of brasil and ship over to congo where and in the country adjacent he live very many year and be sergeant of a Band etc. Andrew battle my near neighbour dwell at Leigh in Essex who serve under Manuel Siluera Perera governor under the king of Spain at his city of saint Paul and with he go far into the country of angola their army be eight hundred portugal and fifty thousand natural this Andrew battle tell that they be all heathen in angola they have their idol of wood in the midst of their town fashion like a negro and at the foot thereof be a great heap of Elephant tooth contain three or four tun of they these be pile in the earth and upon they be set the scull of dead man which they have slay in the war in monument of their victory the idol they call Mokisso and some of they have house build over they if any be sick he account it mokisso hand and send to appease his angry god with pour wine which they have of the palm-tree at his foot they have proper name of distinction for their mokisso as Kissungo Kalikete etc. and use to swear by they kissungowy that be by Kissungo they have another more solemn oath in trial of controversy * * this trial be call Motamba for which purpose they lay a kind of hatchet which they have in the fire and the ganga-mokisso or mokisso priest take the same red hot and draw it near to the skin of the accuse party and if there be two he cause their leg to be set near together and draw this hot iron without touch between they if it burn that party be condemn as guilty otherwise he be free for the ceremony about the dead they first wash he then paint he three apparel he in new clothes and then bring he to his grave which be make like a vault after it be dig a little way down undermine and make spacious within and there set he on a seat of earth with his bead which they use in chain and bracelet for ornament and the most part of his good with he in his last home they kill goat and shed the blood in the grave and pour wine there in memorial of the dead they be much give a a od. Lopez to divination by bird if a bird fly on their left hand or cry in some manner which they interpret ominous and unlucky they will cease from the enterprise which they have in hand their priest be b b gi. bot. ben. part. 1. l. 3. call gange and so high repute that the people think it in their power to send plenty or scarcity life or death they be skilful in medicinal herb and in poison and by familiarity with the devil foretell thing to come in angola every man take as many wife as he will there be mine of silver and of most excellent copper they have many kine but love dog better than any other flesh and fat they to the shambles Andrew battle say that the dog in those country be all of one sort prick ear cur of a mean bigness which they use also to hunt with but they open not for they can bark and therefore they hang clapper make of little board about their neck he have see a Mastiff sell for three slave Lopez affirm that a great dog be exchange for two and twenty slave which may happen upon some extraordinary occasion the money in angola be glass-bead which they use also as be say for ornament the king of angola have seem willing to become christian and have send to the king of congo for that purpose but can not obtain any priest in that scarcity to instruct he Andrew battle this kingdom hath many lordship subject thereto as far on the sea-coast as cape negro towards a lake call lie a country call Quizama the inhabitant whereof be govern after the manner of a commonwealth have show themselves friendly to the portugal and help they in their war against angola the house in angola be make in fashion like a beehive the woman at the first sight of the new moon turn up their bumme in despite as offend with their menstruous course which they ascribe unto she the man sometime in a valorous resolution will devote themselves unto some haughty attempt in the war and take leave of the king will vow never to return till they bring he a horsehead or some other thing very dangerous in the enterprise and will either do it or die horse tail be great jewel and two slave will be give for one tail which common they bring from the river of plate where horse be exceed increase and grow wild they will by fire the grass round about hem the horse about with a fiery circle the fire still straighten and approach near till they have advantage enough to kill they thus have the european cattle of horse and kine so increase in that other world as they spare not to kill the one for their hide and the other for their tail @. 2 of congo next to angola northwards * * od. Lopez be the kingdom of congo the western line whereof Lopez extend three hundred threescore and fifteen mile the northern five hundred and forty the eastern five hundred and the southern three hundred and threescore the breadth thereof from the mouth of Zaire cross over the mountain of the sun and the mountain of crystal be six hundred mile and yet be it much straighten of the ancient bound only the title except which still hold the old stile don Alvero king of congo and of abundos and of Matama and of Quizama and of angola and of Cacongo and of the seven kingdom of congere amolaza and of the langelungo and lord of the river Zaire and of the anziquos and Anziquana and of Loango the present kingdom be divide into six province Bamba Songo sundi pango Batta Pemba Bamba be the chief for greatness and riches then govern by don Sebastian mani-bamba the word mani be a title of honour and signify a prince or lord when need require the mani-bamba may have in camp four hundred thousand man of war therein be mine of silver and on the sea-coast a kind of shell which they use for money for silver and gold be not use for money among they in this province be yearly buy by the portugal about five thousand negro there be among they very mighty man that will cleave a slave in the middle or cut off a bull head at one blow yea one of they do bear on his arm a vessel of wine contain the four part of a butt and may weigh three hundred and five and twenty pound until it be clean empty there be certain creature as big as ram and have wing like dragon with long tail and chap and diverse row of tooth and feed upon raw flesh their colour be blue and green their skin bepaint like scale and they have but two foot these the pagan negro do worship for god and at this day many of they be keep for a miracle and because they be very rare the chief lord do curious preserve they and suffer the people to worship they in regard of the profit which accru to they by the offering which the people make unto they other creature of these part be mention in the first chapter of the former book peacock be not common and be very dear their feather be use for royal ensign the king of angola bring up some in a enclose wood and suffer none to keep they but himself to speak at large of the other five province will be tedious to the reader and master * * history of congo translate by Abraham Hartwell Hartwell have teach Lopez to speak english of who such as be desirous may be further satisfy over-against the i will Loanda where the shell-money be gather be upon the continent the town of saint Paul inhabit with portugal and their wife the river of congo be many Bengo Coanza Dande lembe Ozone Loze Ambriz and the great of all Zaire all which have some either affinity in mutual marriage of their stream or consanguinity in the fountain from whence they flow which be certain lake one of which be Zembre the other aquelunda in all these river be common the rarity of Nilus the overflow of the water riverhorse crocodile and such like Andrew battle tell i of a huge crocodile which be report to have eat a whole Alibamba that be a company of eight or nine slave chain together and at last pay for his greediness the chain hold he slave as before it have the negro and by his undigestible nature devour the devourer remain in the belly of he after he be find in testimony of this victory he have see they watch and take their prey hale a jennet man or other creature into the water a soldier thus draw in by a crocodile in shallow water with his knife wound he in the belly and slay he in their summer it rain not and then the place in their winter the time of the sun near presence attend with daily reins cover with water do grow thick and mat with abundance of little tree herb and plant which the fatten womb of that moist soil conceive by the direct beam of the sun and the overflow water in the winter carry away as it be small * * they call these patch of ground thus carry in Zaire balsa the river Zaire island lift they up together with the root and soil the young tree and dear stand and grow thereon carry captive unto Neptune eternal prison in Bengo and Coanza they be force to set up for a time house upon cratche their other house be take up for the river lodging Zaire be of such force that no ship can get in against the current but near to the shore yea it prevail against the ocean saltness threescore and as some say fourscore mile within the sea before his proud wave yield their full homage and receive that salt temper in token of subjection such be the haughty spirit of that stream which overrun the low country as it pass and swell with conceit of daily conquest and daily supply which in army of shower be by the cloud send to his succour run now in a furious rage think even to swallow the ocean which before he never see with his mouth wide gape eight and twenty mile as Lopez affirm in the open but meet with a more giant like enemy which lie lurk under the cliff to receive his assault be present swallow in that wide womb yet so as always be conquer he never give over but in a eternal quarrel with deep indent frown in his angry face foam with disdain and fill the air with noise with fresh help supply those force which the salt-sea have consume in this river be a fish call Ambize Angulo or hog-fish that have as it be two hand and a tail like a target which eat like a pork and whereof they make lard and have not the savour or taste of fish it feed on the grass that grow on the bank of the river and never go out it have a mouth like the muzzle of a ox there be of they that weigh five hundred pound a piece observe where it feed with weapon in their boat they hinder it from take water and have take it present it to the king it be upon peril of life they smoke it as we do Bacon and reserve it for dainty about the year 1490. John the second king of Portugal send consalvo di sosa with three ship and priest in they to bring the king and people of congo to christian religion * * of the conversion of congo read io. di Barros dot. 3. l. 3. cap. 10. and Osorius reb. emanueli lib. 3. and Maffaeus Hist. ind. lib. 1. and Lopez l. 2. and got. Arthus hist ind. orientalis cap 14 15 16 17. jarric etc. which be effect and although hence arise civil war among they yet the matter be at last end to the advancement of the christian religion such as the portugal teach and no doubt infinite better than their pagan superstition howsoever spot with many romish stain and from that time to this now a hundred and twenty year have congo continue Christian under John Alfonso Piedro and the rest of their king when the first bishop of saint Thomas go into congo to take possession of his pastoral charge there for the kingdom of congo be annex to the bishopric of saint Thomas from the seaside to the city which be a hundred and fifty mile king Piedro cause the way to be make smooth and trim and cover over with mat that the bishop shall not set his foot upon any part of the ground not adorn all the way tree and high place swarm with people offer lamb kid chicken partridge venison fish and other necessary to testify their zeal and at last arrive at the city of saint saviour before call Banza which signify a court and be common attribute to all the chief city where the king of any of those country hold his residence he be there receive by the king and his noble and ordain the church there to be the cathedral church of his see which have belong to it eight and twenty canon with other officer and ornament usual @. 3 of their heathenish rite also of their strange tree and of the i will Loanda after don Piedro succeed Francisco and after he Diego who be dead his son and two other competitor of the kingdom be slay and Henrico brother to Diego be make king and after his death Alvaro who the Giacchi drive out of his kingdom till king Sebastian send Francisco di Gevea to expel they the great and most zealous prince for christian religion be Alphonso who on pain of death forbid to all his subject the have or worship of idol which he command shall be all bring and deliver to the lieutenant of the country together with their character and witchery for before every * * Lopez man adore that which best like he some those dragon before speak of other serpent which they nourish with their dainty provision some worship the great goat they can get some tiger and the more uncouth and deform any beast be the more in their beastly and deform superstition be they observe bat owl and screech-owl bird of darkness be the object of their darken devotion snake and adder envenom their soul with a more deadly poison than they can do their body beast bird herb tree character and the form of those thing paint and grave yea the skin of they be dead stuff with straw have their share in this diffuse variety and confuse mass of irreligious religion the ceremony they use to they be kneel on their knee cast themselves grovel on the earth defile their face with dust verbal prayer real offering they have their witch which make the people believe that their idol can speak and if any man have recover of any sickness after he have recommend himself to they they will affirm that the angry idol be now appease all these idol king Alphonso cause to be burn in one heap in stead whereof the portugal give they image of saint and crucifix to worship this may seem a exchange rather than a cease from superstition be not some fundamental substance of truth communicate beside those blind shadow wherewith no doubt God draw some out of darkness this darkness notwithstanding in a true and save though a dim and shadow light wherewith as far go before we in affection as we before they in knowledge I dare not but in the hope of salvation of some thank God for this glimpse of heavenly light rather than rash to censure and sentence they to a total and hellish darkness Emanuel a a Maff hist ind. l 3 and 15. since send supply of religious person to confirm they in their christianity and his son John the three send also jesuit to that purpose who erect school among they and they also send their son into Portugal to learn the science and knowledge of Europe god almighty grant that those fountain may be cleanse of all popish mire that thence more wholesome water may flow to the water of this ethiopian vineyard they use in congo b b Arthus c 25. Linschot lib. 2. Andrew battle say that the tree which thus strange multiply itself be call the Manga tree to make clothes of the Enzanda tree of which some write the same thing that be report of the indian figtree that it send forth a hairy substance from the branch which no soon touch the ground but they take root and grow up in such sort that one tree will multiply itself into a wood if nature set not some obstacle the innermost bark of the Inzanda by beat be make excellent cloth other tree there be which the tide cover and be discover by the ebb lade at the root with oyster but more admirable be that huge tree call alicande of which my friend Andrew c c andr. battle battle suppose some be as big beside their wonderful tallness as twelve man can fathom it spread like a oak some of they be hollow and the liberal cloud into those natural cask disperse such plenty of water that one time three or four thousand of they in that hot Region continue four and twenty hour at one of those tree which yield they all drink of her watery store and be not empty their negro climb up with peg for the tree be smooth and therefore not otherwise to be climb and so soft that it easy receive peg of a hard wood drive into her yield substance with a stone and dip the water as it have be out of a well he suppose that there be forty ton of water in some one of they it yield they good opportunity for honey to which end the countrypeople make a kind of chest with one hole into the same and hang it upon one of these tree which they take down once a year and with fire or smoke chase or kill the bee take thence a large quantity of honey neither be it liberal alone to the hungry and thirsty appetite but very bountiful it clothes their back with the bark thereof which be take from the young alicunde and beat one fathom which they cut out of the tree will by this mean extend itself into twenty and present be cloth fit for d d Linschot l. ^ Lopez these boat say Andrew battle be make of another tree for the alicunde be of too spongy a substance for that purpose wear though not so fine as that which the Inzanda tree yield it serve they also for boat one of which cut out in proportion of a state will hold hundred of man of their palmtree which they keep with water and cut every year they make velvet satin taffatas damask sarcenet and such like out of the cleanse and and purge leaf hereof draw long and even thread for that purpose and for their Palm-wine which they draw out of the top of a kind of palm which at first be strong and inebriate wine and in time decline to a sour and wholesome vinegar of the stone of the fruit which be like a almond they also make bread of the shall of the fruit oil which also serve they for butter Lopez distinguish this tree from the Coco tree which be there also grow and another palm that bear date other that bear Cola like a pineapple excellent for the stomach and for the liver most admirable it be suppose that the liver of a hen or other bird putrify sprinkle with this matter recover the former freshness and soundness other sort of palm yield other fruit and of their leaf they make mat wherewith they cover their house Lopez see a pomecitron the kernel whereof leave within the rind yield a pretty tall sprig in four day of stone they have such store to build with that in some place they may cut out a church of one piece there be whole mountain of porphory of jaspar of white marble and other marble one especial that yield fair jacinth that be good jewel streak like as it be with natural vein the port and i will of Loanda lie over against the Portugal town of saint Paul about twenty mile in circuit famous for many thing deserve especial mention for this that it yield in less than half a yard dig water very sweet but of so contrary a nature to the sea her mighty neighbour that when the sea ebb the water be salt and when it flow the same be sweet and fresh as if the sea impart that which itself have not or rather envy that which he have and therefore always at his come redemandeth that saltness from those spring to attend upon their ocean-mother so do we see the silver lamp of heaven in the sun absence to lighten the world which yet want light when it be most plentiful to show themselves Monopoly even nature seal and confirm monopoly to her principal courtier always as provide that it thereby better serve for the common good and therefore no precedent to such dropsy and spleen-like monopoly money-pollings with which some exorbitant member burden themselves and make other by light heavy worthy therefore by the sun of our great Britain at the first rise of his morning brightness disperse from our horizon but how far be Loanda from Britain and yet our scope be to bring Loanda and all the world else into our Britain that our Britain might see the in and outside of the same loando be report as some affirm of Egypt and Nilus to be the issue of the ocean sand and coanzo mire which in process of time bring forth in their disagree agreement this island in congo the king be lord supreme and none have power to bequeath his good to his kindred but the king be heir general to all man chap. x. of Loango the Anzichi Giachi and the great lake in those part of the World @. i. of Loango it follow in the course of our discovery to set you on shore in Loango the northerly neighbour of congo right under the line a a Lopez l. 1. c. 5. who country stretch two hundred mile within land the people be call Bramas the king mani Loango sometime as report go subject to the king of congo they be circumcise after the manner of the hebrew like as also the rest of the nation of those country use to be they have abundance of elephant and wear clothes of palm Andrew b b Andrew bat. battle live among they two year and a half they be say he heathen and observe many superstition they have their mokisso or image to which they offer according to the proportion of their sort and suit the fisher offer fish when he sue for his help in his fish the countryman wheat the weaver alibungo piece of cloth other bring bottle of wine all want that they will have and bring what they want furnish their Mokisso with those thing whereof they complain themselves to be disfurnish their ceremony for the dead be diverse they bring goat and let they bleed at the mokisso foot which they after consume in a feast memorial of the decease party which be continue four or five day together and that four or five several time in the year by all of his friend and kindred the day be know and though they dwell twenty mile the end yet they will resort to these memorial-exequies and beginning in the night will sing doleful and funeral song till day and then kill as aforesaid and make merry the hope of this make such as have store of friend to contemn death and the want of friend to bewail he make a man conceive a more dreadful apprehension of death their conceit be so ravish with superstition that many die of none other death kin be the name of unlawful and prohibit meat which according to each kindred devotion to some family be some kind of fish to another a hen to another a buff and so of the rest in which they observe their vow abstinence so strict that if any shall though at unaware eat of this kin he will die of conceit always present to his accuse conscience the breach of his vow and the anger of Mokisso he have know diverse thus to have die and sometime will when some of they have eat with he make they believe that they have eat of their kin till have sport himself with their superstitious agony he will affirm the contrary they use to set in their field and place where corn or fruit grow a basket with Goats-horn parrot feather and other trash this be the mokisso ensign or token that it be commend to his custody and therefore the people very much addict to theft dare not meddle or take any thing likewise if a man weary with his burden lay it down in the highway and knit a knot of grass and lay thereon or leave any other note know to they to testify that he have leave it there in the name of his idol it be secure from the lime-finger of any passenger conceit will kill the man that shall transgress in this kind in the Banza or chief city the chief idol be name chekoke every day they have there market and the chekoke be bring forth by the Ganga or priest to keep good rule and be set in the marketplace to prevent steal moreover the king have a bell c c recovery of steal good the stroke whereof sound such terror into the heart of the fearful thief that none dare keep any steal good after the sound of that bell. our author inhabit in a little reed-house after the Loango manner and have hang by the wall in a cloth-case his piece wherewith he use to shoot fowl for the king which more for love of the cloth then for the piece be steal upon complaint this bell in form like a Cowbell be carry about and ring with proclamation to make restitution and he have his piece the next morning set at his door the like another find in a bag of bead of a hundred pound weight steal from he and recover by the sound of this bell. they have a dreadful and deadly kind of trial in controversy after this manner a a trial of suspect person there be a little tree or shrub with a small root be call Imbunda about the bigness of one thumb half a foot long like a white carrot now when any list to accuse a man or family or whole street of the death of any of his friend say that such a man bewitch he the Ganga assemble the accuse party and scrape that root the scrape whereof he mix with water which make it as bitter as gall he taste of it one root will serve for the trial of a hundred man the Ganga brew the same together in gourd and with plantine stalk hit every one after they have drink with certain word those that have receive the drink walk by till they can make urine and then they be thereby free other abide till either urine tree they or dizziness take they which the people no soon perceive but they cry Undoke Undoke that be naughty witch and he be no soon fall by his dizziness but they knock he on the head and drag he away hurl he over the cliff in every liberty they have such trial which they make in case of theft and death of any person every week it fall out that some or other undergo this trial which consume multitude of people there be certain person call dunda which be bear of negro-parent and yet be by some unknown cause white they be very rare and when such happen to be bear they be bring to the king and become great witch they be his councillor and advise he of lucky and unlucky day for execution of his enterprise when the king go any whither the dundas go with he and beat the ground round about with certain exorcism before the king sit down and then sit down by he they will take any thing in the market not dare to contradict they kenga be the land place of Loango they have there a idol call Gumbiri and a holy house call keep and inhabit by a old woman where once a year be a solemn feast which they celebrate with drum dance and Palm-wine and then they say he speak under the ground the people call he Mokissa Cola or a strong Mokisso and say that he come to stay with chekoke the idol of Banza that chekoke be a Negro-image make sit on a stool a little house be there make he they anoint he Ticcola which be a red colour make of a certain wood b b this seem to be red Sanders a bat say it be logwood ground on a stone and mix with water wherewith they daily paint themselves from the waste upward esteem it great beauty otherwise they account not themselves ready it be for like purpose carry from hence to angola sometime it fall out that some man or boy be take with some sudden enthusiasm or ravishment become mad and make a whoop and great clamour they call they mokisso-moquat that be take of the mokisso they clothe they very handsome and whatsoever they bid in that fit for it last not very long they execute as the mokisso charge Morumba be thirty league northwards from hence in the mani loango dominion where he live nine month there be a house and in it a great basket proportion like to a hive wherein be a image call Morumba who religion extend far they be swear to this religion at ten or twelve year old but for probation be first put in a house where they have hard diet and must be mute for nine or ten day any provocation to speak notwithstanding then do they bring he before Morumba and prescribe he his kin or perpetual abstinence from some certain meat they make a cut in his shoulder like to a half moon and sprinkle the blood at morumbas foot and swear he to that religion in the wound they put a certain white powder in token of his late admission which so long as it continue do privilege he to take his meat and drink with whosoever he please none deny he the same at free cost they also have their fatal trial before this image where the accuse party kneel down and clasp the hive say Mene quesa cabamba morumba signify that he come thither to make trial of his innocence and if he be guilty he fall down dead be free he be free Andrew battle say he know six or seven in his be there that make this trial @. 2 of the anzigue beyond the country of Loango be the anzigue a a od. Lopez l. 1. cap. 5. the cruel cannibal which the sun look on for inother place they eat their enemy or their dead but here they take and eat their kinsfolk and Country-folk they keep shambles of man flesh as with we of beef and mutton they eat their enemy their slave if cut out they will yield they more in the several joint or piece then to be sell alive they kill though it be but to save a halfpenny some of they for weariness of life and some oh cruelty of vainglory even for valour of courage in contempt of death and esteem it a honourable proof of their fidelity and manhood will offer themselves to the butchery as faithful subject unto their prince of they to be consume and eat that with their death and after their death they may do they service these Anzichi stretch from Zaire to Nubia they have many mine of copper and great quantity of sanders red and gray wherewith mix with the oil of palmtree they anoint themselves the portugal temper it with vinegar for the heal of the french pock by the smoke thereof they drive away the headache it be incredible or at least will so seem to we which Lopez report that they carry their arrow which be short and slender of very hard wood in the bowe-hand will shoot off eight and twenty so many they hold at once before the first of they fall to ground and with a short hatchet with a sudden whirl themselves about break the force of the enemy arrow and then hang this hatchet on their shoulder discharge their own arrow they be of great simplicity loyalty and fidelity and the portugal more trust they then any other slave they be yet savage and beastly and there be no converse with they but they bring slave of their own nation and out of Nubia to congo to sell for which they recarrie salt and shell which they use for money silk linen glass and such like they b b all the heathen Nation in these part of Africa be circumcise circumcise themselves and beside that both man and woman of the nobility and and commonalty from their childhood mark their face with sundry slash make with a knife I ask say c c cap 10. Lopez of their religion and it be tell i that they be gentile which be all I can learn of they they worship the sun for the great God as though it be a man and the moon next as though it be a woman otherwise every man choose to himself his own idol and worship it after his own pleasure the Anzichi d d g. Bot ben. part. 1. l. 3. have one king principal which have many prince under he of Ambus and medera northern region little beside the name be know Biafar be inhabit with people much addict to enchantment witchcraft and all abominable sorcery @. 3 of the Giacchi or jag of the Giacchi we have make often mention and of their incursion into congo these in their own language be call agag as Lopez c c Lopez l. 1. 13. and l. 2. c. 9 testify and live on both side of Nilus in the border of the empire of Mohenhe-Muge they use to mark themselves about the lip and upon their cheek with certain line which they make with iron instrument and with fire moreover they have a custom to turn their eyelid backward so that their black skin white eye and cauterise mark seem to conspire a dreadful and ghastly deformity in their face they hold war with the d suppose amazon e e these amazon be as we have observe doubt of in other place and and. battle which travel near to those part deny this report of Lopez as untrue and of late year have invade the neighbour-nation their weapon be dart their food human flesh without all humanity devour thus Lopez report by report Andrew battle live by occasion of the portugal treachery with the jag a long time than ever any christian or white man have do namely sixteen month and serve they with the musket in their war neither can Lopez say he have true intelligence whence they come for the christian at that time have but uncertain conjecture of they neither after have the portugal any converse but by way of commerce but he be betray flee to they for his life and after by stealth escascape from they the only european that ever live in their camp he say they be call jag by the Portugal by themselves imbangolas which name argue they to be of the Imbius and Galae before mention and come from Sierra Liona that they be exceed devourer of man flesh for which they refuse beef and goat whereof they take plenty they have no settle habitation but wander in a unsettle course they rise in harvest and invade some country there stay as long as they find the palm or other sufficient mean of maintenance and then seek new adventure for they neither plane or sow nor breed up cattle and which be more strange they nourish up none of their own child although they have ten or twenty wife a man of the proper and comely slave they can take but when they they be in travel they dig a hole in the earth which present receive in that dark prison of death the new bear creature not yet make happy with the light of life their reason be that they will not be trouble with education nor in their flit wander be trouble with such cumbersome burden once a secret providence both punish the father wickedness and prevent a viperous generation if that may be a prevention where there be a succession without generation and as Pliny c c plin. l. 5. c 17. say of the for of the conquer nation they preserve the boy from ten to twenty year of age and bring they up as the hope of their succession like negro Azimogli d d Azimogli be the child of christian take from the parent by the Turk the spawn of their janissary with education fit their design these wear a collar about their neck in token of slavery until they bring a enemy head slay in battle and then they be uncollare free and dignify with the title of soldier if one of they run away he be kill and eat so that hem in betwixt hope and fear they grow very resolute and adventurous their collar breed shame disdain and desperate fury till they redeem their freedom as you have hear elembe the great jagge bring with he twelve thousand of these cruel monster from Sierra Liona and after much mischief and spoil settle himself in benguele twelve degree from the line southwards and there breed and grow into a nation the sacrifice and ceremony of the jag but Kelandula sometime his page proceed in that beastly life before mention and the people of Elembe by great troop run to he and follow his camp in hope of spoil they have no fetisso or idol the great jagge or prince be master of all their ceremony and be a great witch I have see this Kelandula say our author continue a sacrifice from sun to sun the rite whereof be these himself sit on a stool in great pomp with a cap adorn with peacock feather which fowl in one country call Shelambanza be find wild and in one place empale about the grave of the king be fifty keep and feed by a old woman and be call jugilla Mokisso that be bird of Mokisso now about he thus set attend forty or fifty woman each of they weave continual a Zebras tail in their hand there be also certain gangas priest or witch behind they be many with drum and pipe and Pungas certain instrument make of elephant tooth make hollow a yard and half and with a hole like a flute which yield a loud and harsh sound that may be hear a mile off these strike and sound and sing and the woman weave as be say till the sun be almost down then they bring forth a pot which be set on the fire with leaf and root and the water therein and with a kind of white powder the witch or gangas spot themselves one on the one cheek the other on the other and likewise their forehead temple breast shoulder and belly use many enchant term which be hold to be prayer for victory at sunset a Ganga bring his Kissengula or war-hatchet to the prince this weapon they use to wear at their girdle and put the same in his hand bid he be strong their god go with he and he shall have victory after this they bring he four or five negro of which with a terrible countenance the great jagge with his hatchet kill two and other two be kill without the fort. likewise five kine be slay within and other five without the fort and as many goat and as many dog after the same manner this be their sacrifice at the end whereof all the flesh be in a feast consume Andrew battle be command to depart when the slaughter begin for their devil or Mokisso as they say will then appear and speak to they this sacrifice be call Kissembula which they solemnize when they attempt any great enterprise there be few leave of the natural jag but of this unnatural brood the present succession be raise @. 4 of the lake and river in these part of Africa now that we have thus discourse of these former nation let we take view of the more inland and easterly border which about on congo where we shall find the great lake Aquilunda which with her many river aforesaid water all that great country assist therein by a far great lake call Zembre great mother and chief lady of the water in Africa as for the mountain of the moon now call Toroa there be a lake call gale of no great quantity whence issue a river name comissa and by the portugal the sweet river disembark at the false cape a arm whereof have before enter the sea in 32. degree 40. minute of infante t t io. di Barros dec 1 l. 3. c. 4. odd Lopez l. 2. c. 8. Pigafella one of Dias his companion in the first discovery of those part call Infanto because he there go first on land but from those hill of the moon the lake whence Nilus spring have no help neither be there two lake east and west distant from each other about four hundred and fifty mile as Ptolemey describe for then the one shall be in the confine of congo and angola the other about Sofala and Monomotapa where be find but one lake for aquilunde be no tributary to Nilus this lake be between angola and Monomotapa and contain in diameter 195. mile there be indeed another lake which Nilus make in his course but stand northward from the first lake Zembre and not in east or west parallel neither do Nilus as some affirm hide itself under the ground and after rise again but u u I aver not this but set down Lopez his opinion run through monstrous and desert valley without any settle channel and where no people inhabit from whence that fabulous opinion do grow this lake be situate in twelve degree of southerly latitude and be compass about like a vault with exceed high mountain the great whereof be call Cafates upon the east and the hill of sal-nitrum and the hill of silver on another side and on the other side with diverse other mountain the river Nilus run northwards many hundred mile and then enter into another great lake which the inhabitant do call a sea it be much big than the first and contain in breadth two hundred and twenty mile right under the equinoctial line of this second lake the Anzichi give certain and perfect intelligence for they traffic into those part and they report that in this second lake there be a people that sail in great ship and can write and use number weight and measure which they have not in the part of congo that they build their house with lime and stone and for their fashion and quality may be compare with the portugal this seem to be in Goiame where the abassine entitle himself king and in his title as 10 10 cap. 3. before you have read call it the fountain of Nilus which aluares y y f. Aluares c. 135. also mention that Peter Conilian see he affirm that there be jew about those part which perhaps be the people that the Anzichi speak of from this second lake in Goiame the river which be there call Gihen pass through the pretes dominion to Meroe and so to Egypt as elsewhere be show in these two great lake be diverse island that we speak not of the triton and other I know not what monster there report to be find the lake Zembre yield not Nilus alone but Zaire a far more spacious river in wideness and more violent in force then Nilus or any other river in Africa Europe or Asia of which we late relate and beside her northern and western tribute carry by those two river to the mediterranean and ocean sea she send her great stream of Magnice Coava and Cuama into the inner or eastern ocean Magnice z z od. Lopez l. 2 cap. 9 spring out of Zembre receive in his voyage to the sea three other river Nagoa call saint Christopher and Margues which both spring out of the mountain of the moon by the people there call Toroa the three be arroe which beside his water pay to Neptune which neither need nor heed it a great quantity of gold which it wash from the mountain of Monomotapa a country extend itself between Magnice and Cuama who seven mouth seek to swallow up many island g. bot. ben. part. 1. lib. 3. which they hold in their jaw but through greediness lose that which greediness make they seek not able to swallow so great morsel which therefore remain and be inhabit with pagan Boterus say that this river run out of that lake a great space in one channel and then be divide into two the one call Spirito Sancto run into the sea under the cape coventi the other Cuama receive the Rivers Panami Luangua Arruia mangiono inadire Ruina and be sail more than seven hundred mile coava be also a great river the inhabitant within land about these river be as you have hear pagan and rude people let i now have leave to convey myself down this river Coava into the ocean and there take view of the many island with which nature have adorn this african world as with many brooch and jewel set and hang about the fringe of her garment and first learn what we can of the island in and from the red sea hither we will in some Portugal carrack sail round about the african coast and acquaint you with what we shall find worthy observation and then not willing as yet to set foot in Lisbon as we meet with the fleet of Spain sail to the new-found world will pass with they for further discovery for to go into the mediterranean to discover the african island there will scarce be worth the while to hear a little of those few may content we thus author have write of the river which they never see but John des santos a Portugal friar which live many year in those part have give a full description of the river and coast in those eastern shore of Africa by who narration it appear that Cuama and Nilus come not out of one and the same lake for Cuama overflow in march and April not as Nilus in july and August and make the country at that time sickly and drive the wild beast to the high part where lion tiger elephant merus a kind of horn ass ounce rhinocerote buffal wild kine and swine and horse and dog Zeuras and other creature of those part be assemble in a peaceable parliament by the river forcible summons which so awe they that as sometime in Noah ark they forget their prey nature and quiet expect their dismission with that of the water river horse there abound and crocodile other strange beast bird fish and worm they have with manna and other natural rarity touch which I refer the reader to the second part of my pilgrim where the relation of santos and jobson will entertain he frank santos also will there acquaint you with the description of the river country mine and people of those part their kingdom war custom politic Oeconomike and religious the Portugal fort of Sofala Sena Tete and the mart of Massapa Luanze manzono the strange rite of the king of Monomotapa quiteve sedanda and their neighbour the quiteve be king of Sofala and on that side of Cuama and have about 100 woman among which his ant sister daughter who he carnal use which incest to a subject be death and when he die the successor be he to who those woman give peaceable and quiet possession of the king house and themselves no force be make nor subjection yield upon force possession the king thus by they receive be not only admit of the rest but adore yea they ask of he rain seasonable harvest and all thing they need not without great present he have his oracle-consultation with the devil and every year on the obit day of the former king the devil then enter into some one of the assembly and give answer every new moon be a holy day and the or feast day which the quiteve appoint by proclamation which they observe without work they otherwise worship no god nor have any idol image or temple priest or sacrifice they call the quiteve by prodigious title lord of the sun and moon and especial entitle he in all thing great as great thief great witch none else be permit to be witch great lion etc. good or bad so as great be the epithet the name quiteve be common to all their king successive in that country and to the country itself their oath by poison lick of hot iron etc. and other strange custom you shall find in the place aforesaid chap. 11 of the sea and island about Africa the ancient and modern observation navigation and discovery @. i. of the red sea and why it be so call after this long and tedious journey over land where the steep and snowy mountain the miry and unwholesome valley the unpassable wilderness swift river still lake thick wood and variety of the continent-obseruation have thus long while we let we now by a swift course take view of the african sea and those island which they hold always besiege but never conquer in the first place present itself to our discovery that sea which separate after the modern reckon Africa and Asia asunder this be call the red sea which name say a a plin. l. 6. c. 23 Pliny the grecian call erythraeum this word signify red and be ascribe by some to a king name Erythras who postellus b b post. Orig. and some other think to be Esau or edom which the like signification of his name signify red and habitation not very far distant make enough probable by other to the repercussion of the sunbeam by other to the colour of the sand and earth in the bottom and by other to the nature of the water itself Solinus c c Solin c. 41. affirm it be call erythraeum of king erythrus the son of Perseus and andromade and not only of the colour allege d d m. Varro Varro that learned roman for his author who also mention a fountain on the shore thereof which change the colour of the sheep fleece which drink thereof into a duskish and dark colour Strabo e e Strabo l. 16. cite the testimony of Nearchus and orthagoras concern the i will Tyrina two thousand furlong from Carmania in which the sepulchre of Erythras be show be a great hill plant with tree and that he reign in those part and leave his name thereunto which they learn of Mithropastes who fly from Darius have live in that island barrius f f jo. di Barros dec 2 l 8 c. 1. al. Alboquerke write that Alfonso Dalboquerque that victorious Portugal who subdue so many island sea and kingdom to that crown in a letter to king Emanuel affirm that it may be call the red sea of certain red spot or stain which be see therein and when he enter into the straits he encounter a great vein of red water extend itself from aden as far as they can see from the ship top these red vein of water the moor ascribe to the ebb and flow of that Sea John di Castro g g io. di Castro afterward viceroy of India sail to the bottom of Streit as far as suez and much labour to find the cause why it shall be call the h h the scripture often mention this sea but call it as Tremel and jun. translate or after Vatablus Carectosum of the weed plentiful grow therein ex. 10.18 etc. red sea there know only by the name of the sea of Mecca and they marvel much at our name red. he or Gaspar Aloisius which write the book of this voyage which my friend master hakluyt communicate to i say that the colour of this sea be as of other sea neither be there red dust blow in by the wind but the land general on both side be brown and very dark as if it be scorch in some place black and in some white the sand be of ordinary colour only in three place be certain mountain with vein of red which be hard rock in many place the wave seem very red by accident but take up the water in a vessel out of the sea it seem clear and more crystalline than that without the strait he cause also some to dive which do bring he out of the sandy bottom a red matter branch like coral in other place where be green spot in the sea be take out green branch and where the sea be white the sand there under be very white and though the depth in some place amount to twenty fathom yet the purity of the crystalline water cause this transparent colour near to Suachen he find most of those spot and from thence to Alcocer the space of one hundred thirty six league the sea in this space have many shelf the ground whereof be coral-stone of which one sort be red the other very white the white sand in the bottom make it seem white the ooze green that corally substance red which in that space be the most of the three but near the bottom towards suez in a great space he see none further without the straight he see such red i i see of this Lewis de Urreta hist Aethiop l. 1. c. 11. and Marmol l. 10. c. 10. spot or vein of water at cape Fartach as if ox have be slay there yet the water take up in a vessel seem clear and he suppose that this redness proceed of the whale bring forth their young barrius mislike that conjecture and those other of antiquity in search the cause of this name of red and be of opinion that the violent current of the tide assist with some tempestuous wind raise up from the bottom that red floor whereof we have speak and cause by the motion of the same under the water that redness in the upper face thereof which be in more spacious quantity near the Strait where there be great force of the tide and the thread or strain of this redness be less in the great and more spacious sea-room the Portugal pilot first thought that the wind bring out red dust from the dry soil of Arabia which no man experience have confirm Andrea k k a. Corsali let 2. Corsali which sail and war under the portugal in these sea 1516. say he know not why it shall be call red for the water be colour as in other sea which seem to cross the former report and may either be construe of the water general not discolour or perhaps while he be there the tide and wind do not conspire so boisterous as at some other time they do against the yield and weak soil in the bottom thereof our english pilot have give late and better light in their trade at Moha and other place as in the first and second part of our book of voyages be evident but the most learned pilot for the erythraean antiquity be master Fuller who in the last chapter of his four book examine the grecian fable of Ayatharchides ctesias Ourainus pausanias of boxus also Mela Pliny and the rest and at last conclude that of Esau name edom the country be call Edumaea far large than that of Ptolomey beside it contain a great part of Petraea and all Nabathea and of that country coast so great a part of that sea as appear by Salomon and jehoshaphat Ophyrian navy build at Ezion-Geber in Edumaea their own country the sea adjoin be call edumaean or in greek interpretation erythraean that be rubrum or red as Cephas the name proper by Christ give to the first of the apostle be common in a greek interpretation call Peter however it be for this redness many deceive themselves in streitn this name to the arabian gulf which the ancient l l liu. l. 45. plin. l. 6. c. 24. give unto all the sea from Egypt to India and reckon the persian and arabian gulf arm of the red sea yea arrianus not he that write n n Arrian reb. alex. l. 8. Alexander life who yet in the report of Nearchus his voyage from Indus to the river Tigris call it the red sea but another of that name in his o o Arrian Perip Ortelius senec. Troas periplus of the Erythrean sea translate and illustrate with a large commentary by Stuckius and set forth by Ortelius in a peculiar map thereof comprehend in the title of the red sea all from Arsinoe and Egypt to malacca or the chersonesus aurea have now trouble you with the name why and how far the name extend we may view the island therein situate which if any will more full know let he read arrianus and barrius and the voyage of Solyman Bassa 1538. unto Diu write by p p dam. a go op. Dionsis utaggio Venet. Comito Cit diu. Ramus part. 1. Damianus in latin and by a venetian in ramusius who be present in the action I must but touch the principal @. 2 of the chief town and island in the red sea sve be near the begin of the sea which some suppose to be that which the ancient call Arsinoe after other Heroum here be the place where the Turk have his arsenal and galley for those sea the matter whereof be bring out of Caramania by sea by Nilus and by camel over land the rest of the way at incredible charge here in old time be a channel which convey the water of Nilus to this place where they have cistern to receive it all destroy by the mahometans and now the inhabitant fetch the water which they use six mile off some think that Pharaoh be here drown which passage other set down at Tor where the sea be straighten and be not above nine mile over it seem that the print of the Chariot-wheel which orosius q q Oros l. 1. c. 10. affirm still remain as testimony of pharaoh overwhelm under those wave and can not by any industry of man be do out but by the mighty hand of God be soon restore in the same form be not now there to be find for they will soon end the controversy asion Gaber r r 1. reg. 9.26 be a port hereabout whence Solomon send his navy to Ophir and after he jehoshaphat s s 1. reg. 22.48 but not with like success which josephus t t Ios. antiq. l. 8. say be Berenice not far from Elana Jerome call it Essia doctor dee write that Ezion geber be near Eloth or Elana or Iltor the east end of the bay the other which some call suez be high Bernice u u Adrich p. 118 be the port of the red sea where the indian drug and spice in the time of the roman empire be unlade and land to be carry thence to Alexandria the whole course whereof Pliny 10 10 lib. 6. c. 33. describe agatharchides y y phot. 250. r. bret. reckon diverse etymology of the erythraean title like best of that which ascribe it to one Erythras who first build a ship to sail in those sea altogether disallow that it shall be so call of the colour he have write strange thing of the people adjoin he name four sort of ethiopian according to their dwell near the river or lake or sea-coast or wander those on the sea-coast he say live altogether on fish which the tide bring up and leaf on the hollow place or plash near the shore which they cast upon hot rock which cause the fishy substance to fall from the bone this they tread with their foot mix the seed of paliurus and then make cake thereof which they dry in the sun and eat all in common and on the five day go to drink lay their mouth to the water like ox and sup in as much as their skin will hold not able scarce to breathe nor eat any thing one day after some of those ichthyophagi or fish-eater which have store of this provision content themselves with the moisture of their diet and drink not at all some of they seem subject to a apathy not of stoike but of stock not shun or complain for blow or wrong but i think I see my reader have sense and not without reason make complaint of wrong do he in these relation and therefore will refer they that will to our author himself don John di Castro can better acquaint we with the late jo. di cast than agatharchides with the ancient state he ascribe to Toro which he make the same with Elana 28. 1 8 degree they be christian and have a grecian monastery he report the moor tradition that Moses smite the sea twelve time and thereby open twelve path for the israelite 600000. egyptian be drown the jew arrive where Toro now be at bohalel xame they find a town within a house like a chapel where be hang a banner of silk and many arrow or dart round about the grave at the head of the grave be a table with a epitaph testify that there lie bury one of Mahomet kindred and great indulgence be grant to such devout pilgrim as to that place resort but the portugal burn it Hieronymo da sancto Stephano relate his voyage from cairo in fifteen day to Cariz m. st. ap. Ramus and a good port call cane find many building and temple ruin by the way seven day journey they go from hence by land to Cosir a haven of the red sea Procopius say Procop bell perf. that this sea be boisterous and rough in the day time and calm in the night that jotabis one thousand furlong from Aila be a island of jew of which he mention among the homerite arabian as do Nicephorus Tudelensis and Vertomannus also which he extend alongst the sea and add to they many other nation and man-eating saracen what the portugal have do in these sea barrius Marmolius Osorius Maffaeus relate nonius cugna in his letter to the king non. Cug ap. refond declare that 1530. they take surrate other piece of Cambaya and many indian ship and chase away the turk navy which besiege aden and bring the king of aden to pay yearly tribute ten thousand serassin but the turk after obtain it the length of this arabian gulf d d g. b. b. Botero reckon 1200. mile in breadth 100 for the most part Comito Venet. Ramus part. 1. fol. 274. Comito Venetiano in ramusius say it account 1400. in length in breadth 200. and in some place more so full of shold that if they keep not the channel in the midst there be no sail but by day light outward bind they keep the middle and have pilot for that purpose homeward they have other pilot which direct the ship within the shallows and be take in at Babelmandel call by e e ptol. lib. 4. cap. 1. Ptolemey insula diodori a i will in the entry or strait of the gulf which Strabo say the ancient king of Egypt chain to keep the passage zidem be twelve league from Mecca where the ship have use to unlade their spicery as before at Berenice without this town be a Moschee which the moor say be the sepulchre of Eua. their water be rainwater reserve in cistern pass by the i will mehun the i will Camaran be famous by the diverse spoil there make by the portugal it be in fifty degree this island say Corsali be the hot place that ever I see not one of we but have our secret part chafe and flay with heat and many of our company die Dalaqua be a island where they gather pearl 125. league long twelve broad it be the name also of the metropolitan city between it and abex say Aloisius in the relation of Castros voyage be five island one of which be call Xamoa the land of which be red the king a Moor Suachen be the best harbour in all the gulf which the turk have take from the abassine it stand in nineteen degree and a three Mazzua be a island which make Ercocco a good haven but of the haven and port on both side the gulf barrius f f bar. dec. 2. lib 8. relate more large of the isle achafas and tuicce we have but name likewise of other whereof Ptolemey g g ptol. l. 4. c. 8. do number a great multitude the people of these part be mahumetan and many baduini heretical and thievish moor many jew be in aden the chief town of merchandise in these part the king whereof after much kind gratulation Salyman Bassa hang up at the yard arm and at his return deal the like dole to the king of zibit subject their state under treacherous pretence to his great master Scaliger h h Ios. Scalig. can. be post Orig. tell of Samaritan dwelling in a island of the red sea which when any man land there will religious forbid to touch they but we have before mention both they and their letter suppose the most ancient in the world howsoever postellus call the present Hebrew letter eternal and faith that the law be write in they but that they be sacred and not public know till the time of ezra who excommunicate the samaritan and their letter first publish not invent those which now be in use the ascension i i r. covert ascend into the red sea 1608. to Moha which be a city of great trade and 1612. diverse k k w. Hawkins english ship be together in the same sea where they somewhat avenge themselves for such wrong as by the turk and mogoll or mogor have be former offer to sir Henry Middleton and other english man as you have read before l l lib. c. 14. @. 3. in our first book as likewise of their find the good road of Assab on the abassine shore and of the king of Rehita which come ride to they on a cow with a turban and a cuttle shell on his forehead be drunken with aqua-vita but kind to the english and also of the strong current and strange shine in the night by cuttlefish not meet to be repeat @. 3 of Socotora Madagascar and other island on the eastern coast of Africa in the ocean without the straight near to the african shore be not many island mention by the ancient arrianus in his periplus speak of seven island call Pyralaon and of another great island near to they call Menuthesias or menuthias now call Madagascar and saint Laurence some take it for the island of jambolus whereof Diodorus * * dio. sic. lib. 3. cap. 13. have large relate and ramusius a a Ramus part 1. by Ortelius map of arrianus Periplus jamboli insula seem java maier have discourse thereon other seek for that island in Somatra that jambolus be a merchant which trade in Arabia for spice be take by thief and make a shepherd after carry away by ethiopian who take these foreigner according to their rite to expiate their country for they be enjoin by oracle to make such expiation once in six hundred year with two man that be foreigner for the fulfil whereof they be put in a boat fit for two man with six month victual and command to sail southwards and they shall come to a happy island where the man live a bless life and if they come safe thither their country shall enjoy prosperity six hundred year if they turn back they shall bring upon they much trouble the ethiopian meanwhile keep holy-day and offer sacrifice for their good voyage which in four month they achieve and be exceed courteous use and entertain of the islander these be four cubit high than other man very nimble and strong the report of this his voyage savour more of a a a sir Thomas More Utopia feign a country and commonwealth in manner too good to be true Utopia and Plato b b plat. de repub l. Sanut lib. 12. commonwealth then of true history yet be it think as ramusius discourse not altogether fabulous but that he be indeed in some remote island to which he apply such fancy as Diodorus report to leave there the certain fiction and uncertain conjecture of antiquity and come to more certain relation the only island of name without the strait be Socotora in thirteen degree of which we have speak large already speak of the island of Asia yet if any will suffer we to remember it again among these of Africa for it lie between both we may here mention what other and somewhat otherwise have relate Sanutus call it Zacotora and affirm that the sand on the top of the high hill therein have no exemption from the wind that the people be nestorian christian which observe the cross with much devotion otherwise want Christian both baptism and doctrine and be circumcise that the moor say it belong to the amazon in testimony whereof the woman still wear the breech and govern among they Corsali c c a. Corsali let 2. be at Soquotera 1516. non. cugna think it unknown to Ptolemey which other suppose to be his insula dioscoridis he say that it be inhabit of christian shepherd which live on milk and butter their bread be of date like to the people of Prester John but their hair be long clothe with one only piece of cloth about their privity the land barren as in all Arabia foelix and the seacoast govern by the arabian hence come and be name the aloe socotrina d d maginus they be jacobite and have church with altar and observe the cross with great reverence they enter not their church but stand in the churchyard or porch their Abuna or priest rule they other governor they have none of their own the portugal have two town there Coro and benin they e e pory before Leo cap. hold opinion that saint Thomas here suffer shipwreck and that of his ship be build a ancient church which be yet to be see wall about with three partition and three door they live for the most part in cabin of bough or in cave their woman be as good soldier as the man they be much addict to magic and bring to pass matter incredible although the bishop excommunicate such as use it they will with contrary wind hinder man that endamage they from sail away conceit they be exceed of their own excellence the english have often trade in this island master downton write that mulai amore bensaide have long govern there as viceroy to his father the king of Fartac in Arabia not far from aden of these island see my first part of voyage in sir tho. roe master payton master Finch their relation and master terry in the second part. his strength consist in his arab the rest be slave which have be banish people in August they make their aloe of a herb like in Spain but big about a tun in a year their bread be date this island say Benjamin day be in twelve degree barren all rock and stone almost no green thing in the whole island but date-tree and some few shrub and small tree and aloe out of the bark of a small tree be cut issue a red gum call the people the most obedient that ever he see all the profit of the island be the king he seem kind to the english but no great trust if we trust captain Saris to be repose in he as falsify both word and weight they buy goat there which they find after to be abuse by the buggering-beast people they buy aloe 2720. pound as master bring report at thirty rial of eight their hundred which make of we but 97. pound this be an. 1614 this island he say be twenty league long their kine at ten rial of eight their goat sheep hen all very lean the inhabitant of a Mulla to colour and some negro apparel with a piece of calico about their waste and turban on their head the king in turkish habit he have five camel and five horse which be all in the island Tamarin and Delisha be harbour and place of trade there Abadalenry be a island fourteen league from Zacotora from whence it be fifteen league to cape Guardafu at Tamarind they have no rain in two year together two small isle lie to the north of Socotera call the two sister the inhabitant of a olive colour without law among themselves or commerce with other there f f m. polo lib. 3. cap. 33 34. Sanut be also those two isle the one of man the other of woman which we mention in our five book g g cap. 13. pag. 438. a matter how true I know not but very strange they be christian subject to the bishop of Socotera and he to the Zatoia in Baldach many other island there be of no great name in that sea call sinus Barbaricus as of don garcia the three and the seven brethren of saint Brandon saint Francis Mascarenna do Natal Comoro and many other beside those of Quiloa Mosambique and some other for their vicinity to the land before handle the i will b b maginus of saint Laurence so call by the portugal by themselves Madagascar be meet in all those part to entertain the reader observation as be one of the great island of the world it contain in breadth four hundred and fourscore mile in length a thousand and two hundred m. polo c c m. polo lib. 3. cap. 35. say the inhabitant be saracen and be govern under four lord eat camel flesh use merchandise or art thus far do the great can stretch his tartarian dominion and send hither to spy the land that which polo say he hear of a bird in this island call Ruch so big as it can take up a elephant have no likelihood of truth he call it Magascar it be situate from seventeen to six and twenty @ of southerly d d Maffaeus hist ind. lib. 3. latitude only upon the coast they be mahumetan within land idolater black and like the caffre the soil yield clove ginger and silver it deserve to have better inhabitant if Linschoten e e Linschot lib. 1. cap. 3. and l. 2. Paludanus judge right have many fair and fresh river safe harbour plenty of fruit and cattle therein be four government each fight against other they use not themselves to trade with other nor suffer other to traffic with they the portugal have some trade with they but go not on land in the first discovery of they by f f Osor lib. 4. the portugal 1506. they show themselves in hospital and treacherous reward receive kindness in their canoas or boat make of the body of a tree with shot there g g ph. Pigafetta congo lib. 2. c. 9 be say to be some white people suppose to be of chinian offspring of the people of Madagascar the hollander h h de bry. part 3. ind. or. report that they be of colour black strong and well make they cover their privity with cotton they have large hole in their ear in which they wear round stick they acknowledge one creator and observe circumcision but know nothing of pray or keep festival they have no proper name whereby to distinguish one day from another neither do they number week month or year nor do they number above ten they be exceed afraid of the devil who they call because he use often to afflict they they live mostwhat on fish they marry but one wife their time of marriage be for the man at twelve the woman at ten year of age adultery and theft be punish with death the man use to hunt abroad the woman spin their cotton at home whereof they have tree yield plenty if any man kill any of his kine all his neighbour may challenge part Cornelius Houtman say they be sweet-spoken man they have a kind of bean or Lobos grow on tree the cod whereof be two foot long they have a kind of seed whereof a little make foolish a great quantity kill herewith they betray and kill threescore and eight hollander with their captain the english have have some knowledge of this island to their cost as those of the union before mention but not trust they too far they here find good refresh captain downton arrive there in the bay of saint Augustine aug. 10. 1614 and buy of they diverse beef at a reasonable rate the people be tall and swart their hair smooth and fine plait their weapon be dart neat head with iron their cattle fair than any i i mart. bring I have see have on their fore-shoulder a lump of fat like the pommel of a saddle here be Tamarin tree with green fruit upon they the pulp whereof boil cure our man of the scorbute they have store of cotton whereof they make stripe cloth of diverse colour another then in company k k ben. day and Anon. report they to be a strong active people not fearful of gun or other weapon civil honest and understanding their weapon small lance bow arrow and dart their kine sell at three four or five shilling a piece as sweet and fat as we that bunch on the shoulder be very sweet in taste nic. downton and as one report he have see the skin that compass one of they contain six or eight gallon here be many crocodile the union come to Gungomar in the northwest corner of Madagascar be assault by a navy of a hundred canoe by water arrange in order of a half moon the king treacherous assault they out of the wood and take captain Michelborne with other merchant in saint Marie a island by Madagascar they meet with the king which be observe of his subject with great reverence here they bury one of their dead man the islander be present who signify by sign that his soul be go to heaven and will have have they to cut off his leg by the knee the i will of cerne they call Maurice island they find excellent ebon tree there the wood whereof be as black as pitch and as smooth as ivory enclose with a thick bark they find of the same kind some red some yellow there be palmtree like the they find store of bird whereof they may take some in their nest with their hand s. ed. mich. there be no people inhabit in the i will of bata our man kill a bat as great as a hare in shape like a squirrel with two flappe of skin which he spread forth when he leap from tree to tree which they can do nimble often hold only by their tail the hollander in the bay of Anton Gil southwards from Madagascar in sixteen degree see the king black or hue wear two horn on his head holl. nau. 1595. and many chain or bracelet of brass on his arm this place be fertile the people valiant in the channel between the firm land and Madagascar be many island g g g. bot. ben. deal hole great and small all inhabit by mahumetan the chief of which be s. Christopher more northwards against Mombaza and Melinde be three island Momsid zanzibar and Pemba inhabit with mahumetan of white colour in the time of m. h h m. polo l. 3. cap. 36. polo Zenzibar be heathenish the inhabitant he say very gross and deform and likewise the woman near the cape of good hope be the isle of don Aluares and Tristan d' Acunuha but of no great note the deepness of these sea make they uncapable of many island chap. 12 of the island of Africa from the cape hitherward @. i. of saint Helena Thomee cape de verd and diverse other betwixt they and of the weed and calm of those sea on this side the cape i i Linsc l. 1 c. 4. hist of China part. 3. c. ult. be the island of s. Helena in 16 degree and one quarter of southerly latitude it be very high and hilly the name be give of the saint on who day it be discover it have in it store of goat hog hen and other creature which the portugal have there left to multiply for before there be none of they there also they have plant fig orange lemon and such like whereof the valley be full that it seem a earthly paradise the fruit grow all the year long they have great store of fish of which with crooked nail they take great plenty the rock yield salt for the further of their provision it seem God have plant it in convenient place for the long and dangerous indian navigation there the portugal leave their sick which stay till other ship come the next year to take they it be never inhabit only a hermit dwell there who under pretence of mortify his flesh by penance butcher the flesh of the goat and buck so fast for their skin that the king send for he home and will suffer none to dwell there Abraham Kendal put in there about the year 1591. and leave on shore one Segar a sick man who k k edm. Barker Hak. to 2. par. 2. Edmund Parker eighteen month after find in good plight but their unexpected come as it seem so ravish his weak spirit with joy that it distract he and be otherwise of bodily constitution very well he die eight day after the like I have read of a Portugal in the same place in june l l s. Castleton 1613. the dutch set upon two carrick in this road but with ill success one of their ship with nine and forty man be casual blow up northwest from hence be the isle of ascension not inhabit of Loanda nigh to or rather a piece of congo be already speak over against the cape of Lopo Gonsalues be the i will of Nobon and not far from thence m m navigation all Isola di s. Thome Ramus pag. 1. fol. 116. saint Thomas a hundred and fourscore mile from the shore and so much also in compass right under the line at the first discovery it be a wood now inhabit by portugal and negro these live a hundred and ten year but few bear in Europe exceed fifty it be unwholesome through exceed heat unto europaean especial which in December january and February n n the wind which at other time refresh they be then by nature imprison in (@) home can scarce walk up and down for faintness in the midst be a woody mountain continual overshadow with a thick cloud which so moisten the tree that grow in great abundance thereon that from hence drop water sufficient for the water of all their field of sugarcane they have threescore and ten ingenio or sugar-house each of which have two or three hundred slave belong thereto they grind the cane and boil the juice to make it into sugar but by no mean can they make it so white here as in madera and other place the refuse of their cane they give to their hog which be here very many fat and delicate as the flesh of a hen. they be some year exceed plague with ant and also with rat white man which live there be visit two hour in every eight or ten day with a ague but stranger have more shrewd entertainment and scarce in twenty day with great care can shake off this shaker the chief city be povoason a episcopal see the negro work six day for their master and the seven day for themselves in set and plant their seed fruit and provision wheat here sow become all blade without ripen any corn no fruit which have a stone in it will here prosper the town which have about seven hundred family and the castle be take by the hollander 1599 the i will deal principe o o holl. Navig be so call because the revenue thereof be in time past allow to the prince of Portugal it stand in three degree of northerly latitude julian Glerehagen take the same an. 1598. the isle p p Vid. Sanut of s. Matthew Santa cruz s. Paul and conception yield small matter of history next to cape verde stand seven island full of bird empty of inhabitant call Barbacene but those that be call the isle of cape verde be nine situate between the green and white cape Linschoten reckon ten they be first discover by antoni di Nolli a genoese an. 1440. none of they be inhabit but the isle of jago and deal fogo both which be take an. 1596. by sir anth. q q sir ant. sher. Hak tom. 3. pag. 600. Shirley who have one night shower of ash from that island of fogo or Fuego or of fire so call because it continual burn which fall so thick on their ship that you may write your name with your finger upon the upper deck saint jago be take and burn by sir Francis r r sir Francis Drake Drake an. 1585. brava and Bueva Vista have brave and goodly name than nature maio yield salt in a lake of two league long the sun congeal and turn the water into Salt from thence be pass into the sea call Sargasso s s Linschot l. 1. cap. 95 sam. castleton they meet with it in sail to Bermudas as master barkly tell i and to the indies also both east and west because it be cover with herb like to the herb Sargasso in the Portugal well not unlike to samper yellow of colour with empty berry like goose-berry but less which begin at twenty degree and continue till thirty four far off in the sea for the ship in their go to India keep near the shore meet not with any the sea seem as a green field so thick that a man can see the water and hinder the ship passage except they have a strong wind Ralph Wilson have tell we of a new island discover by the Solomon in 19 34. to the south 1612. the coast of Africa be four-hundred mile distant neither be any island near save that these weed seem to make many island thus do man in ship behold the wonder of the lord in the deep no land be nigh nor no ground to be find although it be think to come from the ground some t t pat. Copland think it grow on the rock and be thence beat off by the sea and indeed all those sea be full of wonder as they pass along the coast towards the indies Thomas u u tho. steven Hak. tom. 2. p. 2. steven complain of the continual thunder lightning and unwholesome Rainos which there they meet the rainwater if it stand a little convert present to worm and fill the meat hang up with worm a herb also swim upon the face of the water like a cock comb so venomous that it can scarce be touch without peril fish call shark most ravenous devourer which have other six or seven small fish guard with blue and green attend like servingman fish also as big as a herring with wing which do not so much help they by fly to escape another great fish that pursue they by sea as endanger they to a Sea-fowl which wait that opportunity neither can it fly high or far or long than the wing be wet nor swim fast have exchange fin for wing so have I see man thrice worse that have two trade than such as have be skilful and thrifty in one Lerius 10 10 lerij na. in brasil c. 3. add the like wonder of certain bird so tame that they will light upon the hatch and suffer themselves to be take these be the same bird which pursue those fly fish wise to hunt they then to save themselves as big as crow in feather in flesh little big than a sparrow and far less than the fish which they take and devour these sea be also subject to great and tedious calm which not only hinder the voyage but end the life of many Giovanni da Empoli say in his return out of India they be here detain four and fifty day in which they scarce sail above six league and in thirty five day they cast overboard threescore and sixteen of their company very few survive in their ship which likewise happen to other ship their consort so that they have utter despair have not God sent a Portugal ship that way bind to relieve they and will God the like example many may not be produce among our own between y y pat. Copland 17. and 32 degree of northerly latitude man be subject to gripe and have need to keep themselves warm to return to our discovery from jago where we leave where the negro z z nau. Isidi s. Thome be wont to bring slave to sell to the portugal for Bead and other trifle and cotton with other base commodity and they not such alone as they take in war but their father and mother think they do they a benefit to cause they thus to be convey into better country they bring they naked the isle of Arguin be six or seven inhabit by the azanhagi where the king of Spain have a fortress concern the trade whereof you may read the letter of Melchior a a mel. Peton Hak. part. 2. Petonoy @. 2 of the canary madera and Port-Santo fvrth into the sea be the canary * * this name be suppose vulgar to have arise from the small prick-eared dog which be common reckon seven Canaria Teneriff Palma Gomera Hierro Lansarrotte and Fuerte ventura Thauet a a Thevet c. 5. sanuto 12. add three other more Lobos Roca gratiosa s. Clara Alegranca and Infierno the inhabitant be so gross before they be discover that they know not the use of fire they believe in one creator of the world who punish the evil and reward the good herein they all consent in other thing disagree their weapon be stone and staff they shave their head with sharp stone like flint iron they have not gold they respect not the woman nurse not their child but common commit that office to their goat they as much delight in dance as the bird b b canary Bird which bear their name in sing they be unknown from the time of the roman empire c c g. bot. ben. part. 1 Vol 2. bar. dec. 1. l. 1. at which time they be call fortunatae till either a english or french ship by misfortune light on they a 1405. io. Bentacor conquer they and after he 1444. Henry the infanta of Portugal that daystar which by his industry make way to the present sunshine of discovery whereby the world in her last day have full view of herself Galuano d d a. Galuano discovery Lewis Orda 1334. assail Gomera but in vain and 1393 the spaniard commit great spoils in this island descrip Canar ap call that frenchman io. Betancourt and say he be send by John the second of Castille an. 1417. who be slay in the action his son sell they to Peter Barba a Spaniard and he to don Henry he say the people be idolater and do eat their flesh raw for want of fire they till their ground with ox and goats-horn they have many wife but deliver they to their superior to have the first use of they before they lie with they don Henry conquer the rest which Betancourt have not possess their former government be by a hundred and ninety person which rule also in matter of religion prescribe to the people their faith and worship they have in high name of authority a king and a duke to slay a beast be esteem the base office in the world and therefore commit to their prisoner they which do this live separate from the people thus be it in the grand canaria in Gomera e e Cadamosto they use for hospitality to let their friend lie with their wife and receive they in like courtesy and therefore as in India the sister son inherit in tenarife they have two king one dead and another alive when a new king be crown some man to honour his entrance offer himself to voluntary death when the king be bury the noble man carry he on their shoulder and put he into the grave say depart in peace o bless soul Theuet f f a Thevet new-found-world c. 5. affirm that the canary be so call of the cane and reed that grow there that they worship the sun moon and planet of these island Thomas Nichols g g tho. Nichols a Englishman have compose a treatise extant in Mr hakluyt voyage tom. 2. part. 2. he say they dwell in cave suppose to descend of such as the roman in Africa have exile and out their tongue out for blasphemy against thiir god the pike or high hill of tenarife be after thevet measure four and fifty mile tho. byam h h tho. byam some say it may be see a hundred and fifty Descrip. cah. Caluet sanuto add that it cast fire and be in the ascent 60. mile a friend of i tell i that he have see it eight and forty league into the sea in clear weather one of our nation have write a tractate of his observation of these island here before the conquest be seven king which with their people dwell in cave their burial be to be set upon their foot naked in a cave prop against the wall and if he be a man of authority he have a staff in his hand and a vessel of milk stand by he I have see say Nichols three hundred of these corpse together the flesh dry up the body light as parchment I myself see two of those body in London canaria Tenerife and Palma have one bishop who have twelve thousand ducat revenue which place be not long since possess by Melchior i i m. Canus Loc theol. l 12. Canus a great writer in defence of the fall Babylon they pay to that king fifty thousand ducat Hierro or the island of iron be by a multitude of author k k benzo sanuto Ouiedo etc. affirm to have it in no fresh water but what fall from the leaf of a certain tree which be always green and cover with cloud and underneath the same be a cistern to receive the water for the use both of man and beast throughout that island a whole wood of such tree we mention in saint Thomas island which yield from their drop leaf rille of water down all side of the hill where they grow in this island here be but one and that very ancient differ in this if we believe Sanutus from those of st Thomas they always this only afternoon be cover with that cloud which continue till two hour before day and then the body bough and leaf of the tree sweat out that liquor till two hour after sunrising it be in 27. degree Lewis jackson say that he see this tree be in this island 1618. that it be as big as a oak the bark like hard beam six or seven yard high with ragged bough with the leaf like that of the bay-tree white on the bottom green on the other side it bear nor flower nor fruit situate in the declivity of a hill wither in the day drop in the night a cloud hang thereon yield water sufficient for the whole island which he say if report deceive he not sir Edward Skory hear of many few 8000 soul and above 100000 beast it fall into a pond make of brick floor thick with stone by pipe of lead convey from the tree thither and thence divide into divers pond through the island fetch up hill by barrel the pond hold 20000 ton and be fill in a night thus he relate to i Hierro and Gomera and Lancarato be in the hand of private man madera stand in two and thirty degree it be the great of all the atlantike iles. * * a Galuano see sanuto of these and many other iles. it be discover by one Matham a english man who arrive there by tempest anno. 1344 together with a woman who he there bury and on her tomb do write his come and the cause thereof with his and her name and be occasion to the king of Spain to discover that and the canary it be call madera of the wilderness of tree there grow here be a city call Fouchal the i will contain in compass a hundred and forty mile the wood a a a. cadamosto which give name to the island be fire and burn so furious that the people for a time be force to go some space into the sea from the violent heat which cause such fatness to the soil that at first it yield threescore fold since half so much the excellent wine be of vine first bring from Candie they bring forth more grape say he than leave and cluster of two three and four b b span long at first the pigeon suffer themselves to be take not know and therefore not fear a man forty mile from the i will of madera c c Sanut l. 3. be the i will of puerto or Porto santo call of all saint day in which it be first discover 1428. it be take by sir Amias d d sir am. Preston Hak. Preston 1596. here be such store of coney breed of one she-cony bring hither great with young that the islander be out of hope almost to withstand and amend their damage by they sustain a little island near to this breed nothing else and now we can accompany our Portugal no further but before I leave these island I think fit to feast you with some observation of a eyewitness elegant spectator and learned gentleman sir Edmund Scory @. 3 extract take out of the observation of the right worshipful sir Edmund Scory knight of the pike of Tenariffe and other rarity which he observe there TEneriffe be the pleasant of the canary island this island have be call nivaria by reason of the snow which like a collar environ the neck of the pike of teyda the name of Tenariffe be impose by the inhabitant of the palm island for Tener in the palmesian language signify snow and a Hill it be situate in the Atlantic ocean fourscore league from the coast of Africa it be in form triangular extend itself into three cape and stand within eight and twenty degree of the equinoctial the great mountain of teyda common call the pike of Tenariffe be a mountain which beget I know not whether a great attention when you come to it or when you behold from a far off but in both very great the base of it begin at the port-town of garachico journey up though pike and description thereof from whence it be two day journey and a half to the top of it the point of which though it seem as sharp as a sugarloaf which figure of all other it do most resemble yet be there a flat of a acre in breadth on the top of it and in the midst of that flat a gulf out of which great stone be with like noise fire and smoke many time cast forth a Vulcan seven league off this way may be travel upon ass or mule the rest on foot and with great difficulty all the country lie about the ascent of the hill for ten mile upward be overgrow or rather adorn with the goodly tree in the world of diverse sort goodly country by reason of the multitude of spring which intermingle one with another and with the addition of the violent winter rain descend in huge torrent down into the sea a cold ascent and hot top and bottom in the midst of this hill be the cold intolerable in the top the heat and so likewise in the bottom through all the cold region you must cast your journey to travel on the south side and in the day time through all the hot region which be within two league of the top on the north side and in the night time every man carry his own portion of victual and borrachoc of wine your time of approach to the top must be about midsummer for the avoid of the torrent cause by the snow and about two of the clock in the morning and so you may abide there until sunrising but no long the sun be exalt above the horizon of the ocean seem far less than when you be on the low ground and seem to whirl itself about in manner of a gyre rarity of the sun hot breath the stream that come out of the east a little before his rise can be compare to nothing more proper then to the breath of a hot oven and so come on his course through a unclouded heaven be of a pure blue crystalline colour without the least spot in it when you be on the top of this hill all the island lie subject like a plain and level plot of ground under you although there be in this island not so few as twenty thousand sharp deform and uneven rock cloud beneath they no wind not rain and all the edge of that plain ground seem to be lift or fringe with snow which indeed be nothing else but the white cloud which be many furlong below you near the top of this mountain it never reign neither be there ever any wind stir thereupon the same be report of the hill Olympus all the upper part of this mountain be afflict with barrenness want the generative benefit of the low and middle region of the air for no manner of tree bald and barren shrub or leaf beautify the head thereof but it rest disgrace with a unseemly baldness out of which towards the south side do the vein of Brimstone issue down into the neck thereof where the region of snow be among which the brimstone be intervene in diverse place in the summer time the fire fire do ofter break forth from out the hole in the top of this hill into which if you throw a great stone it sound as if a great weight have fall upon infinite store of hollow brass the spaniard merry call it the devil cauldron devil cauldron wherein the whole provision of hell be boil but the natural the guanche themselves do say that it be hell and that the soul of their wicked ancestor go thither to be torment conceit of Hell and that those who be good and valiant man go down into the pleasant valley where the great city di laguna laguna now stand then which and the town adjoin to it there be not in any place of the world a more delicater temperature of air nor a goodly object for the eye to make a royal landscape of as to stand in the centre of this plain and to behold how nature have delineate all earthly beauty in the great on the north side of the island be many fresh water with fall down from the top of exceed high mountain refresh the plain and city di laguna and be afterward by the greatness of their torrent carry into the ocean the island be part in the midst with a ridge of mountain like the roof of a church have in the midst of it like a steeple the pike of teyda rock if you divide the island into twelve part ten of they be take up in impassable rocky hill in wood and in vineyard and yet in this small remainder of arable ground there be gather as I see upon their account in the year of our lord 1582. 200. and 5000. hannack of wheat fertility beside infinite store of rye and barley one of our english quarter make four and a half of their hannack the soil be delicate temperate and will produce all the most excellent thing the earth bear if the spaniard will seek and labour they the vineyard vineyard of account be in buena Vista in dante in Oratana in tigueste and in the Ramble which place yield the most excellent wine of all other there be two sort of wine wine in this island Vidonia and Muluesia Vidonia be draw out of a long grape and yield a dull wine the Maluesia out of a great round grape and this be the only wine which pass all the sea of the world over and both the pole without sour or decay whereas all other wine turn to vinegar or freeze into ice as they approach the southern or northern Pole there be no where to be find fair or better melon pomegranate pomecitron fig fruit orange lemon almond and date honey and consequent wax and silk though not in great quantity yet excellent good and if they will plant there store of mulberry tree the ground will in goodness and for quantity equal if not exceed either Florence or Naples in that commodity the north side of this island abound aswell with wood as with water there grow the cedar cypress and bay tree the wild olive mastic and sauine Tree goodly procerous palm and pine-tree which shoot up into a beautiful straight talnese in the passage betwixt Oratana and Garachiro you ride through a whole forest of they the strong savour of which perfume all the air thereabouts of these there be such abundance all the island over that all their wine vessel and wooden utensil be make of they there be of these pine-tree two sort the strait pine and the other grow after the manner of our spread oak in England which will the inhabitant call the immortal tree immortal tree for that it rot neither above nor below the ground nor in the water it be near as red as Brasill and as hard but nothing so unctuous as the other kind of Pine of these they have such great one that the spaniard do faithful report that the wood of one pinetree alone cover the church of Remedios in the city of laguna which be 80. foot in length and 48. foot in breadth and that one other pinetree cover the church of s. benito in the same city which be 100 foot in length and 35. in breadth the noble and strange tree of all the island be the tree call Draco his body rise into a exceed height and greatness Draco tree the bark be like the scale of a dragon and from thence I suppose it have his name on the very top of the tree do all his arm cling and interfold together by two and by two like the mandragora they they be fashion even like the arm of a man round and smooth and as out of their finger end grow the leaf about two foot in length in fashion like to our green wild water segg this tree have not wood within its bark but only a light spongiou pith and they common make bee-hive of the body of they towards the full of the moon it sweat forth a clean vermilion gummme which they call sangre de Draco more excellent and astringe by far then that which we have from goa and from other part of the east indies by reason the jew be the only druggist of those part and to make money they falsify and multiply it with other trash four pound weight for one the first that be know to inhabit this island be call guanche but how they come thither it be hard to know because they be and be people mere barbarous and void of letter ancient inhabitant the language of the old guanche which remain to this day among they in this island in their town of Candelaria allude much to that of the moor in Barbary when Betanchor the first christian discoverer of these part come thither he find they to be no other than mere gentile ignorant of God notwithstanding I do not find that they have any manner of commerce with the devil a thing not usual among the indian gentile their religion they hold there be a power which they call by diverse name as Achuhurahan Achuhucanar Achguayaxerax signify the great the high and the maintainer of all if they want rain or have too much or any thing go ill with they they bring their sheep and their goat into a certain place and sever the young one from the dam and with this bleat on both side they think the wrath of the supreme power be appease and that he will provide they of what they want they have some notion of the immortality and punishment of soul for they think there be a hell and that it be in the pike of teyda and they call hell Echeyde and the devil Guayotta in civil affair they be somewhat regular as in acknowledge a king and confess vassalage in contract matrimony reject of bastard succession of king make of law and subject themselves to they when any child be bear they call unto they a certain woman baptism and she do with certain word pour water upon the child head and ever after this woman be assume into the number of that kindred and with she it be not lawful ever after for any of that race to marry or use copulation the exercise which the young man use be leap or run shoot the dart cast of the stone and dance in which to this hour they do both exceed glory and delight and so full of natural virtue and honest simplicity be these barbarian that it be a inviolable law among they that if their soldier do in any place public or private offer any licentious or injurious behaviour to a woman he be assure put to death the people of this country be of a goodly stature well form and of a good complexion there be among they giant giant of a incredible greatness the skull of one of they be remain in which there be eighty tooth and his body which be find bury in the sepulchre of the king of guymur of which race he be measure fifteen foot the people that dwell on the southside of the island be of the colour of a olive but those that dwell on the north-side be fair especial their woman have bright and smooth hair their common apparel apparel be a certain garment make of lamb skin like a short coat without pleat or colour or sleeve fasten together with strap of the same leather the ordinary garment for man and woman of the common sort be call Tomarco only the woman for modesty sake have another cover under their Tomarco which be a side coat down to the knee make of skin which reach down to the ground for they hold it a unseemly thing in a woman to have her breast or her foot uncover in this garment they live and in this they die and in this they be common bury for their diet diet they sow barley and bean wheat be utter unknown to they they toast their barley by the fire then do grind it in certain hand mill such as be now in Spain the flower so make they call Giffio wet it with water milk or butter it serve instead of bread also and be their great and most general sustenance they eat the flesh of sheep of goat and pork but not common for they have certain assembly like our festival Wake-day in England at which time the king in person with his own hand do give to every twenty of they three goat and a proportion of their Giffio after which feast every company come before the king show their agility in leap run wrestle dart dance and other sport they have a certain kind of honey out of a fruit call Mozan of the greatness and bigness of a pease before they be ripe they be very green when they begin to ripe they be red and when they be ripe be black nothing unlike our blackberry mozan their physic save in their taste which be exceed pleasant they eat no more but the juice of they which they call Yoya and the honey which they make of they they call they gather these mozan very ripe and do put they into the sun for a week than they break they in piece and put they into water to be boil until they come to a syrup and this be their physic for the flux and the grieving in the back and for both these disease they do also let blood in the arm head and forehead with a flintstone at their time of sow the king have appoint to every man his portion of ground that be to be sow seed how swoon they dig up the earth with goat horn and with certain word throw their seed into the ground all other work appertain unto and be perform by their woman the king do make his habitation in natural cave or hollow rock of which there be infinite store remain to this day when there be any feast make in any kingdom their feast feast have the privilege that man may with immunity pass to and fro through the enemy country yea and many time the enemy will feast one with another in their marriage marriage the man use to ask the consent of the widow or maid parent if there be any which be grant they be marry with little or no ceremony that I can learn and the marriage be not so soon make but it may be as quick break for if the husband or wife be dispose to be separate they may be so and both of they marry again with other at their pleasure notwithstanding all the child of the separate beget afterward be esteem as bastard the king only for succession sake exempt from this custom and to who for that respect it be lawful to marry with his own sister for many year this island be subject to one only king who they call adexe who be grow old his son which be nine in number conspire against he part the island into nine several kingdom all their war be to steal cattle one from another and especial the spot goat which among they be in great and religious estimation the government there be very little difference betwixt the body colour and smoothness of our english fallow deer and their goat the ancient guanche of this island have a appoint officer or embalmer answerable to the sex man or woman who wash the dead corpse do put into its body certain confection make of goat butter melt the powder of furze and of a kind of ruff stone the rind of pine-tree and other herb and do stuff the body with this every day for 15. day together put the body against the sun now on the one side now on the other funeral until it be stiff and dry all this space their friend bewail their death at the end of 15. day they wrap their body in goat skin so cunning sow together that it be marvelous and so they carry the body to a deep cave where none may have access there be of these body remain yet which have be bury these 1000 year the near port town to the city call cidade de laguna be Santa cruz sancta Cruz. from thence you ascend up the steep mountain to the city which you shall find to be most miraculous seat in the midst of a flat of ten mile in compass as if nature have prepare that place for man to build a city upon and be wall about with hill of wonderful height on all side save to the northwest from whence there be a level tract of land even to the seaside which be seven league distant there do continual arise from the sea a vapour which be circulate among so many and intricate mountain grow to be a wind and take his passage through those channel of mountain to the city to its great refresh refresh wind and in this great plain like envy for want of opposition die and let the wind blow full southeast at sea yet shall you always have the wind full northwest at the city like a true friend when you must need he from twelve a clock in the day until night the extreme dew which fall do sufficient cool the night their building be all of a open rough stone nothing fair they be very plain in their building two or three story high and no more and common but one story high in the remote part of the city it be not wall they have no chimney no not so much as in their kitchen they make only a flat hearth against a wall and there they toast their meat rather than roast it the decency of their street in commendable for when you be in the centre of the city your eye reach almost to the extreme part thereof they have no want of water the city have its name from a great stand lake at the west end of it upon which there be common diverse sort of fresh water-fowl the haggard falcon do every evening fly upon this lake and the negro with sling beat they which be the noble sport of that kind in the world for the stoop be many and at one time sport with hawk and the hawk the strong and best mettal of all other of a great kind than the Barbary falcon the viceroy be one evening to see this natural sport and he demand of i what I think thereof and I just commend the strength and mettle of the hawk assure i upon his honour that a falcon breed in that island which he have former send to the duke of Lermo do at one flight except she rest upon ship by the way pass from Andaluzia to Tenariff which be 250. spanish league and be there take up half dead with the duke varvel on and the time from her go out to her be take up strange flight of a hawk etc exceed not sixteen hour etc. but I dare not dwell any long with this industrious gentleman in these canary and have need borrow the wing of one of these hawk to make a swift flight to some other african island where next you shall find we within the mediterranean @. 4 of Malta and the navigation about Africa within the strait be no great island belong to Africa pennon or the rock against velles de Gumera the i will of Gerbi and some other Malta be the most famous where in old time be the temple of juno spoil by a a cic. in ver. 6. verres suppose to be that melita b b melita so call of the store of honey where Paul suffer c c act 28 1. shipwreck although there be another melita in the adriatic sea near to Dalmatia Polybius d d Polybius call it Melytusa as Volaterranus e e Volaterran write Ptolemy and Cicero name melita now call Malta in this i will of Malta this Malta be distant from Sicilia 60. mile from Africa 190. it have be sometime subject to the carthaginian as may appear by diverse monument with inscription of carthaginian letter and the islander it our author f f Malta say true can understand that scene in Plautus before mention eloi Effetcha word use in scripture be likewise use in the Maltese their manner of life be sicilian but we may not dwell here some g g ortel in Thesaur ascribe Paul shipwreck to melita in the adriatic near to Dalmatia who Beza h h Beza Annot. aret. in learned confute and prove it to be that Malta which now the knight hold against the Turk who valour and success in resist that mighty turkish adversary i i Curio bellum Melitense Viperanus Knols p. 796 Curio and io. Antonius Viperanus in their book of that argument Knolles in his turkish history ri. Carre and other relate at large it be an. 1565. that which deceive those man in Malta be the name of the adriatic sea which now be give to the gulf of Venice but then as Beza and Aretius show out of Strabo l. 3. be give to the ionian sea also and further southwards where Malipiero a stand and Ortelius out or k k ovid. fast 4. adria so Statius to metius go from the Tirrhene to Egypt Quostibi curren^ adriamore Ovid and other prove the same as do also that epitome of all learning io. Scaliger that learned gentleman m. Sandys in the four book of his journal have large relate of this island it contain after his description sixty mile in circuit a country altogether champain be no other than a rock cover over with earth but two foot where deep have few tree but such as bear fruit whereof all sort plentiful so that their wood they have from Sicilia yet there be a great thistle which together with cowdung serve the country people for fuel the less needful by the immoderate heat there exceed far any other seat in the same parallel yet sometime temper by the wind to which it lie open river here be none but sundry fountain the soil produce no grain but barley bread make of it and olive be the villager ordinary diet and with the straw they sustain their cattle cuminseed aniseed and honey they have here in abundance and a indifferent quantity of the best cotton wool the inhabitant die more by age then disease and heretofore be repute fortunate for their excellency in art and curious weave this island be give by Charles the five to the knight hospitaler after their loss of Rhodes who first seat be the hospital of s. John in jerusalem build by one Gerard at such time as the holy land become famous by the successful expedition of the christian who rite be record by many author but by we to be reserve for another task there be sixty village in the island under the command of ten captain and four city old Malta suppose the work of the phoenician be seat on a hill in the mid of the island keep with a garrison though of small importance in it be a grot of great veneration because they suppose that Paul lie there after his shipwreck the other three city if they may so be term be about eight mile distant and not much without a musket shoot each of other near the east end and on the north side of the island where there be a double haven divide by a tongue of a rock on the top of this tongue stand the castle of s. Hermes after 20000. shot and the loss of 10000 life take by the turk but so can they not that of s. Angelo which only and burgo escape their fury in that their siege after their departure when the knight have think to have abandon the island by the help of the pope Florentine and especial the Spaniard they be furnish with provision for new fortification and add a new strong City call Valetta in honour of he that then be their great master John de Valetta the great master palace be a princely structure the market place spacious the church of s. Paul magnificent as that also of s. John the house uniform of free stone two story flat roof s. john hospital give entertainment to all that fall sick the attendant many the bed overspread with fair canopy every fortnight have change of linen serve by the junior knight in silver and every Friday by the great master accompany with the great cross a service whereto they be oblige as their name of hospitular knight also import it be victual for three year supply from Sicilia the island have not of live soul above 20000. their expedition be usual but for booty the people almost as tawny as moor the heat make they sleep at noon these votary have store of courtesan for the most part greek which sit play in their door on instrument by their eye bewitch unstable soul their vow rather prohibit if the practice interpret marriage than incontinency their market be on sunday the knight come hither exceed young the soon to attain Commendam at home which go by seniority there be resident about five hundred and as many abroad to repair upon summons sixteen of they be counsellor of state call great cross there be seven Albergs or seminary one of which be of England till in the general deluge under Henry the eight saint john without Smithfield sometime the mansion of the grand prior of England be hook into that crooked stream though still that title continue a irish man now enjoy it every nation feed by themselves in their several Alberges and sit at table like friar but how do I preoccupate my christian relation and fall into a lethargy have opportunity of such a hospital and such hospitulars now a word of the ancient navigation about Africa Hanno his voyage set forth by the carthaginian seem fabulous but ramusius show every place by he mention to agree with the late discovery of the portugal and think guide by a Portugal pilot skilful of those sea which skan this navigation of Hanno that he go as far as saint Thome long before this Homer report of Menelaus compass the ethiopian from Egypt which some interpret of sail by the cape of good hope as the portugal of this mind Strabo cite Aristonichus of Solomon and jehoshaphat be say before Herodotus affirm the phoenician sail in the red sea in Cambyses time but this be usual and yearly as Pliny show lib. 6. cap. 23. the same Pliny allege out of Cornelius nepos the sail of eudoxus out of the red sea round about Africa to Cales which Strabo relate otherwise and refute the like may be show in some other instance of which read master hakluyt his epistle dedicatory tom. 1. ramusius part. 1. pag. 111. and Galuanus in his discovery of the World which I mention not to disparage or weaken the portugal praise but to give antiquity their due which I think a a see Panciroll to 2. c. 1. and Salmath Causaub Athen l. 3. 7. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) can not ordinary if at all compass so long a navigation for want of the compass yet we shall injury our author if we shall not believe somewhat although not so much as they report and this agree with the greek proverb of hanno discovery and jubas history that he which find sweetness in the one may swallow the other and as well entertain bavius as Mavius the periplus of the one and Libyc history of the other not obtain full credit nor whole meet to be reject and thus much of this african part of the world the region and religion thereof the one most subject to the burn beam of the heavenly sun the other least enlighten by the comfortable warmth of the sun of righteousness black in body but more darken and deform spiritual as have only some part of Habassia entire possess with christian beside what in congo have of late year be effect by the portugal and that little which be subject to they and Spain all the rest be pagan or mahometan and will God this be the case of Africa alone see that if we divide the know region of the world into thirty equal part it be master brerewood b b brerewood enquiry c. 14. computation the christian part understand it in all sect and profession bear that name be as five the mahometans as six and the idolater as nineteen beside that huge heathenous tract of the unknown south continent which by probable reason be by he conjecture to be no less than Europe Africa and Asia together so far be it from truth which one c c doctor hils reason 5. of our countryman have lusty brag on behalf of his romish mother that the catholic roman religion have have and have yet a far great sway in the world than any other religion ever have or have whereas this our Africa have more mahometans d d cairo fesy Morocco in two or three city than romish catholic perhaps in her whole compass and for Asia how pitiful do he tumble together some name of a few town or little island it seem unknown to himself as monument of romish conquest what their american conversion e e lib. 9 c. ult. be be touch elsewhere yea even in our Europe where this mystical Babylon be situate the mother of the whoredom and abomination of the earth the number of protestant f f see the preface to brerewood book be not much inferior unto they but his reason have be already prove unreasonable by he who pen then and prelacy since we with all duty acknowledge a pillar to the truth and ornament to our church and State for my part I be sorry his assertion be no true as one see (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) between catholic and roman a great gulf Luke 16.36 not easy without many proviso passable but between heathen and heaven a bottomless depth the way impassable and life impossible let we pray to he which be the way the truth the Life to make and be the way by revelation of his truth unto everlasting life to these poor african that as they be almost whole in all profession christian jewish moorish ethnic circumcise in the flesh so they may receive that circumcision of the spirit not make with hand which may cut away this superfluity of superstition wherein they seem more devout than any part of the world and make they with meekness to receive that word which be graft in they be able to save their soul amen lord jesus relation of the discovery region and religion of the new world of new france UIRGINIA FLORIDA new Spain with other region of America MEXICANA and of their religion the eight book chap. i. of the new world and why it be name America and the west indies with certain general discourse of the heaven air water and earth in those part @. i. of the name give to this part of the world and diverse opinion of the ancient concern the torrid zone now be we ship for the new world and the new discovery but see this inky sea through which I under-take a pilot office to conduct my Reader be more peaceable than that which on the backside of this american world be call the * * mare pacificum and deal Sur. ortel theat peaceable by Magellane the first discoverer it yield vs the fit opportunity to contemplation and discourse in such philosophical subject as a a fest the best author have think worthy the first place in their history of these part yet before we pray into nature mystery the better to know our intend voyage let we inquire somewhat of the name b b joseph acosta Indoram salute and hist indiae lib 1 and 2. boter part. 1. lib 4. Gomara hist etc if any notice may thence arise of the place thereby know the new world be the fit name which can be give to this vast and huge tract just call new for the late discovery by Columbus an. dom. 1492. and world for the huge intention thereof as c c Hak. Tom 3. Epist. dedicat. ger. mer. master hakluyt have observe a new world it may be also call for that world of new and unknown creature which the old world never hear of and here only be produce the conceit whereof move mercator to think which I dare not think with he that the great deluge in the day of Noah drown not these part because man have not here inhabit who with a deluge of sin may procure that deluge of water America be a more common than fit name see americus vespucius the florentine from who this name be derive be not the first finder nor author of that discovery Columbus will challenge that and more just with b b mun Cosm. lib. 5. who and under who americus make his first voyage howsoever after that he coast a great part of the continent which Columbus have not see at the charge of the castilian and Portugal c c am. Vesp nau. maff. hist ind. lib. 2. king but so it may more right be term Cabotia or Sebastiana of Sebastian cabot a venetian which discover more of the continent than they both about the same time first employ by d d Hakl tom. 3. pag. 7. king Henry the seven of England and after by the catholic king Columbus yet as the first discoverer deserve the name both of the country for the first find and of modesty for not name it by himself seek rather effect than name of his exploit but leave we these italian the genuois Venetian and florentine to decide this question among themselves and why now be it call the west indies to this e e Acost. histor ind. lib. 1. c. 14. acosta exposition of the word indies that thereby we mean all those rich country which be far off and strange be too general a answer and give not the true cause of the name Gomara say that a certain pilot of who Columbus receive his first instruction take it to be India or else Columbus himself think by the west to find a near passage unto the east by reason of the earth roundness seek for Cipango or japan and cathay when he first discover the island of the new World and this opinion be probable f f pet. mart. dec. 1. lib 1. both because he name hispaniola Ophir whence Solomon fetch his gold and Sebastian cabot in the first voyage which he make at the charge of king Henry the seven intend as himself g g hakluyt sup. confess to find no other land but cathay and from thence to turn towards India and the opinion of Aristotle h h Arist. and Seneca that India be not far from Spain confirm they i i maginus say it be call India because it be discover at the same time that India be find by the portugal or else for the likeness of manner in the indian therein now that we may descend from the name to the nature of this new world a world it be to see how nature do deflect and swarm from those ground and principle which the naturalist k k ptol. Strabo Plutarch and some other mention the ethiopian beyond the tropic of cancer and Taprobana Agisimba etc. it seem that their meaning be it be very scarce inhabit of few and small nation experience have find no place more people and philosopher her forward scholar have set down for rule and axiom of nature work for if we regard the ancient poet philosopher and father we shall see they deceive and that not in few opinion which they seem to have learn in nature sanctuary and in most closet in the heaven they suppose a burn zone in the earth a plague plague with scorch heat zonae and l l virg. aras Scalig. georg. lib. 1. a great than Ovid etc. the sense whereof be that those part of the world next the Arctic or Antarctic pole be not habitable by reason of extreme cold nor the middle part by reason of unreasonable heat the two other part temperate and habitable the philosopher account this no poem or rather be more poetical themselves for that which those account a torrid and scorch earth these m m cicer. somn scipionis macrob. insom make to be a spacious and unpassable ocean where the star hot with their continual motion and the sun thirsty steed weary with their daily journey may find moisture to refresh and nourish their fiery constitution and therefore they divide the earth into two habitable island compass about and sever in the midst with a huge ocean on this side whereof we be situate and beyond the antipode some philosopher n n vid. plutar. Ph indeed hold otherwise but with great error as Leucippus Democritus Epicurus Anaximander which multiply world according to their fancy raw and uncertain be the conjecture of the o o Arist. 2. Meta. cap. 5. Plin l 2 c. 68 best yea those who we reverence as better than the best philosopher have no less error in this point the golden-mouthed p p chrysost hom 14. and 17. in Heb. theod. doctor have a leaden conceit that the heaven be not round who Theodoret be say to follow Theophilact q q Theophilact in cap. 8. Heb. allege Basil for this his assertion that heaven be neither movable nor round how firm and confident do firmianus f f lact. l. 3. c. 24. Lactantius both deny and deride the opinion that there be antipode but easy it be for he with a rhetorical flourish wherein I think of all latin father g g christianorum facundiss. lactant. Viues trad. dis. lib. 3. he deserve high prize and praise to dash this opinion out of countenance then to confute the argument and allegation which he there cite in the adversary name but he that surpass Lactantius no less in knowledge of truth than he be surpass by he in smoothness of style herein hold equpage and draw in the same yoke of error I mean he who venerable name no word be worthy and sufficient to usher in saint Augustine who though somewhere a a Aug to 1 he affirm the antipode yet elsewhere b b aug. de civit. l. 16. c. 11. press with a argument how man shall pass from these part in which Adam and Noah live to the antipode through the unmeasurable ocean he think it easy to deny that which certain experience at that time can not so easy prove although c c Viues in even then some report but obscure and uncertain have be spread abroad of sail about Africa as d d lib. 7. c. ult. a little before be show which must enforce that which Augustine deny more hot and forcible be the argument of our more zealous than learned countryman Boniface e e aventinus annal. Boi l. 3. archbishop of Mentz and of pope Zachary who pursue this opinion of the antipode so eager against Virgil bishop of the Iwanenses in Boiaria about the year 743. that upon Boniface his complaint the pope write to he to cast out this Virgil the philosopher so do that (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) call he out of the temple and church of God and to deprive he for this perverse doctrine that there be antipode of his bishopric and Virgil must pack to Rome to give account of this philosophy to the pope Minerva let the reader here judge between the philosophy of the one and the Fool-asse-o-phy of the other and let our catholic parasite tell we whether their not-erring father pronounce this sentence of error as a pope or as a private doctor but what do this doter in my way some f f accost and Sixt. senens Bibliot lib. 5. annot. 3. also allege Nazianzen Jerome and Procopius for this or the like opinion but poet philosopher father in other thing worthy our love for their delightful poem our admiration for their profound science our awful respect and reverence for their holy learning and learned holiness herein we bid you farewell our America subject to that suppose burn zone with cloud and army of witness in her well-peopled region can aver that the part betwixt the Tropic be both habitable and inhabit and for the Perioeci g g Perioeci be those which dwell in the same parallel but contrary Meridian anticthones which dwell in the opposite zone or plague of the world the Perioeci have summer and winter but not day and night alike the Antaeci have day and night alike but not the season of the year the antipode differ in both Antoeci anticthones and antipode the world roundness and other thing of like nature this America yield and be sufficient proof and the yearly compass the world which the spaniard and portugal divide betwixt they make more than evident and let those two english ship the only two of one nation which ever have sail and that with admirable success and fortune about the globe of the earth tell Lactantius ghost whether they drop into the cloud as he fear there to become new constellation which antiquity will easy have attribute to they the golden hind which traverse the world round and return a golden hind indeed with her belly full of gold and silver be yet at Debtford there rest after her long journey offer up herself to time her deed to eternity the cause of the temperature and habitableness of those part that which beguile the ancient be the nearness of the sun his direct beam and the swift motion of the heaven which they conjecture do chase away cold and moisture out of all those part and hardly can reason otherwise guess till experience h h that all the world be habitable see the discourse of George best in a preface to the northwest discovery of m. Frobisher and insert Hak. voyag to. 3. page 48. rain fall about and afternoon every day when the sun be over their head cause of temperature betwixt the Tropic Similitude show the contrary for never be it moist in those part between the Tropic then when the sun be near cause terrible storm and shower every day as if have drunken too much in his long and hot journey over the ocean he do there vomit it up again once the people of those part reckon it winter when the astronomer will call it summer because of this tedious weather which every day happen not but cool the air and earth with a marvelous temper and on the other side they call the time of the sun absence summer because of the perpetual clearness which continue those six month the sun then exhale no more vapour then his hot stomach can digest which with his direct beam be draw up surcharge he with abundance and in the middle region of the air by the then strong Antiperistasis be thicken into rain and attend with thunder and lightning proclaim daily defiance to the earth threaten harm but do good cool the same after the morning sun have heat it the shower then fall when the sun threaten his hot fury and violence these rain make the like inundation and overflow of river in America as before we have observe in Nilus Niger and Zaire in Africa which break their bound and drive the inhabitant sometime to dwell on tree grow sometime in their carcase frame into boat or canoe therein to retire themselves till the water be retire cause a cool and refresh to the earth which they cover and shield by their inundation from the sun angry arrow as in a alembic a strong fire cause abundance of vapour to be extract out of herb or other matter which be press and find no issue turn into water and if the fire be small it exhaust the vapour as fast as it raise they so the sun in his great strength exhale these plentiful vapour and distil they in shower which in less heat be of less quantity and more easy consume without the Tropic it be contrary for the summer be dry the winter moist the cause be the sun weakness not able to concoct and disperse the vapour by the moist earth then easy yield which in his great force in the summer season we see effect the like we see in green wood and dry on the fire it be no less worthy note that no part of the world have so many so great lake and river the vapour and exhalation whereof can but cool and moisten the neighbour element of the air and the earth again the equal length of the day and night perpetual share the time in equal portion cause a a Honterus that the heat be not so unequal as the ancient dream the great dew also in the night which be great they we will think and comparable for wet to pretty shower increase the freshness and coolness we may add hereunto the neighbourhood of so huge a ocean the propriety of the wind which in most place between the Tropic be set and certain no less than the sun and tide and bring with they much refresh further the situation of the land do further the cold not a little in those hot Region contrariwise near the pole the continuance of the sun and long day make it hot than in part near the sun as in Russia b b d. Fletcher description of Russia then in England yea the high ridge and top of some mountain in the burn zone be unsufferable for cold always have on they snow hail and freeze water the grass wither and the man and beast which do pass along that way for here be no convenient dwelling benumb with the extremity of cold when the mountain be subject to this degree of cold it can but temper the neighbour region with some coolness at least now to all these reason of the temperature under the line and between the Tropic some add the influence of some unknown constellation only let this be remember that the former hold not equal in all part of the torride zone see that nature have diversify herself in diverse place and by natural exception have bound and limit those general rule in some place under the line it rain not at all in other some those cool wind be want neither have every region lake Rivers or mountain to refresh they but of these particular we shall take better view in their peculiar place in the same space the wind be mostwhat easterly and without the Tropic westerly so that the mariner use not to go and return the same way but observe the general wind seek to make use thereof according the reason of this easterly wind under the zodiac c c acosta l. 3. c. 6. be ascribe to the motion of the heaven the first movable draw say acosta with his own motion the inferior orb yea even those elementary of the fire air and where it find no other obstacle of the water also as d d pet. martyr dec. 3. lib. 6. sir humf Gilbert Discou master George best some suppose but for the air whereof we now special speak the motion of the comet circular carry in the air where also their motion be diverse as be observe in the planet do sufficient prove without the Tropic from seven and twenty to seven and thirty degree the wind be say to be for the most part westerly move as some think by the repercussion of the air here prevail against that force of the heaven which master it within the Tropic even as we see water be encounter with more force return with a eddie in a manner back this of the easterly wind be to be understand of the sea for at land though wind be as before be say certain and set yet that which be the general wind of one country be not general to all yea in the same country they have a set wind in some place for the day and another quite contrary blow in the night e e Linschot lib. 1. also near unto the coast they be more subject to calm in this burn zone than further off in the sea the grosser vapour which arise out of the earth and the diverse situation thereof be the cause of these difference such be the force of this natural situation that in some place it be strange what effect it produce there be in Peru a high mountain call pariacaca whereupon joseph f f Ios. Natur. and moral history of the indies lib. 3. cap. 6. acosta say he ascend as well provide as he can be forewarn and overwhelm by man expert but in the ascent he and all the rest be surprise with so sudden pang of strain and cast and some also of scour that the Sea-sickness be not comparable hereunto he cast up meat phlegm choler and blood and think he shall have cast out his heart too some think to die therewith demand confession and some be say to have lose their life with this accident the best be it last but for a time neither leave any great harm behind and thus it fare in all the ridge of that mountain which run above a thousand and five hundred mile although not in all place alike in four different passage thereof he find the like difference and distemper but not so grievous as at pariacaca he ascribe it to the subtlety of the air in those high hill which he think be the high in the world the Alpes and Pirenees be in respect hereof as ordinary house compare to high tower it be desert the grass often burn and black for the space of five hundred league in length and five and twenty or thirty in breadth there be other desert in Peru call Punas where the air cut off man life without feeling a small breath not violent and yet deprive man sometime of their life or else of their foot and hand which fall off as a rot apple from a tree without any pain this seem to be do by the force of cold which in the northern and northeasterne part of Europe work like effect some a a this master George Barkley a merchant which live long in livonia tell i of his own sight be find dead sudden in those sled in which they come to market sit therein as if they be alive and some lose their joint by the like cause but this make up the strangeness of these mortal accident that this pierce cold air both kill and preserve the same body deprive it of life and yet free it from putrefaction a certain Dominike pass that way fortify himself against the cold wind by heap up the dead body which here he find and repose himself under this shelter by these dead help save his life the cause be putrefaction can be procreate where her parent heat and moisture be confine and have little or no force the sea which compass this western India beside the Magellane streit and the northern unknown for the knowledge whereof our countryman b b see c. 3. Frobisher davis Hudson and other have adventure their life and fortune and at last have give we more hope than ever of the discovery be the great and spacious ocean which on this side be call the north sea and on the other side of America be name the south sea the quality thereof will better appear when we come to speak of the island therein @. 3 of the nature of metal in general of gold silver quicksilver and the plenty and mine thereof in America concern the land of the new world acosta divide it into three part high low and mean which hold almost the same proportion that master Lambert c c Lambert peramb of Kent wealth without health health without wealth health and wealth observe of Kent the first have some wealth by reason of the haven and port therein and of the vine that grow there but be very unwholesome the hill be healthful but not fertile except in the silver bowel and golden entrails thereof the three be the most commodious habitation where the soil yield corn cattle and pasture and the air health the principal thing that have bring this western India into such request be the mine and metal therein the wisdom of God d d acosta l. 4. c. 2. Arist. eth. l. 5. have make metal for physic for defence for ornament and special for instrument in the work which God have impose upon man that in the sweat of his brow he shall eat his bread the industry of man have add another use of metal by weight or stamp convert it to money which the philosopher e e phil. de gen. mundi lib. 5. euseb Praep. Euang. l. 8. c 9 call the measure of all thing and a fit measure may it have be if the mind of man be not unmeasurable and unsatiable in measure his measure metal natural grow as some f f Apoc. 3.18 psal. 12.6 observe in land natural most barren nature recompense the want of other thing with these hide treasure and the god of nature enrich the indian with this substance otherwise barren of human and divine knowledge that may as a rich bride but wither and deform make she find many suitor for love of her portion and will God they which reap here these temporal thing will sow spiritual and give they g g bart. de las casas Hispan Urban calueto hier. Benzo lib. 3. cap. 21. gold try in the fire and that which be as silver try seven time I mean the word of God sincere preach without the dross of their own superstition and will they give they not iron for gold a iron age for a golden impose a heavy yoke of servitude h h aurea etc. ovid. First be a age of gold then golden goodness abound last be a age for gold and now gold only triumph abr. France Amintes which have consume world of people in this new-world and make the name of Christ and Christian to stink among they yea they abhor the sea itself for bring forth such monster as they think the spaniard who for their execrable wickedness they esteem not to come of human generation but of the froth of the sea and therefore call they Viracochie or sea-froth that which one say of religion I may apply to this american world she bring forth rich metal and the daughter have consume the mother her gold that shall have be a price in her hand to buy wisdom have to these importunate chapman sell her freedom it be i a golden and silver age indeed to the spaniard for the condition and state which hereby accru to they not for the condition and state of life which they observe in the year 1587. when acosta come to Peru eleven million be transport in the two fleet of Peru and Mexico almost one half thereof for the king in the time when polo be governor of Charcas in Peru from the mine of Potozi alone be draw and custom every day thirty thousand peso of silver every Pezo amount to 13. rial and a four part and yet it be think the one half be not custom or as Ouiedo h h Ouiedo lib. 6. cay. 8. reckon one four part more than a spanish ducat he write that 1535. three or four ship come to sivil lade with none other commodity but gold and silver miles Philip record that when he return out of the indies 1581. there be seven and thirty sail and in every of they one with another thirty pipe of silver beside great store of gold Cochinile sugar hide etc. and at this day say i i acosta l. 4 c. 7. give c de la Vega speak of 25. million of Pezos only out of Peru in one fleet and that Paulo de laguna precedent of the council of the indies affirm that all the king of Spain from Pelagius hitherto have not so much money as Philip the second alone and Peru bantraydo a Espanna 1602. 200. million of peso register and above a hundred not register lib. 1. cap. 7. part. 2. acosta the mine of Potozi yield the king a million of silver for his five yearly beside the wealth that grow by quicksilver and other prerogative in the year 1574. be enter threescore and sixteen million that which be wrought in the country be not enter beside privy conveyance how much differ Potozi from the mine Bebello in Spain one thousand and five hundred pace deep admire and that just by k k plin l. 23. c. 6. antiquity for yield three hundred pound weight of silver a day to Hannibal but with much more charge by reason of the intolerable pain in draw out the water which therein flow and in Potozi be want but what will not this unlovely love of money do hereby man encounter the vast ocean pass the far and most contrary climate drown Bootes and all his team bury himself in the bowel of the earth raise new heaven and seek his heaven where he can see heaven or light near the bottomless bottom of hell remove fountain and mountain reduce a new chaos in the confusion of element the earth entrails be tower in the air and sacrifice to his hot brother in fiery purgation the air file the dark hollow and hell which it can see the water force out of those possession wherein they challenge succession and inheritance after the decease and remove of the earth all fill with darkness to bring to light those metal which possess the possessor deprive they of the high light and brand they for the low darkness precious peril l l Pretiosa Boet. de Consol. speciosa cipr. where so many body be pine so many soul endanger so much good lose for good and man for price set himself at the worst and base price of all that he have how happy and golden be the outward state of these indian before they account gold any part of their happiness and find it the cause of their ruin of meal gold be esteem most precious as most endure both age and fire and least subject to rust according to those verse their gold m m acosta Ouiedo herrera etc. be find either in grain which they call pippin because they be like the pippin or seed of melon which be pure and have no need of melt or in powder which be find in river mix with the soil and sand for which Tagus Pactolus and Ganges have be famous or else in stone be a vein that grow and engender intermix itself with the stone those pippin or piece of pure gold find among the rock or hill be sometime very great Peter martyr n n pet. mart. dec. 1. lib. 10. tell of one that weigh three thousand three hundred and ten peso and be with much people and treasure drown in the ship call Boadilla be therewith surcharge in the return homeward a fit emblem for christian which when they will o o Abac. 2.6 lade themselves with this thick clay p p 1. tim. 6.3 drown the soul in perdition and destruction q q hist gen. ind. l. 6. c. 8. Ouiedo who a long time hold the office of proveditor for the mine say that he see two grain of gold one of which weigh seven pound and be in value 700. castilian or Pezos the other five pound and be worth five hundred and many other of one two or three hundred yet be not these grain so welcome to the miner as that in powder because this continue and therefore in fine contain more than the former he observe that gold have a far bright lustre in the natural virginity then when it have pass the fire and man industry and that coal be often find very fresh where they find gold which place he think be sometime the face of the earth and by time which conserve coal as well as gold under the earth without corruption cover through shower bring the earth from the high place whereby he suppose it come to pass that in a virgin-mine fifteen foot under the earth he once find two ring of the indian fashion he add that the gold in stone will run as small as a pin or thread and meet with a hollow place fill it and so guide the miner by thick and thin but always pliant and flexible like liquid wax till the first sight of our air breathe as from the covetous hard heart of man this natural hardness which it present to we the wild indian have the art of gild their work with such dexterity that they seem pure gold which mystery they perform with certain herb but will never teach it any european the indian a a ovid. l. 5. c. 3. in hispaniola observe a kind of religion in gather their gold as the arabian in their frankincense fast and for twenty day space come not at their wife otherwise think they shall find none Columbus imitate the like superstition will suffer none to seek this golden idol without those gild ceremony of confession and their sacrament before receive the great quantity be draw at the indies in the powder-gold the gold in stone be draw out of the mine or pit with great difficulty they refine powder gold in basin b b see hereof Ouiedo sup. wash it in many water until the sand fall from it and the gold as more heavy remain in the bottom they have other mean of refine it with quicksilver and strong water in the fleet 1585. the declaration of the firm land be twelve casson or chest which be so many hundred weight of gold beside one thousand fifty and six mare from new Spain which be for the king only not mention that which come for merchant and private man for the silver the second place be give to it among metal because next to gold it be the most durable and least endamage by the fire and in the sound and colour pass the Gold the mine thereof be common in mountain and rock seldom in plain and champain sometime they find find it c c Pliny say but not true that silver be never find pure straggle in piece not hold any continue vein sometime it be fix and spread itself in depth and length like to great branch and arm of tree strange it be that in some place the fire kindle with blow of bellows will not serve to refine the silver but they use furnace call Guayras set in such place where the wind continual blow thus in Peru the mine of Porco stoop to artificial fire which those Potozi scorn and contemn Potozi be a dry cold barren d d I have see some in all proportion resemble plant with leaf spread and divide and a stalk descend as if it promise a flower much like the Ribwort the like report mun cosmog l. 1. c. 9 and unpleasant soil if the rich mine do not more than supply all those defect and make it a plentiful both habitation and mart not fear the heaven disaster the cold air the frown earth the fell shower so long as the silver hook can be sufficient attractive for foreign store hence it be that they feel no want of store and yet have no store but of want the mine except which I know not how be both store and want according as man mind in a second refine can digest and dispose they they which work in the mine see no sun nor light by absence whereof they find both extreme cold and dreadful darkness and a air so unwholesome as make they no less sick than man toss at sea they e e see of these labour plin. l. 33. c. 6. and more in acosta l. 4. break the metal with hammer and split it by force and then carry it up on their shoulder by ladder make of neat leather twist like piece of wood which be cross with staff of wood at the end of one ladder begin another with seat of wood between to rest they they mount three and three he that go before carry a candle tie to his thumb they have their metal tie in a cloth like a scrip each man bear about fifty fifty pound weight and that common above a hundred and fifty f f a stade be the height of a man Stades in height the most usual manner of refine in these time be by quicksilver and therefore there be not now above two thousand Guayras in Potozi which have be in time past six thousand a pleasant sight to such who darken conceit make their heaven upon earth to see such a resemblance of the starry heaven in the night disperse such a manifold light the silver swim on the top the other metal under and the dross in the bottom the quicksilver g g acosta l. 4. c. 10. be admire for his natural property that be a metal it be liquid not by art as other metal or by expense in which respect the other may no less be call quicksilver but by it own nature and be a liquor be more heavy than those which have a natural subsistence this subsist and sink to the bottom when the other swim above it God only challenge pre-eminence if Pliny h h plin. sup. be believe nothing in this admirable liquor be more to be admire than the natural love and sympathy which it have to gold as appear in such as for the french disease use ointment of this composition i i Lemnius occult be lib. 3. cap. ult. if they wear a gold-ring in their mouth it attract this quick and willing metal to it from the vein and inward part into which it have secret and dangerous convey itself the ring pluck out of the mouth be of a silver complexion which mutual copulation nothing but fire can divorce or restore the same to the former colour in their gild of curious work it have be observe that the workman which use quicksilver to that purpose to prevent the secret and venomous exhalation thereof have swallow a double ducat of gold roll up which draw that fume of this liquor which enter in at the ear eye nose and mouth unto it in the stomach k k acosta say that if it meet with no solid body where it may congeal it ascend till the air by cool the fume cause it to fall in quicksilver and for this fume Lemnius tell that the goldsmith hang a cloth over the place where they gild which receive the fume of the quicksilver find that smoke in the cloth recover again his former nature in drop of that liquid metal say Pliny it be a venom to all thing and yet a great venom be in the mouth of man I mean not that l l rom. 3.13 psal. 140 3. poison of asp under the lip of many as the prophet speak in a spiritual sense but even in natural operation the spittle of man enuenome with a strong poison this poison of quicksilver and either kill it m m some think that quicksilver can quite be ki lead or at least deprive it of the motion and quickness and make it pliant to medicine and ointment yea some n n Lemmium occult nat. l. 2. c. 44. report that this spittle of man arise of secret vapour out of the body as infectious exhalation out of unwholesome lake especial when a man be fast kill scorpion and other venomous beast or at least do much hurt they quicksilver disdain other metal only it be thus ravish with gold and not a little affect to silver for the refine of which it be principal in use it corrupt force consume and fly the rest as much as may be and therefore they use to keep it in earthen vessel bladder skin quill and such unctuous receptacle it have pierce and eat through the body of man and have be find in their grave quicksilver be find in a kind of stone which do likewise yield vermillion at Amador de cabrera be such a stone or rock fourscore yard long forty broad interlace with quicksilver with many pit in it threescore Stades deep and be able to receive three hundred workman it be value worth a million of Gold from the mine of Guancavilca they draw yearly eight thousand quintal of quicksilver as for the manner of refine silver by quicksilver their engine and mill with the trial of their metal I refer the reader to o o accost l. 4. c. 12. 13. acosta Atabaliba marvel why the europaean have such chrystaline and pure glass will expose themselves to those danger by sea and land for those metal which he think not comparable to the same well indeed may he have wonder if that art have remain which p p vid. jan. Dous praecid Arbit l. 3. c. 9 Plin l. 36 c 26 isid b. 16 c 15. policrat l. 4 c. 5. Pancirol I know not how true Pliny Petronius Isidorus and other report to have be in Tiberius his time to who one present a fair glass which be cast on the ground be bow but not break and be take up by the same artificer be with his hammer bring to the former form and beauty his reward beside the wonder and astonishment of the beholder be that which precious thing often procure their owner for the emperor ask whether any other know this mystery this be deny he cause his head the only work house of this secret to be smote off lest gold and silver shall give place q q dio. hist l. 57 in relate this story give another reason of his death to art the emerald grow in stone like crystal and there be many of they in the indies but of these and other gem it will be too tedious to write Pedro ordonne a spanish priest have write of the profit which the spaniard reap of Peru and the indies he say that the king revenue thence accru to twelve million which arise out of ten spring his fifth of the gold and silver mynes great melt custom of port indian tribute sale of office the Cruzada tribute of rent quicksilver fine of court and the nine part of ecclesiastical rent of these rent and other thing worthy knowledge see himself in the seven book of the last part of our pilgrim let we now come to the man beast fowl and plant of this new world whereof we will here promise a general taste and hereafter give in the due place some other particular relation chap. 2 of the first knowledge habitation and discovery of the new world and the rare creature therein find beast bird tree herb and seed @. i. whether the ancient have any knowledge of America and whence the inhabitant first come see of the late people America my Pilgri l. 1. c 1. and 2. after these general discourse of the american some other of like nature I hold not unmeet to be handle before we come to the particular region and first of the man whether the ancient have any knowledge of they how man first come into these part and of the first discovery in the former Age concern the first knowledge of these part it may just be a question whether the ancient ever hear thereof for to say nothing of that opinion that the torrid zone be not habitable in the opinion of the most as we have show in the former chapter the allegation a a humf. Gilbert Discou Ortei theat in n Hak in epi deed ^^ 1. and io. 3 be not such as can force we to believe that whereto by great author they be allege Seneca prophecy be little to the purpose sen. Medea act. 2. Pancirol. and shall de invent new-world say he shall be in the last age discover and b b Thule be by mercator and other interpret island by Ortelius tile mark in Norway Thule shall not be any long the further of nation but all that chorus seem to a diligent reader to intend nothing else then to describe the usual affect and effect of ship and navigation agree to that argo-argument of the tragedy wherein jason in that famous Argo sail to Colcos have obtain Medea love which he unkind requite and have the poet intend these western discovery he will never have say Thule but Gades as Boterus c c Botero part. 1. lib. 4. observe for the american discovery have not be by the way of island and northward but southward and this appear by the verse before Pontus and Peruius Indus Araxem albin Persae Oceanus as for Plato d d Plato discourse hereof in his timaeus be english by r. Eden in the preamble of the decade vid. ram. praef vol. 3 atlantis and tertullian e e Tertul. de pal. and in Apologet. Aoost. l. 1. c. 22. plut. fancy in orb Aeon borrow of he acosta allege diverse Platonic Proclus Porphyry and Origen which interpret Plato after a mystical sense and prove by the word of Plato himself that they can be no true history the like allegation have Marsilius ficinus in his commentary upon Timaus and Cricias howsoever he allege crantor and some other which esteem it a bare history to which yet his thousand of year before the flood deny truth and credit although we interpret they of the year of the moon ficinus show both their allegorical and his anagogical interpretation but the discourse of Plato can agree if it be a history to America both because it place atlantis at the mouth or entry of the strait by Hercules pillar whence this be by a huge sea separate and that be not say still to continue land but by a earthquake to have sink and become sea that which be cite out of Aristotle his if any read the place may appear to be some near island and neither island nor continent of America neither can I credit that which f f Ouied. gen. hist l. 2. c. 3. Ouiedo suppose of the hesperides island cite out of Pliny Mela Solinus daub over with mortar borrow of fabulous Berosus and the poet as if in those first age of the world they have be spanish inheritance and none other than hispaniola or some other of the island or main land of this new world the history whereof may perhaps move Columbus to these discovery out of Plutarch and other history of the carthaginian phoenician and tyrthenian navigation they have conjecture but very uncertain and obscure and those thing which Diodorus report of that island agree nothing to the new-world which have not attain to that civility he there mention before the spaniard arrival and by his discourse it seem rather to be some of the island of Africa than America if the history be true neither can g g ortel in Chartar. 6. such long voyage so far off from any land be perform without the help of the compass which be first find thirteen hundred year after Christ by John Goia of Melfi according to that verse of Panormitan h h Antonius Panorm. i i Amalphis in lucania in the kingdom of Naples Amalphis Gomara k k f. gom. hist cap. 9 cite Blondus and Maffaeus Girardus witness of this melfian invention save that he call he not John as Ortelius do but Flavius di Malphi and in the tempest which happen among the ancient l l act 27.20 virg. Aeneid 1. Seneca sup. it seem that for want of this skill they wander very uncertatin but as the sun or star by return of their desire light after the tempest end direct they yet I will not say but that in former-time some ship may come sometime by casualty into those part m m of the suppose former discovery of the new world read ortel Theag 6. but rather force by weather then direct by skill and thus it be likely that some part of America have be people this I much doubt whether their science in navigation be such as that they will voluntary adventure and can happy effect this voyage to and from the west indies the most probable history in this kind be in my mind that of n n d. powel history of Cambria p. 127 a. d 1170. Madoc ap Owen guyne who by reason of civil contention leave his country of Wales seek adventure by sea and leave the coast of Ireland north come to a land unknown where he see many strange thing this by d. powel and master Humphrey lhuyd be think to be the continent of the new world confirm herein by the speech of Mutezuma profess his progenitor to be stranger and so be all the mexican to those part as the history in the eight chapter follow will show and by the use of certain welsh word which o o Dau. ingram Hak cadit. 1. to 3 Meredithan rise and Guiyn^ Owen make mention of (@) this Owen navigation See Hak. tom. 3. p. 1. David ingram observe in his travel through those part the history add that he leave certain of his people there and come home for more people return thither with ten sail howsoever it be certain that the print of british expedition be in manner wear out and no sign thereof be find by the spaniard only p p a. s. Andrews E^^n^enr cumana which Herera deny a cross ten foot long to which they pray in Acusamil for rain Gomar hist of Cortes part. 1. and hist part 2. c. 82. they use a cross in cumana in the island of Acuzamill the same be worship but without any memory of Christ or any thing savour that way and may as well be there without any christian erect as those cross which in the six book we have show be in the temple of serapis at Alexandria moreover some author deny that any such cross be there find and brand the report for a fiction as for Mutezuma be a stranger it may be so and yet his progenitor of some other part of America and the word of welsh be q q Three or four word very few which as it happen in any other language may by some chance come to pass but if any be desirous to believe that this Madoc people the continent or island of America rather than the tercera or some of the african island I will not hinder nor will I run too much out of compass in plead for the compass as which only can direct in such spacious sea yet of this opinion be that learned and judicious author josephus acosta who diligent discuss this question how man pass first to the indies large and learned contend that they come not thither purposely if they come by sea but by distress of weather and yet find no less difficulty that way in the transport beast especial wild and unprofitable beast which be not like any will take into the ship with they much less convey they over so huge a ocean at last he conclude that although some may arrive there by shipwreck and tempest of weather yet be it most likely that the first inhabitant descend of Adam and Noah of which one r r act 17.27 Ortelius in his map of Mare-Pacificum affirm that the people of America in likelihood be people from Europe by Groenland Island Friesland etc. blood God have make all mankind to dwell on all the face of the earth and have assign the bound of their habitation pass thither by some place where the continent of our world join with America or where the island thereof be find fit mediator for this passage be not far distant from the land and this on the north part of the world where they place that fabulous streight of Anian not yet certain discover may be so beside that on the south man may pass from the coast of malacca to java and so to the south continent and from thence by the Magellane streights into America Groneland be find to be the same continent with Estotiland on the north. some negro by force of tempest it be probable have pass hither because in Careca some have be find between saint Martha and cartagena of who John s s io. di Castellanos di Castellanos write Son ello negro comocuero etc. they be all say he as black as raven and of this mind be Botero t t Du Bartas colonies Morney Christ Relig. Botero sup. and those french worthy Du Bartas and Philip Morney it be not likely that the beast can otherwise pass but by the continent or by island not far off from the continent or from one another master Brerewood a man learned and judicious in his posthume work u u Gap 13. of language and religion affirm that America receive she first inhabitant from those part of Asia where the tartar first inhabit for those part of America being most replenish which respect Asia and there be no token of the art or industry of China India or Cataya in many thing also they seem to resemble those old tartar and their country be either not at all or least of all other sever from the north part of America he conclude as aforesaid a man may with like probable conjecture bring they from the samoy border northward from Russia and the laplander which by northern island whereof there be some daily discover may by pass from one to another seat themselves in greenland gronland Estotiland and other part near to or upon America for the inhabitant of the one be much like to the other and thus by many way God providence may dispose inhabitant to these part that we speak not of the south unknown continent which be suppose to extend itself to the line and from the island of Asia may easy receive and convey inhabitant hither as for genebrard derivation of the american from the ten tribe Genebr chron. l. 1. and 150 duret prove by the dream of esdras elsewhere allege with like truth for the tartar and some inscription out of Thenet they which will may believe here also arise another question how these beast can pass from the part of the know world where none such be know to which it may be answer that God have appoint to every creature his peculiar nature and a natural instinct to live in place most agree to his nature as even in our world every country have not all creature the elephant rhinoceros Riuer-horse crocodile camel camelopardalis and other be not ordinary and natural in Europe nor the Zebra in Asia or Europe and the like may be say of many other creature now as in the ark itself the cradle of man and stall of beast we must not only observe nature and art for the make and manage thereof but a high and more powerful hand even so in dispence the creature which come from thence they choose place by their own natural instinct and man dispose by his industry according as he have use of they but most of all the secret and mighty providence of God cowork in those work of nature and industry and in likelihood infuse some more special and extraordinary instinct in that replenish and refurnish of the world 10 10 act. 7.26 assign they their season and bound of habitation have thus diversify his work according to the diversity of place and sort out to each country their peculiar creature as for the come by ship it be for the beast improbable for the man by any great number or of any set purpose unlikely except as before be say see in all America they have no ship but their canoe the beast also have not be find in the island which be in the continent and if any hereunto will add a supposition that there may be some island or part of the continent in time past which be now swallow by the merciless ocean so that then there may be a way which now be bury in the wave as some y y sir Humphrey gilbert discovery of the north-west Plato own discovery tell that it be swallow by a earthquake suppose of Plato atlantis place at the mouth of the straits or Hercules pillar which yet they will have to be America and some of the z z r. verflegant antiquity sea betwixt Dover and Calais once one firm land as they do imagine I listen not to contradict they as for the * * F.G. histor part. 2. cap 13. i. mar. lib. 26. cap. 3. indian own report of their beginning which some ascribe to a fountain other to a lake other to a cave or what other opinion they conceive thereof we shall more fit observe in their proper place discourse of their religion and opinion now for he first certain discovery of this new world the world general ascribe it to Columbus and worthy but Columbus himself be say to have receive his instruction from another @. 2 of Christopher Colon or Columbus his first discovery and three other voyage this history be thus relate by Gomera and joannes Mariana a certain caravel sail in the ocean by a strong east wind long continue be carry to a land unknown which be not express in the map and card it be much long in return then in go and arrive have none leave alive but the pilot and three or four mariner the rest be dead of famine and other extremity of which also the remnant perish in few day leave to a a Columbus be bear at Cugureo or as some say at nerui in the territory of Genua he be a mariner from a child and trade into Syria and other part of the east after this he become a master in make sea-card he go to Portugal to learn their navigation on the coast of Africa and there marry gom. cap. 14. r Eden Columbus than the pilot host their paper and some ground of this discovery the time place country and name of the man be uncertain some esteem this pilot a andaluzian and that he trade at madera when this befall he some a Biscaine and that his traffic be in England and France and some a Portugal that trade at the mina some say he arrive in Portugal other at madera or at one of the Azores all agree that he die in the house of Christopher Columbus it be most likely at madera this relation as it have no witness to prove it the whole company be dead nor any good circumstance so Benzo and ramusius b b hier. Benzo lib. 1. cap. 5. ram. praef 3. vol. plain affirm it to be a fable and a spanish trick envy a Forrenner and italian that glory to be the first finder of the indies and the most sincere and judicious of the spaniard themselves esteem it but a tale as appear by the testimony of Gonzalo Fernando de Ouiedo in his summary and more full in his general c c lib. 2. cap. 1. history of the indies they show and so do he which then live in the court of Spain Peter martyr another cause that move Columbus to this discovery and not that pilot paper or d d Gaspar ens lib 1. cap. 2. conjecture that Columbus move with his own conjecture to this discovery be confirm further therein by this pilot which be say to die in his house report for he be a mariner use to the sea from his youth and sail from Cales to Portugal observe that at certain season of the year the wind use to blow from the west which continue in that manner a long time together and deem that they come from some coast beyond the sea he busy his mind so much herewith that he resolve to make some trial and proof thereof when he be now forty year old he propound his purpose to the senate of Genua undertake if they will lend he ship he will find a way by the west unto the island of spice but they reject it as a dream Columbus frustrate of his hope at Genua yet leave not his resolution but go to Portugal and communicate this matter with John the second king of Portugal but find no entertainment to his suit send his brother Bartholomew Columbus to king Henry the seven of England to solicit he in the matter while himself pass into Spain to implore the aid of the castilian herein Bartholomew g g Fernand columb in Christophori c 13. Hak tom. 3. and Navig c. col. in no. Orb. ouy lib 2. 4. unhappy light on pirate by the way which rob he and his company force he to sustain himself with make of sea-card and have get somewhat about he present a map of the world to king Henry with his brother offer of discovery which the king glad accept and send to call he into England but he have speed of his suit before in Spain and by the king and queen be employ according to his request for come h h Gomar c. 15. Herera say he first solicit the catholic king but receive a answer to his discontent he make offer to the duke from Lisbon to palos di moguer and there confer with Martin Alonso pinzon a expert pilot and friar io. Perez a good cosmographer he be counsel to acquaint with those his project the duke of Medina sidonia and of Medina caeli which yield he no credit the friar counsel he to go the court and write in his behalf to friar Fernand di Telavera the queen confessor Christopher Columbus come to the court of Castille 1486 and find cold welcome to his suit at the hand of the king and queen then busy with hot war in Granada whence they expel the moor and thus remain he in contempt as a man mean clothe without other patron than a poor friar save that alonso di Quintaniglia give he his diet who also at last procure he audience with the Archbishop of Toledo by who mediation he be bring before the king and queen who give he favourable countenance and promise to dispatch he when they have end the war of Granada which also they perform thus Columbus be set forth with three carvel at the king charge who because his treasure be then spend in the war borrow sixteen thousand ducat of jew de sanct Angelo and on Friday the three of August in the year of our lord 1492. in a vessel call the Gallega accompany with the pinta and ninna in which the pinzon brethren go as pilot with the number of a hundred and twenty person or thereabouts set sail for Gomera one of the canary island and have there refresh himself follow his discovery after many day he encounter with that Hearbie sea whereof before we have i i lib. 7. cap. ult. speak which not a little amate and amaze the spaniard and have cause their k k pet. mart. dec. 1. l. 1. return have not the sight of some bird promise he land not far off he also first teach the spaniard to observe the sun and pole in their navigation which till his voyage they have not use nor know but the spaniard after three and thirty day sail desperate of success mutine and threaten to cast Columbus into the sea l l a. Benzo lib. 1 cap. 6. disdain much that a stranger a genuois have so abuse they but he pacify their enrage courage with mild speech and gentle promise on the eleven day of October m m Gaspar ens lib. 1. cap. 2. one Rodorigo di triana espy and cry land land the best music that may be especial to Columbus who to satisfy the spaniard importunity have promise the day before that if no land appear in three day he will return n n Columbi-Nauigationes 1. 2 3 4. Ouied. l. 2. c. 5. one the night before have descry fire which kindle in he some hope of great reward at the king hand when he return into Spain but be herein frustrate he burn into such a flame as that it consume both humanity and christianity in he and in the agony of indignation make he leave his country and faith and revolt to the moor but thou Columbus how can I but remember but love but admire sweet may those bone rest sometime the pillar of that temple where so divine a spirit o o of his death see Ouied. l. 3. c. 9 reside which neither want of former example nor public discouragement of domestical and foreign state nor private insultation of proud spaniard nor length of time which usual devour the best resolution nor the unequal plain of huge unknown sea nor grassy field in Neptune lap nor importunate whisper murmur threaten of enrage companion can daunt o name p p his true name be Colon which corrupt be call Columbus Colon worthy to be name unto the world end which to the world end have conduct colony or may I call thou Colombo for thy dovelike simplicity and patience the true Colonna or pillar whereon our knowledge of this new world be found the true Christopher which with more than giantlike force and fortitude have carry Christ his name and religion through unknown sea to unknown land which we hope and pray that it may be more refine and reform then popish superstition and spanish pride will yet suffer now let the ancient no long mention Neptune or Minos or Erythras or Danaus to all which diverse author diverse ascribe the invention of navigation mysian trojan tyrian veil your bonnet strike your topsail to this Indian-admiral that deserve the topsail indeed by aspire to the top that sail can aim at in discover another world let spaniard french english and dutch resound thy name or his name rather q q prou. 30.4 who name who can tell that will acquaint thou and the world by thou with news of a new-world but lest we drown ourselves in this sea of ecstasy and admiration let we go on shore with Columbus in his new discover island and first i think I see the spaniard yesterday in mutiny now as far distract in contrary passion some gaze with greedy eye on the desire land some with tear of joy not able to see that which the joy of see make they not to see other embrace and almost adore Columbus who bring they to that sight some also with secret repine envy that glory to a stranger but bite in their bite envy and make show of glee and gladness all new awake out of a long trance into which that step-mother-ocean with danger doubt dread despair have deject they revive now by the sight of their mother-earth from who in unknown arm they have be so long wean and detain on shore they go and fell a tree make a cross thereof which there they erect and take possession of that new world in the name of the catholic king this be do on the eleven of October 1492. in the island Guanahani one of the Lucai which Columbo name San saluatore from whence he sail to Baracoa a haven on the north side of the i will Cuba where he go on land and ask of the inhabitant for Cipango so do Paulus call japan they understand he of Cibao where be the rich mine of hispaniola sign he that it be in haiti so be the island then call and some of they go with he thither what worldly joy be not mix with some disaster their admiral here split on a rock a a some think Columbus do run on ground of purpose that he may leave some behind but the man be save by the help of the other ship this fall out in the north part of hispaniola so name by they where they have sight of inhabitant which see these stranger run all away into the mountain one woman the spaniard get who they use kind and give her meat drink and clothes and so let she go she declare to her people the liberality of this new people easy persuade they to come in troop to the ship think the spaniard to be some divine nation send thither from heaven they have before take they for the caribe which be certain cannibal which use inhuman hunt for human game to take man for to eat they child likewise which they geld to have they more fat and then to devour they the woman they be not but use they for procreation and if they be old for other service the islander have no oath defence against they but the woody hill and swift heel to which they betake they at the spaniard arrival think they as be say to be cannibal and such have they since prove in b b bart. de las casas Hispan. effect not leave of three million of people which here they find 200. person and that long since the devil have forewarn they of this by c c history of China p. 312. h. Benzo l. 1. c. 8. oracle that a beard nation shall spoil their image and spill the blood of their child as we shall see in the particular tractate of hispaniola nothing more please the spaniard then the gold which the naked inhabitant exchange with they for bell glass point and other trifle Columbus obtain leave of Guacanarillus the cacike or king to build d d the fort of the nativity in hispaniola a fort in which he leave eight and thirty spaniard and take with he six indian return to Spain where he be high welcome of the king and queen some controversy fall out between Columbus and one of the pinzon master of one of the carvel about leave these man behind but Columbus send a letter to reduce he unto peace by the indian who hold the letter in almost religious regard think it have some spirit or deity by which they can understand one another be absent the pope e e Alexander a wicked pope Guicciard l. 1. and he of who daughter Lucretia Pontanus write that she be alexandri filia Sponsa nurus abuse by the incestuous lust of the father and his two son be author of the bull whereby the spaniard challenge the new world for they than a Spaniard Alexander the six hear of this divide the world by his bull betwixt the portugal and spaniard bear date the four of May 1493. draw a line a hundred league beyond the island of Azores and Capt verde this Alexander give more than great Alexander can conquer the east to the one and west to the other the bull be become a unicorn and his two horn be now grow into one in the unite of those two state Columbus grace with the the title of admiral and enrich with the ten of the spanish gain in the indies be send a second f f sept. 25. 1493 time with his brother Bartholomeus who be make adelantado or deputy of hispaniola they have allow they for this expedition small and great seventeen sail and fifteen hundred man the first island he espy in his second navigation he call Desseada or desire because he have long to see land arrive in hispaniola he find the spaniard which he have leave there that they be now not leave nor any where to be find the indian have murder they and lay the blame on the spanish insolence he now build and people the town of Isabel which be their chief place of residence and government which be in the year a thousand four hundred ninety eight be remove to the city of San Dominico they build also the fort of s. Thomas but both in the one and the other the spaniard die of famine through the indian wilfulness who unwilling to have such neighbour will not plant their Maiz and jucca and so starve both themselves and their guest as for the pock the spaniard in this voyage get they of the indian woman and bring they into Spain as Ouiedo of his own knowledge a a Ouied. l. 2 c. 13 report of his own countryman and they after pay the indian b b Ramus in praefat. vol. 3 Ouied. l. 3. c. 6. in recompense with a disease as deadly and infectious to they which consume thousand and be never before know among they I mean the small pock the other be improper name of the french or of Naples see that in those war of Naples which the spaniard maintain against the french some carry this disease with they thither out of Spain and communicate the same both to the french and neapolitan have be usual and easy curable in the indies another disease also assault they of a little kind of flea call which will eat into and breed in the flesh and have make many lose their toe Columbus at this time discover Cuba and jamaica with the neighbour-ile return to hispaniola he find his brother and the spaniard in dissension and separation and punish the au hour of sedition return home in the year of our lord 1497. he make his three voyage and then touch on the continent discover Cubagua paria and cumana but Roldanus Ximenius raise a rebellion and accuse the columbi to the king effect that Bovadilla be send governor into hispaniola who send the two brethren bind as prisoner to Spain unworthy recompense of the worthy attempt of these worthy the king free they and employ Christopher in a four voyage 1502. in which Oxandus the governor forbid Columbus the first finder to land on hispaniola c c Gas ens lib. 1 cap. 5. he then discover Guanaxa Higuera fondura Veragua Uraba and learned news as some say of the south sea he stay at jamaica to repair his fleet where some of his man be sick and they which be sound in body be more than sick froward and tumultuous in behaviour and many leave he upon this occasion the islander also forsake he and bring in no victual herewith Columbus neither able to abide nor depart be drive to his shift no less admirable for subtlety than resolution d d l. 5. c 16 pag. 452. he tell the islander that if they do not bring he in provision the divine anger will consume they a sign whereof they shall see in the darken face of the moon within two day at that time he know the moon will be eclipse which the simple islander see with fear and grief humble themselves to he and offer themselves ready to all kind and dutiful office at last return into Spain he there die 1506. his body be bury at Seville in the temple of the carthusian this be the end if ever there can be end of Columbus pinzonus e e vinc. Pinzoni alb. Vesp seb. Cabota vid. Hak. tom. 3. one of Columbus his companion by his example invite make new discovery and vespucius and Cabota and many other every day make new search and plantation till the world at last be come to the knowledge of this new world almost whole the particular will more fit appear in our particular relation of each country @. 3 of the beast fowl and plant in America after this discourse of the man in those part let we take some general view of the other creature especial such as be more general disperse through the indies I have before note that America have very few of such creature as Europe yield until they be transport thither and therefore they have no indian name for they f f a rule to know what beast be here natural for to such they have name in their own language and what transport for these the indian call by their spanish name but those which the spaniard that bring they give unto they as horse kine and such like they have lion but not like in greatness fierceness nor colour to those of Africa they have bear in great abundance except on the north part they have store of deer boar fox and tiger which as in congo be more cruel to the natural then to the spaniard these beast be not find in the island but in the continent and yet now in those island kine be multiply and grow wild without other owner than such as first can kill they g g accost l. 1. c. 21 and l. 4. c. 34. the dog likewise march by troop and endamage the cattle worse than wolf their swine do multiply exceed but as a enemy to their sugar a great commodity in hispaniola where 1535. Ouiedo reckon almost thirty ingenious the number daily increase they be force to root out this root kind of beast this island have store the other about it with store of horse and mare which be sell very cheap for kine the bishop of Venezuola have sixteen thousand head of that kind of beast and more other possess thousand also and some kill they only for their hide of which be ship from hence for Spain 1587. 35444. and from new Spain 64350. as acosta relate the lion be gray and use to climb tree the indian hunt and kill they the bear and tiger be like those in other part but not so many ape and monkey they have of many kind and those admirable please in their apish trick and imitation seem to proceed from reason a soldier level at one of they to shoot he the silly beast die not unrevenged but hurl a stone as the other aim at he deprive the soldier of his eye and lose his own life they have monkey with long beard acosta a a lib. 4. c. 39 see car. clus exot and Ouied. hist and summar and sebast schroteri to 2. gens qu dr. tell of one monkey that will go to the tavern at his master send and carry the pot in one hand and money in the other will not by any mean depart with his money till he have his pot fill with wine and return home will pelt the boy with stone and yet have care to carry his wine home safe to his master neither touch it himself till some be give he nor suffer other they b b Vincent pinzon have a monstrous deform beast who forepart resemble a fox the hinder part a ape except the foot which be like a man beneath her belly she have a receptacle like a purse wherein she bestow her young until they can shift for themselves never come out of this natural nest but to suck sheep have much increase and by good husbandry in that plenty of pasture will be a great commodity but in the island the wild dog destroy they and therefore they that kill these dog be reward for it as they which kill wolf in Spain the dog c c p. mart. de Insulis which the indian have before be snout like fox they fat they to eat and keep they also for pleasure but they can not bark such dog we have show be in congo their stag and d d Ouied. summar 22. dear in the south part of America have no horn they have store of coney the Armadilla be a admirable creature of which there be diverse kind they resemble a e e cataphractus barded horse seem to be arm all over and that as if it be rather by artificial plate open and shut then natural scale it dig up the earth as coney and mole the hog of the indies have their navel upon the ridge of their back they go in herd together and assail man have sharp talon like razor and hunt their hunter up the top of tree whence they easy kill these enrage Sainos so they call they bite the tree for anger the dant resemble small kine and be defend by the hardness of their hide the Vicugne somewhat resemble a goat but be great they shear they and of their fleece make rug and cover and stuff in the stomach and belly of this beast be find the bezar-stone sometime one alone sometime two three or four the colour of which be black or gray or green or otherwise it be account sovereign against poison and venomous disease it be find in diverse sort of beast but all chew the cud and common feed upon the snow and rock the indian sheep they call lama it be a beast of great profit not only for food and raiment but also for carriage of burden they be big than sheep and less than calf they will bear a hundred and fifty pound weight in some place they call they Amydas and use they to great burden Hulderike schmidel f f hul. schmidel cap 44. a. d o 1548. affirm that he live in the part about the river of plate be hurt on his leg ride forty league upon one of they they will grow resty and will lie down with their burden no stripe nor death able to assuage their mood only good word and fair deal with gentle entreaty sometime diverse hour together can prevail of fowl they have many kind which we have as partridge turtle pigeon stock-dove quail falcon heron eagle and a world of parrot which in some place fly by flock as pigeon there be also ostrich hen they have before the spaniard arrive they have other kind peculiar the tomineio g g aug. carate hist Peru l. 1. be the least in quantity the great for admiration and wonder I have oftentimes doubt say acosta see they fly whether they be bee or butterfly but in truth they be bird Thenet h h and. Thevet cap. 41. lerius nau c. 11. and lerius call it gonambuch or gonanbuch they affirm that it yield nothing in sweetness of note to the nightingale and yet be not big than a beetle or drone-bee one will say but so can not any true say for even otherwise it be almost miraculous nature make this little shop her great store-house of wonder and astonishment and show i i her great greatness in the least instrument the provincial of the jesuit in brasil affirm as k k car. clus exot. lib. 5. clusius testify that the brasilian call it Ourissia which signify the sunbeam and that it be procreate of a fly and that he have see one partly a bird and partly a fly first colour black then ash-coloured than rose-coloured then red and last the head set against the sun to resemble all colour in most admire variety it fly so swift say l l Ouiedo summar cap. 48. Ouiedo that the wing can be see it have a nest proportionable I have see say he one of those bird together with her nest put into the scale wherein they use to weigh gold and both weigh but two Tomin that be four and twenty grain haply it be therefore call Tomineios as weigh one Tomin the feather be beautify with yellow green and other colour the mouth like the eye of a needle it live on m m Lopez de Gomara hist Mexicana of Conquest of the West Indies dew and the juice of herb but sit not on the rose the feather special of the neck and breast be in great request for those feather-picture or portraiture which the indian make cunning and artificial with these natural feather place the same in place and proportion beyond all admiration the indian bat shall not flee your light and be for their rarity worthy consideration but that we have speak before somewhat of they they have n n accost l. 4. c. 17. bird call condore of exceed greatness and force that will open a sheep and a whole calf and eat the same they have abundance of bird in beauty of their feather far surpass all in Europe wherewith the skilful indian will perfect represent in feather whatsoever they see draw with the pencil a figure of saint Francis make of feather be present to pope sixtus quintus who eye can not discern they to be natural colour but think they pencil-work till he make trial with with his finger the indian use they for the ornament of their king and temple some bird there be of rich commodity only by their dung in some island join to Peru the mountain be all white like snow which be nothing but heap of dung of certain sea-fowl which frequent those place it rise many else yea many lance in height and be fetch thence in boat to hearten the earth which hereby be exceed fertile to add somewhat of the indian plant and tree o o see Monardus and clusius d. Lovel Gerard and other herbarist and chief of these and other the indian plant and tree see Ouied. hist ind. l. 7 8 9 10 11. and of the beast fowl fish in the 12 13 14 15. book and also his mangle be the name of a tree which multiply itself into a wood as before we have observe of it the branch descend and take root in the earth the planetree of India have leaf sufficient to cover a man from the foot to the head but these the Coco and other indian tree be in the east-indies also and there we have mention they Cacao be a fruit little less than almond which the indian use for money and make thereof a drink hold among they in high regard they have a kind of apple p p th. Turner call Ananas exceed pleasant in colour and taste and very wholesome which yet have force to eat iron like the q q accost l. 4. c. 24. mamaye Guayavos and Paltos be the indian peach apple and pear but it will be a weary wilderness to the reader to bring he into such a indian orchard where he may read of such variety of fruit but like Tantalus can taste none or to present you with a garden of their tree which bear flower with other fruit as the Floripondio which all the year long bear flower sweet like a lily but great the Volusuchil which bear a flower like to the form of the heart and other which I omit the flower of the sun be be now no long the marigold of Peru but grow in many place with we in England the flower of the granadille they say if they say true have the mark of the passion nail pillar whip thorn wound exceed stigmatical Francis for their seed and craine maize be principal of which they make their bread which our english ground bring forth but hardly will ripen it grow as it be on a reed and multiply beyond comparison they gather three hundred measure for one it yield more blood but more gross than our wheat they make drink thereof also wherewith they will be exceed drunk they first steep and after boil it to that end in some place they first cause it to be champ with maid in some place with old woman and then make a leaven thereof which they boil and make this inebriate drink the cane and leaf serve for their mule to eat they boil and drink it also for pain in the back the bud of maize serve in stead of butter and oil in some part they make bread of a great root call Yuca which they name cacavi they first cut and strain it in a press for the juice be deadly r r in the island but not in all place of the firm land poison the cake dry be steep in water before they can eat they another kind there be of this Yuca or jucca the juice whereof be not poison it will keep long like biscuit they use this bread most in Hisponiola Cuba and jamaica where wheat and maize will not grow but so unequal that at one instant some be in the grass other in the grain they use in some place another root call Papas like to ground nut for bread which they call Chuno of other their root and fruit I be loath to write lest I weary the reader with tedious officiousness spice grow not there natural ginger thrive well bring and plant by the spaniard they have a good kind of balm though not the same which grow in Palestina of their amber oil gum and drug I listen not to relate further out s s spanish fruit thrive well in one place or other of the indies of Spain they have carry great variety of plant herein Americo exceed Spain that it receive and fructify in all spanish plant that be bring thither whereas the indian thrive not in Spain as vine olive mulberry fig almond lemon quince and such like and to end this chapter with a comparison of our world with this of America our advantage and preferment be many t t Botero rel. port l. 4. our heaven have more star and great as acosta by his own sight have observe challenge those author which have write otherwise of fable our heaven have the north-star within three degree and a three of the pole their crosier or four star set across which they observe for the antarctic be thirty degree off the sun commucate his partial presence long to our Tropike then that of Capricorn remain in the southern sign 178. day one and twenty hour and twelve minute in the northern 186. day eight hour and twelve minute b. Keckerman system astron l. 1. Tycho brahe l. 1. reckon these a hundred fourscore and six day hour eighteen and a half day eight and one three part this want of the sun and star be one cause of great cold in those part then in these our earth exceed they for the situation extend itself more between east and west fit for human life whereas they trend most towards the two pole our sea be more favourable in more gulf and bay especial such u u the Baltic persian arabian caspian sea etc. as go far within land beside the mid-land-sea equal communicate herself to Asia Africa and Europa this convenience of traffic America want our beast wild and tame be far the more noble as the former discourse show for what have they to oppose to our elephant rhinocerote camel horse kine etc. neither be the natural fruit of America comparable to those of our world whence be their spice and the best fruit but from hence by transportation or transplantation as for art state literature divine and human multitude of city law and other excellency our world enjoy still the privilege of the firstborn America be as a young brother or sister and have in these thing almost no inheritance at all till it buy somewhat hereof of the spaniard with the price of her freedom on the other side for temperature of air general America be far before Africa in the same height for greatness of river canada plata and Maragnon exceed our World whether Africa or America exceed in gold it be a question in silver Potozi seem to have surmount any one mine of the world beside those of New-spain and other part howsoever Boterus doubt yet and now America excel because beside her own store she be so plentiful furnish with all sort of live and grow creature from hence as even now be show chap. 3 of the discovery of the north part of the new-world and towards the pole and of greene-land or new-land groenland estotiland and other place unto New-France @. i. of the discovery make long since by Nicolo and Antonio Zeni AMerica be common divide by that isthmus or neck and narrow passage of land at darien into two part the one call northern America or Mexicana the other southern or Peruana this trend betwixt the darien and Magellan straits that from thence northwards where the confine be yet unknown for it be not yet full discover whether it join somewhere to the continent of Asia or whether groenland and some other part account island join 10 10 many have write discourse of the possibility of a passage by the n. or N.W. as Thome S.H. Gilbert cir. of the earth allege some example of a friar which pass it the Portugal card etc. with it these be discover before the day of Columbus and yet remain almost cover still in obscurity and be therefore just term y y discourse of frobisher voyage by Georgae best voyage 3 by great ELIZABETH the best know and most renown lady of the World the first knowledge that have come to we of those part be by Nicholas and Antony Zeni two brethren venetian happy Italy that first in this last age of the world have discover the great discoverer of the world to who we owe our m. Paulus Odoricus Vertomannus for the east Columbus Vespacius cabot for the west these noble Zeni for the north and the first encompass the world wide compass unto pigafetta discourse companion of Magellan in his journey that I speak not of the pain of Russelli ramusius Boterus and a world of italian author that I think more than any other language have by their historical labour discover the world to itself unhappy Italy that still have beat the bush for other to catch the bird and have inherit nothing in their eastern and western world except thy catholic claim whereby the catholic and spanish sword make way for the Catholic-roman crown and key neither the sword of Paul nor the key of Peter for both these be a a 2. cor. 4. spiritual but to return to our venetian b b the discovery of m. nic. and ant. Zeni gather out of their letter by Francisco Marcolina they be relate by m. hakluyt in his 3. vol. pa. 121. in the year a thousand three hundred and fourscore Mr Nicolo Zeno be wealthy and of a haughty spirit desire to see the fashion of the world build and furnish a ship at his own charge and pass the strait of Gibraltar hold on his course northwards with intent to see England and Flanders but a violent tempest assail he at sea he be carry he know not whither till at last his ship be carry away upon the i will of Friesland where the man and most part of the good be save in vain seem that delivery that deliver up present to another executioner the islander like Neptune hungry groom or his base and black guard set upon the man who the sea have spare but here also they find a second estape by mean of a prince name zichmui prince of that and many island thereabouts who be near hand with his army come at the outcry and chase away the people take they into protection this zichmui have the year before give the overthrow to the king of Norway and be a great adventurer in feat of arm he speak to they in latin and place they in his navy wherewith he win diverse island Nicolo behave himself so well both in save the fleet by his sea-skill and in conquest of the island by his valour that Zichmui make he knight and captain of his navy s. Thomas monastery in Groenland after diverse notable exploit Nicolo arm three bark with which he arrive in Engroneland where he find a monastery of friar of the preacher order and a church dedicate to st Thomas hard by a hill that cast out fire like veswin and Aetna there be a fountain of hot water with which they heat the church of the monastery and the friar chamber it come also into the kitchen so boil hot that they use no other fire to dress their meat and put their bread into brass pot without any water it do bake as it be in a hot oven they have also small garden which be cover over in the winter time and be water with this water be defend from the violence of the frost and cold and bring forth flower in their due season the common people astonish with these strange effect conceive high of those friar and bring they present of flesh and other thing they with this water in the extremity of the cold heat their chamber which also as the other building of the monastery arc frame of those burn stone which the mouth of the hill cast forth they cast water on some of they whereby they be dissolve and become excellent white lime and so tough that be contrive in building it last for ever the rest after the fire be out serve in stead of stone to make wall and vault and will not dissolve or break except with some iron tool their winter last nine month and yet there be a fair haven where this water fall into the sea not freeze by mean whereof there be great resort of wild fowl and fish which they take in infinite multitude the fisher boat be make like to a weaver shuttle of the skin of fish fashion with the bone of the same fish and be sow together with many double they be so strong that in foul weather they will shut themselves within the same not fear the force either of sea or wind neither can the hard-hearted rock break these yield vessel they have also as it be a sleeve in the bottom thereof by which with a subtle device they convey the water forth that soak into they the most of these friar speak the latin tongue a little after this Nicolo return and die in Friesland whither his brother Antonio have before resort to he and now succeed both in his good and honour who Zichmui employ in the expedition for Estotiland Estotiland which happen upon this occasion six and twenty year before four fisherboat be apprehend at sea by a mighty and tedious storm wherewith after many day they be bring to Estotiland above a thousand mile west from Friesland upon which one of the boat be cast away and six man that be in it be take and bring to a populous city where one that speak latin and have be cast by chance upon that island in the name of the king ask they what countryman they be and understand their case he acquaint the king there with they dwell there five year and find it to be a island very rich be little less than Iseland far more fruitful one of they say he see latin book in the king library which they at this present do not understand they have a peculiar language and letter or character to themselves they have mine of gold and other metal and have trade with Engroneland they sow corn and make beer and Ale they build bark but know not the use of the compass and have many city and castle the king send these fisherman with twelve bark southwards to a country which they call Drogio in which voyage escape dreadful tempest at sea they encounter with cannibal at land which devour many of they these fisher show they the manner of take fish with net escape and for the present which they make of their fish to the chief man of the country be belove and honour one of these more expert it seem then the rest be hold in such account that a great lord make war with their lord to obtain he and so prevail that he and his company be send unto he and in this order be he send to five and twenty lord which have war one with another to get he in thirteen year space whereby he come to know almost all those part which he say be a great country and as it be a new World the people be all rude and void of goodness they go naked neither have they wit to cover their body with the beast skin which they take in hunt from the vehement cold they be fierce and eat their enemy have diverse law and governor their live be by hunt further to the south-west they be more civil and have a more temperate air they have city and temple dedicate to idol where they sacrifice man and after eat they and have also some use of gold and silver he flee away secret and convey himself from one lord to another come at length to Drogio where he dwell three year after this time find there certain boat of Estotiland he go thither with they and grow there very rich furnish a bark of his own and return into Friesland where he make report unto his lord of that wealthy country Zichumi prepare to send thither but three day before they set forth this fisherman die yet take some of the mariner which come with he in his stead they prosecute the voyage and encounter after many day a island where ten man of diverse language be bring unto they of which they can understand none but one of island he tell they that the island be call icaria and the knight thereof call icari descend of the ancient pedigree of Dodalus king of scot who conquer that island leave his son there for king and leave they those law which to that present they retain and that they may keep their law inviolate they will receive no stranger only they be content to receive one of our man in regard of the language as they have do those ten interpreter Zichumi sail hence in four day descry land where they find abundance of fowl and bird egg for their refresh the haven they call cape Trinity there be a hill which burn cast out smoke where be a spring from which issue a certain water like pitch which run into the sea the people of small stature wild and fearful hide themselves in cave Zichumi build there a city and determine to inhabit send Antonio back again with the most of his people to Friesland this history I have thus insert at large which perhaps not without cause in some thing may seem fabulous not in the Zeni which thus write but in the relation which they receive from other howsoever the best geographer * * Abrah ortel chart. 6. Hak. vol. 3 Botero maginus be behold to these brethren for that little knowledge they have of these part of which none before have write nor since have there be any great inland discovery @. 2 discovery make by sebastian cabot cortregalis GOMES with some note of Groenland somewhat since there have be discover by Gasper Corteregale a Portugal Stephen Gomes a Spaniard and sebastian cabot and more by late pilot of our nation but little of the disposition of the inland people yea it be think to be all break * * Groenland be now find a huge continent to 78. by baffin an. 1616. island and not inhabit but at certain season frequent by some savage which come thither to fish such as we can in due order we here bestow sebastian a a Ramus in praefat. in 3. vol. cabot report to Ramusio that in the year 1497. at the charge of king Henry the seven he discover to the 67. degree and a half of northerly latitude mind to have proceed for the search of cathay but by the mutiny of the mariner be force to return the map of Sebastian cabot cut by b b clem. adam Hak. to 3. p. 1. 6. Clement adam relate that John cabot a venetian and his son Sebastian set out from Bristol discover the land call it prima Vista and the island before it saint john the inhabitant wear beast skin there be white bear and stag far great than we there be plenty of seal and sole above a yard long he name say Peter c c p. mart. dec. 3. l. 6. martyr certain island d d codfish boccalaos of the store of those fish which the inhabitant call by that name which with their multitude sometime stay his ship the bear catch these fish with their claw and draw they to land and eat they in the time of e e rob. Fabian ap. Hak. sup. Henry the seven William purchas be then of London be bring unto the king three man take in the new-found island these be clothe in beast skin and do eat raw flesh but cabot discover all along the coast to that which since be call Florida and return find great preparation for war in Scotland by reason whereof no more consideration be have to this voyage whereupon he go into Spain and be entertain by the king and queen be send to discover the coast of Brasill and sail up into the river of plate more than six score league he be a make pilot of Spain and after that 1549. be constitute grand pilot of England by king Edward the six with the yearly pension of a hundred threescore and six pound thirteen shilling four penny where in the year 1553. he be chief dealer and procurer of the discovery of Russia and the north-east voyages f f sir hugh Willoughby r. chanceler Steven Burrow pet. and jackman write by Hugh smith and all in Hak. to 1. make by sir Hugh Willoughby r. chancellor Stephen Burrough and prosecute by pet jackman and other towards noua Zemla Persia Tartary as in master hakluit first tome appear perhaps this voyage of cabot be the same which be mention by master Robert thorn in a treatise of his write 1527. that his father and Hugh eliot a merchant of Bristol be the discoverer of the newfoundland and if they have follow their pilot mind the land of the west indies have be we 1500. g g Osor reb. Eman. l. 2. tit pet. pasquali 3. in N.. Gasper corteregalis a Portugal mind new discovery set forth a ship at his own charge from Lisbon and sail far north at last come to a land which for the pleasantness thereof he call green the man as he report be barbarous brown-coloured very swift good archer clothe in beast skin they live in cave or base cottage without any religion but observe sooth-saying they use marriage and be very jealous Petrus Pasqualigi in a letter concern this voyage say they bring from thence a piece of a gild sword which seem to be of italian workmanship a child also among they wear two silver-earring which by the workmanship appear to be bring from these part perhaps belong to some of cabot company return into Portugal he sail thitherward again 1501. but what become of he none can tell his brother Michael corteregalis the next year set forth two ship to make search for his brother but he also be lose the king Emanuel grieve herewith send to inquire of they but all in vain their brother vasco will have put himself on this adventure but the king will not suffer he the name Greene upon this occasion be wither and the land be call h h corterealis or Laborador extend from 60. degree to the river of s. Laurence g. bot. Ben thus far Osorius it reach according to Boterus reckon to the 60. degree let we come to our own for of Steven i i steph. Gomes Gomes little be leave we but a jest this Gomes have be with Magellan a few year before in his discovery of the south sea enlarge with hope of new strait in the year 1525. set forth to search this northerly passage but find nothing to his expectation he lade his ship with slave and return k k Gaspar ens l. 2. c. 25. hist ind. at his return one that know his intent be for the Moluccas by that way inquire what he have bring home be tell Esclavos that be slave he forestall with his own imagination of clove have think it be say clavos and so post to the court to carry first news of this spicy discovery look for a great reward but the truth be know cause hereat great laughter l l Dithmar Bleskens Dithmar Bleskens in his treatise of island relate that in the year 900. the nobility of east Frisia and bream find that island and 200. league from thence discover Groenland which he say be name antiphrasin of the contrary for want of green and pleasant pasture and that by whirlpool and misty darkness all their navy but one ship perish William steere translate a m m write by juer boty a principal man in the bishop court book 1608. before translate out of the Norsh language 1560. for the use of Henry Hudson in which be mention of diverse town of Groenland as Skagenford a eastern dorp or village and from thence more easterly Beareford where be great fish for whale by the bishop licence the benefit redound to the cathedral church Allabourg sound where foul and ox be plentiful Fendbrother haven where in saint olaff time some be drown and their ship cast away cross be yet see on their gravestone corsehought where by authority from the bishop they hunt for white bear from hence eastward nothing but ice and snow westward stand Kodesford a dorp well build with a great church Wartsdale Peterswick saint Olaffes monastery and another of saint Benet nun here be many warm-water^ in the winter intolerable hot and medicinable there be also a church of saint Nicholas and many other parish and village desert bear with red patch on their head hawk marble of all colour great stream nut and acorn in the hill wheat Sable losh etc. he affirm that it be not so cold there as in island and Norway but let we observe the discovery of our own countryman @. 3 discovery by sir MARTIN Frobisher sir Martin Frobisher n n sir mart. Frob. deserve the first place as be the first that in the day of queen Elizabeth seek the northwest passage in three several voyage the first whereof be write by Christopher o o Christ Hall dionise settle Thomas Ellis George best hall the second by dionise settle the three by Thomas Ellis and all in one discourse by m. George best all which at large the reader may find in m. hakluyt laborious discovery of discovery to speak brief what may best befit we in our pilgrimage sir Martin Frobisher sail from Blackewall june the fifteen and the seven of july p p 1576. have sight of Friesland but can not get on shore for the abundance of ice which be also accompany with a extreme fog as double guard to that island uncertain whether to fortify it or to imprison they the twenty of july he have sight of and high land which he name q q queen fore-land and opposite thereto hals i will in 62. degree 50. min. queen Elizabeth fore-land here be he much trouble with ice but sail more northerly descry another fore-land with a great gut bay or passage which he enter call it frobisher strait suppose it to be the division of Asia and America have enter threescore league he go on shore and be encounter with mighty deer which run at he with danger of his life here have he sight of the savage which row to his ship in boat of seales skin with a keel of wood within they like a spanish shallop save only they be flat in the bottom and sharp at both end they eat raw flesh and fish or rather devour the same they have long black hair broad face flat nose tawny of colour or like a olive which neither sun or wind but nature itself imprint on they as appear by their infant and seem to be the general livery of America their apparel be scale skin their woman be paint or mark down the cheek and about the eye with blue strike These savage intercept five of our man and the boat we also take one of they which they bring into England where they arrive the second of October r r Gaspar ens l. 2. hist ind. Occid c. 26. affirm that one John Scoluc a polonian this year 1576 sail beyond Friesland and Groneland and thence to Estotiland and labrador 1576. he have take possession of the country in right of the queen and command his company to bring every one somewhat in witness of the same one bring a piece of black stone like sea-coal which be find to hold gold in good quantity whereupon a second voyage be make the next year 1577. to bring Ore and come to those strait in july find they in manner shut up with a long mure of ice which sometime endanger their ship especial on the nineteenth of that month they find a great dead fish round like a Porcpis twelve foot long have s s such a horn be bring home two year since find on shore in greenland by the carpenter of jonas pool ship 7. foot and a half long and sell since at Constantinople report to be good against poison and such a one be take up 1588. in the coast of Norfolk and sell by a ignorant woman for 18. penny which be also say to be effectual against poison as I be tell by m. rob. salmon of Leegh who have a piece of it a horn of two yard lack two inch grow out of the Snout wreathe and straight like a wax taper and may be think to be a sea unicorn it be break in the top wherein some of the sailor say they put spider which present die it be reserve as a jewel by the queen commandment in her wardrobe of robe and be still at Windsor to be see they go on shore and have some encounter with the inhabitant which be of so fierce and terrible resolution that find themselves wound they leap off the rock into the sea rather than they will fall into the hand of the english the rest flee one woman with her child they take and bring away they have take another of the savage before this savage in the ship see the picture of his countryman take the year before think he to be alive and begin to be offend that he will not answer he with wonder think that our man can make man live and die at their pleasure but strange be the gesture and behaviour of this man and the woman when they be bring together which be put into the same cabin and yet give such apparent sign of shamefastness and chastity as may be a shame to christian to come so far short of they where they can have any trade with the savage their manner of traffic be to lay down somewhat of they and go their way expect that our man shall lay down somewhat in lieu thereof and if they like of their mart they come again and take it otherwise they take away their own and depart they make sign that their catchoe or king be a man of high stature than any of we and that he be carry upon man shoulder they can not learn what become of the five man they lose the year before only they find some of their apparel which make they think they be eat they lade themselves with ore and so return and with fifteen sail the next year 1578. a three voyage for discovery be make by the say captain and general he go on shore the twenty of june on Friesland t t Friesland be in length 25. league the southern part of it be in the latitude of 57 degree and one second Thomas Wiar 1 which be name by they west England where they espy certain tent and people like those of the people flee and they find in their tent a box of small nail red herring and board of fir-tree well cut with other thing artificial wrought whereby it appear that they be workman themselves or have trade with other some of they be of opinion this be firm land with or with gronland whereunto the multitude of island of ice between that and induce they in depart from hence the salamander one of their ship be under both her course and bonnet happen to strike on a great whale with her full stem with such a blow that the ship stand still and neither stir forward nor backward the whale thereat make a great and hideous noise and cast up his body and tail present sink under water within two day they find a whale dead which they suppose be this which the salamander have strike the second of july they enter in with the strait the entrance whereof be bar with mountain of ice wherewith the bark Dennis be sink to the hindrance of their project for in it be drown part of a house which they have intend to erect there for habitation the man be save the other ship be in very great danger the sea muster army of icy soldier to oppress they use other natural stratagem of fog and snow to further these cruel design these icy island seem to have be congeal in the winter further north in some bay u u it seem they be of fresh water because the ice be fresh and the sun melt the top cause ril of fresh water to run down which meet together make a pretty stream or river and with the summer sun be loose and break out of their natural prison offer themselves to all outrage whereto the swift current and cold wind will conduct they strange it be to see their greatness some not less than half a mile about and fourscore fathom above water beside the unknown depth beneath the usual rule be that only the seven part be extant above the wave strange the multitude strange the deform shape if this be not more strange that they sometime save with kill and suffer man to Moor their anchor on they and to get upon they to work against they for the safeguard of their ship that bloody enemy shall entertain they with disport to walk leap shout forty mile from any land without any vessel under they according to m. best riddle and a hundred and ten mile from land shall present they with-running stream of fresh water able to drive a mill. the flood be there nine hour the ebb but three a strong current run westward the people resemble much the tartar or rather the samoed in apparel and manner of live it be cold here in 62. then 9 or 10. degree more northerly towards the north-east which it seem come to pass by the wind east and north-east which from the ice bring so intolerable a cold the people be excellent archer a thing general throughout America beside seals-skin they use the skin of deer bear fox and hare for apparel and the case also of fowl sow together they wear in summer the hairy side outward in winter inward or else go naked they shoot at the fish with their dart they kindle fire with rub one stick against another they use great black dog like wolf to draw their sled and a less kind to eat they have very thin beard in the best of summer they have hail and snow sometime a foot deep which freeze as it fall and the ground freeze three fathom deep they have great store of fowl whereof our man kill in one day fifteen hundred they have thick skin and be thick of down and feather then with we and therefore must be flay the sun be not absent above three hour and a half all which space it be very light so that they may see to write and read hence be it that those part near the pole be habitable the continuance of the sun presence in their summer heat and warm with lively cherishment all creature and in the winter by his oblique motion leave so long a twilight and the increase light of 10 10 the moon set not nor the sun in the polar region be in cancer see the relation of the dutch winter in noua Zembla in the three part of my pilgrim and w. Hely his report of light Tobacco^ by the sun with a glass at mid night the moon the sun great and diligent lieutenant the brightness of the star and whiteness of the snow not suffer they to be quite forlorn in darkness the beast fowl and fish which these man kill be their house bedding meat drink hose thread shoe apparel and sail and boat and almost all their riches beside their eat all thing raw they will eat grass and shrub like our kine and morsel of ice to satisfy thirst they have no hurtful creep thing but spider and a kind of gnat be there very troublesome timber they have none grow but as the undermine water do supplant and bring they from other place they be great enchanter when their head ache they tie a great stone with a string into a stick and with certain word effect that the stone with all a man force will not be lift up and sometime seem as light as a feather hope thereby to have help they make sign lie grovel with their face upon the ground make a noise downward that they worship the devil under they there be no flesh or fish which they find dead smell it never so filthy but they will eat it without any other dress their deer have skin like ass and foot large like ox which be measure 7. or 8. inch in breadth there be no river or run spring but such as the sun cause to come of snow sometime they will parboil their meat a little in kettle make of beast skin with the blood and water which they drink and lick the bloody knife with their tongue this lick be the medicine also for their wound they seem to have traffic with other nation from who they a small quantity of iron their fire they make of heath and moss in their leather boat they row with one oar fast than we can in our boat with all our oar @. 4 discovery by JOHN Davis GEORGE weymouth and JAMES HALL. to the north-west master John davis a a the voyage of m davis write by John Iames hac to. 3. p. 100 in the year 1585. make his first voyage for the northwest discovery and in 64. degree and 15. minute they come on shore on a island where they have sight of the savage which seem to worship the sun for point up to the sun with their hand they will strike their breast hard with their hand which be answer with like action of the english be take for a confirm league and they become very familiar they first leap and dance with a kind of timbrel which they strike with a stick their apparel be of beast and bird skin buskin hose glove etc. some leather they have which be dress like the glover leather the 6. of August they discover land in 66. deg. 40. min. they kill white bear one of who forefoot be fourteen inch broad so fat that they be force to cast it away it seem they feed on the grass by their dung which be like to horse-dung they hear dog howl on the shore which be tame they kill one with a collar about his neck he have a bone in his pisle these it seem be use to the sled for they find two sled the next year he make his second voyage wherein he find the savage people tractable they be great idolater and witch they have many image which they wear about they and in their boat they find a grave wherein be many bury cover with seales skin and a cross lay over they one of they make a fire of turf kindle with the motion of a stick in a piece of a board which have a hole half through into which he put many thing with diverse word and strange gesture our man suppose it to be a sacrifice they will have have one of the english to stand in the smoke which themselves be bid to do and will not by any mean whereupon one of they be thrust in and the fire put out by our man they be very thievish they eat raw fish grass and ice and drink salt-water here they see a whirlwind take up the water in great quantity furious mount it up into the air three hour together with little intermission they find in 63. degree 8. minute a strange quantity of ice in one entire mass so big that they know not the limit thereof very high in form of land with bay and cape like high-cliff-lan they send their pinnace to discover it which return with information that it be only ice this be the 17. of july 1586. and they coast it till the thirty of july in the 66. deg. 33. min. they find it very hot and be much trouble with a sting fly call Muskito all the land they see seem to be break and island which they coast southwards till they be in four and fifty and a half and there find hope of a passage in the same voyage b b hen. Morgan he have send the sunshine from he in 60. degree which go to Iseland and on the seven of july have sight of the gronland and be hinder from harbour by the ice they coast it till the last of july their house near the seaside be make with piece of wood cross over with pole and cover with earth our man play at football with they of the island the three voyage be perform the next year 1587. wherein Mr c c John davis in his hydrographical description davis discover to the 73. degree find the sea all open and forty league between land and land have Groenland which have a island near it to the west for the loathsome view of the shore cover with snow without wood earth or grass to be see and the irksome noise of the ice call desolation in 59 on the east and America on the west the spanish fleet and the untimely death of master secretary Walsingham the epitome and summary of human worthiness hinder the prosecution of these intend discovery in the year 1602. captain George weymouth make a voyage of discovery to the northwest with two fly-boat set forth by the Muscovy company see the south part of gronland and have water in 120. fathom black as thick as puddle and in a little space clear with many such interchange the breach of the ice make a noise as a thunderclap and overturn have sink both their vessel if they have not with great diligence prevent it they have store of fog some freeze as they fall in 68 deg. 53. min. they encounter a inlet forty league broad and sail west and by south in the same 100 league james hall an. 1605. sail to Groenland from Denmark james hall his 4. voyage to Groenland and have like encounter of ice yield in the breach no less noise then if five canon have be discharge with people also like those which in frobisher voyage be mention they make sail of gut sow together for their fish boat and deceive the seal with seals-skin garment Groenland be high mountainous full of break island alongst the coast river navigable and good bay full of fish between the mountain be pleasant plain and valley such as a man will scarce believe this gronland be Westward from greenland 150 league in greenland be no people nor wood he see store of fowl no beast but black fox and dear the people seem a kind of samoyde wander in summer by company for hunt and fish and remove from place to place with their tent and baggage they be of reasonable stature brown active warlike eat raw meat or a little parboil with blood oil or a little water which they drink their apparel beast of fowl skin the hairy or feather side outward in summer in the winter inward their arrow and dart with two feather and a bone-head they have no wood but drift they worship the sun 1606. he make a second voyage thither find their winter house build with whale bone cover with earth and vault two yard deep under the earth square they call Groenland in their language Secanunga up within the land they have a king carry on man shoulder the next year he sail thither the three time a a this voyage be write by josias Hubert and in a four voyage b b write by Will baffin allen. sallowe of Redriffe tell i hall be slay in 76. degree 1612. be slay there by a savage in revenge as be think for some of the people before ship from thence they have hare white as snow with long fur dog which live on fish who pisle as also of their fox be bone their summer work be to dry their fish on the rock every one both man and woman have each of they a boat make with long piece of fir cover with seales skin sow with sinew or gut about twenty foot long and two and a half broad like a shuttle so light that one may carry many of they at once so swift that no ship be able with any wind to hold way with they and yet use but one oar which they hold by the middle in the midst of their boat c c one of these boat with the Oar be in sir Thomas smith hall in Philpot lade broad at both end wherewith they row forward and backward at pleasure general they worship the sun to which they point at our approach say baffin strike on their breast and cry ilyout not come near till you do same d d davis mention the same 2. io. knight they bury in out-land on the top of hill in the heap of stone to preserve from the fox make another grave hard by wherein they place his bow and arrow dart and other his utensil they bury they in their apparel and the cold keep they from putrefaction 1606. Mr John knight make a northwest voyage lose his ship sink with ice and be with three more of his company surprise by the savage of who language he write a pretty dictionary which I have see with m. hakluyt @. v. of king JAMES his newland alias Greeneland and of the whale and whalefishing I will not here begin with record of discovery in these part write two thousand year since out of which Mr doctor dee be report to have gather diverse antiquity antiquate by antiquity and rot with age nor to show that king Arthur e e Lambert Ap^ Sr h. Willoughby possess as far as Greeneland nor that sir Hugh Willoughby discover hitherto as some conjecture but content myself with late discovery and observation much have be spend both of cost Industrie and argument about find a more compendious way to the indies by the northwest and by the north-east and by the north. of the first somewhat have be speak of the second be the voyage of master Stephen Burrough pet and jacman our countryman and of the hollander in the year 1594. and the three follow before by we mention in a due f f l. ^4 c. 17. Navig 3 ger. de Vetr place as appertain to Asia for they find themselves by astronomical observation in a hundred and twelve degree five and twenty minute of longitude and threescore and sixteen of latitude in the place where they winter they have touch more northerly in some part as be think of greene-land sail along by the land from fourscore degree eleven minute unto noua Zemla I omit their red goose in one place of this voyage their azure-coloured ice in another place and the loss of their ship in the ice which constrain they to set up a house to winter in that land of desolation this building they begin about the 27. of September stilo novo the cold even then kiss his newcome tenant so eager that when the carpenter do but put a nail in their mouth after their wont the ice will hang thereon and the blood follow at the pull out in December their fire can not heat they this be also the effect of charcoal wherewith in close room diverse have be smother their sack be freeze and each man force to melt his share thereof before he can drink it their melt beer drink like water they seek to remedy it with sea-coal fire as be hot than the fire of wood which they have store of though none there grow by drift and stop the chimney and door to keep in the heat but be sudden take with a swoon which have soon consume they if they have not present admit the air to their succour their shoe do freeze as hard as horn on their foot and as they sit within door before a great fire seem to burn on the fore-side behind at their back they be frozon white the snow meanwhiles lie high than the house which sometime in clear weather they endeavour to remove cut out step and so ascend out of their house as out of a vault or seller they be force to use beside store of clothes and great fire stone heat at the fire and apply to their foot and body and yet be freeze as they lie in their cabin yea the cold not only stay their clock but insult over the fire in some extremity that it almost cast no heat so that put their foot to the fire they burn their hose and discern that also by the smell before they can feel the heat they suppose that a barrel of water will have be whole freeze in the space of one night which you must interpret of their twelve hour glass for otherwise they see no sun after the three of November to the 24. of january reckon by the new calendar a thing strange to be without the sun fifty day before the solstice which happen after their account on December 23. and yet within forty one day after may see the upper circle of the sunrising above the horizon which make great question whether their eye have deceive they or the computation of time in that long night which both be find otherwise by their observation and experience cause no less wonder whether this timely approach shall be attribute to the reflection by the b b m. Scory tell i that on the pike of Tenariffe they may see the sun a hour soon by this mean water or the not absolute roundness of the earth in those part or the false account of the solstice or which some affirm the falsehood of their calculation but I leave this to philosopher our author affirm that when the sun have leave they they see the moon continual both day and night never go down when it be in the high degree the twilight also remain many day and again they may see some daylight sixteen day before they see the return of the sun the bear which have hold they besiege and often endanger they forsake they and return with the sun the white fox all that while visit they of which they take many who flesh be good venison to they and their skin in the line of their cap good remedy against that extremity of cold. as for their foot they use patent of wood with sheepskin above and many sock or sole underneath they use also shoe of rug and felt. these bear be very large and cruel some of they yield skin thirteen foot long and a hundred pound of fat which serve they for oil in their lamp the flesh they dare not eat some of they forfeit their whole skin after they have eat of the liver of one of these eater which devour any thing not spare their own kind for the hollander have kill one bear another carry it a great way over the rugged ice in his mouth in their sight and fall to eat it they make to he with their weapon and chase he from his purchase but find it half eat and then four of they can scarce carry the other half when as the whole body have be very light carry in his fellow mouth as for the thin diet which these hollander endure and other discommodity together with their return in two open scute wherein they sail above a thousand mile after ten month continuance in this desolate habitation their danger in the ice which somewhat besiege they like whole tent town and fortification and other the particular of this voyage I refer to the author himself here I remember thus much for greene-land sake on which in this navigation they be say to have touch how ever that be they continue no trade nor discovery thither till the english diverse year after have make a new discovery and find there a profitable Whale-fishing in the year 1607. Hen. Hudson discover these part to the latitude of fourscore M.S.W. baffin there name a point of land hackluyt head-land which name be still bear and Ionas Poole in the year 1610. be set forth by the Muscovy company in the amity and discover diverse sound and harbour here with the sea-horse he kill and other thing find on shore give such good content to the adventurer that he be by they employ the next year in the Elizabeth with master Steven Bennet in the Mary Margaret both which ship be unfortunate cast away the man and part of the good be bring home by master Marmaduke then there in a ship of Hull in the year 1612. be set forth three ship from Holland and one from biscay all have english pilot beside two send thither by the company call the Sea-Horse and the whole under the master before mention in the year 1613 many ship be thither send from France Biskay Holland so that the company address thither seven warlike ship under the command of master Benjamin joseph who without bloodshed disappoint those stranger ready to reap that which other have sow and either have not at all discover or whole give over the business the next year 1614 eleven good ship and two pinass be employ to Greeneland and three more not then ready appoint to follow under the same general which voyage be in my hand communicate to i by my industrious friend a skilful mariner and discoverer both in these and other part William baffin entertain in this Fleet. but the particular will be howsoever profitable to our mariner tedious to our ordinary reader they then discover well-near to 81. for beyond that degree our author believe not that any have be the name of diverse place as saddle island barren island bear island red goose island all betwixt 80. and 81. and sir Tho: smith inlet Maudlin sound fair haven sir Thomas smith bay ice sound Bell sound with other place on or near the great isle or suppose continent I forbear to recite as not intend to instruct the mariner so much as the scholar this year 1616. be send thither ten ship which kill above a hundred whale as master Thomas sherwin employ therein relate to i Greeneland be now almost altogether discover to be a island or rather many island and break ground in the Greeneland voyage 1611. from cherry island towards Greeneland they meet with a bank of ice forty league long and run almost alongst another a hundred and twenty league at their first come all be cover with snow at their departure the top of the hill and plain have receive a new livery of green moss and a little grass the air be misty like night they find many fat deer many white bear with white gray and dun fox there be a bird call a Allen which beat the other bird till they vomit their prey for he to devour and then dismiss they with little meat in their belly or feather on their back they find morse sea-unicorn horn white partridge wild-goose but not a bush or tree in my pilgrim I have publish many voyage and letter of greenland write by jonas Pooley rob. Fotherbie tho. edge Will Hely Robert Salmon Thomas sherwin james Beversham io. chamber i. catcher w. Goodlard etc. also to cherry island in 74. by jonas Pooley Will garden etc. and to other northern part by Hudson please Widhouse etc. to which I refer the more industrious reader I may here add diverse voyage to cherry island where they have thousand of morse the tooth and oil whereof yield they no small commodity there also be many bear I may here recreate your weary eye with a hunt spectacle of the great chase which nature yield I mean the kill of the whale when they espy he on the top of the water which he be force to for to take breath they row towards he in a shallop in which the harponier stand ready with both his hand to dart his harping-iron to which be fasten a line of such length that the whale which sudden feel himself hurt sink to the bottom may carry it down with he be before fit that the shallop be not therewith endanger come up again they again strike he with lance make for that purpose about twelve foot long the iron eight thereof and the blade eighteen inch the harping-iron principal serve to fasten he to the shallop and thus they hold he in such pursuit till after stream of water and next that of blood cast up into the air and water as angry with both element which have bring thither such weak hand to his destruction he at last yield his slay carcase as meed to the conqueror they tow he to the ship with two or three shallop make fast to one another and then float at the stern of the ship they cut the blubber or fat from the flesh in piece three or four foot long which after at shore be cut small and boil in copper which do they take they out and put they into wicker basket which be set in shallop half full of water into which the oil run and be thence put into butt this whalefishing be yearly now use by our man in Greeneland with great profit the ordinary length of a whale be sixty foot and not so huge as Olaus have write who make the also as big as a elephant the proportion of this huge Leviathan deserve description as one of the great wonder of the lord in the deep whereon himself so much insist job 41.12 that he will not conceal his part nor his power nor his comely proportion the whale that here we speak of be the great bay-whale for there be many other kind the Tromp which have two trunk or breathe hole on his head whereas the bay-whale have but one who brain be say to be the the Inbarte which have a fin on his back dangerous to boat exceed swift and little profitable besides other kind this be the most simple and useful the great and fat the more easy take his head be the three part of he his mouth o hellish wide sixteen foot in the open and yet out of that belly of hell yield much to the ornament of our woman back the whalebone or fin be no other than the rough and inner part of the mouth close in the shut thereof as the finger of both hand within each other of these fin be five hundred from the length of fourteen foot or more in less and less proportion he have no tooth his meat he suck his tongue be monstrous great of deform form like a Wool-sack about eight tun weight and one part thereof use to this purpose yield from six to eleven hogshead of oil his food that nature may teach the great to be content with little and that greatness may be maintain without rapine as in the elephant and whale the great of land-creature and sea-monster be grass and weed of the sea and a kind of water-worm like a beetle whereof the fin in his mouth hang full and sometime little bird all which strike the water with his tail and make an eddie he gape and receive into his mouth neither be any thing else master sherwin have see they open and open this unto i find in their belly this great head have little eye like apple very little big than the eye of a ox and a little throat not great than for a man fist to enter and that with huge bone on each side not admit it to stretch wide his body be round fourteen or sixteen foot thick his pisle hang from he as a beast in generation they draw to shallow water near the shore and in the act join belly to belly as be also say of the elephant in their engender season much of that matter float on the water they be swallow-tailed the extreme be twenty foot distant they have but one young at a time which be bring forth as in beast master sherwin have see they in the belly be rip about the bigness but long of a hogshead the female have two breast and teat with white milk in they not big than a man head wherewith she suckle the young whereof she as the also be very tender they kill one and can not get the young one from it there have be make seven and twenty tun and a pipe of oil out of one whale ordinary sixteen ton but much be waste for haste in that store the english be grow as expert in this business as the biscainer they never lose man in this action but one only this last year @. 5 of hudson discovery and death Henry Hudson 1607. discover further north towards the pole than perhaps any before he he find himself in 80. deg. 23. minute where they feel it hot and drink water to cool their thirst they see land as they think to 82. and further on the shore they have snow morse tooth deer horn whalebone and foot of other beast with a stream of freshwater the next year 1608. he set forth on a discovery to the north-east at which time they meet as both himself and juet have testify a mermaid in the sea see by Thomas hils and Robert rainer another voyage he make 1609. and coast Newfoundland and thence along to cape Cod. his last and fatal voyage be 1610. which I mention in my former edition relate the same as Hesselius gerardus have guide i by his card and report who affirm that he follow the way which captain winwood have beforc search by Lumleys inlet in 61. degree so pass through the strait to 50. etc but have since meet with better instruction both by the help of my painful friend master Hakluit a a he communicate to i hudson abstract th. wid. house Abacuk prick of this voyage to whose-labour these of i be so much indebt and special from he who be a special setter forth of the voyage that learned and industrious gentleman sir Dudley digges how willing can I here lose myself in a parenthesis of due praise to who these study have seem to descend by inheritance in diverse descent improve by proper industry employ to public good both at home and in discovery and plantation abroad and for my particular but why shall I use word unequal pay to he unequal stay to thou from he I say so great a furtherer of the northwest discovery and of your discoverer the poor pilgrim and his pilgrimage have receive full relation I have be bold with the reader to insert this voyage more large in the year 1610. sir tho. smith sir tho. Smith sir Dudley digges and master John Wostenholme with other their friend furnish out the say Henry Hudson to try if through any of those inlet which davis saw but dare not enter on the western side of fretum davis any passage may be find to the other ocean call the south-sea there bark be name the discovery they pass by island and see mount Heela cast out fire a note sign of foul weather towards other conceive themselves and deceive other with I know not what purgatory fable hereof confute by Arngrin jonas b b a. io. Crymogea a islander who reprove this and many other dream relate by author say that from the year 1558. to 1592. it never cast forth any flame they leave the name to one harbour in island lousy bay they have there a bath hot enough to scald a fowl they raise gronland the four of june and desolation after that whence they ply northwest among island of ice whereon they may run and play and fill sweet water out of pond therein some of they a ground in six or seven score fathom water and on diverse of they bear and partridge they give name to certain island of God mercy prince Henry forland k. james his cape q. Annes gape one morning in a fog they be carry by a set of the tide from the n. e. into one of the inlet above mention the depth whereof and ply forward of the ice make Hudson hope it will prove a thoroughfare after he have sail herein by his computation 300. league west he come to a small strait of two league over and very deep water through which he pass between two headland which he call that on the south cape Wostenholme the other to the N.W. digges island in deg. 62. 44. minute into a spacious sea wherein he sail above a hundred league south confident proud that he have win the passage hudson winter but find at length by shoal water that he be embay he be much distract therewith and commit many error especial in resolve to winter in that desolate place in such want of necessary provision the three of November he moor his bark in a small cove where they have all undoubted perish but that it please God to send they several kind of kind of fowl they kill of white partridge above a hundred and twenty dozen these leave they at the spring and other succeed in their place swan goose teal a strange tree duck all easy to take beside the blessing of a tree which in December blossom with leaf green and yellow of a aromatical savour and be boil yield a oily substance which prove a excellent salve and the decoction be drink prove as wholesome a potion whereby they be cure of the scorbute sciatica cramp convulsion and other disease which the coldness of the climate breed in they at the open of the year also there come to his ship side such abundance of fish of all sort that they may therewith have fraught themselves for their return if Hudson have not too desperate pursue the voyage neglect this opportunity of store themselves with fish which he commit to the care of certain careless dissolute villain which in his absence conspire against he in few day the fish all forsake they once a savage visit they who for a knife glass and bead give he return with bever skin deer skin and a sled at hudson return they set sail for England but in few day their victual be almost spend and he out of his despair let fall some word of set some on shore the former conspirator the chief whereof be hen. Greene none of their allow company these be the worst or weak of the company but take in by Hudson himself and one Wilson enter his cabin in the night and force he the master together with his son John Hudson tho. widow arn. Ludlo Sidraoh favor ad. Moor hen. king mic. bute to take shallop and seek their fortune but see what sincerity can do in the most desperate trial one Philip staff a Ipswich man who according to his name have be a principal staff and stay to the weak and more enfeeble courage of his companion in the whole action lighten and enlighten their droop darken spirit with spark from his own resolution their best purveyor with his piece on shore and both a skilful carpenter and lusty mariner on board when he can by no persuasion season with tear divert they from their devilish design notwithstanding they entreat he to stay with they yet choose rather to commit himself to God mercy in the forlorn shallop then with such villain to accept of likely hope a flood from the west a very proble argument of a open passage to the south sea and so be their weapon and art be far beyond other savage a few day after their victual be spend the ship come aground at digges island and so continue diverse hour till a great flood which they by this accident take first notice of come from the westward and set they on float upon the cliff of this island they find abundance of fowl tame whereof they take two or three hundred and see a grea long boat with forty or fifty savage upon the shore they send on land and for some of their toy have deer skin well dress morse-teeth and some few fur one of our man go on land to their tent one of they remain for hostage in which tent they live by hoard man woman and child they be big-boned broad-faced flatnosed and small-footed like the tartar their apparel of skin but wrought all very handsome even glove and shoe the next morning Greene will needs go on shore with some of his chief companion and that unarmed notwithstanding some advise and entreat he the contrary the savage entertain he with a cunning ambush and at the first onset shoot this mutinous ringleader into the heart where first those those monster of treachery and bloody cruelty now pay with the like have be conceive end Wilson his brother in evil have the like bloody inheritance die swear and curse Perseus Thomas and moter die a few day after of their wound everywhere can divine justice find executioner see his relation of the three part of my pilgrim with other many for these part the boat by God blessing with some hurt man escape in this manner one Abacucke pricket a servant of sir Dudley digges who the mutineer have save in hope to procure his master to work their pardon be leave to keep the shallop where he sit in a gown sick and lame at the stern upon who at the instant of the ambush the leader of all the savage leap from a rock and with a strange kind of weapon a a such they use in java indent broad and sharp of bright steel rivet into a handle of morse-tooth give he diverse cruel wound before he can from under his gown draw a small scottish-dagger wherewith at one thrust into his side he kill this savage and bring he off with the boat and some of the hurt company that get to he by swim be get aboard with a small weak and wound company they make from this island unto the northern continent where they see a large open of the sea north-west-ward and have a great flood with such a large billow as they say be no where but in the ocean from hence they make all possible haste home-ward pass the whole strait and so home without ever strike sail or any other let which may easy have make it impossible for their best sustenance leave they be seaweed fry with candle end and the skin of the fowl they have eat some of their man be starve the rest all so weak that only one can lie along upon the helm and steer by God great goodness the six of September 1611. they meet with a fisherman of foy by who mean they come safe into England @. 7 of button and baffin late discovery this news so encourage the adventurer sir th. button be very confident of a passage by the north west into the south sea as appear by his relation in the end of the four book of the three part of my pilgrim where also Mr brig his map the letter of Mr lock and juan de Fuca the testimony of th. cowles etc. further prove the same that by the gracious assistance of that star of the north illustrious son of Britain bright sun and in his presence shine with beauteous beam in this and even to that further hemisphere but with speedy set raise above the sun and sphere and star to discover the strait and passage to a better world there to shine with light unspeakable in the fruition of that light inaccessible with the father of light and sun of righteousness for how can a worldly kingdom though the kingdom of the world deserve so good so great a spirit to rule it but these my word be too short a epitaph his own name even after death speak more and proclaim in a few letter all human greatness great Britain great hope prince henry the adventurer I say who my weak eye dazzle with this great light can scarce recover by this princely assistance pursue the action in more royal fashion with great ship under the command of a worthy seaman servant to prince henry captain Thomas button who discovery of a great continent call by he New-Wales and other accident of his voyage I have not see only I have see a chart of those discover place and I hear that he pass hudson strait and leave hudson bay to the south sail above two hundred league south-west-ward over a sea above fourscore fathom deep without sight of land which at length he find to be another great Bay and after much misery of sickness in his winter notwithstanding he be force to quit the great ship he beat and search the whole bay with very great industry even back again almost to digges island near which he find the come in of the great and strong tide from the north-west b b this be after find otherwise the error grow by his meeting of Bylet and ask of the flood at this island which he say be eight of the clock whereas it be about eleven baffin which feed both those huge bay this seem strange that in this voyage as he search many Leaguee east and West he find the variation of the compass to rise and fall in a admirable proportion as if the true magnetical pole may be discover the come in of the flood from the northwest give they hope of a passage in march 1614 captain gibbins be employ on this discovery in the discovery so be the ship call but withous any great discovery that I have hear of persist in their purpose the next year c c exit Relat. w. baff 1615. Robert byle one which have be in three former voyage be send forth in that ship as master and William baffin his mate with fourteen other man and two boy which leave England about the latter end of march stay at silly till the seven of April and be force to put-back to padstow in Cornwall but weigh anchor on the nineteenth on the six of May see land on the coast of groenland on the east-side of cape farewell on the first of lune they come into a good harbour on the n. w. side of the island of resolution which be at the entrance into hudson strait in 61. degree 45. minute on the eight they come to savage island in 62. degree 30. minute threescore league from the entrance so call of some people they find in a Canow they be at their tent also and find among other thing a little bag with many small image of man therein and one of a woman with a child at her back the tent be cover with seales skin and about they some forty dog run up and down most of they muzzle as big as mongrel-mastiff of a brinded black colour look almost like wolf these they use to draw their sled over the ice with collar and furniture fit their sled also be shod or line with fishbone the people be like those in Groenland but not so neat and civil range up and down as their fish be in season uncertain where they keep in winter the master be confident in this and other place that the flood come from the west which baffin say by the float of the ice he observe on land to be contrary only the island cause by their diverse point differ sect and eddie on the two and twenty of june he observe the longitude have fair sight of the sun and moon and find himself by astronomical account 74. degree 5. minute west from the meridian of London which if some studious mariner will practice in their remote voyage we shall soon have a far more perfect geography I omit their icy siege sometime scarce leave they space to dip a pail of water they call one place in 65. latitude and 85. degree and 20. minute long cape comfort for the hope they apprehend of a passage which soon they find to be frustrate hence they pass to sea-horse cape so name of the plenty of morse and fifteen league thence to Nottingham island and thence to dig his * * at this i will be store of fowl call willocke whereof they may have kill thousand island in all those place observe the flood come from the southeast captain button and hudson man be all deceive as this our author affirm other island sometime keep off the force of the tide or by eddy cause a obscurity and their error we will therefore leave that spacious sea call button bay with the great island and some place not yet perfect discover within and beyond that straight of Hudson and come to baffin bay so discover to be this last year 1616. 1616. at the charge of the worthy adventurer before mention in the same ship sir t. Smith sir d. dig m. Wostenholme ald. jones etc. by the same master a a w. baffin the same both their pilot and we the first land they see after their departure from England be in fretum davis on the coast of Groenland in 65. degree 20. minute on the fourteen of May where they see people but they ply to the north till they be in 70. degree 20. minute the people flee from they here they take in fresh water but doubt the passage because the tide be small not above eight or nine foot and uncertain the flood from the south on the six and twenty day they find a dead whale float and get from the roof of her mouth 160. of those sin or whalebone but can not get the rest by reason of foul weather follow on the first of june they put in among diverse island the people forsake their Seal-skin-tent and flee some woman they find who they kind entreat give they piece of iron for which they return seal skin and the fat or blubber of they as for our meat taste they will not swallow it they call the place the woman island woman island in 72. degree and 45. minute the flood come from the south and the most of their food be the flesh of seal dry and eat raw they clothe themselves with the skin whereof they also make cover for their tent and boat dress they very well the woman differ in their apparel from the man raze their skin with sharp instrument and put thereon a indelible black colour mark their face with diverse black line they have a kind of devotion to the sun which continual they will point unto and strike their hand on their breast cry ylyout they bury their dead on the side of the hill where they live which be common on small island make a pile of stone over they yet not so close but that the corpse may be discern the pierce air keep they from stink their dog also they bury in the same manner they come to other island in 74. degree 4. minute which use to be much frequent with people in the latter part of the year as it seem by the house make of stone and turf round like oven with door to the south but they be not yet come june the nine the flood arise not above five or six foot the ebb run strong by the abundance of melt snow on the fifteen day in the latitude of 73. degree 45. minute come forty two of the inhabitant to they in boat and give they seal skin and many piece of the bone or horn of the Sea-unicorn and show they piece of morse tooth they receive in exchange small piece of iron glass bead and the like thus they do four time the place they call horn sound on the three of july they pass by a fair cape in 76. degree 35. minute which they name sir Dudley dig his cape twelve league beyond be wolstenholme sound a fit place for kill of whale proceed a little further they find themselves embay one place they call whale sound of their abundance in 77. degree and 30. minute hakluyt island be near strange variation of the compass and sir Thomas smith sound in 78. degree the compass there vary above 56. degree to the westward so that a north-east and by east of the compass be the true north which have not be observe so much vary in any part of the World put off to the west side of the bay they give name to alderman jones his sound and that of sir james Lancaster and in their return recover their sick man by scurvygrass or which they find on a little island in great plenty boil in beer and eat in salad with Orpine and Sorrell and so return home thus we see fretum davis be no passage but a bay and uncertain what that of Hudson be the most of which be discover impassable yet hope be not quite extinct we must expect God pleasure and future discovery for this passage it seem that most of all those sea in the north part beyond Newfoundland be intermix with island a maze and labyrinth to the discoverer in this voyage and bay they see many of those fish call sea-unicorn such as we have mention in sir Martin Frobisher navigation some of which fish be twelve or sixteen foot long the horn seem to hold the proportion of two three in length to their body and of these it seem be those in Venice and other place reserve as great jewel great jewel be those merchant and mariner which to the glory of our nation spare no cost and fear no danger in these their attempt resolute gallant glorious attempt which thus seek to tame nature where she be most unbridled in those northeasterly northwesterly and northerly border where she show herself all y y as borderer be most unruly and lawless so in these out-border of the world the power of nature great Officer the sun etc. be least see borderer indeed and to subdue she to that government and subjection which God over all bless for ever have impose on all sensible creature to the nature of man resemble in one image and abridgement both God and the world consist of a spiritual and bodily visible and invisible subsistence how shall I admire your heroic courage you marine worthy beyond all name of worthiness that neither dread so long either presence or absence of the sun nor those foggy mist tempestuous wind cold blast snow and haile in the air nor the unequal sea which may amaze the hearer and amate the beholder where the triton and Neptune self will quake with chill fear to behold such monstrous icy island rent themselves with terror of their own massine and disdain otherwise both the sea sovereignty and the sun hot violence muster themselves in those watery plain where they hold a continual civil war and rush one upon another make wind and wave give back seem to rend the ear of other while they rend themselves with crash and split their congeal armour nor the rigid ragged face of the break land sometime tower themselves in a lofty height to see if they can find refuge from those snow and cold that continual beat they sometime hide themselves under some hollow hill or cliff sometime sink and shrink into valley look pale with snow and fall in freeze and dead swoon z z these thing agree with the relation of those part which tell of earthquake break of cliff etc. Boterus a zealous and slanderous catholic use these disgraceful speech of this discovery pare pare 1 lib. 5. sometime break their neck into the sea rather embrace the water than the air cruelty and otherwhile with horrible earthquake in heat of indignation shake asunder to shake off this cold and heavy yoke great God to who all name of greatness be little and less than nothing let i in silence admire and worship thy greatness be little and less than nothing let i in silence admire and worship thy greatness that in this little heart of man not able to serve a kite for a a breakfast have place such greatness of spirit as the world be too little to fill only thyself the prototype and sampler of this model can with thy own self become all in all unto we fill and more than satisfy thou I beseech to prosper in this and like attempt this nation of we that as in great light then to other thou have give we thy son so with he thou will give all thing even this among other blessing that thy virgin truth by virginian plantation or northerly discovery may triumph in her conquest of indian infidelity maugre the brag of that adulteress that vaunt herself to be the only darling of God and nature chap. 4 of newfoundland noua Francia Arambec and other country of America extend to Virginia @. i. english discovery and plantation in newfoundland leave those unknown and freeze land and sea although there be yet know no freeze a a the northern sea may be call freeze in respect of the icy island which by their freshness manifest themselves to proceed of fresh water no experience yet show nor reason convince that the ocean always salt and move be any where freeze as my learned friend m. brig a great mathematician also affirm and Merula Cos. l. 3. c. 5. sea otherwise then as you have hear let we draw somewhat near the sun gentle march as the situation of region shall direct we lest if we shall sudden leap from one extremity to another we shall rather exchange then avoid danger and here we have by land saguenay and many country of canada which the french have style by a new name of new France and by the sea the island many in number and much frequent for their plenty of fish common call newfoundland which name some ascribe to a i will other to diverse island and break land which the french call Bacalos upon the gulf and entrance of the great river call saint Laurence in canada this river some b b edw. Haies Hak. to 3. 9 152. call the straight of the three brethren some c c gi. bot. ben. saint Laurence and other d d jaq. cart. l. 2. c. 11. canada it far exceed any river of the elder World it begin say jaques cartier beyond the island of assumption over against the high mountain of honbuedo and of the seven island the distance from one side to the other be about five and thirty or forty league in the midst it be about e e other say 200. two hundred fathom deep there be great store of whale and sea-horse from the entrance up to hochelaga be three hundred league many island be before it offer of their good nature to be mediator between this haughty stream and the angry ocean many other all alongst his passage he hold in his love unlovely lap wash and hug they with his rude embrace the former be usual frequent and be first discover by the english the other by the french of Sebastian cabot his proceed this way be speak already Robert thorn f f rob. thorn in m. hakluyt voyage ^ ^ p. 21. 9 in a treatise of his before mention affirm that his father and one master eliot be the discoverer of the newfoundland and exhort king Henry to undertake the search of the indies by the pole which he hold to be navigable upon this motion 1527. the king send two ship as hall and g g m. Hall m. Grafton Grafton mention in their chronicle one of which ship be cast away about the north part of newfoundland the other shape her course towards cape Briton and the coast of Arambec or as some call it Norumbega return home John Rutilio write a discourse hereof to the honourable king grace of England that I may borrow his own word wherein he declare their coast and the height of some place as cape Bas in 52. degree and 25. league thence cape ras etc. they find there eleven sail of norman one Briton and two Portugal bark fish Albertus de Prate another of they write another journal to cardinal Wolsey more tragical be the success h h m. hore 1530 Hak. to. 3. p. 129. of master Hore company which set our nine year after in this discovery but by famine be bring to such extremity that many of the company be murder and eat by their fellow and those which return be so alter that sir William butt a Norfolk knight and his lady know not their son master Thomas butt one of this starve number but by a secret mark namely a Wart which nature have seal on one of his knee the commod tie and quality of newfoundland be relate i i a parkhurst edw. hare sir g. Peckham step. parmenius Richard Clarke Christoph Carlisle by master parkhurst master hayes sir geo. Peckham Stephen parmenius Richard Clarke master Christopher Carlisle all who discourse and experiment hereof master hakluyt have collect and bestow on the World the northpart be inhabit the south be desert although fit for habitation beside the abundance of cod here be herring salmon thornbacke oyster and muskle with pearl smelt and squid which two sort come on shore in great abundance flee from the devour cod out of the frying-pan into the fire it be think that there be buff and certain that there be bear and fox which before your face will rob you of your fish or flesh before they come at newfoundland by fifty league they pass the bank so they call certain high ground as a vein of mountain raise themselves under the water about ten league in breath extend to the south infinite on which be 30. fathom water before and after 200. sir hum. Gilbert take possession thereof by virtue of her majesty commission 1582. it be within land a goodly country natural beautify with rose sow with pease plant with stately tree and otherwise diversify both for pleasure and profit and now our english nation do there plant and fix a settle habitation a chief actor and author of which business be master John Guy of Bristol who in the year 1608. sail from Bristol in three and twenty day to conception bay k k concep bay in 48. m Guy his letter to m. slany in newfoundland of this plantation and their wintring and continuance there I have see diverse relation with master hakluyt write by master Guy William Colston etc. in the year 1611. in October and November they have scarce six day frost or snow which present thaw the rest of those month be warm and dry then in England December be also fair with some frost snow and rain the wind in these three month variable from all part january and February be most part frost to mid march the wind most common westerly and sometime from the north. the sun often visit they with warm and comfortable ray chase away the snow and not suffer the brook to be freeze over three night with ice able to bear a dog the snow be never except in drift above eighteen inch deep they have there l l w. Colston filbert fish mackerel fox in the winter partridge white in the winter in summer somewhat like we but great they be much afraid of raven they kill a wolf with a mastiff and a greyhound Easton piracy be some trouble to they 1612. they find house of savage which be nothing but pole set round and meeting in the top ten foot broad the fire in the midst cover with deer skin they be of reasonable stature beardless and in condition like to those which sir Martin Frobisher discover broad-faced full-eyed colour on their face and apparel with red oaker their boat of bark as in canada twenty foot long four and a half broad not weigh 100 weight make in form of a new moon which carry four man and be by they carry to all place of their remooving their patent be grant 1610. for plantation between forty six and fifty two to be govern by a council of twelve and a treasurer there winter 1612. 54. man six woman and two child they kill there bear otter sable sow wheat rye turnip colewort their winter till April 1613. be dry and clear with some frost and snow diverse have the scurvy whereto their turnip there sow be a excellent remedy no less than Cartiers tree hereafter mention April be worse than the midst of winter by reason of east-wind which come from the island of ice which the current bring at that time from the north. the same I have see confirm by a letter of Thomas dermer one of that colony date at cuper cove the nine of September last 1616. in other month he say the temperature be as in England he mention musk-cat and musk-rat in those part the fertility of the soil in produce pease rye barley and oat probability of metal with promise of more full relation hereafter master Richard Whitborne have late publish a book of his voyage to newfoundland and observation there with certain letter also touch the new plantation by english therein at the charge of sir George caluard write by Edward winne n. h. etc. @. 2 the voyage and observation of JAQVIES cartier in noua Francia near to newfoundland in 47. degree be great kill of the Morse or Sea-ox a a thom. jamed the morse be say to sleep in great troop and to have one sentinel or watchman to awake the rest upon occasion the like be say of the seal some call the Morse a sea-horse in the i will of Ramea one small french ship in a small time kill fifteen hundred of they they be as great or great than ox the hide dress be twice as thick as a bull hide it have two tooth like elephant but short about a foot long grow downward out of the upper jaw and therefore less dangerous dear sell than ivory and by some repute a Antidote not inferior to the unicorn horn the young one be as good meat as veal which the old will defend hold they in her arm or forefoot and with the belly of five of the say fish if so we may call these amphibia which live both on land and water they make a hogshead of train oil their skin be short-haired like seal their face be like a lion and may more fit have be term sealion than sea-horse or Sea-ox they have four foot no ear the horn be about half a ell in length they use to lie on the ice sun and be soon kill with a blow on the forehead some of our english ship have attempt this enterprise for the kill of the Morse but not all with like success nor with so good as report of cherry island at brion island be such abundance of cod that master b b Charles Leigh leigh company with four hook in little more than a hour catch 250. of they near to the same in the gulf of s. Laurence be three term the island of bird the soil be sandy red but by reason of many bird on they they look white the bird sit as thick as stone lie in a pave street or to use jaques c c jaques cart. 5. Cartiers comparison as any field or meadow be of grass two of these island be steep and upright as any wall that it be not possible to climb they on the other which be in 49. degree 40. minute and about a league in circuit they kill and fill two boat d d in a hour they may have fill thirty boat of and might have lade all their ship with they without any miss in less than half a hour beside they which they do eat fresh every ship do powder five or six barrel of they there be a hundred fold as many hover about as within the island some be as big as jay black and white with beak like unto crow their wing be no big than half one hand and therefore they can fly high yet be they as swift near the water as other bird they be very fat these they call Aponatz a lesser kind which there abound they name Godetz a big and white which bite like dog they term Margaulx although it be 14. league from the main yet bear swim thither to feast with these bird one they see as great as a kow say cartier and as white as a swan which they do kill and eat and the flesh be as good as of a two year old calf about the port of breast they find so many ilet as they be impossible to be number continue a great space the island of assumption siluest. Wyet by the savage call Natiscotec stand in 49. degree the savage dwell in house make of fir-tree bind together in the top and set round like a dove-house this as before be say be at the entry of the river into the gulf of saint Laurence the bank of this river be inhabit of people that worship the devil and sometime sacrifice to he their own blood f f Botero part ^ lib. 5. Francis the first king of France send thither james Breton and Henry his son Nicolas Villaegagnon but the great riches they find be the diamond of canada and those of small value for their brittleness thus Boterus jaques g g jaq. cart. ^ cartier make three voyage into these part first in the year 1534. then be he glad welcome of the savage sing dance and express other sign of joy as rub his arm with their hand and then lift he up to heaven give all to their naked skin though all be worse than nothing for the trifle he give they they go naked save their privity which be cover with a skin and certain old skin they cast upon they some they see who head be altogether shave except one bush of hair which they suffer to grow upon the top of their crown as long as a horsetayle and tie up with leather string in a knot they have no dwell but their boat which they turn upside down and under they lay themselves along on the bare ground they eat their flesh and fish almost raw only a little heat on the coal the next year captain h h jaq. cart. 2. cartier return and carry back two savage which he before have carry into France to learn the language he then pass up to hochelaga i i he winter this time in the country they find rat which live in the water as big as coney and be very good meat hochelaga be a city round compass about with timber with three course of rampire one within another frame sharp about two rod high it have but one gate which be shut with pile and bar there be in it about fifty great house and in the midst of every one a court in the middle whereof they make their fire before they come there they be force to leave their boat behind because of certain fall and hear that there be three more high up the stream towards Sanguenay which in his k k jaq cart. 3. three voyage be discover concern the religion in these part of canada even among the savage we find some tract and foot-print thereof which neither the dreadful winter have quite freeze to death nor these great and deep water have whole drown but that some shadow thereof appear in these shadow of man howsoever wild and savage like to they which give her entertainment this people believe say jaques l l jaq. cart. 2. cap. 10. cartier in one which they call Cudruaigni who say they often speak to they and tell they what weather will follow whether good or bad moreover when he be angry with they he cast dust into their eye they believe that when they die they go into the star and thence by little and little descend down into the horizon even as the star do after which they go into certain green field full of goodly fair and precious tree flower and fruit the frenchman tell they Cudruaigni be a devil and acquaint they with some mystery of the christian religion whereupon they condescend and desire baptism the french excuse and promise after to bring priest for that purpose they live in common together and of such commodity as their country yield they be well store they wed two or three wife a man which their husband be dead never marry again but for their widow livery wear a black wood all the day of their life besmear their face with coal-dust and grease mingle together as thick as the back of a knife they have a filthy and detestable use in marry their maiden first put they be once of lawful age to marry in a common place as harlot free for every man that will have to do with they until such time as they find a match I have see house as full of such prostitute as the school in France be full of child they there use much misrule riot and wantonness they dig their ground with certain piece of wood as big as half a sword where they sow their maize the man also do much use tobacco the woman labour more than the man in fish and husbandry they be more hardy than the beast and will come to our ship stark naked go upon snow and ice in which season they take great store of beast stag bear martern hare and fox who flesh they eat raw have first dry it in the sun or smoke and so they do their fish they have also otter weasil beavers badger coney fowl and fish great variety and one fish call Adhothuis who body and head be like to a greyhound white as snow their great jewel be chain of Esurgnie which be shellfish exceed white which they take on this manner when a captive or other man be condemn to death they kill he and then cut slash in his most fleshy part and hurl he into the river Cornibots whence after twelve hour they draw he find in those cut these Esurgnie whereof they make bead and chain they be excellent for staunch of blood thus much out of cartier in the year 1542. m m m. Francis roberual roberual be send to inhabit those part he say that he build a fort fair and strong the people have no certain dwell place but go from place to place as they may find best food carry all their good with they it be more cold in that then in other place of like height as John alphonse of Xanctoigne n n John alphonse of Xanctoigne Hak. tom. 3. affirm because of the greatness of the river which be fresh water and because the land be untilled and full of wood we may add the cold vapour which the sun exhale in that long passage over the ocean the abundance of ice that come out of the north-sea and the wind which blow from they and from the cold snowy hill in the way @. 3 late plantation of New-France and relation of the native SAmuel champlain Mouns. Champlein make a voyage to canada 1603. and encounter with a bank of ice eight league long in 45. degree two three part with infinite small the streit mouth from cape Ray to the cape of saint Laurence within the gulf of canada be eighteen league he observe a feast make by Anadabijon the great Sagamo in his cabin in which eight or ten kettle of meat be set on several fire six pace asunder the man sit on both side of the room each have a dish make of the bark of a tree one appoint to divide to every man his portion before the meat be boil one take his dog and dance about the kettle from one to another and when he come before the Sagamo cast down his dog and then succeed another in the like exercise after their feast they dance with the head of their b b the Irocois with who these Estechemin algoumequin and montainer have war enemy in their hand some sing their canoas be of the bark of birch strengthen within with little circle of wood eight or nine pace long fit for active and passive carriage their cabin be low like tent cover with the say bark the roof open a foot space uncover to let in light with many fire in the midst ten household sometime together the lie upon skin one by another and their dog with they after a certain feast the algoumequin one of these three nation in league go out apart and cause all their woman and maid to sit in rank themselves stand behind sing sudden all the woman and maid cast of their mantle of skin and strip themselves naked not ashamed of their shame keep on still their Matachia which be c c bead pater-noster and chain interlace make of the hair of the porkespicke die of diverse colour their song end they cry with one voice ho ho ho and then cover themselves with their mantle which lay at their foot and after a while renew their former song and nakedness their Sagamo sit before the virgin and woman between two staff whereon be hang those enemy head and he exhort the mountainer and estechemain to the like signification of joy which then cry all together ho ho ho. when he be return to his place the great Sagamo and all his company cast off their mantle their privity only remain cover with a little skin and take each what they think good as Matachias hatchet sword kettles flesh etc. which they present to the algoulmequin after this two of each nation contend in run and the best runner be reward with present they be well set of tawny or olive colour by reason of their paint they be liar their custom give to revenge without law when a maid be fourteen or fifteen year old she have many lover and use carnal filthiness with who she please so continue five or six year and then take who she like for her husband live with he chaste all her life after except for barrenness he forsake she the husband be jealous and give present to her parent when one die they make a pit and therein put all his good with the corpse cover the same with earth and set over it many piece of wood with one stake paint red and set up on end they believe the immortality of the soul and that the dead go into far country to make merry with their friend d d m. Champlein Champlein discourse with certain savage yet live of who he learn touch their religion that they believe in one God who have create all thing that after God have make all thing he take a number of arrow and do stick they into the ground from whence man and woman spring up which have multiply ever since touch the trinity be ask a sagamo or governor answer e e the answer of a sagamo in case of religion there be one only God one son one mother and the sun which be four notwithstanding f f this somewhat agree with the manichean and Pythagorean error that God be over and above all the son be good and the sun also but the mother be naught and do eat they and that the father be not very good be ask if they or their ancestor have hear that God be come into the world he say that he have not see he but that ancient there be five man who travel towards the set of the sun meet with God who demand of they whither go you they answer we go to seek for our live God say you shall find it here but they not regard pass further and then God with a stone touch two of they who be turn into stone and he say again to the three other whither go you they answer and he reply as at first they yet pass further he take two staff and touch therewith the two foremost and transform they into staff ask the three man whither he go he say to seek his live whereupon he bid he tarry and he do so and God give he meat and he do eat and after he have make good cheer he return among the other savage and tell they all his tale this sagamo also tell that at another time there be a man which have store of tobacco and God come and ask he for his pipe which the man give he and he drink much of it and then break the pipe the man be offend hereat because he have no more pipe but God give he one and bid he carry it to his sagamo with warning to keep it well and then he shall want nothing nor any of he since the say sagamo lose the pipe and find famine and other distress this seem to be the cause why they say God be not very good be demand what ceremony they use in pray to their god he say that they use no ceremony but every one do pray in his heart as he will they have among they some savage who they call Pilotova who speak visible to the devil and he tell they what they must do as well for war as for other thing and if he shall command they to put any enterprise in execution or to kill a man that they will do it immediate they believe also that all their dream be true so far Champlein in the year 1604. de mont m. de mont according to a patent grant he the year before for the inhabit of cadis canada and other part of New-France from the forty degree to the six and forty rig two ship and bare with those part that trend westward from cape Breton give name to place at pleasure or upon occasion one port be name Savalet savalet two and forty voyage to noua Francia of a french captain who be there a fish and have make his two and forty voyage hither another be name of Rossignol who ship be confiscate for trade there with the savage a poor preferment to leave name to a port by his misery another be name port-moutton and within a great bay they name another portroyall where after they fortify the inhabitant of these part be term Souriquois from they westward be the people call Etechemins where the next port after you be pass the river of saint John be saint croix where they erect a fort and winter threescore league west from thence be the river Kinibeki and from thence the land trend north and south to Malabarre author place in that former extension of land betwixt east and west a great town and fair river call Norombega by the savage call Agguncia these french discoverer utter deny this history affirm that there be but caban here and there make with Perkes and cover with bark of tree or with skin and both the river and inhabit place be call Pemtegoet and not Agguncia and there can be no great river as they affirm because the great river canada have like a insatiable merchant engross all these water-commodity so that other stream be in manner but mere pedlar Armouchiquois the armouchiquois be a traitorous and thievish people next unneighbourly neighbour to the Etechemins they be light-footed and lime-fingered as swift in run away with their steal prey as the greyhound in pursue it Champlein testify that the armouchiquois be deform with little head short body arm small like a bone as be their thigh also their leg great and long and disproportion with likeness of proportion when they sit on their heel their knee be half a foot high than their head they be valiant and plant in the best country m. du point du point arrive in those part in the year 1605. and du mont remove the french habitation to the portroyall de Pourtrincourt sail thither in the year 1606. and with he the author of the book call noua Francia * * mark L'scarbot who have write the rite and custom of these country he say that the armouchiquois be a great people but have no adoration they be vicious and bloody both they and the souriquois Souriquois have the industry of paint and carve and do make picture of bird beast and man both in stone and wood as well as the workman in these part they as be say ascribe not divine worship to any thing but yet acknowledge some spiritual and invisible power I know not by what divine justice and injustice of the devil it come to pass that God have give some man up so far unto the devil tyranny that he have banish out of their heart the knowledge and worship of the true God and yet the nature of man can be without apprehension of some great and more excellent nature and rather than want of all religion they will have a religious-irreligious commerce with the devil yea the more all knowledge of God be banish the base service do man in do and suffer yield to the devil as to leave other part to their own place it fall out in these region the prince and great commander of man among they seem by this mean to be the devil vicegerent and by wizardly and devilish practice to up-hold his own greatness so it be with sagamo Membertou if any body be sick he be send for he make invocation on the devil he blow upon the party grieve make incision suck the blood from it a practice use in very many country of the continent and island of America if it be a wound he heal it after the same manner apply a round slice of beavers stone some present be therefore make to he of venison or skin if it be a question to have news of thing absent have first question with his spirit he render his oracle common doubtful very often false and sometime true he render a true oracle of the come of poutrincourt to du Pont say his devil have tell he so when the savage be hungry they consult with membertou oracle and he tell they the place whither they shall go and if there be no game find the excuse be that the beast have wander and change place but very often they find and this make they believe that the devil be a god and know none other although they yield he no adoration when these so they call these wizard consult with the devil they fix a staff in a pit to which they tie a cord and put their head into the pit make invocation or conjuration in a language unknown to the other that be about and this with beat and howl until they sweat with pain when this devil be come the master Aoutmoin make they believe that he hold he tie by his cord and hold fast against he force he to give he a answer before he let he go that do he begin to sing something in the praise as it seem of the devil that have discover some game unto they and the other savage that be there make answer with some concordance of music among they then they dance with song in another not vulgar language after which they make a fire and leap over it and put half a pole out of the top of the cabin where they be with something tie thereto which the devil carry away Memberton carry at his neck the mark of his profession which be a purse trianglewise cover with their embroider work within which there be somewhat as big as a nut which he say be his devil call this function be successive and by tradition they teach their elder son the mystery of this iniquity every * * sagamo signify a king or ruler sagamo either be or have his aoutmoin the man and woman wear their black hair long hang loose over the shoulder wherein the man stick a feather the woman a bodkin they be much trouble with a sting fly for prevention whereof they rub themselves with a certain kind of grease and oil they paint their face with blue or red but not their body for their marriage they be contract with the consent of parent who will not give their daughter in marriage to any except he be a good hunter the woman be say to be chaste and the contrary seldom find and though the husband have many wife yet be there no jealousy among they the widow here if there husband be kill will not marry again nor eat flesh till their death be revenge otherwise they make no great difficulty which cartier report of canada to marry again if they find a fit match sometime the savage have many wife will give one to their friend if he like she so to disburden themselves the woman eat not with the man in their meeting but apart when they make feast they they end with dance all in a round to which one sing at the end of every song all make a loud and long exclamation and to be the more nimble they strip themselves stark naked if they have any of their enemy head or arm they will carry they as a jewel about their neck while they dance sometime bite the same after their feast they will diet themselves live sometime eight day more or less with the smoke of tobacco they be in nothing laborious but in hunt they sow but so much as will serve they for six month and that very hardly during the winter they retire three or four month space into the wood and there live on acorn fish and venison they wash not themselves at meal except they be monstrous foul and then wipe on their own or their dog hair their entertainment be with small compliment the guest sit down by his host if it be the king take tobacco and then give the pipe to he that he think the worthy person in the company they be dutiful to their parent obey their commandment and nourish their person in age they use humanity to the wife and child of their conquer enemy but the man of defence they kill their chief hunt be in winter they carry always tinderbox with they to strike fire when hunt be do or night take they for they follow the game sometime three day together their dog be like fox which spend not never give over their beast and hunt and have racket tie under their foot the better to run on the snow they seethe the flesh in a tub of wood by put stone heat red hot therein the woman duty be to slay the beast and bring it home the ellan dear stag and bear be their game they take also with their hand bever which be of a chest-nut colour short legged his forefoot have open claw the hinder fin like a goose the tail scale almost of the form of a solefish it be the delicate part of the beast the head be short and round with two rank of jaw at the side and before four great tooth two above and two beneath with which he cut down small tree he build on the brink of a lake cut his wood therewith raise a vault and because the water sometime rise he have a upper story to betake himself to in such case he build it Pyramid-wise sometime eight foot high and daub it with mud he keep his tail still in the water they take he with their hand in a frost one fray he on the ice while another seize on his neck when one die they mourn for he long every cabin his day by course after that they burn all his good and bury the body in a grave where when they have place he every one make a present of the best thing he have as skin to cover he bow knife or the like quebec a a s. champlain be a strait of canada where be a goodly country furnish with Okes cypress wild vine pear nut cherry goose-berry diamond in the rock of slate and other profitable pleasure they see in forty five degree a lake fifteen league long and eight wide with a salt or fall not above three fathom but very furious the savage relate to they of passage to a salt lake whereof they know no end reach so far southerly that the sun set to the north thereof in summer it be four hundred league from the place where the french then be in the addition to noua Francia addition to n f. mention be make of a lake about threescore league long with fair island in it the iroquois the iroquois have no town their dwelling and fort be three or four story high as in New-Mexico another lake be say to continue a hundred league in length and some conceive hope of passage to the south-sea thereby the scurvy or scorbuch much consume the french in these part a disease that usual attend evil diet Ol mag. lib. 16. cap. 51. and much salt meat which and want of exercise convenient be the harbinger of this sickness in long siege and navigation Cartiers company be in a little time wonderful cure hereof by a tree like to sassafras but of the french in these part and of their do and suffering see more in the four part of my pilgrim the eight and nine book out of mark Le'Scarbot sir w. Alexander etc. chap. v. of UIRGINIA @. i. the preface sir WALTER Raleigh plantation and the northern colony leave New-France let we draw near the sun to New-britain who virgin soil not yet pollute with Spaniard lust by our late virgin-mother be just call Virginia whether shall I here begin with eulogy or elegy whether shall I warble sweet carol in praise of thy lovely face thou fair of virgin which from our other Britain world have win thou wooer and suitor not such as Leander who love the poet have blaze for swim over the strait betwixt Sestos and abydus to his lovely hero but which for thy sake have forsake their mother-earth encounter the most tempestuous force of the air and so often plough up Neptune plain furrow the angry ocean and that to make thou of a rude virgin not a wanton minion but a honest and christian wife or shall I change my accent and plain i for I know not of who to who to complain of those disadventure which these thy lovely lover have sustain in seek thy love what envy I know not whether of nature willing to reserve this nymph for the treasury of her own love testify by the many and continual present of a temperate climate fruitful soil fresh and fair stream sweet and wholesome air except near the shore as if her jealous policy have prohibit foreign suitor or of the savage inhabitant unworthy to embrace with their rustic arm so sweet a bosom and to appropriate with great disparagement so fair a virgin to savage love or haply some conceive indignity that some parent shall thither send their most unruly son and that our Britannia shall make her virginian lap to be the voider for her lewd and more disorder inhabitant who ill part have make distasteful those kind office of other our Britain worthy which else have be long since with great gladness and the recompense of herself entertain or whether it be virginian modesty and after the use of virgin she will say nay at first hold that love sure in continuance which be hard in obtain whether any or all of these or what else have hinder hinder we have be and have not yet obtain the full fruition of her love and possession of her gainful dowry which yet now more than ever before she seem to promise and doubtless will quick perform if nigardise at home do not hinder and shall man be niggardly in this adventure where Nabal must needs verify his name where keep lose adventure promise so fair a purchase misery of our time that miserable man shall here want what they already have and refuse to have there at no rate abundant supply to their too miserable fear of want lift up your eye and see that brightness of Virginia beauty which the mountain lift up themselves always with wild smile to behold send down silver stream to salute she which power themselves greedy into her lovely lap and after many wind embracement loath to depart be at last swallow of a more mighty corrival the ocean he also send army of fish to her coast to win her love even of his best store and that in store and abundance the mountain outbid the ocean in offer the secret storehouse of undoubted mine he again offer pearl and thus while they seek to outface each other with their puff big and swell cheek who shall get the bride the one lay hold on the continent and detain the same maugre the ocean fury and he again have get the island all along the coast which he guard and keep with his watery garrison Virginia betwixt those two sour-faced suitor be almost distract and easy will give entertainment to english love and accept a new Britan appellation if her husband be but furnish out at first in sort and suit befit her marriage solemnity all which her rich dowry will maintain for ever after with advantage and well may England court she rather than any other european lover in regard of his long continue amity and first discovery of her land and sea an. 1497. this by Sebastian cabot with his english mariner a hundred and fifteen year since and the other by sir Walter Raleigh charge and direction dom. 1584. then first of all christian do master Philip Amadas and master Arthur barlow take possession in queen Elizabeth name the next year that mirror of resolution a a Hak. voyage tem. 3. p. 246. and d. Gaspar Ens. hist. ind. Oc. l. 3. c. 23. theod. de bry. sir Richard Greenuile convey thither a english colony which he there leave for plantation under the government of master Ralph lane which there continue until the eighteen of june in the year follow and then upon some urgent occasion return with sir Francis drake into England yet have they stay but a little long a ship of sir Walter Raleigh have supply their necessity and soon after sir Richard again repair thither with three ship and then also leave fifteen man more to keep possession in the year 1587. a second colony be send under the government of master John white to their succour sir Walter Raleigh have send five several time the last by b b brief note of a bark etc. print 1602. Samuel mace of weymouth in march one thousand six hundred and two but he and the former perform nothing but return with frivolous allegation the same year captain Bartholomew gosnold and captain Gilbert discover the north part of Virginia of which voyage John brereton c c joh. brereton Gabriel archer write note thereof and m. gosnold himself in a letter to his father they reside in 41. deg. 20. minute have write a treatise in the year 1603. d d write by Martin bring write by tho. Canner the Bristol man by leave of sir Walter Raleigh set forth a voyage thither in 43. degree in this expedition be Robert salterne which have be the year before with captain gosnold they discover whitson-bay so they term it in one and forty degree twenty five minute the people use snake skin of which some be six foot long for girdle they be exceed ravish with the music of a gitterneboy dance in a ring about he they more fear two english mastiff then twenty man they have such boat as before be mention seventeen foot long four broad of birchbarke sow with osyer the seam cover with resin almost as sweet as frankincense carry nine man stand upright and yet not weigh above threescore pound they bring one of they to Bristol this year captain Gilbert set forth again for Virginia at Mevis they lade twenty tun of he have four more be slay by the savage and in the year 1605. captain George weymouth make thither a prosperous voyage and discover threescore mile up a most excellent river his voyage be set forth in print by e e james rosier james rosier after this follow the plantation by the present adventurer for the foundation of a new Britan commonwealth and the east and f f their parent prescribe that they plant not within 100 mile of each other and contain from 30. deg. to 45. west part of England join in one purpose of a twofold plantation in the north and south part of Virginia of the north part our method require first mention Mawooshen be many year together visit by our man extend between 43. and 45. degree 40. league in breadth and 50. in length they find therein nine river Quibiquesson Pemaquid Ramassoc apanawapaske Apaumensele Aponeg Sagadahoc Ashamahaga Shawokotoc Sagadahoc be in 43. degree it be a mile and half at the mouth hold the same breadth a day journey and then make a sound three day g g the savage reckon thus by day journey journey broad in which be six island it have two branch the one from the north-east 24. day journey the other northwest 30. day journey at the head be two lake the westermost 8. day journey long and four wide the eastermost half so large this be Bashaba his dominion the tarentine h h Christopher fortescue country be in 44. deg. two three part where the savage tell of a rock of alum near the river of Sasnowa captain i i tho. hanham m. challenge make a voyage hitherward the same year but be take by the spaniard t. hanham i i tho. hanham m. challenge make a voyage hitherward the same year but be take by the spaniard Thomas hanham sail to the river of Sagadahoc 1606. he relate of their beast dog like wolf of colour black white red grisle red deer and a beast big call the Must etc. of their fowl fish tree of some oar prove to be silver bashabe have many undercaptaine call sagamo their house build with withe and cover over with mat six or seven pace long he express also the name of their twelve moon or month as january Mussekeshos February Gignokiakeshos etc. an. 1607. be settle a plantation in the river Sagadahoc the ship call the gift and the Mary and John k k james davies be send thither by that famous english justicer sir John popham and other they find this coast of Virginia full of island but safe they choose the place of their plantation at the mouth of Sagadahoc in a westerly Peninsula these hear a sermon read their patent and law and build a fort. they sail up to discover the river and country and encounter with a island where where be a great fall of water over which they hale their boat with a rope and come to another fall shallow swift and unpassable they find the country store with grape white and red good hop onion garlic Okes walnut the soil good the head of the river be in forty five and odd minute cape Sinieamis in 43. deg. 30. min. a good place to fortify their fort bare name of saint George forty five remain there l l io. eliot g. pop. let. to s. i. Gilbert and e. s. captain George popham be precedent Raleigh Gilbert admiral the people seem affect with our man devotion and will say king JAMES be a good king his god a good God and tanto naught so they call a evil spirit which haunt they every moon and make they worship he for fear he command they not to dwell near or come among the english threaten to kill some and inflict sickness on other begin with two of their sagamo child say he have power and will do the like to the english the next moon to wit in December the people m m ral. Gilbert tell our man of cannibal n n these seem to be the deform armouchiquois make in the tell more dreadful near Sagadahoc with tooth three inch long but they see they not in the river of tamescot they find oyster nine inch in length and be tell that on the other side there be twice as great on the 18. of january they have in seven hour space thunder lightning rain frost snow all in abundance the last continue on February the 5. the precedent die the savage remove their dwelling in winter near the dear they have a kind of shoe a yard long fourteen inch broad make like a racket with strong twine or sinew of a dear in the mid be a hole wherein they put their foot buckle it fast when a sagamo die they black themselves and at the same time yearly renew their mourn with great howl as they then do for Kashurakeny who die the year before they report that the cannibal have a sea behind they they find a bath two mile about so hot that they can not drink it master patteson be slay by the savage of Nanhoc a river of the tarentine their short commons o o Edward hartley cause fear of mutiny one of the savage call Aminquin for a straw hat and knife give he strip himself of his clothing to bever skin worth in England 50. shilling or three pound to present they to the precedent leave only a flap to cover his privity he will also have come with they for England in winter they be poor p p other note ap. Hak. and weak and do not then company with their wife but in summer when they be fat and lusty but your eye weary with this northern view which in that winter communicate with we in extremity of cold look now for great hope in the southern plantation as the right arm of his virginian body with great cost and number furnish from hence but first let i tell you that by some late these northern part be style by the name of New-england as be suppose in the same latitude with noua Albion on the south sea discover by sir Francis Drake have new France on the north and the southern plantation of Virginia on the south new Spain new Granado new Andalusia be in the same continent a map and discovery hereof be set forth this last year by captain John Smith with new english name exchange for the savage it lie betwixt 41. degree and 45. minute the harsh name of the habitation of those part I forbear to recite the commodity be express by that author first for fish let not any think this contemptible when by his report the hollander reap from three kind herring cod and ling fifteen hundred thousand pound yearly hereupon principal sound their greatness by sea and land in march April May and half june here be cod in abundance in May june july and August mullet and sturgeon who roe do make caulary and puttargo their store of herring they compare to the hair of their head in the end of August September October and November you have cod again to make corfish or Poor-iohnt wise as good as in Newfoundland where their fish also be chief but in june and july mullet be here take by net which at cape blank be hook and twice as large he add store of red-berry call Alkermes Musk-rat bever otter martin black fox probability of mine and manifold commodity of the soil the particular whereof I refer to the book itself together with the argument for a plantation there there also you may read his observation and discovery 1614 with the success of six ship that go the next year and his disaster by french pirate and q q see the examination of d. baker and other of his company they take one prize worth 200000. crown which be after split the captain and half his company drown english perfidy this present year 1616. eight voluntary ship go thither to make further trial and hereafter we hope to have english colony renew in this northerly plantation new call New-england @. 2 of the southern plantation and colonies and many cause allege of the ill success thereof at the first captain Bartholomew gosnold have long solicit many of his friend at last prevail with some gentleman as master Edward Maria Wingfield Richard pot tho. Studley etc. captain John Smith and diverse other with the help of some nobleman and merchant his majesty grant commission for establish counsel to direct here and to govern and execute there so that December 19 1606. they set sail and after long contend with contrary wind and the windy inconstancy of some of the company that will have return for England before they have salute their desire port they be by a storm force into the same unexpected where after some harm by assault of the savage on the 13. of May master Wingfield be choose precedent their fort contrive and the fall soon after discover six week be thus spend captain Newport return with the ship and captain Smith before hold in much jealousy be by the pain of Mr hunt the preacher reconcile and admit of the council a hundred be leave there for the plantation within ten day after the departure of this movable tavern as they call it a more savage enemy than the savage have assault they and scarce ten leave untouched with sickness through want of convenient lodging and diet of which from may to September fifty die Wingfield be depose and Ratcliff establish in his place and by the industry of smith james town be build the savage supply their necessity they fail captain Smith seek trade abroad other at home intend a return in the pinnace for England by his unexpected return be force to stay or sink which action cost the life of captain Kendal soon after the like plot of the precedent a a m. Wingfield write that one read a smith escape hang by accuse Kendal who be shoot to death and that smith and he have follow if Newport have not come and captain archer be discover and by he again suppress the winter approach the river afford they plenty of crane swan goose duck with which and pease wild beast and other land-commodity they daily feast but in the discovery of chickahamine river George Casson be surprise and smith with two other be beset with two hundred savage his man slay and himself in a quagmire take prisoner but after a month he procure himself not only liberty but great admiration among they and return once more stay the pinnace from flight and the fort from be abandon the treasurer and council meanwhile careful to supply their want send two ship with near a hundred man capt. Newport arrive safe captain nelson with the other ship by force of wind be drive to shift as he can elsewhere now the savage enchant by smith relation of God nature and art be in manner at his command till the ambition of some by give four time as much for their commodity as he appoint seek to seem of so much great magnificence and authority make they prize their commodity dear Newport who smith have call father and extol with powhatan the emperor go with solemnity to visit he send smith before who after his manner of state give he b b ed. Wingfield Newp journey to powhatan he tell he of the s. sea and ship etc. royal entertainment sit upon his bed of mat his pillow of leather embroider with pearl and white bead attire with a robe of skin large as a irish mantle at his head and foot sit a handsome young woman on each side his house twenty other their head and shoulder paint red with a great chain of white bead about their neck before those sit his chief man in like order in his arbor-like house Newport give he a boy for who powhatan give he namontacke his servant which be after bring into England powhatan witty cheat our man and offer so much corn as they give copper say he can eat that not this c c tho. savage he adopt also smith and Scrivener newport son his grandchild disc of Chesap see pot his collection c. 6. their get in this voyage other commodity and their town be casual consume by fire and the ship stay fourteen week spend most of that provision for the relief of the colony and by the bitterness of that great frost 1607. above half take their death Wingfield and archer be send for England be busy in the spring to rebuild their town nelson arrive with his lose phoenix so they suppose his ship and deal honest than they report of the former mariner the second of june 1608. Smith leave the fort to discover the bay of Chesapeack in the way want of convenient water place they be so thirsty as they will have refuse two barricoe of gold for one of water and they arrive at james town in September where they find some sick many dead and the precedent prisoner which place by election of the council and request of the company be bestow on smith captain Newport return with rich present of basin Ewer bed clothes with a crown for powhatan which make he overvalue himself some pole and Dutch which be send to make pitch and tar glass mill and soap-ash prove after treacherous powhatan mind murder and villainy at once sixteen of our man be beset with seven hundred which by the policy of smith seize on opechancanough their king be prevent and turn to their enrich with their commodity and among other they use poison which wrought not after Smith take the king of paspaheigh prisoner which force the savage to peace thus have we a little while behold tragical more than show on this virginian theatre those thing which be well intend be ill pervert and their great advantage arise from casual disadvantage diversity of emulation beclowd that morning star a disastrous comet shine rather with fiery gleam of civil broil and brawl in that hemisphere then comfortable illumination and influence to the common good the savage be now in good term with the english their plantation at james town where they have build a church and many house in some reasonable manner flourish the country be with great pain and peril of the precedent further discover their swine hen and other provision nourish and some quantity of many commodity as fur die mineral sassafrasse sturgeon and other thing send hither in testimony of their industry and success and Virginia grow now in such request a a new life of Virginia that nine ship be furnish with the better part of five hundred man to inhabit there in the year one thousand six hundred and nine the government be devolve to the l. de la Ware sir Thomas gate be appoint lieutenant general sir George Summers admiral of Virginia and be send to reside there as governor of the colony but the sea-venture wherein the two knight and captain Newpott with a hundred and fifty person sail after long conflict with the two angry element be send to be imprison in bermuda where between two rock the ship split the people escape to land in the mean time b b three of the other ship c c a catch perish at sea in a hurricane the other come thither but in the return two of they in one of which capt. w. king be master perish on Ushant have land their man in Virginia some of who d d ratliffe Martin archer be such as have be the emulous and envious corrival of the precedent which they then begin to show and to second the same a great hurt by gunpowder befall he which force he for his recovery to set sail for England after he have live there three year maintain himself and his that time principal with such food as the country yield he say he leave behind at his return five hundred man and woman three ship seven boat two hundred expert soldier thirty nine of their Weroances or king as subject and contributor to the english so far subject that at his command they have send their subject to james town to receive correction at his appointment for wrong do and their country be free to the english for travel or trade but necessity force he to leave the country which it force the other appoint governor not to find hence proceed the disorder and confusion which after happen among they a great body be here which acknowledge no head and therefore grow unwieldy and distemper some seek for rule over other which be overrule by unruly passion of ambition and faction in themselves other seek their ease except sometime they be overbusy in disease other and devour that which other have careful labour for ruin seize on the church rapine make prey and spoil of the good ravine devour their beast famine consume the man injury make the indian their enemy two of the ship perish upon Ushant and one man alone be leave to bring home news of their perish the rest return lade with letter of discouragement paint out famine sedition and other fury which have break loose among they in the black colour which be seal with report of the loss of their admiral to make up the measure of mischief all this do not daunt the noble spirit of e e lord de la Ware that resolute lord appoint lord governor who in the begin of April one thousand six hundred and ten set sail from the coast of England and on the nine of june arrive safe at the disfortified fort in Virginia where he find the present state like to the box f f nat. com. Mytholog l. 4. c. 6. hygin fab. 142. of Pandora who be endow with manifold good gift each of the god bestow one on she be send with a box full of evil to Prometheus who refuse the offer but by epimetheus be open whereby all evil be suffer to fly out hope only remain which he shut fast in the bottom and thus be it with this virginian Pandora enrich with the best offering of nature bounty but by epimethean carelessness all evil have now disperse themselves and make the virginian colony a stage of misery only hope remain but alas even that also prove sick and be ready to give up the ghost in the dangerous sickness which befall that noble c c relation to the council of Virginia by the lord de la Ware 1611. lord which force he after eight month sickness to return for England again he ship himself indeed for Mevis a island in the west indies famous for wholesome bath but by southerly wind be compel to change his purpose and at last to make home have leave deputy governor captain George Percy a gentleman of honour and resolution with upward of two hundred person almighty God that have thus far try the patience of the english will not suffer they to be tempt above that they be able and therefore in his secret providence before any knowledge be here have of his lordship sickness have ordain sir Thomas dale shall be furnish out with a good supply of three ship man cattle and many provision all which arrive safe at the colony the ten of May 1611. he by his letter and the lord governor by his relation do animate the adventurer the one protest himself willing and ready to lay all that he be worth upon the adventure of the action rather than so honourable a work shall fail and to return with all convenient expedition if their friendly endeavour will therein second his resolution the other d d sir th. Dales letter to the committee write that four of the best kingdom in Christendom put all together may no way compare with this country either for commodity or goodness of soil this spark kindle in their heart such constancy of zeal and forwardness that they furnish out sir Thomas gate who have happy return with the rest from bermudas with six ship 300. man and a hundred kine with other cattle munition and provision of all sort sir Thomas dale have news that it be a fleet of enemy prepare himself and the rest to a encounter but it end with a common joy in the shake of hand and not of pike law be now make for lawlessness have mar so much before for the honour of God frequent the church observation of the sabbath reverence to minister obedience to superior mutual love honest labour and against adultery sacrilege wrong and other vice harbinger of God wrath and man destruction the colony consist of seven hundred man of sundry art and profession few of they sick which have leave the fort at cape Henry fortify and keep by captain davies and the keep of james town to that noble and well-deserving gentleman master George Perole be remove up the river fourscore mile further beyond james town to a place of high ground strong and defensible by nature with good air plenty of spring much fair and open ground free from wood and wood enough at hand here they burn brick cut down wood and every man fall to somewhat they have build they say competent house the first story all of brick that every man may have his lodging and dwell by himself with a sufficient quantity of ground allot thereto here also they be build a hospital with fourscore lodging and bed already send for the sick and lame as the book call the new life of Virginia relate master Whitaker in his letter and book from Henrico 1612. testify the health and welfare of the colony Samuel argal in the year 1613. affirm likewise that he find the state of Virginia far better than be report in one voyage they have get 1100. bushel of corn they find a slow kind of cattle as big as f f Alvaro Nunez speak of such kine in Florida which come hither from the north. kine which be good meat and a medicinable sort of earth they take Pokohuntis g g her true name be Matokes which they conceal from the english in a superstitious fear of hurt by the english if her name be know she be now christen Rebecca powhatan dear daughter prisoner a matter of good consequence to they of best to she by this mean be become a Christian and marry to master rolph a english gentleman thus I have be bold somewhat large to relate the proceed of this plantation to supplant such slander and imputation as some have conceive or receive against it and to excite the diligence and industry of all man of ability to put to their help hand in this action so honourable in itself glorious to God in the furtherance of his truth and beneficial to the commonwealth and to the private purse of the adventurer if the bloom of our hope be not blast with our negligence as for the want of success hitherto reason shall prevail with man leave sense and event of thing as a argument for beast that reason which show Virginia more than possibility and probability do also point out the cause of those ill success h h above 20. cause allege of ill success in this plantation discontent at sea ignorance of the country and of their language division in the council commander some of they not skilful soldier nor forward adventurer care to relade the ship before they can provide house of victual ambition cruelty neglect of the season for fish and land-commodity brackish slimy water at james fort riot Sloth false information in England send ill people that consume the rest with idleness want of authority to punish they that kind of aristocratical authority first establish occasion of their quarrel injury to and from the savage and yet a necessity of their use and help sickness cause by the gross and vaporous air and soil about james town and drink water the thievish truck and exchange which some secret hold with they the treachery of fugitive falsehood of the savage and the many many fault as they report of mariner in private truck and night mart both with our man and savage their long stay and spend the colony relief beside extraordinary casualty of fire cold shipwreck and if we believe i i Ouied. hist c. 13. l. 2. toast and Indie etc. Ouiedo and observe the like among the spaniard the very air of the indies seem to be of inclination and disposition to contention which easy ruin and dissolve the great and best enterprise that I speak not of the devil malice to christian hope experience have now make man wise both to prevent and remedy these evil and to order their proceed according and although fame fill not our ear with so often and many virginian rumour as aforetimes yet we know that still water be deep and we can but hope that those worthy virginian-consul k k sir t. gate and sir t. dale rather with careful providence and watchful diligence work sure then with humorous hastiness lay foundation to a leisurely repentance seek more the common good there then to be the common talk here once they there maintain themselves now a long time without the wont charge to the company and diverse of our nobility and gentry do now as after a long slumber while we be write these thing again bethink they of this virginian plantation whereunto the profitable neighbourhood of the summer isle or bermuda may be good furtherance God almighty prosper both that the word may go out of bermuda and the law of the lord from Virginia to a true conversion of the american world than hitherto our humorist or spanish insolence have intend @. 3 of the soil people beast commodity and other observation of Virginia for the description of the country master hakluyt from other relation in his three volume of voyages have write large of those part discover for sir Walter Raleigh concern the late captain John Smith partly by word of mouth partly by his map thereof in print and more full by a l l since print at Oxford manuscript which he courteous communicate to i have acquaint i with that whereof himself with great peril and pain have be the discoverer be in his discovery take prisoner as be before say and escape their fury yea receive much honour and admiration among they by reason of his discourse to they of the motion of the sun of the part of the world of the sea etc. which be occasion by a dial then find about he they carry he prisoner to powhatan and there begin the english acquaintance with that savage emperor the sum of his observation in that and other discovery since concern the country be this Virginia be situate between 34. and 44. degree of northerly latitude the bound whereof on the east side be the great ocean Florida on the south on the north noua Francia the western limit be unknown but that part which begin to be plant by the english southern colony in the year 1606. be under the degree 37. 38. and 39 the temperature agree with english body not by other mean distemper the summer m m al. Whitaker say not so hot as Spain nor winter so cold as in England be hot as in Spain the winter cold as in France and England certain cool brize do assuage the vehemency of the heat the great frost in the year 1607. reach to Virginia but be recompense with as mild a winter with they the next year and the winter 1615. n n master rolph be as cold and frosty one fortnight as that there be but one entrance by sea into this country and that at the mouth of a very goodly Bay the cape on both side be honour with the name of our britanian hope prince Henry and duke charles the water flow in this bay near two hundred mile and have a channel for a hundred and forty mile of depth betwixt seven and fifteen fathom of breadth ten or fourteen mile at the head of the bay the land be mountainous and so run by a south-west line from which mountain proceed certain brook which after come to five principal navigable river the mountain be of diverse composition some like millstone some of marble and many piece of crystal they find throw down by the water which also wash from the rock such glister tincture that the ground in some place seem gild the colour of the earth in diverse place resemble Bole-Armoniac and other such appearance but general be a black sandy mould the river next to the mouth of the bay be powhatan the mouth whereof be near three mile broad it be navigable a hundred mile fall rock shoald prohibit further navigation hence powhatan their great king have his title in a Peninsula on the northside thereof be situate james town the people inhabit which have their Weroances be the kecoughtan which have not past twenty fight man the paspaheghe have forty Chichahamania two hundred the weanock a hundred the arrowhatock thirty the place call powhatan forty the appamatusk threescore the quiyonghcohanock five and twenty the warraikoyack forty the naudsamund two hundred the chesapeack a hundred the chickahamanians be not govern by a Weroance but by the priest no place afford more sturgeon in summer of which at one draught have be take threescore and eight nor in winter more foul fourteen mile from powhatan be the river pamaunke navigable with great vessel not above threescore and ten mile toppahanok be navigable a hundred and thirty mile Patawomeke a hundred and twenty to speak of powtuxunt bolus and other river on the east side of the bay likewise of diverse place which receive name by some accident as Fetherstone bay so call of the death of one of we there happen and the like or to mention the number which every people can make will exceed our scope and the reader patience captain smith map may somewhat satisfy the desirous and his book now print further this the captain say that he have be in many place of Asia and Europe in some of Africa and America but of all hold Virginia by the natural endowment the fit place for a earthly paradise Alexander Whitaker the preacher at Henrico alex. Whitaker now preacher at Virginia write that at the mouth of powhatan be the fort of Henrico and Charles two and forty mile upward be james town and threescore and ten mile beyond that the new town of Henrico ten mile high the fall where the river fall down between many mineral rock twelve mile beyond a crystal rock wherewith the indian head their arrow three day journey from thence be a rock or hill find cover over with a rich silver Ore our man that go to discover those part have but two iron pickaxe with they and those so ill temper that the point turn again at every stroke but trial be make of the ore with argument of much hope six day journey beyond this mine run a ridge of hill beyond which the indian report be a great sea which if it be true be the south sea at Henrico they be exceed healthful and more than in England master Thomas hariot o o Hak. vol. 3. pag. 267. theod. de bry. part 1. America have large describe the commodity which the water and earth yield set forth also in latin with exquisite picture by Theodore de bry beside the relation of brereton and rosier and other there be a grass which yield silk beside store of silkworm hemp and flax surpass we in growth and goodness exceed by a new find stuff of a certain sedge or water-flag which grow infinite and with little pain of boil yield great quantity of sundry sort of skeine of good strength and length some like silk and some like flax and some a courser sort as hemp there be also a rich vein of alum of pitch tar resin turpentine sassafras cedar grape oil iron copper and the hope of better mine pearl sweet gum dye timber tree of sweet wood for profit and pleasure of which kind have be discover fourteen several kind neither be it needful that here I relate the commodite of Virginia for food in fowl beast fish fruit plant herb berry grain especial their Maiz which yield incredible recompense for a little labour one acre of ground will yield with good husbandry two hundred bushel of corn they have two root p p cap. smith m. s. the one for medicinal use to cure their hurt call Weighsacan the other call Tockahough grow like a flag of the greatness and taste of a potato which pass a fiery purgation before they may eat it be poison while it be raw yet in all this abundance our man have have small store but of want and no fire nor water can purge that poison which be root in some to the hindrance of the plantation the chief beast of Virginia be bear less than those in other place dear like we m. Whitaker and m. Hamor mention also Lion aronghcun much like a badger but live on tree like a squirrel squirrel as big as rabbit and other fly squirrel call assepanicke which spread out their leg and skin seem to fly thirty or forty yard at a time the opassom have a head like a swine a tail like a rat as big as a cat and have under her belly a bag wherein she carry her young their dog bark not their wolf be not much big than our fox their fox be like our silver-haired coney and smell not like we Mussascus be otherwise as our water-rat but smell strong of musk master Whitaker say they yield musk as the musk-cat do their Vetchunquoys be wild cat their vermin destroy not our egg and pullen nor be their serpent or fly any way pernicious they have eagle hawk wild turkeye and other fowl and fish which here to repeat will to some nice fastidious stomach breed a fullness though with some of their countryman in Virginia they will have be savoury sometime and dainty they be a people q q tho. hariot clothe with loose mantle make of deer skin and apron of the same round about their middle all else naked of stature like to we in England they use to paint themselves and their child he be the most gallant which be most monstrous their woman embroider their leg hand etc. with diverse work as of serpent and such like with black spot in the flesh their house be make of small pole make fast at the top in round form as be use in many arbour with we cover with bark or mat twice as long as they be broad they be exact archer and will with arrow kill bird fly fish swim beast run one of we by they have be shoot through the body and both r r m. George Percy write that one with a arrow of a ell longth shoot through a target which a pistol can not pierce his arm thereby fasten and pierce they speak of man two hundred year old and more as master Wingfield report their bow be of tough Hasill the string of leather arrow of cane or Hasill head with stone or horn and artificial feather they be heartless if they see defence to frustrate their arrow @. 4 of the present estate of Virginia and the english there reside the last of may 1616. sir Thomas dale that worthy commander and best establisher of the virginian plantation come from thence into England to procure and further the common good partly by conference with he and chief by a tractate and relation of master rolph the husband of Pokahuntas which come over with he I have learn what here I deliver you the english do now find this country so correspondent to their constitution that it be more rare to hear of a man death in Virginia then in that proportion of people in England that aristocratical government by a precedent and council s s twelve in all be long since remove and those hateful effect thereof together order and diligence have repair what confusion and idleness have distemper the man have be employ in palazade and build of town impal ground to keep their cattle from range and to preserve their corn and a peace conclude betwixt the english and indian peace betwixt we and the savage for howsoever they can well before defend themselves and their town from they yet not easy their corn and cattle this peace have yield many benefit both opportunity of lawful purchase of a great part of the country from the native free and willing relinquish and sell the same for copper or other commodity a thing of no small consequence to the conscience where the mild law of nature not that violent law of arm lay the foundation of their possession and quiet enjoy thereof yearly plant and reap without impediment fowl hunt fish travel as secure as in England plenty and health attend their peace and industry they have indian wheat call maize pease and beanes and other the natural commodity english wheat pease barley turnip cabbage carrot parsnep herb and flower for pleasure and use with other thing as good as the best make english ground can yield and that you may know what two man labour with spade and shovell only can manure in one year they refuse fifty pound offer for their Crop hemp flax tobacco which with a little better experience in the cure will be as good as any in America fish fowl dear and other beast I need not mention sir Thomas dale who prudence fortitude temperance justice in the well order and govern the english virginian affair I can sufficient honour observe two season for the take of fish the spring and the fall himself take no small pain in the trial at one hale with a saint he catch five thousand three hundred of which be as big as cod the least of the residue a kind of salmon trout two foot long yet dare he not adventure on the main skull for break his Net likewise two man with axe and such like weapon have take and kill near the shore and bring home forty as great as cod in two or three hour space and whereas heretofore we be constrain yearly to buy corn of the indian which bring we into base esteem with they now they seek to we come to our town sell the t t they can dress leather fine and quick but it will not hold our wet skin from their shoulder which be their best garment to buy corn yea some of their petty king have this last year borrow four or five hundred bushel of wheat for payment whereof this harvest they have mortgage their whole country some of they not much less in quantity then a whole shire in England so that famine the quondam devourer of our nation be famish and in itself devour the place inhabit by the english be six Henrico and the limit bermuda nether hundred west and Shirley hundred james town Kequoughton Dales gift the inhabitant be officer habitation Officer labourer farmer the first have charge and care over both the latter watch and ward for their preservation in the due execution of their employment and business these be bind to maintain themselves and their family with food and raiment by the industry of they and they the labourer labourer be of two sort some employ only in the general work feed and clothe out of the store other be special artificer as smith shoemaker carpenter tailor tanner etc. which work in their profession to the colony and maintain themselves with food and apparel have time limit they to till and manure the ground the farmer farmer live at most ease yet by their good endeavour bring much plenty to the plantation they be bind by covenant both for themselves and their servant to maintain his majesty right and title in that kingdom to watch and ward in the town where they be resident to do one and thirty day service for the colony when they shall be call thereunto to maintain themselves and they with food and raiment to pay yearly for themselves and each manservant two barrel and a half a piece of their best indian wheat this amount to twelve bushel and a half english measure that no farmer nor other shall plant tobacco know to be a vendible commodity except he yearly manure for himself and every manservant two acre of ground with corn and then to plant as much as they please also the company have already send a ship to Virginia with provision of clothing householdstuff and other necessary to establish a magazine there to be buy at easy rate in bartar and exchange for their commodity to a mutual benefit of both part I can here omit the christian care of his majesty worthy the defender of the faith in provide charitable collection and contribution in England letter patent for collect for the erect and maintain of a college in Virginia to be a seminary and school of education to the native in the knowledge and perfection of our religion which I beseech almighty God to prosper with answerable success they have likewise bring thence child of both sex here to be teach our language and letter which may prove profitable instrument in this design as for the english there now reside likely to be much increase by good supply now in send at Henrico Henrico and in the precinct which be seat on the north side the river ninety and odd mile from the mouth thereof which somewhat differ from the number before mention and within fifteen or sixteen mile of the fall be our further habitation within land be eight and thirty man and boy of which two and twenty farmer captain Smaley commander in the absence of james davies who now be return master William wickham minister at bermuda nether hundred bermuda nether hundred seat on the south side the river which almost encompass it and with a pale on a short neck of land bound this be a hundred and nineteen these be incorporate to bermuda town which be make a corporation according to certain order and constitution captain yeardly deputy governor live most here master Alexander Whitaker be minister west and Shirley hundred w. and sh. hundred be three or four mile low on the north side the river here be twenty five man command by captain Maddeson employ only in plant and cure tobacco to the public benefit low by thirty seven mile be james town james town where be fifty man under captain Francis west brother to the l. la Ware and in his absence command by lieutenant sharp master buck minister at Kequoughton Kequoughton thirty seven mile low near the mouth of the river be twenty capt. Webbe commander master maize minister dales-gift dale gift be upon the sea near cape Charles where be seventeen under lieutenant cradock their labour to make salt and catch fish the number of officer and labourer be two hundred and five the farmer eighty one beside sixty five woman and child in every place some in all three hundred fifty one person these I have thus particular relate as a witness to after-age of their little but now hopeful proceed after ten year habitation which as Jacob little family in Egypt and gedeon small army less than that which the father of the faithful muster in his own household I hope and pray may grow into town city and christian-english church in numberless number to the glory of God and honour of our nation even in all the great work of God and exploit of man the beginning be ordinary slow and small how many of the four hundred and thirty year be almost if not more then half spend when jacob be but a little family and those in a strange land there sudden grow under the cross into a multitude and great people from her village-foundation how do Rome peep and creep forth by degree unto the height of majesty so may we say of the spanish plantation in this american continent from contemptible and troublesome beginning to their present splendour nor be our hope less if our heart be sincere and mind as we profess the propagation of Christianity as for their transport cattle there be the last of May of bull steer cow heifer calf a hundred forty and four horse three and as many mare goat and kid two hundred and sixteen hog wild and tame not to be number and great plenty of poultry chap. 5 of the religion and rite of the virginian @. i. of the virginian rite relate by master hariot now for the manner and rite of the people thus have master hariot report they believe that there be many god which they call Mantoac but of different sort and degree one only chief and great God which have be from all eternity who as they affirm when he purpose to make the world make first other god of a principal order to be as mean and instrument to be use in the creation and government to follow and after the sun moon and star as petty god and the instrument of the other order more principal first they say be make water out of which by the god be make all diversity of creature that be visible or invisible for mankind they say a woman be make first which by the work of one of the god conceive and bring forth child and in such sort they say they have their beginning but how many year or age have pass since they say they can make no relation have no letter nor other mean to keep record of time past but only tradition from father to son they think that all the god be of human shape and therefore they present they by image in the form of man which they call Kewasowock one alone be call Kewas they they place in house or temple which they call Machicomuck where they worship pray sing and make many time offering unto they in some Machicomuck we have see but one Kewas in some two in other three they believe the immortality of the soul that after this life as soon as the soul be depart from the body according to the work it have do it be either carry to heaven the habitacle of god there to enjoy perpetual bliss and happiness or else to a great pit or hole which they think to be in the further part of their part of the world towards the sunset there to burn continual this place they call Popogusso for the confirmation of this opinion they tell tale of man dead and revive again much like to the popish legend thus they tell of one who grave the next day after his burial be see to move and his body be therefore take up again who report that his soul have be very near the enter into Popogusso have not one of the god save he and give he leave to return again and teach his friend how to avoid that terrible place they tell of another which be take up in that manner relate that his soul be alive while his body be in the grave and that it have travel far in a long broad way on both side whereof grow most delicate pleasant tree bear more rare and excellent fruit than ever he have see before or be able to express and at length come to most brave and fair house near which he meet his father that have be dead before who give he great charge to go back again and show his friend what good they be to do to enjoy the pleasure of that place which when he have do he shall after come again what subtlety so ever be in their Weroances a a tho. hariot Hak to. 3. p. 277. these people of sir w. ral. his discovery be somewhat more to the south than the present english colony and priest the vulgar be hereby very respective to their governor and careful of their manner although they have also in criminal case punishment inflict according to the quality of the offence this I learn by special familiarity with some of their priest wherein they be not so sure ground but that they lend open ear to we with doubt of their own the b b Weroance be a chief lord or petty king which sometime have but one town and none that we have deal with have above eighteen town under he priest in Secota have their hair on the crown like a comb the rest be cut from it only a foretop on the forehead be leave and that comb they have a garment of skin peculiar to their function they be great wizard our artificial work firework gun write and such like they esteem the work of god rather than of man or at least teach we by the god they bear much respect to our bible c c tho. de bry in pictur when the weroan be sick he send we to pray for he some be of opinion that we be not mortal nor bear of woman but that we be man of a old generation many year past then rise again to immortality some will likewise seem to prophesy that there be more of our generation yet to come to kill they and take their place which be now in the air invisible and without body and that they by our entreaty do make man to die which have wrong we they have i i first voyage to Virginia Hak to. 3. p. 249. their idol in the innermost room of their house of who they tell incredible thing they carry it with they when they go to the war and ask counsel thereof as the roman do of their oracle they sing song as they march towards the battle in stead of drum and trumpet their war be bloody and have waste much of their people a certain king call Piemacum have invite many man and woman of the secotan to a feast while they be merry and pray before their idol come upon they and slay they when k k m. rolph lan. Hak. to 3. p. 261. one of their king have conspire against the english a chief man about he say that we be the servant of God and not subject to be destroy by they and that we be dead man can do more hurt then while we be alive they use to solemnize certain months-mind in their savage manner for any great personage dead james l l James rosier rosier from the relation of Owen Griffin a eyewitness thus tell of their ceremony one among they the elder as he judge rise right up the other sit still and look about sudden cry with aloud voice baugh waugh then the woman fall down and lie upon the ground and the man all together answer the same fall a stamp round about the fire with both foot as hard as they can make the ground shake with sundry out-cry and change of voice and sound many take the fire-stick and thrust they into the earth and then rest a while of a sudden they begin as before and continue so stamp till the young sort fetch from the shore many stone of which every man take one and first beat upon they with their fire-stick then with the stone beat the earth with all their strength and in this manner they continue about two hour after this end they which have wife take they apart and withdraw themselves several into the wood this seem to be their evening devotion when they m m theod. de bry Icone 17. 18. and seq have obtain some great deliverance from danger or return from war they observe a public and solemn rejoice by make a great fire encompass with the man and woman promiscuous all of they with rattle in their hand make a great noise they hold one time in the year festival and then they meet together out of many village every one have a certain mark or character on his back whereby it may be discern who subject he be the place where they meet be spacious and round about be set post carve with the resemblance of a nun head in the mid be three of the fair virgin love embrace and clasp each other about this live centre and artificial circle they dance in their savage manner their idol call Kiwasa be make of wood four foot high the face resemble the inhabitant of Florida paint with flesh-colour the breast white the other part black except the leg which be spot with white he have chain or string of bead about his neck this idol be in Socota as it be the keeper of the dead body of their king in their temple be house of public devotion they have two three or more of they set in a dark place the dead body of their Weroances be keep on certain scaffold nine or ten foot high this Kiwasa their guardian be place with they and underneath dwell a priest which night and day there number his devotion @. 2 observation of their rite by captain smith and other but let we take view of our last colony observation capt. n n news from Virginia and a m. s. of captain Smith smith be take by the virginian and while he stay among they observe these their magical rite three or four day after his take seven of their priest in the house where he lay each with a rattle set he by they begin at ten of the clock in the morning to sing about a fire which they environ with a circle of meal at the end of every song which the chief priest begin the rest follow lay down two or three grain of wheat and after they have lay down six or seven hundred in one circle account their song by grain as the papist their orison by bead they make two or three other circle in like manner and put at the end of every song betwixt every two or three or five grain a little stick the high priest disguise with a great skin his head hang round with little skin of weasil and other vermin with a crownet of feather paint as ugly as the devil at the end of each song use strange and vehement gesture cast great cake of Deer-suet and tobacco into the fire thus till six of the clock in the evening they continue these howl devotion and so hold on three day this they pretend to do to know if any more of his countryman will arrive and what he there intend they so feed this our author that he much misdoubt that he shall have be sacrifice to the quoyoughquosicke which be a superior power they worship than the image whereof a more ugly thing can be describe to cure the sick a certain man with a a their rattle be of gourd or pompion rind of which they have their treble tenor base etc. a little rattle use extreme howl shout sing with diverse antic and strange behaviour over the patient suck blood out of his stomach or disease place not much unlike to that rattle devotion of their exorcise priest at least in absurdity be that entertainment b b m. s. by w. s. which powhatan woman give the same captain then be free and precedent of the company at Werowocomoco where thirty of they come out of the wood naked only cover behind and before with a few green leaf their body paint but with some difference each from other the leader of these nymph resemble both Actaeon and Diana have on her head a fair pair of stag horn and a quiver of arrow at her back with bow and arrow in her hand the rest follow all horn alike weapon with unlike instrument these as if they have be the infernal guard come with Cerberus to welcome Proserpina to her palace rush from the tree with hellish shout and cry dance about a fire which there be make for that purpose and after a hour thus spend they depart then do they solemn invite he to their lodging where he be no soon come but all round about he with tedious kindness cry c c how can he choose love you not i this salutation end which pan and all his satyr will have accept they feast he with plenty and variety some sing and dance whiles other attend and at last lead he with a firebrand in stead of a torch to his lodging when they d d capt. smith intend any war the Weroances or king consult first with the priest and conjurer and no people have there be find so savage which have not their priest god and religion all thing that be able to hurt they beyond their prevention they after their sort adore as the fire water lightning thunder our ordnance piece horse yea I have hear captain Smith say that they see one of the english boar in the way be strike with awful fear because he bristle up himself and gnash his tooth and take he for the god of the swine which be offend with they the chief god they worship be the devil which they call Okee Okee or Okeeus they have conference with he and fashion themselves unto his shape in their temple they have his image ill-favoured make e e one of these paint on a toadstoole fit shrine for such a deity be by a. Whitak send into England paint adorn with chain copper and bead and cover with a skin by he be common the sepulchre of their king who body be first bowel then dry on a hurdle and have about the joint chain of copper bead and other like trash then lap in white skin and roll in mat and orderly entomb in arch make of mat the remnant of their wealth be set at their foot these temple and body be keep by their priest for their ordinary burial they dig a deep hole in the earth with sharp stake and the corpse be wrap in skin and mat with their jewel they lay they upon stick in the ground and cover they with earth the burial end the woman have their face paint with black coal and oil sit four and twenty hour in the house mourn and lament by turn with yell and howl every territory of a Weroance have their temple and priest their principal temple be at Uttamussack in pamaunk where powhatan have a house upon the top of certain sandy hill in the wood there be three great house fill with image of their king and devil and tomb of their predecessor those house be near threescore foot long build after their fashion arbour-wise this place be in such estimation of holiness that none but the priest and king dare enter yea the savage dare not pass by in boat without cast copper bead or somewhat into the river here be common resident seven priest the chief differ from the rest in his ornament the other can hardly be know from the common people but that they have not so many hole at their ear to hang their jewel at the high-priest head-tire be thus make they take a great many snake skin stuff with moss as also of weasil and other vermin skin which they tie by their tail so that all the tail meet on the top of their head like a great tassel the face of their priest be paint as ugly as they can devise in their hand they have rattle some base some treble their devotion be most in song which the chief priest begin the rest follow sometime he make invocation with break sentence by start and strange passion and at every pause the other give a short groan it can be perceive that they have any set holiday only in some great distress of want fear of enemy time of triumph and of gather their fruit the whole country man woman and child assemble to their solemnity the manner of their devotion be sometime to make a great fire all sing and dance about the same with rattle and shout four or five hour sometime they set a man in the midst and dance and sing about he he all the while clap his hand as if he will keep time after this they go to their feast they have certain altar-stone which they call powcorance stand from their temple some by their house other in the wood and wilderness upon which they offer blood Deer-suet and tobacco this they do when they return from the war from their hunt and on other occasion when the water be rough in storm their conjurer run to the water side or pass in their boat and after many hellish out-cry and invocation cast tobacco copper Pocones or such trash into the water to pacify that god who they think to be very angry in those storm before their dinner and supper the better sort will take the first bit and cast it into the fire which be all the grain they be know to use in some part of the country they be say which since be find false to have yearly a sacrifice of child such a one be perform at Quiyoughcohanock some ten mile from james town in this manner Rapahannock f f Will white Werowance make a feast in the wood the people be so paint that a painter with his pencil can not have do better some of they be black like devil with horn and loose hair some of diverse colour they continue two day dance in a circle of a quarter of a mile in two company with antic trick four in a rank the Werowance lead the dance they have rattle in their hand all in the midst have black horn on their head and green bough in their hand next they be four or five principal man diverse paint which with bastinado beat forward such as tire in the dance thus they make themselves scarce able to go or stand when they meet together they make a hellish noise and every one fling away his bough run clap their hand up into a tree and tear it to the ground and fall into their order again thus they do twice fourteen well-favoured child or if you have rather hear capt. smith captain Smith fifteen of the proper young boy between ten and fifteen year of age they paint white have bring they forth the people say he spend the forenoon in dance and sing about they with rattle in the afternoon they put these child to the root of a tree all the man stand to guard they each with a bastinado of reed bind together in his hand then do they make a lane between they all along through which there be appoint five young man White call they priest to fetch these child each of these fetch a child the guard lay on with their Bastinado while they with their naked body defend the child to their great smart all this time the woman weep and cry out very passionate provide moss skin mat and dry wood unknown to what purpose when the child be in this manner fetch away the guard tear down tree branch and bough make wreath for their head or bedeck their hair with the leaf what else be do with the child be not see but they be all cast on a heap in a Valley as dead where be make a great feast for all the company William white William white relate this rite say that they remove they from tree to tree three time and at last carry they into a valley where the king sit where they will not suffer our man to see but feast there two hour on a sudden all arise with cudgel in their hand and make a lane as be before say and the child be lay down under a tree to their seem without life they all fall into a ring again and dance about the child a good space and then sit down in a circle about the tree Raphanna in the mid cause burden of wood to be bring to the altar make of pole set like a steeple where they make a great fire which our man think but be deceive be to sacrifice their child to the devil who they call kewase who as they report suck their blood they be unwilling to let they stay any long they find a woman mourn for young Paspiha sacrifice at the town of Rapahanna but this Paspaiha be now alive as Mr rolph have since relate to i and the mourn of the woman be not for their child death but because they be for diverse month detain from they as we shall after see yea the virginian themselves by false report may delude our man and say they be sacrifice when they be not for even still they be very inconstant it be Mr Rolphs report in all that they speak of their religion one deny that which another affirm and either not know or nor willing that other shall know their devilish mystery and hence perhaps it be that as captain Smith add a Werowance be demand the meaning of this sacrifice answer that the child be not all dead but that the oak or devil do suck the blood from their left breast who chance to be his by lot till they be dead but the rest be keep in the wilderness by the young man till nine moon be expire during which time they must not converse with any and of these be make their priest and conjurer this sacrifice they hold to be so necessary that if they shall omit it their oak or devil and their other quiyoughcosughe or god will let they have no deer turkey corn or fish and who will beside make a great slaughter among they they think that their werowance and priest which they also esteem quiyoughcosughe when they be dead do go beyond the mountain towards the set of the sun and ever remain there in form of their oak have their head paint with oil and Pocones a a Pocones be a small root which dry and beat into powder cut ^ thread they use it for swell ache and paint fine trim with feather and shall have bead hatchet copper and tobacco never cease to dance and sing with their predecessor the common-people they suppose shall not live after death some seek to convert they from these superstition the Werowance of Quiyoughcohanock be so far persuade as that he profess to believe that our god exceed they as much as our gun do their bow and arrow and many time do send to the precedent many present entreat he to pray to his b b in that extremity of misery which we since sustain I have be tell that both the savage and fugitive will object our want and their plenty for they and against our religion god for rain for his god will not send he any William White report these their ceremony of honour the sun by break of day before they eat or drink the man woman and child above ten year old run into the water and there wash a good space till the sun arise and then they offer sacrifice to it strew tobacco on the land or water the like they do at sunset he also relate that one George c c the cruel death of George Casson Casson before mention be sacrifice as they think to the devil be strip naked and bind to two stake with his back against a great fire then do they rip he and burn his bowel and dry his flesh to the bone which they keep aboveground in a by-room many other of our man be cruel and treacherous execute by they though perhaps not sacrifice and none have be leave if their ambush and treason have take effect powhatan thus invite d d declaration of 6 give a. captain ratliffe and thirty other to trade for corn and have bring they within his ambush murder they Alexander Whitaker say that their e e priest in Virginia priest who they call quiokosough be witch of who the people stand in great awe the manner of their life be heremite-fashion in wood in house sequester from the common course of man where none may come or speak with they uncalled they take no care for victual for all such necessary be set in a place near his cottage for his use if they will have rain or have lose any thing he at their request coniur and often prevail he be their physician if they be sick and suck their wound at his word they make war and peace and do nothing of moment without he master rolph affirm that these priest live not solitary and in other thing be of another opinion which perhaps our former author at his first come may have by relation of other the Wirowance of acawmacke tell our man of a strange accident two child be dead and bury be review by the parent seem to have lively and cheerful countenance which cause many to behold they and none of the beholder escape death @. 3 of the sasquesahanocke with other and late observation of the virginian rite the sasquesahanocke be a giantly people strange in proportion behaviour and attire their voice sound from they as out of a cave their attire of bear skin hang with bear paw the head of a wolf and such like jewel and if any will have a spoon to eat with the devil their tobacco pipe be three quarter of a yard long carve at the great end with a bird bear or other device sufficient to beat out the brain of a horse and how many ass brain be beat out or rather man brain smoke out and ass hale in by our less pipe at home the rest of their furniture be suitable the calf of one of their leg be measure three quarter of a yard about the rest of his limb proportionable with much ado restrain they this people from worship our man and f f discovery of Chesipeack 1608. when our man pray according to their daily custom and sing a psalm they much wonder and after begin in most passionate manner to hold up their hand to the sun with a song then embrace the captain they begin to adore he in like manner and so proceed notwithstanding his rebuke they till their song be end which do one with a most strange action and uncomely voice begin a oration of their love that end with a great paint bear skin they cover the captain another hang about his neck a chain of white bead other lay eighteen mantle at his foot with many other ceremony to create he their governor that he may defend they against the massa-womeke their enemy as these be very great so the weighcocomocoe be very little I may also here insert the ridiculous conceit which some virginian hold concern their first original as I have hear from the relation of a english youth b b cap. argol boy his name be Henry Spilman which live long among the savage that a hare come into their country and make the first man and after preserve they from a great serpent and when two other hare come thither that hare for their entertainment kill a deer which be then the only deer that be and strew the hair of that deer hide every hair prove a deer he say they worship towards a certain hoop or sphere double a cross which be set upon a heap of stone in their house they have a house without the town for the woman in the time of their natural sickness to keep in where no man may come but of their opinion and ceremony in religion who fit to be hear then a virginian a experience man and counsellor to Opochancanough their king and governor in powhatan absence such be Tomocomo Tomocomo at this present in London send hither to observe and bring news of our king and country to his nation some other c c I be thus tell by sir Thomas dale which have be here in former time be more silly which have see little else then this city have report much of the house and man but think we have small store of corn or tree the virginian imagine that our man come into their country for supply of these defect this man therefore be land in the west part find cause of admiration at our plenty in these kind and as some have report begin to tell both man and tree till his arithmetic fail for their number beyond a hundred be imperfect and somewhat confuse of he sir Thomas Dales man be our interpreter I learn that their okeeu do often appear to they in his house or temple the manner of which apparition be thus first four of their priest or sacred person of which he say he be one go into the house and by certain word of a strange language which he repeat very round in my hear but the interpreter understand not a word nor do the common people call or conjure this okeeu who appear to they out of the air thence come into the house and walk up and down with strange word and gesture cause eight more of the principal person to be call in all which twelve stand round about he he prescribe to they what he will have do of he they depend in all their proceed if it be but in a hunt journey d d sometime when they be prepare to hunt he will by some know sign manifest himself and direct they to game they all with great alacrity acknowledge that sign and follow who by wind or other awful token of his presence hold they in a superstitious both fear and confidence his apparition be in form of a personable virginian with a long black lock on the left side hang down near to the foot this be the cause why the virginian wear these sinister lock which some think I have hear sir Thomas dale and master rolph of that opinion be first by our man in the first plantation little above thirty year since borrow from these savage a fair unlovely generation of the Love-lock Christian imitate savage and they the devil this virginian so admire this rite that in argue about religion he object to our god this defect that he have not teach we so to wear our hair after that he have stay with his twelve so long as he think fit he depart up into the air whence he come Tomocomo aver that this be he which make heaven and earth have teach they to plant so many kind of corn be the author of their good have prophesy to they before of our man come know all our country who he make acquaint with his come hither and tell he that within so many month he will return but the devil or Okeeus answer that it will be so e e this prove true contrary to tomocomo mind be desirous to return in the first ship which be go already many more neither at his return must he go into that house till Okeeus shall call he he be very zealous in his superstition and will hear no persuasion to the truth bid we teach the boy and girl which be bring over from thence he be too old now to learn be ask what become of the soul of dead man he point up to heaven but of wicked man that they hang between heaven and earth this Tomocomo have Matachanna one of powhatan daughter to wife the vulgar be hold in great awe by their ignorance and when any of they have get a good deer some of the great will pretend Okeeus his name and cause it to be bring to his house and then share it at their pleasure they hold it a disgrace to fear death and therefore when they must die do it resolute as happen to one which have rob the english and by powhatan upon complaint make to he be fetch sixscore mile from the place where he lurk and by this Tomocomo in the presence of the english execute his brain be knock out show no sign of fear or dismayedness they use to make black boy once in fourteen or fifteen year general for all the country this happen the last year 1615. when all of a certain age that have not be make black boy black boy before be initiate in this ceremony they use to make some at other time by themselves as before be show of Rapahannok out of captain Smith and master white which then mistake it for a sacrifice some four month after that rite they live apart and be feed by some appoint to carry they their food master rolph they speak to no man nor come in company seem distract some think by some devilish apparition scar certain to oblige they to that devilish religion as by a hellish sacrament of the devil institution and will offer to shoot at such as come nigh they and when they come into company yet be for a certain time of silent and strange behaviour and will do any thing never so desperate that they shall be bid if they tell they they shall be old man if they go not into the fire they will do it there be none of their man but be make black boy at one time or other let we observe these thing with pity and compassion and endeavour to bring these silly soul out of the snare of the devil by our prayer our purse and all our best endeavour this may be add that their young people have in manner no knowledge and the vulgar little of their religion they use also to beguile they with their Okee or image of he in their house into who mouth they will put a tobacco pipe kindle and one behind that image draw the smoke which the silver vulgar and child think to be do by their god or idol they have f f Virginia voyage 1606. m. s. m. George Percy a certain herb call weysake like Liverwort which they chew and spit into poison wound that be thereby heal in four and twenty hour in find out their medicinal root it be the relation of master George Percy six of they hold together by the arm and so go sing and withal search and when they have find it sit down sing cross the root with their hand for a good space then gather chew and spit he thus describe their dance one stand in the midst sing and clap hand all the rest dance about he shoot hollow stamp with antic gesture like so many devil their foot always and only agree in one stroke land at Kecoughtan the savage entertain they with a doleful noise lay their face to the ground and scratch the earth with their nail the Werowance of Rapahanna meet they play on a flute of a reed with a crown of deer hair colour red fashion like a rose with a chain of bead about his neck and bracelet of pearl hang at his ear in each ear a bird claw the woman be of a modest proud behaviour with a iron pounce and raze their body leg thigh and arm in curious knot and pourtrayture of fowl fish beast and rub a paint into the same which will never out the queen of apametica be attire with a coronet beset with many white bone her ear hang with copper a chain thereof six time compass her neck the maid shave their head all but the hinder part the wife wear it all of a length the man wear the left lock long as be say already sometime a ell which they tie when they please in a artificial knot stick with feather the right side shave the king of Paspahey be paint all black with horn on his head like a devil he testify of their hard fare watch every three night lie on the bare cold ground what weather soever come and ward the next day a small can of barley sod in water be the sustenance for five man a day their drink brackish and slimy water this continue five month the virginian g g cap. smith be bear white their hair black few have beard and they pluck out the hair which will grow the woman with two shell be their barber they be strong nimble and hardy inconstant timorous quick of apprehension cautelous covetous of copper and bead they seldom forget a injury and seldom steal from each other lest the conjurer shall bewray they which it be sufficient that these think they can do they have their land and garden in proper and most of they live of their labour the cause of their blackness master rolph ascribe to their ointment which in their smoky house they use even as Bacon with we be so colour this within door they use against the fire abroad against the sun master Wingfield say ed. mar. Wingfield they will be of good complexion if they will leave paint which they use on their face and shoulder he never see any of they gross h h some of they be find such or bald they will have beard but that they pluck away the hair they have one wife many love and be also sodomite their elder woman be cook barber and for service the young for dalliance the woman hang their child at their back in summer naked in winter under a Deer-skin they be of modest behaviour they seldom or never brawl in entertain a stranger they spread a mat for he to sit down and dance before he they wear their nail long to flay their deer they put bow and arrow into their child hand before they be six year old in each ear common they have three great hole whereat they hang chain bracelet or copper some wear in those hole a small snake colour green and yellow near half a yard long which crawl about his neck offer to kiss his lip other wear a dead rat tie by the tail their name be give they according to the humour of the parent their woman they say be easy deliver they wash in the river their young infant to make they hardy the woman and child do the household and field-work the man disdain the same and only delight in fish hunt war and such manlike exercise the woman plant reap bear burden pound their corn make basket pot bread and do their cookery and other business they easy kindle fire by chase a dry point stick in a hole of a little square piece of wood powhatan have above thirty commander or wirrowance under he all which be not in peace only but serviceable in captain smith presidency to the english and still as I have be tell by some that have since be there they do affect he and will ask of he powhatan have three brethren and two sister to who the inheritance belong successive and not to his or their son till after their death and then the elder sister son inherit he have his treasure of skin copper pearl bead and such like keep in a house for that purpose and there store against the time of his burial this house be fifty or threescore yard long frequent only by priest at the four corner of this house stand four image as sentinel one of a dragon another of a bear a three of a leopard and the four of a giant he have as many woman as he will which when he be weary of he bestow on who he best like his will and custom be the law he execute civil punishment on malefactor as broil to death be encompass with fire and other torture the other werowance or commander so the word signify have power of life and death and have some twenty man some forty some a hundred some many more under their command some be send to inquire for those which be leave of sir Walter Raleigh colony but they can learn nothing of they but that they be dead powhatan be go southwards when our man come last thence some thought for fear of Opochancanough his young brother a man very gracious both with the people and the english jealous lest he and the english shall conspire against he think that he will not return but other think he will return again his second brother be Decrepit and lame his age be not so great as some have reckon the error arise i i master rolph from the virginian computation of year they reckon every spring and every fall several year so do Tomocomo at his come into England mark up his time account each day and because they sail in the night when he think they will have anchor by the shore each night another day chap. 7 of Florida @. i. of the act of the spanish and french in Florida and of the soil and city next to Virginia towards the south be situate Florida b b Florida with I long oriel theat so call because it be first discover by the spaniard on c c Exped in Flor. ap. t. de bry. palm Sunday or as the most d d girava etc. interpret easter day which they call pasqua Florida and not as Thevet write for the flourish verdure thereof the e e Gomara hist gen. ep. 45. Oniedo l. 16. c. 11. first finder after their account be John ponce of Leon in the year 1512. but we have before show that Sebastian Cabota have discover it in the name of king Henry the seven of England this region extend to the five and twenty degree it run out into the sea with a long point of land as if it will either set bar to that swift current which there run out or point out the danger of these coast to the hazardous mariner into the land it stretch westward unto the border of new Spain and those other country which be not full know otherwhere it be wash with a dangerous sea which separate Chichora Bahama and Lucaia from the same John ponce f f Gomara and Calueta aforesaid hear a rumour of a prodigious well which as the poet tell of Medea will make old man become young again play the youngling to go search it six month together and in that inquiry discover this continent and repair into Spain obtain this province with the title of adelantado he return with a navy and band of soldier but at his land be so welcome by the floridian that many of his man be slay and himself wound unto death g g Benzo l z pamphilo de Narva's have no better success he enter Florida 1527. Alvaro nunnez call Capo di vacca or Cabeca de vaca and some of his company after long captivity escape pamphilo carry with he six hundred man about the river of palm his ship be wrack and most of the spaniard drown a few escape drown but twelve fall mad and like dog seek to worry each other scarce ten return into Spain these come to Mexico report that they have restore three dead man to life I rather believe say Benzo that they kill four quick man don Ferdinando de Soto b b the expedition of Soto be by Mr hakluyt set forth in english be write by a Portugal gentleman of elnas employ therein it be 1538. enrich with the spoil of Atibaliba king of Peru in which action he be a captain and horseman here find place to spend that which there he have get for have obtain the government of Florida and gather a band of six hundred man for that expedition in it he spend five year search for mineral till he lose himself julian Samado and Ahumada make suit for the like grant but can not obtain it friar Lewis de Beluastro and other dominick have undertake by the way of preach to have reduce the floridian to Christianity and the spanish obedience and be send at the emperor charge but no soon set foot on shore than he and two of his companion be take by the savage and cruel slay and eat their shave scalp be hang up in their temple for a monument this happen in the year 1549. in the year 1524. Francis the first the french king have send John c c John de Verraz ap. Hak to 3 de Verrazano hither but because he rather seek to discover all along the coast then to search or settle within land I pass he over in the year 1562. that worthy of France d d of his life there be a special book Chastillon champion of religion and of his country send captain John ribault to discover and plant in these part which his voyage and plantation be write by rene e e rene laud. ap. Hak. laudonniere one employ therein he leave capt. Albert there with some of his company who build a fort call Charles fort but this Albert be slay in a mutiny by his soldier and they return home be so pursue by famine the pursuivant of divine justice that after their shoe and leather jerkin eat their drink be sea-water or their own urine they kill and eat up one of their own company laudonniere be send thither again to inhabit 1564. and the next year ribault be send to supply his place but uncouth f f he be relieve by John Hawkins great bounty famine have so waste and consume the french before his arrival that the very bone of most of the soldier pierce through their starve skin in many place of their body as if they will now trust the empty hand no long but will become their own purveyor and look out for themselves and yet better it be to fall into the hand of God then of merciless man famine be but a mere executioner to God justice but these execute also a devilish malice such be the spaniard who be send thither under the conduct of don Pedro Melendes which massacre all of every sex and age which they find in the fort and ribault be cast by shipwreck on the shore and receive of Vallemandus the Spaniard with promise of all kindness be cruel murder with all his company except some few which they reserve for their own employment the manner of it be at large handle by g g Laudonn ap. Hak. laudonniere h h jaques Morgues ap. theod. de bry amer. part. 2. by Morgues by i i nic. Challusius Challusius which be as brand by divine hand pluck out of the spanish combustion the petition or supplication put k k ap. Caluet and ap. theod. de bry. up by the orphan widow and distress kindred of that massacre number to Charles the nine mention nine hundred which perish in this bloody deluge the spaniard have lay the foundation of their habitation in blood find it too slippery to build any sure habitation thereon for their cruelty both to the french and floridian be retort upon themselves in the year 1567. by l l dom. de Gorgues ap. Hak. come 3. dominique de Gorgues and his associate assist by the native inhabitant and Florida be leave destitute of christian inhabitant thus have Florida be first court by the english woo by the spanish almost win by the french and yet remain a rich and beautiful virgin wait till the neighbour Virginia bestow on she a english bridegroom who as make the first love may lay the just challenge unto she her riches be such that m m Cabez de vaca ap. Hak in ep. Dedic in his Virginia rich value cabeza de vaca who be one of Narva's wrack company and Sotos corrival in this Floridian suit and have travel through a great part of the inland affirm to Charles the emperor that Florida be the rich country of the world and that he have therein see gold and silver and stone of great value beside there be great variety of n n Gaspar ens lib. 3. Botero part. 1. l. 5. tree fruit fowl beast bear leopard ounce wolf wild dog goat hare coney dear ox with woolly hide camel back and horse mane sir John Hawkins his second voyage publish by master hakluyt mention unicorn horn among the floridian which they wear about their neck whereof the frenchman obtain many piece and that they affirm there be many of those beast with one horn which they put into the water before they drink haply this may be a tale of the french to sell such piece dear to the English or the horn of some other beast or of the Sea-unicorn our discourse have most right unto their rite for their many city the manner of their building the manner of their inhabitant I will not be so long Morgues o o America part. 2. de bry. have let we see they in the picture they wall or impale they with post fasten in the ground the circle as of a snail come within that point where it begin and leave a way but for two man to enter at either end of that double impale or entrance stand two Watch-tower one within the other without the city where watchman always be set for defence their house be round their apparel nakedness except a beast skin or some ornament of moss about their secret part they paint and raze their skin with great cunning the smart make they sick seven or eight day after they rub over those raze work with a certain herb which colour the same so as it can be do away they paint their face and their skin cunning this Morgues a painter be judge even to admiration they let the nail on their toe and finger grow long they be tall nimble comely @. 2 of their custom manner and superstition they war a a laudonniere always one country upon another and kill all the man they can take the woman and child they bring up they cut off the hair of the head together with the skin and dry it to reserve the same as a monument of their valour after their return from the war if they be victorious they make a solemn feast which last three day with dance and song to the honour of the sun for the sun and moon be their deity their priest be magician also and physician with they they have many hermaphrodite which be put to great drudgery and make to bear all their carriage in necessity they will eat coal and put sand in their pottage three month in the year they forsake their house and live in the wood against this time they have make their provision of victual dry the same in the smoke they meet in consultation every morning in a great common house whither the king resort and his senator which after salutation sit down in a round they consult with the jawas or priest and after this they drink cassine which be very hot make of the leaf of a certain tree which none may taste that have not before make his valour evident in the war it set they in a sweat and take away hunger and thirst four and twenty hour after when a king die they bury he very solemn and upon his grave they set the cup wherein he be wont to drink and round about the grave they stick many arrow weep and fast three day together without cease all the king which be his friend make the like mourn and in token of their love cut off half their hair which they otherwise wear long knit up behind both man and woman during the space of six moon so they reckon their month there be certain woman appoint which bewail his death cry with a loud voice thrice a day at morning noon and evening all the good of this king be put into his house which afterward they set on fire the like be do with the good of the priest who be bury in their house and then both house and good burn the woman b b Morgues icon. 18. 19 that have lose their husband in the war present themselves before the king sit on their heel with great lamentation sue for revenge and they with other widow spend some day in mourn at their husband grave and carry thither the cup wherein he have wont to drink they cut also their hair near the ear strew the same in the sepulchre there they cast also their weapon they may not marry again till their hair be grow that it may cover their shoulder when any be sick they lay he flat on a form and with a sharp shell rase off the skin of his forehead suck out the blood with their mouth spit it out into some vessel the woman that give suck or be great with child come to drink the same especial if it be of a lusty young man that their milk may be better and the child thereby nourish may be strong ribault c c icon. 8. at his first be there have fix a certain pillar of stone engrave with the arm of France on a hill in a island which laudonniere at his come find the floridian worship as their idol with kiss kneel and other devotion before the same lay diverse offering of fruit of the country root which they use either for food or physic vessel full of sweet oil with bow and arrow it be gird about with garland of flower and bough of the best tree from the top to the bottom king athore himself perform the same honour to this pillar that he receive of his subject the king athore be a goodly personage high by a foot and half than any of the french represent a kind of majesty and gravity in his demeanour he have marry his own mother and have by her diverse child of both sex but after she be espouse to he his father Satouriova do not touch she this d d icon. 11. Satouriova when he go to war in the presence of the french use these ceremony the king his coadjutor sit around he place himself in the midst at his right hand have a fire and at his left two vessel full of water then do he express indignation and anger in his look gesture hollow murmur and loud cry answer with the like from his soldier and take a wooden dish turn himself to the sun as thence desire victory and that as he now shed the water in the dish so he may shed the blood of his enemy hurl therefore the water with great violence into the air and therewith besprinkle his soldier he say do you thus with the blood of our enemy and pour the water which be in the other vessel on the fire so say he may you extinguish your foe and bring back the skin of their head outina e e icon. 12. or Vtina another king be a enemy to this Satouriova he in his expedition which he make against his enemy wherein he be assist by the french consult with this magician about his success he espy a Frenchman target demand the same and in the mid of the army place it on the ground draw a circle five foot over about it add also certain note and character then do he set himself upon the target sit upon his heel mumble I know not what with variety of gesture about the space of a quarter of a hour after which he appear so transform into deform shape that he look not like a man wreathe his limb his bone crack with other action seem supernatural at last he return himself as it be weary and astonish and come out of the circle salute the king and tell he the number of their enemy and place of their encamp which they find very true this king be call which signify a king of king and yet have but a few hundred of man in his army which he e e icon. 14. conduct in their rank himself go alone in the mid they dry the arm and leg and crown of their enemy which they have slay to make solemn triumph at their return which they do fasten they on pole pitch in the ground the man and woman sit round about and the magician with a image in his hand mumble curse against the enemy over-against he be three man kneel one of which beat a stone with a club and answer the magician at every of his imprecation the other two sing and make a noise with certain rattle they sow or set their corn rather as in Virginia and have two seed-time and two harvest which they bring into a public barn or common storehouse as they do the rest of their victual none fear to be beguile of his neighbour thus do these barbarian enjoy that content attend with sobriety and simplicity which we have banish together out of our coast every one distrust or defraud other while either by miserable keep or luxurious spend he which be g g seneca bad to all be worst to himself to this barn they bring at a certain time of the year all the venison fish and crocodile dry before in the smoke for the better preservation which they meddle not with till need force they and then they signify the same to each other the king may take thereof as much as he will this provision be send in basket on the shoulder of their hermaphrodite which wear long hair and be their porter for all burden they hunt heart after a strange manner for they will put on a heart skin with the leg and head on so that the same shall serve they to stalk with and they will look through the eye and the hole of the hide as if it be a vizor thereby deceive their game which they shoot and kill especial at the place where they come to drink their crocodile they take in a strange manner they be so plague with these beast that they keep continual watch and ward against they as otherwhere against their enemy for this purpose they have a watch-house h h icon. 26. by the river side and when hunger drive the beast on shore for his prey the watchman call to man appoint they come ten or twelve of they bear a beam or tree the small end whereof they thrust into the mouth of the crocodile come upon they gape for his prey which be sharp and rough can be get out and therewith they overturn he and then be lay on his back easy kill he the flesh i i n. Chaluf c. 3. taste like veal and will be savoury meat if it do not savour so much of a musky send their sobriety k k icon. 2. 8. lengthen their life in such sort that one of their king tell i say Morgues that he be l l Laudon say 250. but he see they not himself as this our author do this man give two eagle to the french perhaps they reckon every year two as in Virginia three hundred year old and his father which there he show i alive be fifty year elder than himself when I see he i think I see nothing but bone cover with skin his sinew vein and artery say laudonniere in description of the same man his bone and other part appear so clear through his skin that a man may easy tell they and discern the one from the other he can not see nor yet speak without great pain de Ottigni demand of their age the young of these two call a company of indian and strike twice on his thigh lay his hand on two of they he show that they be his son and strike on their thigh he show other which be their son and so continue till the five generation and yet it be tell they that the elder of they both might by the course of nature live thirty or forty year more they have a devilish a a Morgues icon. 34. custom to offer the firstborn male-child to the king for a sacrifice the day of this dismal rite be notify to the king he go to the place appoint and sit down before he be a block two foot high and as much thick before which the mother of the child sit on her heel and cover her face with her hand deplore the death of her son one of her friend offer the child to the king and then the woman which accompany the mother place themselves in a ring dance and sing and she that bring the child stand in the mid of they with the child in her hand sing somewhat in the king commendation six indian stand apart and with they the priest with a club wherewith after these ceremony he kill the child on that block which be once do in our presence another b b Icon 35. religious rite they observe about the end of February they take the hide of the great hart they can get the horn be on and fill the same with the best herb which grow among they hang about the horn neck and body as it be garland of their choice fruit have thus sow and trim it they bring the same with song and pipe and set it on a high tree with the head turn towards the east with prayer to the sun that he will cause the same good thing to grow again in their land the king and his magician stand near the tree and begin all the people follow with their respond this do they go their way leave it there till the next year and then renew the same ceremony ribault c c r. Laudon at his first come have two of the floridian aboard with he certain day who when they offer they meat refuse it give they to understand that they be accustom to wash their face and to stay till sunset before they do eat which be a ceremony common in all those part they observe a certain feast call Toya with great solemnity the place where it be keep be a great circuit of ground sweep and make neat by the woman the day before and on the feast day they which be appoint to celebrate this feast come paint and trim with feather and set themselves in order three f f these three be jawas which be priest magician and physician other in differ paint and gesture follow with tabret dance and sing in a lamentable tune other answer they after that they have sing dance and turn three time they fall to run like unbridled horse through the midst of the thick wood the indian woman continue all the day in weep and tear cut the arm of the young girl with mussel-shell with hurl the blood into the air cry out three time he Toya those that run through the wood return two day after and then dance in the midst of the place and cheer up those which be not call to the feast their dance end they devour the meat for they have not eat in three day before the frenchman learn of a boy that in this meanwhile the jawas have make invocation to Toya and by magical character have make he come that he may speak with he and demand diverse strange thing of he which for fear of the jawas he dare not utter to provoke they unto revenge against their enemy they in their feast have this custom there be a dagger in the room which one take and strike therewith one that be thereunto appoint and then place the dagger where he have it and anon renew the stroke till the indian fall down the woman girl boy come about he and make great lamentation the man meanwhile drink cassine but with such silence that not one word be hear afterward they apply moss warm to his side to heal he thus do they call to mind the death of their ancestor slay by their enemy especial when they have invade and return out of their enemy country without the head of any of they or without any captive @. 3 of the more inland part of Florida discover by NUNEZ but let we take view of the more southerly and westerly part of Florida beyond the point of pamphilo Narva's his unfortunate expedition you have hear Ramus vol. 3. the whole history write by one of his company Alvaro Nunez be extant in ramusius out of which I have insert such thing as I hold most fit as their land in Cuba at la Trinita a tempest by land and sea assail they so furious that it overthrow all the house and church make they to fly with no less fear of the tree fall on they and hold six or seven together lest the wind shall have lift they into the air they hear also or fear so phantasy the noise of bell cry flute and other instrument make this dreadful music to which the hill tree and house thus dance and after find one of the shipboat upon the tree the ship be perish the first town in Florida they come to be Apalachen which have not above forty small low cottage so build by reason of continual tempest from thence they travel to aute by the way encounter a giantlike people with bow as big as one arm eleven or twelve span long wherewith they shoot both exact and forcible pierce good armour a long time they hold on a unprofitable march till many of they be slay or consume by sickness and famine which make they bethink they of build vessel there to transport they but their hard hap pursue they at sea and beside outward tempest assault they with one inward more implacable of thirst which force they to drink the sea-water and that so greedy that some die therewith present neither will the sea continue this hospitality howsoever in hospital but have satisfy himself in the person of some and good of all betray the rest to the barbarous indian through many nation of which they travel with as hard disadventure as ever Virginia yield even when it be at worst and let out most clamorous excepter be judge cold which then attend the winter be exceed sharp and they naked and yet famine be more terrible than cold which make five of their company eat up each other till only one remain and no marvel for famine which will be a traveller and sojourner in all place have seem to fix his habitation in these and to hold all the nation adjoin under his lawless law and tyrannical subjection the first Indian they q q they call this place Malsatto meet with have one and some both of their teat bore through in the hollow whereof with no little gallantry they wear a reed two span and a half long and two finger thick and likewise for great bravery wear another less reed through their nether lip they live in these part two month which be the season of certain root grow under the water which they then live on at other time in other place with fish and what they can find when one of they have a son dead all of the kindred and people mourn for he a year at morning and noon and then bury he these exequies they observe to all but the old folk of which they hold no such account as have already live out their time they have among they physician or priest who dead body they burn with great solemnity and make powder of the bone which the kinsman a year after drink these may have more wife the rest but one when any brother or son be dead those of that house in three month space seek not abroad for their food though they die of famine leave that care to their kinsfolk and neighbour which sometime almost starve their cure the physician use to heal with breathe on the sick and touch they they believe that if stone and herb have such faculty be apply much more man as a more excellent creature they will needs have these spaniard such physician who if you believe they do many cure with great admiration but can not cure their famine and captivity in many year this our r r al. Nunez his peregrination through many savage nation author flee from these to the quevene and Marianes which three month in the year leave their former habitation to go seek a kind of fruit call tune of the bigness of a egg black and of good taste these be festival month to these fastivall nation eat and drink the juice of these tune yea many month afore comfort their present famine and pacify their croak entrails with hope of the approach tune-season and thus with word they solace Alvaro impatient hunger six month before he can thus indeed satisfy it their house be mat upon four arch shift every second or three day to seek food they sow nothing have as well a dog ease as hunger yea like some of duke humfreys gallant guest they set a good face on the matter and pass the time in mirth and dance when sometime their tooth dance not in four day together they dote so superstitious on their dream that upon this dream-warning they will kill their son and without so much will leave their daughter to be devour of beast lest say they they shall grow up as the time than be by marriage with they to increase the number of their enemy they have two or three kind of bad root and sometime fish or venison but all rare they eat ant egg worm serpent frog earth wood dung of wild beast and keep the bone of fish and serpent to grind and eat afterward their woman and old man be put to bear their burden and drudgery they be molest with three sort of fly who bite leaf a seem lepry they use smoky fire in their room almost with the price of their eye save their skin other carry firebrand in their hand and therewith set all thing as they pass on fire both to prevent they and to hunt their game into fit place for their take the same they have kine as big as in Spain with small horn and long hair 400. league alongst the country much like be the state of the Canagadi camoni Auavares Malicones and other Floridian nation these keep no reckon of time by the sun or moon but like Plautus his parasite by the belly which be in observe the season of their fruit and fish they tell strange thing of a evil spirit which in fearful apparition do astonish they and cut their flesh all these indian have a custom not to lie with their wife after they know they once conceive till two year after their delivery and their mother give they suck a a great suck-bigs he say till they be twelve year old and be able to get food for themselves which they do because of the famine in those part whereby they will otherwise have die if any sicken by the way they leave he there to die except he have a father or brother which will carry he in this their fleet habitation on their neck they upon any discontent divorce themselves and marry to other except they have have child together and in mutual contention they come to buffet and bastinado till weariness or their wife part they but never deal with deadly weapon and sometime separate themselves and their family till time waste away their indignation and then return yet be the fierce and politic in war these nation and the susolas comos camole Quitones and other name of barbarism use tobacco and a drink make of the leaf of certain tree boil with water and put up into certain vessel which they drink as hot as they can endure cry meanwhile who will drink and when the woman hear this cry they sudden stand still without stir any way although they be lade they believe that if any woman shall then move herself some evil thing will enter into the drink whereof they must die soon after and therefore if any such accident happen they cast all away and likewise if a woman pass by while they be brew it if the vessel be uncover when the woman have their natural flux they must be their own cook but for no body else they have some man marry to other man be attire in habit of woman sodomite and perform only womanly office in some place as they pass their physician which common be in savage nation magician and priest have rattle of gourd which they suppose to come from heaven and to have great virtue none other dare to touch they some use for boil wild gourd not by put fire under but by heat stone continual in the fire and put they into the liquor till it seethe some people on the mountain for a three part of the year eat nothing but a powder make of straw in some place be tree of such venomous quality that the leave thereof in stand water will poison whatsoever drink thereof some acknowledge a certain man in heaven call Aguar who give they rain and all good thing all these people as he pass with a negro and two other after he have escape some of his first master which hold he in hard slavery hold they for child of the sun and therefore receive they with great reverence and festival pomp and convey they still to the next nation westward towards the south sea till they come to spaniard always use to rob those people to who they deliver they of their little wealth which depart from the same with the great content because they serve the next people and so successive with like sauce they find some rich sable of musky send and emerald they be out in this expedition and captivity ten year before they can recover Spain from 1527. to 1537. @. 4 other observation of Florida these thing follow Ortelius b b ortel theat say he have from his nephew Caelius Ortelius by the relation of a eyewitness the king give or sell rather to every man his wife if a woman commit adultery she be bind to a tree her arm and leg stretch out all day and sometime whip a woman three hour after she be deliver of a child carry the infant to the river to wash it they observe no discipline in their family with their child they have flea which bite so eager that they leave a great deformity like a lepry after they have wing serpent one of which I see say c c Challus exped. in florid. cap. 3. nicolaus Challusius the wing whereof seem to enable it to fly a little height from the ground the inhabitant be very careful to get the head thereof as be think for some superstition Botero d d Botero rel. part. 1. l. 5. say that they have three sort of heart and of one of they make the same commodity which we do of our kine keep they tame and milk they the Spaniard have three garrison on the coast of Florida s. jacomo s. agostino and s. Philippo they be e e Gasp ent. l. 3. much addict to venery and yet abstain from their wife after conception know when f f discovery of Florida and Virginia rich value Ferdinando Soto enter Florida he there find among the indian one John ortiz a Spaniard which by the subtlety of the people under colour of deliver a letter which they have fasten to a cleave cane be take and live twelve year with they the lord of the place make he his temple-keeper because that by night the wolf come and carry away the dead corpse he report that these people be worshipper of the devil and use to offer unto he the life and blood of their indian or of any people that they can come by and when he will have they do that sacrifice unto he he speak unto they and tell they that he be a thirst and enjoin they this sacrifice they have a prophecy that a white people shall subdue they wherein the french and spanish have hitherto fail in their attempt Soto have in his greedy hope neglect the many commodity he may have enjoy to find great be bring to such dump that he thereon sicken and after die but before he take his bed he send to the cacique of Quigalta to tell he that he be the child of the sun and therefore will have he repair to he he answer that if he will dry up the river he will believe he and when he be dead because he make the indian believe that the christian be immortal the spaniard seek to conceal his death but the cacique of Guachoya busy inquire for he they answer that he be go to heaven as many time he do and have leave another in his place the cacique think he be dead b b Benzo lib. 2. command two young and well proportion Indian to be bring thither say it be their custom to kill man when any lord die to wait on he by the way which their cruel courtesy the spaniard refuse deny that their lord be dead one Cacique ask Soto what he be and why he come thither he answer that he be the son of God and come to teach they knowledge of the Law not so say the cacique if God bid thou thus to kill steal and work all kind of mischief for their credulity in like case laudonniere tell that a strange and unheard-of lightning happen within a league of their fort which consume in a instant 500 acre of meadow be then green and half cover with water together with the fowl that be therein it continue burn three day together and make the frenchman think that for their sake the indian have set fire on their dwelling and be go to some other place but a certain Paracoussy which be one of their petty king or cacique send to he a present beseech he to command his man that they shall shoot no more towards his dwell think that the ordinance have cause all this which occasion he use to his own good by arrogate that to himself which he see their simplicity conceive of he within two day after this accident fall such a heat that the river I think be ready to seethe and in the mouth of the river be find dead therewith fish enough to have lade fifty cart whereof issue by putrifacton much sickness calos be near the cape of Florida the king thereof make his subject believe that his sorcery and charm be the cause that make the earth bring forth her fruit c c Laudon be tell this of certain spaniard which live in those part and that he may the easy persuade they he retire himself once or twice a year to a certain house accompany with two or three of his friend where he use enchantment if any man offer to see what he do it cost he his life every year he offer a man in the time of harvest which be keep for that purpose and take of such spaniard as have suffer shipwreck on that coast they which further desire to know the riches and commodity of these country may resort to the author in this chapter mention sir Francis Drake in the year 1586. beside his worthy exploit in other place take the fort of s. John and saint Augustine whence he bring Pedro morales and Nicholas burgoignon who relation concern that country master Hackluit have insert among other his painful labour David ingram d d David ingram ap. Hak. Tom 3. Edit. 1. report many strange thing which he say he see in these part elephant horse and beast twice as big as horse their hinder part resemble greyhound bull with ear like hound beast big than bear without head or neck but have their eye and mouth in their breast and another beast Cerberus he call he Colluchio which be say he the devil in likeness of a dog and sometime of a calf with many other matter wherein he must pardon i if I be not too prodigal of my Faith he tell also of punishment of adultery by death the woman cut the adulterer throat and the near kinsman she after many prayer to the Colluchio and a further punishment in that they have no quick body bury with they to attend they into the other world as all other have but they that listen to believe may consult with the author Anthony Goddard another of ingram company leave by sir John Hawkins go another way at Panuco yield himself to the spaniard with who be miles Philip and job Hortop who discourse of their disadventure with the spaniard and indian master Hakluit have publish and have goddard also write chap. 8 of the country situate westward from Florida and Virginia towards the south-sea @. i. of cibola tigue Quivira and noua Albion we have hitherto discover those part of this northern America which trend along the north sea which the english and french nation have most make know unto we further westward the midland country be not so well know yet follow our spanish guide we here present they from their relation to your view when as Cortes have conquer Mexico as after follow to be relate he be make admiral of the south-sea but the government of Mexico and new Spain be with the title of viceroy give to Antonio de Mendoza these two partly in emulation of each other glory partly in hope of enrich themselves seek to discover unknown land the one by sea the late both by sea and land the viceroy send d d in his letter to the emperor ap. Hak to 3. and Ramus as he himself testify Francis vasquez de coronado and friar Marco de Nisa with Stephen a negro by land out of who relation we have insert that which concern our purpose mark e e Marco de Nisa his relation the friar and Stephen set forth with certain indian in this discovery and Stephen go before come to Cevola as mark relate where he be slay the friar follow with his indian guide and pass through one place where be small store of victual because it have not there rain as the inhabitant affirm in three year space the indian call he Hayota that be a man come from heaven he pass on further lead by the same of Cevola which with other six city be report to be under the government of one lord and to have house of stone consist of diverse story where be many Turqueses with many other strange report of their market multitude and wealth but because the friar come not there for fear of the negro entertainment let we listen to f f f. vasquez his relation Francis vasquez who come see and overcome a 1540 he go with his army from Culiacan which be 200. league from Mexico and after a long and tedious journey he at last arrive in this province and conquer almost with the loss of himself the first city of the seven which he call Granado twice he be strike down with stone from the wall as he offer to scale the same he say that their house be of four or five story or loft to which they ascend on ladder and that they have cellar under the ground good and pave but those seven city be small town all stand in the compass of four league all call by that general name of Cevola or cibola and none of they particular so call but have other peculiar name they be of like building in this town which he conquer stand 200. house wall about and 300. other not wall the inhabitant have remove their wife and wealth to the Hill he report of beast there bear tiger lion and sheep as big as horse with great horn and little tail ounce also and stag that which the indian worship as far as they can learn be the water which say they cause the corn to grow and maintain their life he find there a garment excellent embroider with needlework vasquez go hence to Tiguez to Cievic and to Quivira as g g f. lop. c. 212. 213. and 214. Lopez de Gomara report this way be full of crookbacked oxen. Quivira be in 40. degree and the country be temperate they see ship in the sea which bare alcatoaze or pelican of gold and silver in their prowess lade with merchandise which they take to be of China or cathay the man in these part cloth and shoe themselves with leather they have no bread of any kind of grain their chief food be flesh which they often eat raw either for custom or for lack of wood they eat the fat as they take it out of the ox and drink the blood hot which of our bull be count poison and the flesh they warm for they seethe it not at a fire of Ox-dung they rather may be say to ravine then to eat it and hold the flesh with their tooth cut it with razor of stone they go in company as the scythian Nomades tartarian floord and many other nation follow the season and best pasturing for their ox these ox h h ox of Quivera be of the bigness and colour of our bull but their horn be not so great they have a great bunch upon their shoulder and more hair on their forepart then on the hinder and it be like wool they have as it be a horsemane on their back bone and much hair and very long from their knee downward they have great tuft of hair on their forehead and have a kind of beard under their chin and throat the male have very long tail with a great knob or flock at the end so that in some respect they resemble a lion in other the camel horse ox sheep or goat they push with their horn and in their rage will overtake and kill a horse for the horse flee from they either for their deformity or because they have never see the like the people have no other riches they be unto they meat drink apparel their hide also yield they house and rope their bone bodkin their sinew and hair threat their horn maw and bladder vessel their dung fire the calves-skin budget wherewith they draw and keep water Gomara also mention their sheep which they so call because they have fine wool and horn they be as big as horse their horn weigh fifty pound weight a piece there be also dog which will fight with a bull and will carry fifty pound weight in sack when they go on hunt or when they remove from place to place with their herd the winter be long and sharp with much snow in cibola and therefore they then keep in their cellar which be in place of stove unto they in the height of thirty seven degree at Tiguez the cold be so extreme that the horse and man pass over the river upon the ice they there take a town * * take of Tiguez after five and forty day siege but with much loss and little gain for the indian kill thirty horse in a night and in another slay certain spaniard send ouando up into the country they can not tell whether for sacrifice or for the show and wound fifty horse they drink snow in stead of water and see no hope to hold out make a great fire and cast therein all they have of worth and then go all out to make way by force where they be all in manner slay but not unrevenged force some spaniard to accompany they into the region of death and wound many more both man and horse the snow continue in these part half the year Quivira be more northerly and yet more temperate the spaniard return to Mexico in the end of the year 1542. to no small grief of Mendoza who have spend in this expedition six thousand duokat some friar stay but be slay by the people of Quivira only one man escape to bring news to Mexico sir Francis Drake sail on the other side of America to forty degree of northerly latitude and with cold be force to retire although the sun follow he all the way from Guatulco hither which he sail from the 6. day of April to the 5. day of june as if that most excellent and heavenly light have delight himself in his society and acknowledge he for his son more true than the spaniard whereof anon we shall hear or that b b ovid. Metamorph lib. 2. Phaeton of the poet not able to compass this compass journey once he be so good a scholar and learned the sun instruction so well that he follow he in a watery field all that his fiery circle round about this earthly globe carry with the move wind as it be airy wing new star island sea attend and admire the english colour and first of c c Magellanes Victory so be his ship call have win this victory but lose her general any general loose the girdle of the world and encompass she in his fortunate arm enjoy her love but I lose myself while I find he and yet excellent name I know not how compel man to stand awhile and gaze with admiration if not with adoration this our english knight d d sir Francis Drake Hak. tom. 3. land on this coast in thirty eight degree where the inhabitant present themselves unto he with present of feather and call of network which he require with great humanity the man go naked the woman knit loose garment of bulrush about their middle they come a second time and bring feather and bag of tobacco and after a long oration of one that be speaker for the rest they leave their bow on a hill and come down to our man the woman meanwhile remain on the hill torment themselves tear the flesh from the cheek whereby it appear that they be about some sacrifice the news be further spread bring the king thither which be a man of goodly stature many tall man attend he two ambassador with a long speech of half a hour signify his come before one go before the king with a sceptre or mace wherein hang two crown with three chain the crown be of knitworke wrought artificial with diverse colour feather the chain of a bony substance the king follow clothe in Cony-skin the people come after all have their face paint with white black and other colour every one bring his present even the very child also the scepter-bearer make a loud speech of half a hour take his word from another which whisper the same unto he which with a solemn applause be end they come all down the hill in order without their weapon the scepter-bearer begin a song and dance wherein all the rest follow he the king and diverse other make several oration or supplication to the general to become their king and the king with a song do set the crown on the general head and put the chain about his neck honour he by the name of Hioh the common sort leave the king and his guard scatter themselves with their sacrifice among our people take view of all and to such as best please their fancy which be the young offer their sacrifice with weep scratch and tear their flesh with much effusion of blood the english mislike their devotion and direct they to the live God they show again their wound whereunto the other apply payster and lotion every three day they bring their sacrifice till they perceive that they be displease and at the departure of the english they by stealth provide a sacrifice take their depart very grievous they find herd of dear feed by thousand and the country full of strange coney head like we with the foot of a want and tail of a cat have under their chin a bag into which they gather their meat when they have fill their body abroad there be no part of this earth wherein there be not some special likelihood of gold or silver the general name the country a a noua Albion noua Albion @. 2 of new Mexico and Cinaloa in the year 1581. b b history of China by fr. Juan Gonsalez de Mendosa Augustine Ruiz a friar learn by the report of certain indian call Conchos that towards the north there be certain great town not hitherto to discover by the spaniard whereupon he with two other companion of his own order and eight soldier go to seek these part and to preach unto they they come unto the province de los tiguas two hundred and fifty league northwards from the mine of saint Barbara where one of the friar be slay by the inhabitant this cause the soldier to return back but the friar stay still behind the franciscan fear the loss of these their brethren procure Antonio de Espeio c c an. de Espeio novemb. 1512. to undertake this journey with a company of soldier he pass the Conchos the Passaquates the tobose come to the patatabueye which be a great province and have many town their house flat roof and build of lime and stone their street orderly place the people be of great stature and have their face arm and leg raze and pounce here d d new Mexico be many lake of salt-water which at a certain time of the year wax hard and become very good salt the cacique kind entertain they with victual and other present especial hide and chamois skin very well dress as well as those of Flanders and pass many day journey further northwards they come where the house be four story high well build and in most of they stove for the winter season the man and woman wear shoe and boot with good sole of neat leather a thing not elsewhere to be see in the indies in this province they find many idol which they worship and particular they have in every house a oratory for the devil whereinto they ordinary carry he meat and as the papist erect cross upon high way so have this people certain high chapel very well trim and paint in which they say the devil use to take his ease and to recreate himself as he travel from one town to another in the province of tiguas there be sixteen town in one of which the friar aforesaid be slay six league from thence be the province los quire which worship idol as their neighbour they see there certain canopy wherein be paint the sun moon and many star it be in 37. degree and a half hence they pass keep still their northerly course and find a province call Cwames where be five town one of which be Chia which contain eight market place the house be plaster and paint with diverse colour they present they curious mantle and show they rich metal beyond this they come to the amey and fifteen league thence to Acoma which be situate upon a rock and have no other entrance but by a ladder or pair of stair hew in the same rock all their water be keep in cistern they pass hence to Zuny which the spaniard call cibola and there find three spaniard leave by vasquez forty year before which have almost forget their own language westward from hence they come to Mohotze where be exceed rich mine of silver as likewise in some of the other these part seem to incline towards Virginia Martin Perez a jesuite write of these inland part from Cinaloa 1591. that the fly about the mountain Tepesuan in 23. degree be so troublesome as no beast can abide there the Cimmechi be warlike indian some spaniard keep there which hear mass scarce once in a year the province of Cinaloa be water with eight river the soil fertile and air wholesome extend three hundred mile northwards and within two day journey of new Mexico the people wear many earring in fifty hole which they make for that purpose so that they be force to sleep with their face upward the woman be clothe beneath the waste above naked both they and the man wear long hair tie up on knot with coral and shell therein they be a handful high than the spaniard valiant use poison arrow peaceable at home terrible in war they have many language some of they have familiarity and commit abominable sin with the devil they use polygamy and think it not unseemly to use the mother sister daughter as further domestic peace thus respect they affinity but of consanguity be very religious they correct not their child their marriage be solemnize after consent of parent on both side with dance the consummation be stay till fit age of the party to who they then leave a house and household they observe a custom to make gentleman or knight give a bow and then set he to fight with a lion or wild beast the death of which be the life of their gentility when one adopt another a stake be thrust into his throat cause he to vomit all in his belly and as it be his former birth together they be great gamester their play like that of dice in which they carry themselves very patient without swear or word and yet will lose the clothes from their back and go home naked if any be dangerous sick a grave be dig and stand open in which they bury he present be dead or else burn he together with his house and stuff and there cover the ash sprinkle the sepulchre with certain dust whereof they make a drink and eat and drink themselves drink l. t. Toletus in his letter to master hakluyt 1605. write of one John onnate who in the year 1599 travel five hundred league from the old to new Mexico he send his nephew to Acoma a town strong fortify by nature to truck with they who they deceitful slay with his six companion onnate in revenge take and kill the indian and fire their dwelling force a great city to swear obedience to the king of Spain and another city also great than the former they build a town name saint john find mine of gold and silver hunt the herd of cibola in the year 1602. he make another expedition to the lake of Conibas on the bank whereof be a city seven league long and two in breadth the house build scatter with hill and pleasant garden between the inhabitant all have fortify themselves in the market place which be very large the spaniard depart without assault near california be find large haven before unknown and the spaniard determine to build fort now that we have hear of the inland discovery by the spaniard and that noua Albion of sir Francis Drake let we take some view of the spanish navigation on these coast @. 3 the discovery of ULLOA and ALARCHON on the coast of the south sea COrtes the conqueror of Mexico send a a fran. Ulloa ramus and Hak vol. 3 Francis de Ulloa with a fleet for discovery in the year 1539. from acapulco which come to Santa cruz in california they sail over the gulf and come to the river of saint Peter and saint Paul where they behold on both side a goodly country I be loath to hold on with they in their voyage lest I sail from my scope and leave the offend reader behind i here they find in their course burn mountain which cast up fire ash and smoke in great quantity they encounter with a cruel storm and be almost out of hope they see as it be a candle upon the shroud of the trinity one of their ship which the mariner say be saint elmo and salute it with their song and prayer this be the darkness of popery to worship a natural light yea that which have little more than be and be a imperfect meteor be with they more perfect than human and must participate in divine worship without the gulf of california california they find store of great fish which suffer themselves to be take by hand also they see weed float on the sea fifty league together round and full of gourd under they be store of fish on they store of foul they grow in fifteen or twenty fathom depth they catch with their dog a beast very fat haired like a goat otherwise resemble a dear in this neither that it have four dog like unto a cow full of milk but because they have little deal with the inhabitant I leave they and will see what Fernando f f fer. Alarchon Alarchon can show we of his discovery he be set forth by Antonio de Mendoza the viceroy in the year of our lord 1540 with two ship he come to the bottom of the bay of california and there find a mighty river which run with such furious violence that they can scarce sail against it here leave the ship with some of his company he pass up with some piece of ordnance and two boat and so draw the boat with hawser they make up the river call buena Guia they be encounter with the indian inhabitant who forbid they land but Alarchon hurl his weapon down and pull out certain ware to give they appease their fury and cause they also to lay down their weapon and receive of he some trifle which he give they two league high many indian come and call to he these be deck after a strange manner some have paint their face all over some half way other have visard on with the shape of face they have hole in their nostril whereat certain pendant hang other wear shell have their ear full of hole with bone and shell hang thereat All of they wear a girdle about their waste whereunto be fasten a bunch of feathe which hang down behind like a tail they carry with they bag of tobacco their body be trace with coal their hair cut before hang down long behind the woman ware bunch of feather before and behind they there be four man in woman apparel Alarchon perceive by sign that the thing they most reverence be the sun and therefore signify unto they that he come from the sun whereat they marvel and take curious view of he with great reverence than before bring he abundance of food first fling up part of every thing into the air and after turn to he to give he the other part offer in their arm to carry he into their house and do else whatsoever he will have they and if any stranger come they will go and meet he to cause he to lay down his weapon and if he will not they will break they in piece he give the chief of they small ware they need not pray they to help draw the boat up the stream every one labour to get hold of the rope otherwise it have be impossible to have get up against the current he cause cross to be make and give they with instruction to honour they which they do with ecstasy of blind z ale kiss they and lift they up every one come for they till he have not paper and stick enough for that purpose and as he pass further he meet with one which understand his interpreter and ask of he many question to which he answer that he be send of the sun which the other doubt because the sun go in the sky he say that at his go down and rise he come near the earth and there make he in that land and send he hither to visit this river and the people and to charge they not to make further war one upon another but why say the indian do he send you no soon he answer because before he be but a child a long dialogue thus pass betwixt they the issue whereof be that the indian cry out they will all receive he for their lord see he be the child of the sun and come to do they good this use do he make of their superstitious observation of the sun which they worship because he make they warm say they and cause their crop to grow and therefore of all thing which they eat they cast a little up into the air to he they war one upon another a thing common to all savage for small occasion the elder and most valiant guide the army for in some place they have no lord and of those which they take in the war some they burn and from some they pluck out the heart and eat they Alarchon cause a cross to be make of timber command his own people to worship it and leave it with the indian with instruction every morning at the sun-rise to kneel before it this they take with great devotion and will not suffer it to touch the ground until they know by question how deep they shall set it with what composition of gesture to worship it and the like curiosity of paganish christianity he be tell that this river be inhabit by three and twenty language that they marry but one woman to one man that maid before marriage converse not with man nor talk with they but keep at home and wrought adultery be death they burn the dead widow stay half a year or a whole year before they marry again every family have their several governor other ruler they have none the river use at some time to overflow the bank these people tell Alarchon that in Cevola they have many blue stone or Turqueses which they dig out of a rock of stone and when the governor die all their good be bury with they that they eat with napkin many wait at table that they kill the negro before mention because he say he have many brethren to who they think he will give intelligence and therefore kill he a old man tell he the name of two hundred lord and people of those part this old man have a son clothe in woman attire of which sort they have four these serve to the g g sodomite sodomitical lust of all the unmarried young man in the country and may not themselves have to deal with any woman they have no reward for this bestial trade but have liberty to go to any house for their food when any of they die the first son that be bear after succeed in their number as for the more northerly part both within land and the suppose straight of Anian with other thing mention in map because I know no certainty of they I leave they the way by sea from these part to the philippinas two of our own nation have pass who voyage h h Linschoten also in his three book large treat of the course of these and other navigation as also that exact description of the same by Francisco de gualle a spanish captain and pilot master hakluyt have relate who have in these and other labour of like nature deep engage himself for his country good and of his countryman merit a everlasting name and to i have be as admiral hold out the light unto i in these sea and as diligent a guide by land which I willing yea dutiful acknowledge in a great part of this my long and wearisome pilgrimage and his help in the second edition have much more oblige i that I say not thou unto his laborious collection for which our english navigation both for the memorial of pass encouragement of present and instruction to the future be as to Neptune secretary and the ocean protonotary indebt beyond recompense whereby he be l l he die this last winter 1616. dead while we write these thing yet speak and although in this three edition I can not obtain like kindness from he I know not how affect or infect with emulation or jealousy yet shall his name live while my write endure as without who help and industrious collection perhaps I have never trouble the world in this kind and this be my epitaph in his memory who have yet a better his own large volume be the best and true title of his honour and if some juno Lucina will help to bring forth the posthume issue of his voyage not yet publish the world shall enjoy a more full testimony of his pain in that kind chap. 9 of new Spain and the conquest thereof by Hernando Cortes @. i. of the first discovery by Cortes and other now be we safe arrive out of the south k k the spaniard call all that the south sea which be on the further side of America sea and north unknown land where we have wilder ourselves and weary the reader in this great and spacious country of new Spain new Spain be all that which lie between Florida and california and confine on the south with Guatimala and jucatan how it come to be so call ask a long discourse concern the conquest thereof by Cortes who history be thus relate Hernando l l Gomara his three part of the conquest of the west indies translate into english by t. Nicolas Cortes be bear at medellin in Andulozia a province of Spain 1485. when he be nineteen year old he sail to the island of saint Domingo where ouando the governor kind entertain he he go to the conquest of Cuba in the year 1511. as clerk to the treasurer under the conduct of james Velasques who give unto he the indian of Manicorao where he be the first that bring up kine sheep and mare and have herd and flock of they and with his indian he gather great quantity of gold so that in short time he be able to put in two thousand Castlins for his stock with Andres de Duero a merchant at this time Christopher Morante have send an. 1517. Francis Hernandes de Cordova who first discover yucatan whence he bring nothing except the relation of the country but stripe whereupon james Velasques in the year 1518. send his kinsman John de Grijalua with 200. spaniard m m of this voyage read p. martyr four decade and Gomara part. 1. and of all which follow in this chapter p. mart. dec. 5. and Cortes his own large narration to the emperor ap. Ramus vol. 3. in four ship he trade in the river of Tavasco and for trifle return much gold and curious work of feather idol of gold a whole harness or furniture for a arm man of gold thin beat eagle lion and other pourtrature find in gold etc. but while Grijalua defer his return Velasques agree with Cortes to be his partner in the discovery which he glad accept and procure licence from the governor in Domingo and prepare for the voyage Velasques afterward use all mean to break off in so much that Cortes be force to engage all his own stock and credit with his friend in the expedition and with five hundred and fifty spaniard in eleven ship set sail the ten of February 1519. and arrive at the island of Acusamil the inhabitant at first flee but by the kind entertainment of some that be take they return and receive he and he with all kind office they tell he of certain beard man in yucatan whither Cortes send and one of they geronimo de aguilar come unto he who tell he that by shipwreck at jamaica their carvel be lose twenty of they wander in the boat without sail water or bread thirteen or fourteen day in which space the violence of the current have cast they on shore in a province call Maija where as they travel seven die with famine and their captain Valdinia and other four be sacrifice to the idol by the cacike or lord of the country and eat in a solemn banquet and he with six other be put into a coop or cage to be fatten for another sacrifice but break prison they escape to another cacike enemy to the former where all the rest die but himself and Gonsalo Guerrer a mariner he have transform himself into the indian cut bore his nose full of hole his ear jagged his face and hand paint marry a wife and become a captain of name among the indian and will not return with this aguilar Cortes with this new interpreter pass up the river Tavasco call of the former discoverer Grijalua where the town that stand thereon refuse to victual he be take and sack the indian here with enrage assemble a army of forty thousand but Cortes by his horse and ordnance prevail the indian think the horse and rider have be but one creature who gape and swiftness be terrible unto they whereupon they submit themselves when they hear the horse neigh they have think the horse can speak and demand what they say the spaniard answer these horse be sore offend with you for fight with they and will have you correct the simple indian indian simplicity present rose and hen to the beast desire they to eat and to pardon they Cortes purpose to discover westward because he hear that there be mine of gold have first receive their vassalage to the king his master to who he say the monarchy of the universal do appertain these be the first vassal the emperor have in new Spain they name the town where these thing be do victory before call Potonchan Potonchan call victory contain near five and twenty thousand house which be great make of lime and stone and brick and some of mudwal and rafter cover with straw their dwell be in the upper part of the house for the moistness of the soil they do eat man flesh sacrifice the spaniard sail further westward and come to saint John de Ulhua where Teudilli the governor of the country come to he with four thousand indian he do his reverence to the captain burn frankincense after their custom and little straw touch in the blood of his own body and then present unto he victual and jewel of gold and other curious work of feather which Cortes requite with a collar of glass and other thing of small value a woman-slave give he at Potonchan understand their language and she with aguilar be his interpreter Cortes profess himself the servant of a great emperor which have send he thither who power be so high extol that Teudilli marvel think there have be no such prince in the world as his master and sovereign the king of Mexico who vassal he be name Mutezuma to he he send the representation of these beard man and their horse apparel weapon ordnance and other rarity paint in cotton-clothe their ship and number these paint cotton he send by post which deliver they from one to another with such celerity that in a day and night the message come to Mexico which be two hundred and ten mile distant Spanish incurable sickness Cortes have demand whether Mutezuma have gold Teudilli affirm and Cortes reply that he and his fellow have a disease of the heart whereunto gold be the best remedy Mutezuma send he many cotton-clothe of diverse colour many tuffe of feather two wheel the one of silver with the sign of the moon and the other of gold make like the sun which they hold for god and give unto they the colour of the metal most like they each wheel be two yard and a half broad these with other part of the present be esteem worth twenty thousand ducat Mutezuma also profess joy to hear of so great a prince and so strange people and promise provision of all necessary but be very unwilling that Cortes shall come to see he as he pretend yet Cortes persist in that his desire of see Mutezuma that he may further acquaint himself with the knowledge of those part the silly indian have never see such strange sight come daily to the camp to see they and when they hear the ordnance discharge they fall down flat think the heaven have fall the ship they think be the god of the air call quezalcovolt which come with the temple on his back for they daily look for he among the rest or rather aloof off from the rest be certain indian of differ habit high than the other and have the gristle of their nose slit hang over their mouth and ring of jet and amber hang thereat their nether lip also bore and in the hole ring of gold and turquois-stone which weigh so much that their lip hang over their chin leave their tooth bare this ugliness they account gallantry note for fashion-monger and such uncouth deformity to be the only bravery and thou gallant that read and deride this madness of fashion if thy eye be not dazzle with lightness light I can call it of self-reflected Vanity may see as monster-like fashion at home and a more fashionly monster of thyself thy clothes and oath thy gesture and vesture make thy naked deformity worse than their thus deform nakedness both indeed seem to have receive some hellish character if there may be bodily representation of that old serpent in these new fashion strive who shall shape himself near to that misshapen ugliness wherein the indianiagge himself out of human lineament the other swagger himself further out of all civil and christian ornament but these fashion-monger have make i almost out of my fashion and to forget myself in remember their forgetfulness these indian of this Newcut Cortes cause to come to he and learned that they be of Zempoallan Zempoallan a city distant thence a day journey who their lord have send to see what god be come in those Teucallis that be temple so it seem that they call the ship which hold no conversation with the other indian as be not subject to Mutezuma but only as they be hold in by force he give they certain toy and be glad to hear that the indian of Zempoallan and other their neighbour be not well affect to Mutezuma but ready as far as they dare to entertain all occasion of war with he he sail from thence to Panuco Panuco and pass the river far till he come to a little town where be a temple with a little tower and a chapel on the top ascend by twenty step in which they find some idol many bloody paper and much man blood of those which have be sacrifice the block also whereon they cut open those sacrifice and the razor make of flint wherewith they open their breast which strike the spaniard with some horror and fear they pass a little further and there have take possession in the emperor name of the whole country they found the town de la vera crux Cortes vera crux resign his authority and officer be elect and last all with general consent appoint Cortes their captain @. 2 Cortes his expedition to Mexico and entertainment by MUTEZUMA COrtes go forward to Zempoallan where he be solemn receive and lodge in a great house of lime and stone white with plaster that shine in the sun as if it have be silver so do the siluer-conceit of the spaniard imagine the desire of that metal have make such a impression in their imagination that they tell Cortes before he come at it they have see a house with wall of silver here and at Chiaviztlan Cortes incite they to rebel against Mutezuma and to become servant to the spaniard which they do and he underhand so wrought that Mutezuma take he for his friend all his intent be to fish in trouble water and to set they both by the ear that he may watch opportunity to benefit himself his own people rebel some of who he chastise with the halter and the whip for example to the rest and after cause all his ship to be sink close that they shall not mind any return he leave a hundred and fifty man for the guard of the new town under Pedro de Henrico and with four hundred spaniard fifteen horse and six piece of artillery and 1300. indian they go from Zempoallan and come to Zaclotan the lord whereof be Olintler the subject of Mutezuma who to testify his joy and to honour Cortes command fifty man to be sacrifice who blood they see new and fresh they carry the spaniard on their shoulder sit on beeres such as whereon they use to carry dead man he brag as much of the power of Mutezuma as the spaniard of their emperor he say he have thirty vassal each of which be able to bring into the field a hundred thousand man of war bloody sacrifice and sacrifice twenty thousand man yearly to the god in this he somewhat exceed the other be true although some year the sacrifice also be think to amount to fifty thousand this town be great and have thirteen temple in each of which be many idol of stone of diverse fashion before who they sacrifice man dove quail and other thing with great perfume and veneration here Mutezuma have five thousand soldier in garrison Cortes pass from thence to Mexico by the frontier of tlaxcallon which be enemy to Mutezuma who he may easy have overcome but reserve partly for the exercise of his subject to the war partly for the sacrifice to his god these join a hundred and fifty thousand man against Cortes take he for mutezuma friend and yet every day send he guinea-cock and bread partly to espy his strength and partly in a bravery lest their glory shall be obscure in the conquest of man already starve but when in many skirmish and fight they can not prevail against that handful of spaniard they think they be preserve from harm by enchantment and send he three present with this message that if he be that rigorous god which eat man flesh he shall eat those five slave which they bring he and they will bring he more if he be the meek and gentle God behold frankincense and feather if he be a mortal man take here foul bread and cherry at last they make peace with he and submit their city to he their city Tlaxcallan be great Tlaxcallan a great city plant by a river side which issue into the south-sea it have four street each ot which have their captain in the time of war the government be a aristocraty hate monarchy no less than tyranny it have eight and twenty village and in they a hundred and fifty thousand household very poor but good warrior they have one marketplace so spacious that thirty thousand person in a day come thither to buy and sell by exchange for money they have none Mutezuma have send before to Cortes and promise tribute to the emperor whatsoever shall be impose only he will not have he come to Mexico and now he send again that he shall not trust that new friendship with the beggarly nation of Tlaxcallan and they again counsel he not to adventure himself to Mutezuma Cortes hold his determination for Mexico and be accompany with many of the Tlaxcantlexas he go to Chololla chololla a little from whence Mutezuma have prepare a army to entrap he in the way but he find the treachery it redound upon the Cholollois the same day they have think to have execute the same upon he for this end they have sacrifice ten child five male and as many female three year old to Quezalcovatl their god which be their custom when they begin their war he out-going they in their own art of subtlety entrap their captain in council and send his army to spoil the city where be slay thousand there be twenty gentleman and many priest which ascend up to the high tower of their temple which have a hundred and twenty step where they be burn together with their god and sanctuary this city have 20000. household within the wall and as many in the suburb store of temple and devotion it show outward very fair and full of tower for there be as many temple as day in the year and every one have his tower the spaniard count 400. tower it be the city of most devotion in all India whither they travel from many place far distant in pilgrimage their cathedral temple be the best and high in all New-Spain with 120. step up to it their chief god be Quezalcovatl god of the air who be they say founder of their city be a virgin of holy life and great penance he institute fast and draw of blood out of their ear and tongue and leave precept of sacrifice he never wear but one garment of Cotton white narrow and long and upon that a mantle beset with certain red cross they have certain green stone which be he and be keep for great relic one of they be like a ape head eight league from Chololla be the hill Popocatepec Popocatepec a burn Hill or smoke-hill which the earth seem to have erect as a fort to encounter and assault the air now with smoky mist endeavour to choke his pure breath another while with violent flame and natural firework threaten to join league with his elder and superior brother to disinherit he sometime with shower of ash and embers as it be put out the eye and sometime with terrible and dreadful thunder rend the ear of that airy element always such be the event of war hurt and waste itself to endamage the enemy the indian think it a place of purgatory whereby tyrannical and wicked officer be punish after their death and after that purgation pass into glory the spaniard adventure to see it but two only hold on their journey and have there be consume have they not by a rock be shadow from the violent eruption of the fire which then happen it chance that the earth weary it seem of the war as have spend her store and munition agree on a truce which continue ten year but in the year 1540 it break forth into more violent hostility then before quake and rent itself with unbridled passion and whereas the air have always a snowy garrison about her high top and frontier to cool and quench her fiery shower yet these do but kindle a great flame the ash whereof come to Huexozinco Quelaxcopon Tepiacac chololla and Tlazcallan and other place ten or as some say fifteen league distant and burn their herb in their garden their field of corn tree and clothes that they lay a dry the Vulcan crater or mouth whence the fire issue be about half a league in compass the indian kiss their garment a honour do unto their god which have adventure themselves to this dreadful spectacle Cortes draw near to Mexico Mutezuma Mutezuma religion fear say these be the people which our god say shall come and inherit this land he go to his oratory and there shut up himself alone abide eight day in prayer and fast with sacrifice of many man to aslake the fury of his offend deity the devil bid he not to fear and that he shall continue those bloody rite assure he that he shall have the god Vitziliputzli and Tescatlipuca to preserve he say that Quezalcovatl permit the destruction at Chololla for want of that bloody sacrifice Cortes pass a hill six mile in height where by the difficulty of the passage and of the cold be always cover with snow the mexican may easy have prevent his pass further hence he espy the lake whereon Mexico and many other great town do stand Iztacpallapan a town of 10000 household Coyocan of six thousand Vizilopuchtli of five thousand these town be adorn with many temple and tower that beautify the lake from Iztacpalapan to Mexico be two league all on a fair causay with many draw-bridge through which the water pass Mutezuma receive Cortes with all solemnity on the eight of November 1519. into this great city excuse himself of former unkindness the best he can of his house and majesty and the divine conceit the people have of he we shall speak after more full as also of the temple priest sacrifice and other remarkable thing of Mexico Mutezuma provide all thing necessary for the spaniard and indian that attend they even bed of flower be make in place of litter for their horse but Cortes disquiet with those thought which common attend ambition discontent in the present hope and fear of the future use the matter so that he take Mutezuma prisoner and detain he in the place appoint for the spaniard lodging with a spanish guard about he permit he otherwise to deal in all private or public affair as before hereupon Cacarna lord of Tezcuco nephew to Mutezuma rebel but by treachery of his own people be present prisoner to Mutezuma he after this summon a parliament where he make a oration unto his subject say f f the like speech he have make at first to Corte who easy wrought on that advantage apply this tradition to the spaniard Cortes that he and his predecessor be not natural of the country but his forefather come from a far country and their king return again and say he will send such as shall rule they and he have now send these spaniard say he hereupon he counsel they to yield themselves vassal to the emperor which they do at his command though with many tear on his part and they at this farewell of their liberty Mutezuma present give to Cortes in the name of tribute a great quantity of gold and other jewel which amount to sixteen hundred thousand Castlins of gold beside silver @. 3 the conquest of Mexico Cortes have hitherto a continual victory in Mexico without any fight but news be bring he of pamphilo de Narva's who be send yywith eighty horse and some hundred of spaniard by Velasques to interrupt the proceed of Cortes who leave two hundred man in Mexico with 250. other come sudden in the night and take Nerva prisoner and return to Mexico with Narva's his company now his follower also where he find his man exceed distress by the citizen for a murder commit in the great temple at a solemn feast where in a religious dance they be slay for the rich garment and jewel they wear by the spaniard Cortes come in good time for the relief of his man and Mutezuma cause the mexican to bridle their rage which present be renew and when Mutezuma Mutezuma death be again by his guardian the spaniard cause to speak to the people a blow of a stone on his temple wound he whereof three day after he die Cortes have some thousand of the Tlaxoltecas to help he but be drive to fly from Mexico with all his spaniard and indian which he do close in the night but yet a alarm be raise and the bridge be break much slaughter of his people be make by the mexican and all his treasure in manner lose they pursue after he also and have two hundred thousand in the field when it be Cortes his good hap to slay the standard-bearer whereupon the indian forsake the field this battle be fight at Otumpan at Tlazcallan he and he be kind entertain they have prepare before 50000. man to go to Mexico for his help and now they promise he all office of loyalty and service with their help he subdue Tepeacac and build certain brigandine and frigate which be carry many league on the back of those indian and there fasten and finish without which he can never have win Mexico in Tezcuco certain spaniard have be take sacrifice and eat which Cortes now revenge on they eight thousand man have carry the loose piece and timber of this navy guard with twenty thousand tlaxcalans and a thousand Tamemez or porter which carry victual attend they calk they with tow and for want of tallow and oil they use man grease of such as have be slay in the war for so the indian use to take out the grease of their sacrifice Cortes have here nine hundred spaniard of which fourscore and six be horseman three cast piece of iron fifteen small piece of brass and a thousand weight of powder and 100000 indian soldier on his side he make a fluce or trench above twelve foot broad and two fathom deep half a league long in which forty thousand man wrought fifty day he launch his vessel and soon overcome all the canoas of the lake or which be reckon in all five thousand the spaniard break the conduit of sweet water wherewith the city be wont to be serve Quabutimoc now the new king of Mexico receive encouragement from the devilish oracle cause to break down the bridge and to exercise whatsoever wit or strength can do in defence of his city sometime conquer sometime as be the doubtful chance of war conquer Cortes have in Tezcuco ordain a new king a Christian Indian of the royal blood who much assist he in this siege the spaniard be lord of the lake and of the causey by help of their Galliots and ordnance they fire a great part of the city one day the mexican have get some advantage and thereupon celebrate a feast of victory the priest go up into the tower of Tlalelulco their chief temple and make there perfume of sweet gum in token of victory and sacrifice forty spaniard which they have take captive open their breast and pluck out their heart sprinkle their blood in the air their fellow look on and not able to revenge it they slay likewise many indian and four spaniard of aluarado company who they be in the open sight of the army the mexican dance drink themselves drink make bonfire strike up their drum and make all solemn express of joy Dread disdain and all the fury that passion or compassion can conjure up have now fill the spaniard heart and their indian partaker and Cortes that hitherto have hope to reserve some part of the city now do the utmost that rage and revenge can effect help no less within with famine and pestilence then with sword and fire without at last Mexico be raze the earth and water share betwixt they what fire have leave and all which have sometime challenge a lofty inheritance in the air their king also be take all that mighty state subvert and as the mexican before have prophesy that the tlaxantleca shall again build the city if conquer for they if conqueror for the spaniard it be rebuild with a hundred thousand house fair and strong than before the siege last three month and have therein two hundred thousand indian nine hundred spaniard fourscore horse seventeen piece of ordinance thirteen Galliots and six thousand canoas fifty spaniard be slay and six horse of the mexican a hundred thousand beside those which die of hunger and pestilence this be effect 1521. on the thirteen day of August which for that cause be keep festival every year for the description of the country wherein Mexico be situate Cortes in his second narration to the emperor say it be environ with hill he tell of some hill also in his journey wherein diverse of his people die with cold in the midst be a plain of 70. league compass and therein two lake which extend the circuit of fifty league the one salt which ebb and flow a argument for patritius his opinion that saltness be a chief cause of that vicissitude of ebb and flow in the ocean the other fresh when the water of the salt lake increase it run like a violent stream into the fresh lake which when it increase be repair again by the like issue of this into the former Nunno di gusman p p n. di gus ap. ram. vol. 3 have write his expedition into Mechoacan and other country of New-spain 1530. subdue and take possession for the emperor he find some of they sodomite other sacrificer of man flesh and some close practise this butchery after they have profess themselves Christian none of they which dare look a horse in the face but be afraid that that beast will eat they the several people by he reckon will here be tedious to name which we may say of the like make by Godoy and aluarado q q lit. p. aluarado and dieg. Godoy ap. ram. vol 3. of the custom of the ancient mexicane one of Cortes his gentleman have write a treatise r r Relat. Temistitan ca. extant in ramusius wherein be describe their city temple rite of sacrifice and the like as after follow out of he and other chap. x. of the ancient inhabitant of New-spain and the history of their king @. i. the mexican and first sound have now declare the subversion of this state and kingdom by the spaniard I hold it not amiss to look back upon the first people which here inhabit with the beginning and proceed of the mexican empire the a a Bocero part. 1. lib. 5. Ios. acosta l. 7. lop. de gom. part 1. n. di gust first inhabitant of New-spain be very barbarous and savage which live only by hunt and for this reason be call Chichemecas they live naked solitary in the mountain without tillage policy or any religious ceremony their wife follow the same hunt exercise leave their child tie in a Panier of reed to the bough of some tree they do eat what they get in hunt raw they eat also snake and lizard which they offer likewise in sacrifice to the sun who only they worship and that without any image they offer to he fowl from the Butterfly to the eagle and some remnant of the like beastly man as be say before be yet find which do great hurt and will not by either cunning or force of the spaniard be reduce to any other course they seem to have learn the savage nature of the wild beast of who and with who they live by this mean it come to pass that this wild mountainous people leave the best and most fertile part of the country unpeople which certain remote nation possess who they call b b Navatalcas signify welspeaker Navatalcas for their civility these come from those northern part which now they call new Mexico the Navatalcas paint their beginning and first territory in manner of cave because of their seven tribe and man come out of they by the supputation of their book this departure be above eight hundred year since and by reduce to our account about the year of our lord 720. fourscore year they stay on the way the cause whereof they ascribe to their god which speak visible to they and bid they seek new land that have such sign as they notify thus they proceed in seek those sign and people the best part still remove their habitation as they find more fertile country leave only the age sick and weary with a few other to remain in the former and by these leisurely proceed they enter the land of Mexico about the year 902. after our account those seven nation come not all at once but first the Suchimilcos next the Chalcas and three the tepanetans four those of Tescuco after they the tlalluicans the six be the tlascaltecan which help the spaniard to conquer Mexico and therefore be exempt from tribute to this day these expel as their history say certain giant who in pretence of friendship they have invite to a banquet and in their drunkenness steal away their weapon and slay they neither do this seem a fable for at this day be find dead man bone of incredible bigness I see a tooth say acosta at Mexico in the year 1586. as big as the fist of a man and according to this all the rest be proportionable three hundred and two year after the first transmigration those of the seven cave or line arrive which be the mexican nation they worship the idol Vitzliputzli and the devil speak and govern this nation he promise to make they lord over all which the other six nation possess and to give they a land plentiful in riches whereupon they go forth carry their idol with they in a coffer of reed support by four of their principal priest with who he talk and communicate his oracle and direction he likewise give they law and teach they the ceremony and sacrifice they shall observe and even as the pillar of cloud and fire conduct the israelite in their passage through the wilderness so this apish devil give they notice when to advance forward and when to stay the first thing they do wheresoever they come be to build a house or tabernacle for their Vitzliputzli which they set always in the midst of their camp and there place the ark in the midst of the altar this do they sow the land and if their god command to gather they do so and if to raise their camp they obey leave the age sick and weary to gather their fruit and to dwell there the chief captain who they follow be call Mexi whence come the name of their c c Mexico and mexican the mexican picture-history say of Mexiti the name of the people Mexico be so call city and nation their idol persuade they when some be bathe themselves in certain lake to remove the camp close and steal away their clothes whereat they which be thus forsake change their language and manner of life retain always their hatred to the mexican they people the province Mechovacan from hence to Mexico be fifty league and upon the way be Malinalco which they say be people by a witch and her family who by the commandment of their god they leave behind close remove the army by night they stay in a place call tuta where by stop a river they drown a plain and plant it round with willow and other tree and many like the place begin of human sacrifice talk of stay there whereat their god offend threaten the priest and in the night slay those which have consult of stay their heart be find pull out and their stomach open which after that they observe in their sacrifice the mexican by the advice of their idol proceed and by force make way through the Chalcas and send to the lord of Culbuacan who grant they the place of Ticaapan to dwell in which be full of snake and venomous beast which by the help of their god they tame he will not suffer they to stay there but command they to proceed and to seek forth a woman who they shall name the goddess of discord whereupon they send to the king of Culhuacan to demand his daughter to be queen of the mexican and mother of their god who easy condescend and send his daughter gorgeous attire the same night she arrive by order of their god she be murder and flay and a young man be cover with her skin with her apparel thereon and be place near the idol she be consecrate a goddess and mother of their god they ever after worship the same make a idol which they call toccy that be our grandmother the king of Culhuacan hereupon war against they and chase they out of those part by which mean they come to the place where Mexico now be here certain old priest or sorcerer enter into a place full of water-lily they meet with a very fair and clear current of water with tree meadow fish and other thing all very white which be the sign their god have give they of their promise land in the night follow Vitzliputzli appear in a dream to a ancient priest say that they shall go seek out a tunnel in the lake which grow out of a stone upon which they shall see a eagle feed on small bird which they shall hold for the place where their city shall be build to become famous through the world hereupon the next day they all assemble and divide themselves into band make that search with great diligence and devotion in their search they meet with the former watercourse not white as it be then but red like blood divide itself into two stream one of which be a obscure azure at last they espy the eagle with wing display towards the sun compass about with many rich feather of diverse colour and hold in his talon a goodly bird. at this sight they fall on their knee and worship the eagle with great demonstration of joy and thanks to Vitzliputzli for this cause they call the city which there they found g g Mexico tonoxultan tenoxtiltan which signify tunal on a stone and till this day carry in their arm a eagle upon a tunal with a bird in his talon the next day follow by common consent they make a hermitage adjoin to the tunal of the eagle that the ark of their god may rest there till they may have mean to build he a sumptuous temple this they make of flag and turf cover with straw afterward they consult to buy of their neighbour stone timber lime in exchange of fish fowl frog and other thing which they hunt for in the lake by which mean they procure necessary build a chapel of lime and stone and labour to fill up part of the lake with rubbish the idol command that they shall divide themselves into four principal quarter about this house and each part build therein to which he enjoin certain god to his appointment call Calpultecco which be quarter god this be the beginning of Mexico @. 2 the history of eight of their first king this division seem not equal to some of the ancient who value their desert far above their allot portion who therefore separate themselves and go to Tlatedulco who practice against the mexican cause they to choose a king to which sovereignty be choose Acamapitzli Acamapitzli the first king of Mexico nephew to the king of Culhuacan and of the mexican blood by the father side he by embassage they demand and obtain in the name of their god with this answer from the king of Culhuacan let my grandchild go to serve your god and be his lieutenant to rule and govern his creature by who we live who be the lord of night day and wind let he go and be lord of the water and land and possess the mexican nation etc. he be solemn welcome by the mexican welcome thou be say a a a many of these oration be express in Acostas seven book at large full of witty invention and rhetorical flourish orator unto he in their name to this poor house and city among the weed and mud where thy poor father grandfather and kinsfolk endure what it please the lord of thing create remember lord thou come to be our defence and to be the resemblance of Vitzliputzli not to rest thyself but to endure a new charge with many word to that effect express in the mexican history reserve by tradition the child to that end learn they by heart and these be as precedent to they which learn the art oratory after this they be swear and he crown the crown be like that of the duke of Venice his name acamapitz signify a handful of reed and therefore they carry in their armoury a hand hold many arrow of reed the mexican at this time be tributary to the tapanecan who chief city be Azcapuzalco who judge according to the nature of envy and suspicion that they be so much weak how much the strong they see their neighbour think to oppress they by a strange policy move garden in impose a uncouth and in show impossible tribute which be that they shall bring the Tapunecan king a garden plant and grow in the water in this their distress Vitzliputzli teach they to do it by cast earth upon reed and grass lay in the lake and plant in this move garden Maiz fig gourd and other thing which at the time appoint they carry grow and ripe a thing often since prove in that lake emulous no less of that glory to be account one of the wonder in that new world than those pencil garden tower up in the air at Babylon both here and there the reason of man according to his natural privilege subject to his use the most rebellious element of air and water Acamapitzli the mexican king after he have reign forty year die leave it to their choice to choose his successor they choose his son Vitzilovitli Vitzilovitli the second king which signify a rich feather they anoint he with a ointment which they call divine be the same wherewith they anoint their idol of their coronation thus b b lop. de gom. part. 1. Lopez de Gomara say that this be do by the high priest attire in his attend with many other in surplice the ointment be as black as ink they bless he and sprinkle he four time with holy-water make at the time of the consecration of their God then they put upon his head a cloth paint with the bone and skull of dead man clothe he with a black garment and upon that a blue both paint with figure of skull and bone then do they hang on he lace and bottle of powder whereby he be deliver from disease and witchcraft then do he offer incense to Vitzliputzli and the high priest take his oath for the maintenance of their religion to maintain justice and the law to cause the sun to give his light and the cloud to rain and the earth to be fruitful etc last follow the acclamation of the people cry God save the king with dance etc. he be crown and have receive homage of his subject obtain the king of Azcapuzalco his daughter to wife by who he have a son call Chimalpopoca Chimalpopoca 3. and procure a relaxation of tribute from his father in Law he be devout in his superstition have reign thirteen year he die his son then but ten year old be choose in his room but be soon after slay by the inhabitant of Azcapuzalco the mexican enrage with this injury assemble themselves and a orator among many other word tell they that the sun be eclipse and darken for a time but will return sudden in the choice of another king they agree upon Izcoalt Izcoalt 4. which signify a snake of rsor the son of Acamapixtli their first king the common people be earnest with this new king for peace with the tapanecan for the obtain whereof they will carry their god in his litter for a intercessor this be hinder by Tlacaellec the king nephew a resolute and valiant young man who also with peril of his life undertake a embassage to Azcapuzalco and there defy the king anoint he with the ointment of the dead after their manner the commons of Mexico be herewith offend and to pacify they the king indent with they that if he lose the field they shall eat he and his noble they on the other side promise if he do overcome to become his tributary for before they enjoy much freedom and to labour in his field and house and to become his servant in war and peace in fine such be the valour of Tlacaellec the general that the enemy be overthrow their city sack and the remainder of they make tributary the land and good of the conquer be divide among the conqueror and some reserve to each quarter of Mexico for the use of their sacrifice Cuyacan have the next place in the mexican conquest who have invite the mexican to a banquet in the end thereof send for the last service woman habit which they force they to put on but izcoalt and Tlacaellec make they know by their ruin the manhood of the mexican they subdue also the Suchimilchos and Cuitlavaca a city in the lake Tescucoy yield itself izcoalt after twelve year die and Motecuma Motezuma the five King the first be choose in his stead present after his election they conduct he to the temple with a great train where before the divine hearth so call in regard of the continual fire there keep they enthronize he the king there draw blood from his ear and leg with a griffon talon as a sacrifice and be congratulate with many oration of the priest ancient and captain and whereas before they have accustom in their election to make great feast and dance and waste many light he bring in the custom personal to make war in some province thence to procure sacrifice to feast their god and men. this he perform at Chalco from whence he bring many captive which on the day of his coronation be sacrifice and eat at this feast all his tribute be bring in with great solemnity each province march by itself beside innumerable present all comer be bountiful entertain and the poor be clad with new garment give they by the king the Chalcas have take a brother of Motezuma and will have make he their king but he enjoin they to make a high scaffold ascend thereon and tell they the god will not permit that to be a king he shall be a traitor unto his country cast down himself who death Motezuma revenge with the ruin of that whole nation conquer further unto the north and south sea by the counsel and courage of Tlacaelles this king institute new ceremony and increase the number of the priest he build the great temple of Vitzliputzli and sacrifice great number of man at the dedication have reign eight and twenty year he die Tlacaellec be choose his successor by the four deputy and the two lord of Tescuco and Tacuba these be the elector but refuse the empire as be fit for the common good as a instrument to another then if himself weyld the sceptre at his nomination they choose ticocic ticocic 6. son of the late king and pierce his nostril for a ornament put a emerald therein he in seek captive for the solemnity of his coronation lose more of his own people and after four year be poison by his malcontent subject Axayaca Axayaca 7. his brother succeed altogether of another spirit in his time die Tlacaellec chief author of the mexican greatness who before in his age they use to carry in his chair on man shoulder to council he be bury more solemn than any of the king and his son be make general for the war Axayaca conquer Tequantepec two hundred league from Mexico thence to furnish the bloody solemnity of his coronation he add to his conquest Guatulco on the south sea in single combat over come the lord of Tlatelulco and subdue those mexican-enemy of the mexican set fire on their city and temple after eleven year he die and Antzol Antzol 8. the eight king be choose he punish the pride of Quazulatlan a rich province with those captive to celebrate his coronation-feast and extend his dominion to Guatimala three hundred league from Mexico he much adorn his royal city pull down the old house and in their room erect fair he let in a course of water to the city because that of the lake be muddy but because they of Guyoacan use these water the chief man of that city which be a great magician seek to hinder it whereby the king be provoke send to attach he he escape by his protean art now appear like a eagle the second time like a tiger the three like a serpent but at last he be take and strangle and the mexican force a channel whereby the water may pass to their city the priest meanwhile cast incense on the bank sacrifice the blood of quail other wind their cornet and one of the chief go attire in a habit like to the goddess of the water which be salute and welcome by all the people all which thing be paint in the annal of Mexico which book be now in the Vatican a a and master Hakluit have a copy of it translate into english it be in the mexican language send to Charles the five intercept by Florinus library at Rome thus he environ the city with water like another Venice and have reign eleven year die @. 2 of MOTEZUMA and other rarity of the mexican story MOtezuma Metezuma 9 the second be choose who before his sovereignty be of grave and stay disposition much addict to his devotion he retire himself into a chapel appoint for he in the temple of Vitzliputzli where they say the idol speak to he wherein also he hide himself after he have intelligence of this election from whence he be lead to the hearth of their god where he sacrifice with draw blood from his ear and the calf of his leg they attire he with the royal ornament and pierce his nostril hang thereat a rich emerald be seat in his throne the king of Tescuco one of the elector make a eloquent oration which joseph b b lib. 7. cap. 20. acosta have set down word by word and deserve a room here if our hasty pilgrimage will suffer this Motezuma command that no plebeian shall serve he in any office in his house provide knight and noble for that purpose his coronation be solemnize with dance comedy banquet light and other pomp the sacrifice captive be of a far province towards the north sea which he subdue Mechovacan Tlascalla and Tapeaca never yield to the mexican which Motezuma tell Cortes that he spare for the use of his sacrifice and the exercise of his soldier he labour to be respect and worship as a God it be death for any plebeian to look he in the face he never set his foot on the ground but be always carry on the shoulder of nobleman and if he light they lay rich tapestry whereon he do go he never put on one garment twice nor use one vessel or dish above once he be rigorous in execution of his law and for that purpose will disguise himself to see how they be execute and offer bribe to the judge to provoke they to injustice which if they except cost they their life though they be his kinsman or brethren his fall be before declare it shall not be amiss here to mention some prodigious forerunner of the same the idol of Cholola call Quetzacoalt declare that a strange people come to possess his kingdom the king of Tescuco a great magician and many sorcerer tell he as much the king shut up the sorcerer in prison where they vanish present wherefore he exercise that rage on their wife and child which he have intend against they he seek to appease his angry god by sacrifice and therefore will have remove a great stone which by no human industry will be move as refuse his atonement strange voice be hear accompany with earthquake and swell of the water ominous prodigy a prodigious bird of the bigness of a crane be take which on his head have as it be a glass represent arm man and in the king presence vanish a strange thing befall a poor man who be take up by a eagle and carry into a certain cave where he let he down pronounce these word most mighty lord I have bring he who thou have command there he see one like the king lie asleep touch who have receive threaten prophecy he be again by that former pursuivant place where he have be take up these thing as devilish illusion abuse God providence and justice and imitate his power to rob he of his glory deserve to be mention Mutezuma have intelligence of Cortes his arrival be much trouble and confer with his council they all say that without doubt their great and ancient lord quetzacoalt who have say that he will return from the east whither he be go have now fulfil his promise and be come therefore do he send ambassador with present unto Cortes acknowledge he for quetzacoalt sometime their prince now esteem a god and himself his lieutenant the mexican history describe in picture and send to Charles the five which I have see with master Hakluit in the first part show their first expedition and plantation in this place then all drown with water with great bog and some dry bushy place their calendar mexican tribute from Tlatilulco and from other place and the name year and conquest of their king in the second part their tribute be describe the particular whereof be reparation of certain church so many basket of Maiz ground hold half a bushel and almond of Cacao basket of mantle pay every four day and once a year armour and target of feather all this be pay by the city Tlatilulco and in like proportion every town and nation subject be to pay the natural or artificial commodity thereof as armour garnish with feather rich mantle white or of other colour eagle alive beam of timber board salt make in long mould for the lord of Mexico only pot of honey Naguas and Huipiles which be attire for woman Copale for perfume Cotton wool Red-sea-shell Xicharas in which they drink Cacao other full of gold in powder each contain two handful plate of gold three quarter of a yard long and four finger broad as thick as parchment yellow varnish to paint themselves bell and hatchet of copper turquois-stone chalk lime Deer-skin Cochinile feather frizole target of gold diadem border bead of gold bead of gem tigres-skin amber Axi or west-indian pepper etc. concern the state of Mexico under the spaniard Robert * * r. Tomson ap Hak. Tomson who be there about the year 1555. say that then it be think there be a thousand and five hundred household of spaniard and above three hundred thousand indian the * * h. hawk ap. Hak. job Hortop city be environ with a lake and the lake also with mountain about thirty league in compass the rain fall from these hill cause the lake in this city reside the viceroy and here the high indian court be keep there be weekly three fair or market abound with plenty of commodity at a cheap price many river fall into the lake but none go out the indian know how to drown the city and will have practise it have not the conspirator be take and hang the indian here be good artificer goldsmith copper-smith black-smith carpenter shoemaker tailor saddler embroiderer and of all other science and work exceed cheap live of a little they will go two or three league to a fair carry not above a pennyworth of commodity and yet maintain themselves thereby Milos t t miles Philips Philip say that when sir Francis Drake be on the south sea the viceroy cause a general muster to be make of all the spaniard in Mexico and find above seven thousand household and three thousand singleman and of mestizo twenty thousand master chilton u u John chilton testify that every indian pay tribute to the king twelve real of plate and a hauneg of Maiz five hauneg make a quarter english and every widow half so much and all their child above fifteen year old pay after the same rate he have great gain by his fifth and by the pope bull this leaden ware be worth to the king at first above three million of gold yearly the greatness of exaction cause two rebellion while he be there and the king will not suffer they to have oil or wine there grow although the earth will prodigal repay they that they may still have need of Spain Tlaxcalla for their merit in the conquest of Mexico as before be show be free only they pay a handful of wheat a man in sign of subjection but some late encrocher have force they to till at their own charge as much ground as their tribute will amount to there be in it two hundred thousand Indian some of the wild people in new Spain be deadly enemy to the spaniard and eat as many as they get of they John chilton fall into their hand but be sick and lean they think as a captive wench tell he that he have the pox and be but unwholesome food and so let he depart it be a ill wind that blow none to good sickness the harbinger of death be to he a preserver of life Mexico be now a 10 10 Botero university and therein be teach those science which be read in our university of Europe this university be y y Gasp l. 2. there found by Antony Mendoza and king Philip erect a college of jesuit 1577. Mexico be a bishopric there z z ortel Theas be many spanish colony or plantation compostella Colima Guadaleiara Mechocan city of Angelo and other whereof diverse be episcopal see Antonio herrera reckon in this and other part of America five archbishopric twenty seven bishopricke two university four hundred monastery and hospital innumerable in Guastecan not far from Panuco be a hill from whence spring two fountain one of black pitch the other of red very hot to speak large of new Gallicia Mechuacan Guastecan and other region will not be much to the reader delight and less to to my purpose chap 11 of the idol and idolatrous sacrifice of new Spain @. i. of their god the indian as acosta a a natural and moral hist of the indies lib. 5 cap. 3. observe have no name proper unto God but use the spanish word dios fit it to the accent of the cuscan or mexican tongue yet do they acknowledge a supreme power call Vitziliputzli term he the most puissant and lord of all thing to who they erect at Mexico the most sumptuous temple in the indies after the supreme God they worship the sun and therefore call Cortes as he write to the emperor son of the sun that Vitziliputzli b b Hernando Cortes accost l. 5. c. 9 Vitziliputzli be a image of wood like to a man set upon a azure-coloured stool in a brankard or litter at every corner be a piece of wood like a serpent head the stool signify that he be set in heaven he have the forehead azure and a band of azure under the nose from one ear to the other upon his head he have a rich plume of feather cover on the top with gold he have in his left hand a white target with the figure of five pine apple make of white feather set in a cross and from above issue forth a crest of gold at his side he have four dart which the mexican say have be send from heaven in his right hand he have a azured staff cut in fashion of a wave snake all these ornament have their mystical sense the name of Vitziliputzli signify the left hand of a shine feather he be set upon a high altar in a small box well cover with linen clothes jewel feather and ornament of gold and for the great veneration he have always a curtain before he join to the chapel of this idol there be a pillar of less work and not so well beautify where there be another idol call Tlaloc Tlaloc these two be always together for that they hold they as companion and of equal power there be another idol in Mexico much esteem which be the c c Gomar part. 1 call he the god of providence god of repentance and of jubilee and pardon for their sin he be call Tezcalipuca tezcallipuca make of a black shine stone attire after their manner with some ethnic device it have earring of gold and silver and through the nether lip a small canon of crystal half a foot long in which they sometime put a azure feather sometime a green so resemble a or emerald it have the hair bind up with a hairlace of gold at the end whereof do hang a ear of gold with two firebrand of smoke paint therein signify that he hear the prayer of the afflict and of sinner betwixt the two ear hang a number of small heron he have a jewel hang at his neck so great that it cover all his stomach upon his arm bracelet of gold at his navel a rich green stone and in his left hand a fan of precious feather of green azure and yellow which come forth of a look glass of gold signify that he see all thing do in the World in his right hand he hold four dart as the ensign of his justice for which cause they fear he most at his festival they have pardon of their sin they account he the god of famine drought barrenness and pestilence they paint he in another form sit in great majesty on a stool compass in with a red curtain paint and wrought with the head and bone of dead man in the left hand be a target with five pine like unto pine apple of Cotton and in the right hand a little dart with a threaten countenance and the arm stretch out as if he will cast it and from the target come four dart the countenance express anger the body be all paint black and the head full of quail feather Quecalcavatl be their god of the air in Cholula d d Cholula they worship the god of merchandise call quetzaalcoalt Quetzaalcoalt which have the form of a man but the visage of a little bird with a red bill and above a comb full of wart have also rank of tooth and the tongue hang out it carry on the head a point mitre of paint paper a scythe in the hand and many toy of gold on the leg it have about it gold silver jewel feather and habit of diverse colour and be set aloft in a spacious place in the temple all this his furniture be significant the name import colour of a rich feather no marvel if this God have many suitor see gain be both God and godliness to the most the whole world admire and adore this Mammon or Quetzaalcoalt Tlaloc be their god of water to who they sacrifice for raine they have also their goddess e e Gomar part 1 the chief of which be Tozi Tozi which be to say our grand mother of which be speak before she be flay by the command of Vitziliputzli and from hence they learn to flay man in sacrifice and to clothe the live with the skin of the dead one of the goddess which they worship have a son who be a great hunter who they of Tlascalla afterward take for a god be themselves addict much to that exercise they therefore make a great feast unto this idol as shall after follow they have another strange kind of idol which be not a image but a true man for they take a captive and before they sacrifice he they give he the name of the idol to who he shall be sacrifice apparel he also with the same ornament and during the time that this representation last which be for a year in some feast six month in some in other less they worship he in the same manner as they do their god he in the mean time eat drink and make merry when he go through the street the people come forth to worship he bring their alm with child and sick folk that he may cure and bless they suffer he to do all thing at his pleasure only he be accompany with ten or twelve man lest he shall flee and he to the end he may be reverence as he pass sometime sound on a small flute the feast be come this fat fool be kill open and eat the massilian be say f f jan. Dousa praecid Arbit l. 3. c. 1. to have use the like order nourish one a whole year with the pure meat and after with many ceremony to lead he through the city and sacrifice he Lopes g g lop. de gom. part. 1. de Gomara write that the mexican have two thousand god h h they have their Venus and their Bacchus and Mars and other such deity in mexican appellation as the heathen greek and roman as after shall appear but the chief be Vitziliputzli and Tezcatlipuca these two be account brethren there be another god who have a great image place on the top of the idol chapel make of all that country seed ground and make in paste temper with child blood and virgin sacrifice who heart be pluck out of their open breast and offer as first fruit to that idol it be consecrate by the priest with great solemnity all the citizen be present many devout person stick in the dowie image gold and jewel after which consecration no secular person may touch that image not come in his chapel they renew this image with new many time and bless man be that can get any relic of he the soldier think themselves hereby safe in the war at this consecration also a vessel of water be hallow with many ceremony and keep at the foot of the altar for the king coronation and to bless the captain that go to the war with a draught of it @. 2 of their sacrifice of men. next after their god it follow to speak of their i i accost l. 5. and Relat. Temstitan godless sacrifice wherein they surmount all the nation of the world in beastly butchery the person they sacrifice be k k so some say from the like practice of the ancient victima be so call and captive to get which they make their war rather seek in their victory to take then to kill their manner of sacrifice be this they assemble such as shall be sacrifice in the palisado of dead man skull of which we shall after speak where they use a certain ceremony at the foot of the palisado they place a great guard about they present there step forth a priest attire with a short surplice full of tassel beneath who come from the top of the temple bear a idol make of wheat and maize mingle with honey which have the eye thereof make of green glass and the tooth of the grain of maize he descend the step of the temple with all speed and ascend by a little ladder up a great stone plant upon a high terrasse in the midst of the Court this stone be call quauxi-calli that be the stone of eagle as he go up and come down still he embrace his idol then go he up to the place where those be which shall be sacrifice show his idol to every one in particular say unto they this be your God this do he descend by the other side of the stair and all such as shall die go in procession to the place where they shall be sacrifice where they find the minister ready for that office six of the priest be appoint to this execution four to hold the hand and foot of he that shall be sacrifice the five to hold his head the six to open the stomach and pull out his heart they call they Chachalmua that be the minister of holy thing it be a high dignity wherein they succeed their progenitor the six which kill the sacrifice be as high priest or bishop who name be different according to the difference of time and solemnity their habit also differ according to the time the name of their chief dignity be Papa Papa the name of the mexican high priest and Topilzin their habit and robe be a red curtain with tassel below a crown of rich feather Greene white and yellow upon his head and at his ear like pendant of gold wherein be set green stone and under the lip upon the midst of the beard he have a piece like unto a small canon of a azured stone the sacrificer come with his face and hand shine black the other five have their hair much curl and tie up with lace of leather bind about the midst of the head upon their forehead they carry small roundelet of paper paint about with diverse colour and they be attire in a dalmatic robe of white wrought with black in this attire represent the devil the sovereign priest carry a great knife in his hand of a large and sharp flint another carry a collar of wood wrought in form of a snake all put themselves in order before a pyramidal stone which be direct against the door of the chapel of their idol this stone be so point that the man which be to be sacrifice be lay thereon upon his back do bend in such sort as let the knife but fall upon his stomach it open very easy in the midst then do the guard cause they to mount up certain large stair in rank to this place and as every one come in their order the six sacrificer take he one by one foot another by the other and one by one hand another by the other all naked and cast he on his back upon this point stone where the five of they put the collar of wood about his neck and the high priest open his stomach with the knife with a strange dexterity and nimbleness pull out his heart with his hand the which he show smoke unto the sun to who he do offer this heat and present he turn towards the idol and do cast the heart at his face and then cast away the body tumble it down the stair of the temple there be not two foot space betwixt the stone and the first step in this sort they sacrifice they all one after another their master or such as have take they take up the body and carry they away and divide they among they do eat they there be ever forty or fifty at the least thus sacrifice the neighbour nation do the like imitate the mexican in this sacred butchery there be another kind of sacrifice which they make in diverse feast call Racaxipo Velitzli which be as much as the flay of man because they flay the sacrifice as be say and therewith apparel a man appoint to that end this man l l Gomara say that the ancient person and sometime the king himself will put on this skin be of a principal captive go dance and leap through all the house and market place of the city every one be force to offer something unto he which if any refuse he will strike he over the face with the corner of the skin defile he with the congeal blood this continue till the skin do stink during which time much alm be gather which they employ in necessary for their devotion in many of these feast they make a challenge between he that do sacrifice and he that shall be sacrifice thus they tie the slave by one foot to a wheel of stone give he a sword and target in his hand to defend himself then step forth the other arm in like manner and if he that shall be sacrifice defend himself valiant against the other he be free and be repute a famous captain but if he be vanquish he be sacrifice on that stone whereto he be tie they every year give one slave to the priest to represent their idol at his first entry into the office after he have be well wash they adorn he with the idol ornament and name as before be say and if he escape before his time of sacrifice be expire the chief of his guard be substitute to that representation and sacrifice he have the most honourable lodging in all the temple where he do eat and drink and whither all the chief minister come to serve and honour he he be accompany with nobleman though the street at night they put he into a strong prison and at the appoint feast sacrifice he the devil a m m John 8.44 murderer from the beginning suggest to the priest when there seem defect of these sacrifice to go to their king tell they that their god die for hunger and therefore shall be remember then assemble they their people to war to furnish their bloody altar there happen a strange accident in one of these sacrifice report by man of worthy credit that the spaniard behold these sacrifice a young man who heart be new pluck out and himself tumble down the stair when he come to the bottom he say to the spaniard in his language knight they have slay i the indian themselves grow weary of these cruel rite and therefore they easy embrace the spaniard christianity yea Cortes write to the emperor Charles that those of Mechoacan send to he for his law be weary of their own as not seem good unto they some of the spaniard n n lop. de gom. part. 2. be thus sacrifice at Tescuco and their Horse-skin tan in the hair and hang up with the horseshoe in the great temple and next to they the spaniard garment for a perpetual memory at the siege of Mexico they sacrifice at one time in sight of their countryman forty spaniard the o o accost l. 5. c. 27 mexican beside their cruelty have other unbeseeming rite in their religion as to eat and drink to the name of their idol to piss in the honour of they carry they upon their shoulder to anoint and besmear themselves filthy and other thing both ridiculous and lamentable they p p gom. pa. 39^ be so devout in their superstition and superstitious in their devotion that before they will eat or drink they will take a little quantity and offer it to the sun and to the earth and if they gather corn fruit or rose they will take a leaf before they will smell it and offer the same he which do not thus be account neither love nor love of God the mexican in the siege of their city be bring to all extremity speak thus as Lopez report unto Cortes consider that thou be the child of the sun why do thou not entreat the sun thy father to make a end of we o sun that can go round about the world in a day and a night make a end of we and take we out of this miserable life for we desire death to go and rest with our God Quetcanath who tarry for we chap 12 of the religious place and person in New-spain wherein be also handle their penance marriage burial and other rite perform by their priest @. i. of their temple we have already mention the temple of Vitziliputzli in Mexico which require our further description it a a accost l. 5. c. 13. be build of great stone in fashion of snake tie one to another and have a great circuit call Coatepantly that be a circuit of snake upon the top of every chapel or oratory where the idol be be a fine pillar wrought with small stone black as jet the ground raise up with white and red which below give a great light upon the top of the pillar be battlement wrought like snail support by two indian of stone sit hold candlestick in their hand be like croysant garnish and enrich at the end with yellow and green feather and long fringe of the same within the circuit of this court there be many chamber of religious man and other that be appoint for the priest and pope this court be so great and spacious that eight or ten thousand person do dance easy in a round hold hand which be a usual custom there howsoever it seem incredible Cortes b b 2. car. 5. relate that within the compass of the wall a city of five hundred house may have be build round about encompass with goodly building hals and cloister for the religious votary to dwell in in that circuit he number forty high tower well build to which the ascent be by fifty step or stair the least of they as high as the steeple of the cathedral church in Seville the stone-work as curious as in any place full of grave and paint imagery all these tower be sepulcher of great lord and have each of they a chapel to some special idol there be there three large hals with their chapel annex into which none but certain religious man may enter both full of image the chief of which Cortes cast down and in stead thereof place the image of the ever-blessed never worthy to be dignify with indignity the glorious virgin and mother our lord with such other saint there be four gate or entry at the east west north and south at every c c Gomara say that the four be not a causey but a street of the city of which begin a fair causey of two or three league long there be in the midst of the lake wherein Mexico be build four large causy upon every entry be a God or idol have the visage turn to the causey right against the temple gate of Vitzliputzli there be thirty step of thirty fathom long divide from the circuit of the court by a street that go between they upon the top of these step there be a walk of thirty foot broad all plaster with chalk in the midst of which walk be a palisado artificial make of very high tree plant in order a fathom asunder these tree be very big and all pierce with small hole from the foot to the top and there be rod do run from one tree to another to which be tie many dead man head upon every rod be many skull and these rank of skull continue from the foot to the top of the tree this palisado be full of dead man skull from one end to the other which be the head of such as have be sacrifice for after the flesh be eat the head be deliver to the priest who tie they in this sort until they fall off by morsel upon the top of the temple be two stone or chapel and in they the two image Vitziluputzli and Tlaloc these chapel be carve and grave very artificial and so high that to ascend up to they there be a hundred and twenty stair of stone before these chapel there be a court of forty foot square in the midst whereof be a high stone of five hand breadth point in fashion of a pyramid place there for the sacrifice of man as be before show Gomara d d gom. part. 1. say that this and other their temple be call Teucalli which signify God house this temple he say be square contain every way as much e e pet. mart. dec. 5. l. 4. say that in largeness the situation of this temple be matchable with a town of five hundred house as a crossbow can shoot level in the midst stand a mount of earth and stone fifty fathom long every way build Pyramid-fashion save that the top be flat and ten fathom square it have two such pyramid stone or altar for sacrifice paint with monstrous figure every chapel have three loft one above another sustain upon pillar from thence the eye with much pleasure may behold all about the lake beside this tower there be forty other tower belong to other inferior temple which be of the same fashion only their prospect be not westward to make difference some of those temple be big than other and every one of a several God there be one round temple dedicate to the god of the air call Quecalcovatl Quelcovatl the form of the temple represent the air circular course about the earth the entrance of that temple have a door make like the mouth of a serpent with foul and devilish resemblance strike dreadful horror to such as enter all these temple have peculiar house priest god and service at every door of the great temple be a large hall and goodly building which be common armoury for the city they have other dark house full of idol of diverse metal all imbrue with blood the daily sprinkle whereof make they show black yea the wall be a inch thick and the ground a foot thick with blood which yield a loathsome send the priest enter daily therein which they allow not to other except to noble personage who at their entry be bind to offer some man to be sacrifice to those slaughter-house of the devil there do continual reside in the great temple 5000. person which have there their meat drink and lodging the temple enjoy great revenue and diverse town for the maintenance thereof next f f accost l. 5. c. 13. to the temple of Vitziliputzli be that of Tescalipuca the god of penance punishment and providence very high and well build it have four ascent the top be flat a hundred and twenty foot broad and join to it be a hall hang with tapestry and curtain of diverse colour and work the door be low and large be always cover with a veil and none but the priest may enter all this temple be beautify with diverse image and picture most curious for that these two temple be as the cathedral church the rest as parishional they be so spacious and have so many chamber that there be in they place for the priest college and school without g g lop. gom. p. 1. the great temple and over against the principal door a stone cast distant be the charnel house or that Golgotha before mention where upon pole or stick and also in the wall two tower have no other stuff but lime and skull Andrew de Tapia certify h h accost l. 5 c. 15 Gomara that he and Gonsala de Umbria do reckon in one day a hundred thirty six thousand skull when any wastad supply be make of other in their room @. 2 of their nun nun friar and other votary within this great circuit of the principal temple be two house like cloister the one opposite to the other one of man the other of woman in that of woman they be virgin only of twelve or thirteen year of age which they call the maid of penance they be as many as the man and live chaste and regular as virgin dedicate to the service of their God their charge be to sweep and make clean the temple and every morning to prepare meat for the idol and his minister of the alm the religious gather the food they prepare for the idol be small loaf in the form of hand and foot as of marchpane and with this bread they prepare certain sauce which they cast daily before the idol and his priest do eat it these virgin have their hair cut and then let they grow for a certain time they rise at midnight to the idol matin which they daily celebrate perform the same exercise which the religious do they have their abbess who employ they to make cloth of diverse fashion for the ornament of their god and temple their ordinary habit be all white without any work or colour they do their penance at midnight sacrifice and wound themselves and pierce the top of their ear lay the blood which issue forth upon their cheek and after bathe themselves in a pool which be within the monastery if any be find dishonest they be put to death without remission say she have pollute the house of their God they hold it for a ominous token that some religious man or woman have commit a fault when they see a rat or mouse pass or a bat in the Idol-chapel or that they have gnaw any of the veil for that they say a cat or a bat will not adventure to commit such a indignity if some offence have not go before and then begin to make inquisition and discover the offender put he to death none be receive into this monastery but the daughter of one of the six quarter name for that purpose and this profession continue a year during which time their father and themselves have make a vow to serve the idol in this manner and from thence they go to be marry the other cloister or monastery be of youngman of eighteen or twenty year of age which they call religious their crown be shave as the friar friar in these part their hair a little long which fall to the midst of their ear except on the hinder part of the head where they let it grow on their shoulder and tie it up in truss these serve in the temple live poor and chaste and as the levite minister to the priest incense light and garment sweep and make clean the holy place bring wood for a continual fire to the hearth of their god which be like a lamp that still burn before the altar of their idol beside these there be other little boy that serve for manual use as to deck the temple with bough rose and reed to give the priest water to wash razor to sacrifice and to go with such as beg alm to carry it all these have their superior who have the government over they and when they come in public where woman be they carry their eye to the ground not dare to behold they they have linen garment and go into the city four or six together to ask alm in all quarter and if they get none it be lawful for they to go into the Corn-field and gather that which they need none dare to contradict they Cortes write that almost all the chief man son in the city Cortes imp. and Relat. deal Temistitan ap. ram. v. 3. after they be six or seven year old till the time of their marriage especial the elder be thrust into a kind of religious habit and service there may not above fifty live in that strict penance they rise at midnight and sound the trumpet to awake the people every one watch by turn lest the fire before the altar shall die they give the censor with which the priest at midnight incense the idol and also in the morning at noon and at night they i i mexican votary no less strict in that threefold cord which the popish votary glory of poverty continency obedience with other will worship yea for the time more austere be very subject and obedient to their superior and pass not any one point command and at midnight after the priest have end his cense they retire themselves apart into a secret place where they sacrifice and draw blood from the calf of their leg with sharp bodkin therewith rub their temple and under their ear present wash themselves in a pool appoint to that end these young man do not anoint their head and body with k k tobacco Petum as the priest do this austerity continue a year the priest likewise rise at midnight and retire themselves into a large place where be many light and there draw blood as the former from their leg than do they set these bodkin upon the battlement of the court stick in straw that the people may see neither may they use one bodkin in twice the priest also use great fast of five or ten day together before their great feast some of they to preserve their chastity slit their member in the midst and do a hundred thing to make themselves impotent lest they shall offend their god they drink no wine and sleep little for that the great part of their exercise be by night they do use also that the self-tyrannizing catholic shall not outvie merit to discipline themselves with cord full of knot wherein the people likewise come not behind in cruel procession especial on the feast of Tezcalipuca lash themselves with knot manguey-cord over the shoulder the priest fast five day before that feast eat but once a day and abstain from their wife the whip supply those delicacy Gomara l l lop. de gom. part. 1. pag. 396. speak of other beside those young one before mention which live in those cloister some be sick for their recovery some in extreme poverty to find relief some for riches for long life for good husband for many child and some for virtue every one abode there as long as they have vow and after use their liberty their office be to spin cotton wool and feather and to weave cloth for their god and themselves to sweep all thy holy room they may go on procession with the priest but not sing nor go up the stair of the temple their food be boil flesh and hot bread receive of alm the smoke whereof be offer unto their god they late and lay all together but lay in their clothes lit. Episc. mex the multitude of idol and idol-temple in new Spain be such that a bishop of Mexico in his letter 1532. say that the friar have deface twenty thousand of the one and desolate five hundred of the other and where in Mexico they have use yearly to offer more than twenty thousand heart of boy and girl to their idol they now say he offer they by good instruction to God God grant it @. 3 of their priest and the many rite belong to their function touch their priest in Mexico m m Ios. accost l. 5. cap. 14. there be some high priest or pope even under the same name call by the mexican Papas as they shall say sovereign bishop other as before you have hear be of inferior rank the priest of Vitziliputzli succeed by lineage of certain quarter of the city depute for that purpose and those of other idol come by election or by be offer to the temple in their infancy they daily exercise of the priest be to cast incense on the idol which be do four time in the space of a natural day at break of day at noon at sunset at midnight at midnight all the chief officer of the temple do rise and in stead of bell they do sound a long time upon trumpet cornet and flute very heavy which be end he that do the office that week step forth attire in a white robe with a censor in in his hand full of coal which he take from the hearth burn continual before the altar in the other hand he have a purse full of incense which he cast into the censor and enter the place where the idol be he incense it with great reverence then take he a cloth with the which he wipe the altar and the curtain this do they go all into a chapel and there do beat themselves and draw blood with bodkin as be say this be always do at midnight none other but the priest may intermeddle with their sacrifice and every one do employ himself according to his dignity and degree they do likewise preach to the people at some feast they have revenue and great offering they n n Cortes have convenient house for their habitation they wear black garment and cut not nor comb their hair in the time of their ministration the mexican priest o o accost l. 5. c. 26. their anoint be thus anoint they anoint the body from the foot to the head and all the hair likewise which hang like tress or a horse-mane for that they apply this unction wet and moist their hair grow so that in time it hang down to their ham insomuch that the weight make it burdensome for they never cut it until they die or be dispense with for their great age or be employ in government or some honourable charge in the commonwealth they carry their hair in tress of six finger breadth which they die black with the fume of sapine fir or rosine they be always dyed with this tincture from the foot unto the head so as they be like unto shine negro this be their ordinary unction they have another when they go to sacrifice or incense on the top of mountain or in dark cave where there idol be use also certain ceremony to take away fear and add courage this unction be make with diverse venomous beast as spider scorpion salamander and viper which the boy in the college take and gather together wherein they be so expert as they be always furnish when the priest call for they they take all these together and burn they upon the hearth of the temple which be before the altar until they be consume to ash then do they put they in mortar with much tobacco or Petum which make they lose their force mingle likewise with these ash scorpion spider and palmer alive after this they put to it a certain seed be ground which they call Olololuchqui whereof the indian make drink to see vision for that the virtue of this herb be to deprive man of sense they do likewise grind with these ash black and hairy worm who hair only be venomous all which they mingle together with black or the fume of rosine put it in small pot which they set before their god say it be his meat and therefore call it a divine meat by mean of this ointment they become witch and do see and speak with the devil the priest be slubber with this ointment lose all fear put on a spirit of cruelty by reason whereof they do very bold kill man in their sacrifice go all alone in the night time to the mountain and into obscure cave contemn all wild beast believe that lion tiger serpent and the rest flee from they by virtue hereof this Petum do also serve to cure the sick and for child all resort to they as to their saviour to apply unto they this divine physic as they call it they use manifold other superstition to delude the people in tie small flower about their neck and string with small bone of snake command they to bathe at certain time to watch all night at the divine hearth to eat no other bread but that which have be offer to their god that they shall upon all occasion repair to their wizard who with certain grain tell fortune and divine look into keeler and pail full of water the sorcerer and p p their witch minister of the devil use much to besmear themselves there be a infinite number of these witch diviner enchanter and the like and still there remain of they but secret not dare public to exercise their superstition the mexican q q their rite unto infant have among they a kind of baptism which they do with cut the ear and member of young child have some resemblance of the jewish circumcision this ceremony be do principal to the son of king and nobleman present upon their birth the priest do wash they and do put a little sword in the right hand in the leave a target and to the child of the vulgar sort they put the mark of their calling and to their daughter instrument to spin knit and labour the mexican history aforementioned in the three part thereof mex pick hist show in picture their policy and custom when a child be bear as be there describe it be lay in a cradle four day after the midwife bring it naked with the instrument of the trade as be say in the hand into the yard where be prepare bul-rush and a little pan of water in which she wash the same three boy sit by eat toast Mars education of child in Mexico with sodden frizole in a little pan and at the midwife appointment name the child with a loud voice after twenty day they go with it into the temple and present the same in presence of the priest with a offering and be of fifteen year commit he to the high priest of that temple to be teach if they will after have he a priest or if they will have he a soldier they commit he to the master thereof with a offering of meat also in this book be picture how they instruct and feed they at three year of age give they half a cake how at four with a whole cake at five burden and exercise their body and let their daughter to spin how at six they exercise they in gather up corn spill on the ground or the like at seven in fish there be likewise describe their severe discipline in punish they with Manguez the priest do exercise their pupil in bodily service of the temple in go to the mountain to sacrifice in music observe the time by the star and the like old man of threescore and ten may be public drunken without control drunkard thief adulterer stone which to young folk of both sex be death as be theft also and adultery the priest r r their marriage also have their office in marriage the bridegroom and the bride stand together before the priest who take they by the hand ask they if they will marry understand their will he take a corner of the veil wherewith the woman have her head cover and a corner of the man gown which he tie together on a knot and so lead they thus tie to the bridegroom house where there be a hearth kindle then he cause the wife to go seven time about the hearth and so the marry couple sit down together and thus be the marriage contract that book of picture describe it thus as Amantesa or Broker carry the bride on her back at the begin of the night four woman attend with torch of pinetree rosen at the bridegroom house his parent receive she and carry she to he in a hall where they be both cause to sit on a Mat near a fire and tie together with a corner of their apparel and a perfume of Copale wood be make to their god two old man and as many old woman be present the marry couple eat and then these old folk which after this separate they asunder and give they good instruction for economical duty in other part of New-spain s s Gomara part. 1 pag. 389. they use other marriage-rite at Tlaxcallan the bridegroom and bride poll their head to signify that from thenceforth all childish course shall be lay aside at michuacan the bride must look direct upon the bridegroom or else the marriage be not perfect in Mixteopan they use to carry the bridegroom upon their back as if he be force and then they both join hand and knit their mantle together with a great knot the Macatecas do not come together in twenty day after marriage but abode in fast and prayer all that while sacrifice their body and anoint the mouth of their idol with their blood in Panuco the husband buy the wife for a bow two arrow and a net and afterward the father-in-law speak not one word to his son in-law for the space of a year when he have a child he lie not with his wife in two year after lest she shall be with child again before the other be out of danger some suck twelve year and for this cause they have many wife no woman while she have her disease may touch or dress any thing adultery in Mexico be death common woman be permit but no ordinary stew the devil do many time talk with their priest and with some other ruler and particular person great gift be offer unto he who the devil have vouchsafe this conference he appear unto they in many shape and be often familiar with they he to who he appear carry about he paint the likeness wherein be show himself the first time and they paint his image on their door bench and every corner of the house likewise according to his protean and diversify apparition they paint he in many shape accost l. 5. c. 8. burial it belong also to the office of the priest and religious in Mexico to inter the dead and do their obsequy the place where they bury they be their garden and court of their own house other carry they to the place of sacrifice which be do in the mountain other burn they and after bury the ash in the temple bury with they whatsoever they have of apparel stone and jewel they do sing the funeral office like respond often lift up the dead body with many ceremony at these mortuary they do eat and drink and if it be a person of quality they give apparel to such as come when one be dead his friend come with their present and salute he as if he be live and if he be a king or lord of some town they offer some slave to be put to death with he to serve he in the other world they likewise put to death his priest or chaplain for every nobleman have a priest for his domestical holy that he may execute his office with the dead they likewise kill his cook his butler dwarf and deform man and whosoever have most serve he though he be his brother and to prevent poverty they bury with they much wealth as gold silver stone curtain and other rich piece and if they burn the dead they use the like with all his servant and ornament they give he for the other world and last bury the ash with great solemnity the obsequy continue ten day with mournful song and the priest carry away the dead with innumerable ceremony to the nobleman they give their honourable ensign arm and particular blazon which they carry before the body to the place of burn march as in a procession where the priest and officer of the temple go with diverse furniture and ornament some cast incense other sing and some make the drum and flute to sound the mournful accent of sorrow the priest who do the office be deck with the mark of the idol which the nobleman have represent for all nobleman do represent idol and carry the name of some One accost l. 6. c. 26. the mexican honour the best soldier with a kind of knighthood of which be three order one ware a red ribbon which be the chief the second be the lion or tiger-knight the grey-knight be the mean they have great privilege their knighthood have these funeral solemnity they bring the corpse to the place appoint and environ it and all the baggage with pine-tree set fire thereon maintain the same with gummy wood till all be consume then come forth a priest attire like a devil have mouth upon every joint of he and many eye of glass hold a great staff with which he mingle all the ash with terrible and fearful gesture when the king of t t lop. de gom. part. 1. pag. 383. Mexico sicken they use forthwith to put a visor on the face of Tezcatlipuca or Vitzilivitzli or some other idol which be not take away till he mend or end if he die word be present send into all his dominion for public lamentation and nobleman be summon to the funeral the body be lay on a Mat and watch four night then wash and a lock of hair out off for a relic for therein say they remain the remembrance of his soul after this a emerald be put in his mouth and his body shroud in 17. rich mantle costly and curious wrought upon the upper mantle be set the device or arm of some idol whereunto he have be most devout in in his life time and in his temple shall the body be bury upon his face they put a visor paint with foul and devilish gesture beset with jewel then they kill the slave who office be to light the lamp and make fire to the god of his palace this do they carry the body to the temple some carry target arrow mace and ensign so hurl into the funeral fire the high priest and his crew receive he at the temple gate with a sorrowful song and after he have say certain word the body be cast into the fire there prepare for that purpose together with jewel also a dog new strangle to guide his way in the meanwhile two hundred person be sacrifice by the priest or more to serve he as be say the four day after fifteen slave be sacrifice for his soul and upon the twenty day five on the 60 three etc. the ash with the lock of hair be put in a chest paint on the inside with devilish shape together with another lock of hair which have be reserve since the time of his birth on this chest be set the image of the king the kindred offer great gift before the same the king of Mechuacan observe the like bloody rite many gentlewoman be by the new king appoint their office in their service to the decease and while his body be burn be mall with club and bury four and four in a grave many woman slave and free maiden be slay to attend on these gentlewoman but I will not bury my reader in these direful grave of man cruel in like and death let we seek some festival argument if that may be more delightful chap 13 of the supputation of time festival solemnity college school letter opinion and other remarkable thing in new Spain @. i. their calendar and conceit of time and some of their feast the mexican a a accost l. 6. c. 2. divide the year into eighteen month ascribe to each twenty day so that the five odd day be exclude these five they reckon apart and call they the day of nothing during the which the people do nothing neither go to their temple but spend the time in visit each other the sacrificer likewise cease their sacrifice these five day be past the first month begin about the twenty six of February Gomara b b gom. pag. 317. mexican hist m. s ap. Hak. have this calendar set down their month name in order the indian describe they by peculiar picture common take of the principal feast therein they account their week by thirteen day they have also a week of year which be likewise thirteen they reckon by a certain wheel which contain four week that be two and fifty year in the midst of this wheel be paint the sun from which go four beam of line in a cross of distinct colour Greene blue red and yellow and so the line betwixt these on which they note by some picture the accident that befall any year as the spaniard come mark by a man clad in Red the last night when this wheel be run about they break all their vessel and stuff put out their fire and all the light say that the world shall end at the finish of one of these wheel and it may be at that time and then what shall such thing need upon this conceit they pass the night in great fear but when they see the day begin to break they present beat many drum with much other mirth and music say that God do prolong the time with another age of two and fifty year and then begin another wheel the first day whereof they take new fire for which they go to the priest who fetch it out of a mountain and make a solemn sacrifice and thanksgiving the twenty day of each month be call by several name the first Cipactli which signify a spade and so the rest a house a dog a snake a eagle a temple and the like by this calendar they keep thing in memory above nine hundred year since the indian of Culhua do believe that the god have make the world they know not how and that since the creation four sun be pass and that the five and last be the sun which now give light unto the World the first sun forsooth perish by water and all live creature therewith opinion of five sun the second fall from heaven and with the fall slay all live creature and then be many giant in the country the three sun be consume by fire and the four by tempest of air and wind and then mankind perish not but be turn into ape yet when that four sun perish all be turn into darkness and so continue five and twenty year and at the fifteen year God do form one man and woman who bring forth child and at the end of other ten year appear this five sun new bear which after their reckon be now in this year 1612. nine hundred and eighteen year since three day after this sun appear they hold that all the god do die and that these which since they worship be bear in process of time at the end of every twenty day the mexican celebrate a feast call Tonalli mexican feast which be the last day of every month the last day of the first month be call Tlacaxiponaliztli on which be slay a hundred captive in sacrifice and eat other put on the skin as before be show many of they will go to the slaughter with joyful countenance dance and demand alm which befall to the priest when the green corn be a foot above the ground they use to go to a certain hill and there sacrifice two child a girl and a boy three year old to the honour of Tlaloc God of the water that they may have rain and because these child be free bear their heart be not pluck out but their throat be cut their body be wrap in a new mantle and bury in a grave of stone when the field of Maiz be two foot high a collection be make and therewith be buy four little slave betwixt the age of five and seven and they be sacrifice also to Tlaloc for the continuance of rain and those dead body be shut up in a cave appoint to that purpose the beginning of this butchery be by occasion of a drought which continue four year and force they to leave the country when the Maiz be ripe in the month and feast Hueitozotli every man gather his handful of Maiz and bring it to the temple for a offering with a certain drink call Atuli make of the same grain they bring also Copalli a sweet gum to incense the god which cause the corn to grow at the beginning of summer they celebrate the feast Tlaxuchimcaco with rose and all sweet flower make garland thereof to set on their idol head and spend all that day in dance to celebrate the feast Tecuilhuitli all the principal person of each province come to the city on the evening of the feast and apparel a woman with the attire of the god of salt who dance among a great company of her neighbour but the next day be sacrifice with much solemnity and all that day be spend in devotion burn of incense in the temple the merchant have a temple by themselves dedicate to the god of gain they make their feast upon the day call Micailhuitl wherein be sacrifice and eat many captive which they have buy and all the day spend in dance in the feast of Uchpaviztli they sacrifice a woman who skin be put upon a indian which two day together dance with the townsman celebrate the same feast in their best attire in the day of Hatamutzli the mexican enter into the lake with a great number of canoas and there drown a boy and a girl in a little boat which they cause to be sink in such sort that never after that boat appear again hold opinion that those child be in company with the god of the lake that day they spend in feast and anoint their idol cheek with a kind of gum call Ulli. when Cortes be go out of Mexico to encounter pamphilo de Narva's and have leave alvarado in the city he in the great temple murder a great multitude of gentleman which have there assemble to their accustom solemnity be six hundred or as some say a thousand rich attire and adorn where they use to sing and dance in honour of their god to obtain health child victory etc. @. 2 their feast of transubstantiation Lent bloody procession and other holy time in the month of May 10 10 accost l. 5. c. 24 Relat. themistitam the mexican make their principal feast to Vitziliputzli two day before which the religious virgin or nun mingle a quantity of beet with roast Maiz and mould it with honey make a image of that paste in bigness like to the idol of wood put in in stead of eye grain of glass green blue or white and for tooth grain of maize then do all the noble bring it a rich garment like unto that of the idol and be clad do set it in a azured chair and in a litter the morning of the feast be come a hour before day all the maiden come forth attire in white with new ornament which that day be call the sister of Vitziliputzli they be crown with garland of Maiz roast and parch with chain of the same about their neck pass under their left arm their cheek be die with vermilion their arm from the elbow to the wrist be cover with red parrot feather thus attire they take the image on their shoulder carry it into the court where all the young man be attire in red garment crown like the woman when the maiden come forth with this idol the young man draw near with much reverence take the litter wherein the idol be upon their shoulder carry it to the stair foot of the temple where all the people do humble themselves lay earth upon their head after this all the people go in procession to a mountain call chapulteper a league from Mexico and there make sacrifice from thence they go to their second station call Atlacuyavaya and from thence again to a village which be a league beyond cuyoacoan and then return to Mexico they go in this sort above four league in so many hour call this procession Upavia Vitziliputzli be come to the foot of the temple stair they set down the litter with the idol and with great observance draw the same to the top of the temple some draw above and other help below the flute and drum cornet trumpet meanwhile increase the solemnity the people abode in the Court have mount and place it in a little lodge of rose present come the young man which strew flower of sundry kind within and without the temple this do all the virgin come out of their convent bring piece of the same paste whereof the idol be make in the fashion of great bone which they deliver to the young man who carry they up and lay they at the idol foot till the place can receive no more they call these morsel of paste the flesh and bone of Vitziliputzli then come all the priest of the temple every one strict observe his place with veil of diverse colour and work garland on their head and chain of flower about their neck after they come the god and goddess who they worship of diverse figure attire in the same livery then put themselves in order about those piece of paste they use certain ceremony with sing and dance by these mean they be bless and consecrate for the flesh and bone of the idol which be then honour in the same sort as their God then come forth the sacrificer who begin the sacrifice of man whereof they now sacrifice more than at other time for this be their solemn festival the sacrifice be end all the young man and maid come out of the temple attire as before and be place in order and rank one direct against another they dance by drum which sound in praise of the feast and of their God to which song all the ancient and great man do answer dance about they make a great circle as the manner be the young man and maid remain always in the midst all the city come to this spectacle and throughout the whole land on this day of Vitziliputzli his feast no man may eat any other meat but this paste with honey whereof the idol be make and this shall be eat at the point of day not drink till the afternoon the contrary be sacrilegious after the ceremony end it be lawful for they to eat any thing during the time of this ceremony they hide the water from their little child admonish such as have the use of reason to abstain the ceremony dance and sacrifice end they go to unclothe themselves and the priest and ancient of the temple take the image of paste and spoil it of all the ornament make many piece of it and of the consecrate roll which they minister in a kind of communion begin with the great and continue unto the rest both man woman and child who receive it with tear fear reverence and other both affect and effect of devotion say that they do eat the flesh and bone of their God such as have sick folly demand thereof for they and carry it with great reverence and veneration all such as do communicate be bind to give the ten part of this seed whereof the idol be make the solemnity of the idol be end a old man of great authority step up into a high place and with a loud voice preach their law and ceremony this history deserve the long relation because it so a a the new catholic of old Spain and old catholic of new Spain alike in superstition much resemble the popish Chimara and monstrous conception of transubstantiation and of their feast with other their rite to which acosta also the relater compare it blame the devil for usurp the service and imitate the rite of their church whereas their church deserve blame for imitate the devil and these his idolatrous disciple in their stupendous monster of opinion and ridiculous office of superstition but you shall yet see a further resemblance next to this principal feast of Vitziliputzli b b accost l. 5. c. 2. be that of Tezcalipuca of chief estimation this fall on the nineteenth day of May and be call tozcolt it fall every four year with the feast of penance where there be give c c mexican jubilee full indulgence and remission of sin in this day they do sacrifice a captive which resemble the idol Tezcalipuca upon the even of this solemnity the nobleman come to the temple bring a new garment like to that of the idol which the priest put upon he have first take off his other garment which they keep with great reverence there be in the coffer of the idol d d their relic many ornament jewel earring and other riches as bracelet and precious feather which serve to no use and be worship as the god himself beside that garment they put upon he certain ensign of feather with fan shadow and other thing be thus attire they draw the curtain from before the door that all man may see then come forth one of the chief of the temple attire like to the idol carry flower in his hand and a flute of earth have a very sharp sound and turn towards the east he sound it and after that to the west north and south he do the like this do he put his finger into the air and then gather up the earth e e the mexican lend begin not with ash but with dust which he put in his mouth eat it in sign of adoration the like do all that be present weep and fall flat to the ground invocate the darkness of the night and the wind not to forsake they or else to take away their life and free they from the labour they endure therein thief adulterer murderer and all other offender have great fear and heaviness while the flute sound so as some can not hide nor dissemble their offence by this mean they all demand no other thing of their god but to have their offence conceal pour forth many tear with great repentance and sorrow offer great store of incense to appease their god all the martialist and resolute spirit addict to the war desire with great devotion of God the creator of the lord for who we live of the sun and of other their god that they will give they victory against their enemy and strength to take many captive for sacrifice this ceremonious sound of the flute by the priest continue ten day from the nine of May to the nineteenth with eat of earth pray everyday with eye lift up to heaven sigh and groan as of man grieve for their sin yet do not they believe that there be f f Gomara write otherwise as follow in the end of this chapter any punishment in the other life but do these thing to avert temporal punishment they account death a assure rest and therefore voluntary offer themselves thereto the last day of the feast the priest draw forth a litter well furnish with curtain and pendant of diverse fashion this litter have so many arm to hold by as there be minister to carry it all which come forth besmear with black and long hair half in tress with white string and attire in the idol livery upon this litter they set the image of Tezcalipuca and take it on their shoulder bring it to the foot of the stair then come forth the young man and maiden of the temple carry a great cord wreathe of chain of roast Maiz with which they environ the litter and put a chain of the same about the idol neck and a garland thereof on his head the young man and maid wear chain of roast Maiz and the man garland the maid mitre make of rod cover with the Maiz their foot cover with feather and their arm and cheek paint the image be place in the litter they strew round about store of the bough of manguey the leaf whereof be prick they carry g g their bloody procession it on procession two priest go before with incense in the circuit of the court and every time the priest give incense they lift up their arm as high as they can to the idol and the Sun all the people in the court turn round to the place whither the idol go every one carry in his hand new cord of the thread of manguey a fathom long with a knot at the end wherewith they whip themselves on the shoulder even as they do here say acosta on holy Thursday the people bring bough and flower to beautify the court and temple this do every one bring their offering jewel incense sweet wood grape Maiz quailes and the rest quail be the poor man offer which he deliver to the priest who pull off their head and cast they at the foot of the altar where they lose their blood and so they do of all other thing which be offer every one offer meat and fruit according to his power which be lay at the foot of the altar and be carry to the minister chamber the offering do the people go to dinner the young man and maid of the temple be busy meanwhile to serve the idol with all that be appoint for he to eat which be prepare by other woman who have make a vow that day to serve the idol these prepare meat in admirable variety which be ready the virgin go out of the temple in procession every one carry a little basket of bread in her hand and in the other a dish of these meat before they march a old man like to a steward attire in a white surplice down to the calf of his leg upon a red jacket which have wing instead of sleeve from which hang broad ribbon and at the same a small pompion stick full of flower and have many superstitious thing within it this old man come near to the foot of the stair make lowly reverence then the virgin with like reverence present their meat in order this do the old man return lead the virgin into the convent and then the young man and minister of the temple come forth and gather up their meat which they carry to their priest chamber who have fast five day eat but once a day not stir all that time out of the temple where they whip themselves as before be show they do eat of these divine meat so they call it neither may any other eat thereof after dinner they assemble again and then be sacrifice one who have all that year bear the habit and resemblance of their idol they go after this into a holy place appoint for that purpose whither the young man and virgin of the temple bring they their ornament and then they dance and sing the chief priest drum and sound other instrument the nobleman in ornament like to the young man dance round about they they do not usual kill any man that day but he that be sacrifice yet every four year they have other with he which be the year of jubilee and full pardon after sunset the virgin go all to their convent and take great dish of earth full of bread mix with hony cover with small panniar wrought and fashion with dead man head and bone carry the same to the idol and set they down retire their steward usher they as before present come forth all the young man in order with cave of reed in their hand who begin to run as fast as they can to the top of the temple stair every one strive to come first to the collation the chief priest observe who come first second three and four neglect the rest these they praise and give they ornament and from thence forward they be respect as man of mark the say collation be all carry away by the young man as great relic this end the young man and maid be dismiss and so I think will our reader who can but be glut with and almost surfeit of our so long and tedious feast yet let i entreat one service more it be for the god of gain who I be sure will find follower and disciple too attentive for the festival of this Gain-god quetzaalcoalt the merchant his devote and faithful observant forty day before buy a slave well proportion to represent that idol for that space first they wash he twice in a lake call the lake of the god and be purify they attire he like the idol two of the ancient of the temple come to he nine day before the feast and humble themselves before he say with a loud voice sir nine day hence your dance must end and you must die and he must answer whatsoever he think in a good hour they diligent observe if this advertisement make he sad or if he continue his dance according to his wont if they perceive he sad they take the sacrifice razor which they wash and cleanse from the blood which thereon have remain and hereof with another liquor make of Cacao mix a drink which they say will make he forget what have be say to he and return to his former jollity for they take this heaviness in these man to be ominous on the feast day after much honour he and incense he about midnight they sacrifice he offer his heart to the moon and after cast it to the idol let the body fall down the stair to the merchant who be the chief worshipper these heart of their sacrifice some h h pet. martyr dec. 5. say be burn after the oblation to this planet and idol the body they sauce and dress for a banquet about break of day after they have bid the idol good morrow with a small dance this temple of Quetzaalcoalt have chapel as the rest and chamber where be conuent of priest young man maid and child one priest alone be resident which be change weekly his charge that week after he have instruct the child be to strike up a drum at the sun set at the sound whereof which be hear throughout the city every one end his merchandise and retire to his house all the city be as silent as if no body have be there at day break he do again give notice by his drum for till that time it be not lawful to stir out of the city in this temple be a court wherein they dance and on this idol holiday have erect a theatre thirty foot square fine deck and trim in which be represent comedy mask and many other representation to express or cause mirth and joy @. 3 of their school letter and other their opinion the mexican i i acosta li. 6. c. 7. have their school and as it be college or seminary where the ancient teach the child to say by heart the oration discourse dialogue and poem of their great orator and chief man which thus be preserve by tradition as perfect as if they have be write and in their temple the son of the chief man as Peter k k pet. martyr dec. 5. lib. 4. martyr report be shut up at seven year old and never come forth thence till they be marriageable and be bring forth to be contract all which time they never cut their hair they be clothe in black abstain at certain time of the year from meat engender much blood and chasten their body with often fast and although they have not letter l l acosta l. 6. c 9 indian writing yet they have their wheel for computation of time as it be say before in which their writing be not as we from the left hand to the right or as of the eastern nation from the right hand to the left or as the Chinois from the top to the bottom but begin below do mount upward as in that mention wheel from the sun which be make in the centre upward to the circumference another manner of writing or sign they have in circlewise in the province of yucatan or honduras there be book of the leaf of tree fold and square which contain the knowledge of the planet of beast and other natural thing and of their antiquity which some blindly-zealous spaniard take for enchantment cause to be burn the c c cap. 7. indian of Tescuco talla and Mexico show unto a jesuite their book history and kalendar which in figure and hieroglyphic represent thing after their manner such as have form or figure be represent by their proper image other thing be represent by character and I have see say acosta the and confession thus write as for these thing I a sinner do confess myself they paint a indian kneel on his knee at a religious man foot to God most mighty they paint three face with their crown according to that paint blasphemy of the popish image-monger and so they go on in that manner of picture the word of their popish confession where image fail set character their n n Gomara part. 1. p. 3. 69. book for this cause be great which beside their engraving in stone wall or wood they make of Cotton-wool wrought into a kind of paper and of leaf of metal fold up like our broad-cloth and write on both side likewise they o o pet. mart. dec. 4. l. 8. make they of the thin inner rind of a tree grow under the upper bark as do also the ancient latin from whence the name of and liber for a book be derive by our grammarian they do bind they also into some form of book compact they with bitumen their character be of fishhook star snare file etc. thus do they keep their private and public record there p p Gomara 5 be some in Mexico that understand each other by whistle which be ordinary use by lover and thief a language admirable even to our wit so high applaud by ourselves and as deep deject these nation in term of silliness and simplicity yea in our Virginia so I hope and desire captain Smith tell i that there be some which the spacious divorce of the wide stream notwithstanding will by hallow and hoop understand each other and entertain conference the number of the mexican be simple till you come to six than they count six and one six and two six and three ten be a number by itself which in the ensue number be repeat as in other language till fifteen which they reckon in one term ten five and one and so the rest to twenty some write q q Relai del Temistitan ap. ram. v. 3. that the man in Mexico sit down and the woman stand when they make water the mexican r r gom. p. 312. do believe concern the soul that it be immortal and that man receive either joy or pain according to their desert and live in this World they hold for a assure faith that there be nine place appoint for soul and the chief place of glory to be near unto the sun where the soul of good man slay in the war and those which be sacrifice be place that the soul of wicked man abide in the earth and be divide after this sort child which be dead-born go to one place those which die of age or other disease go to another those which die of wound or contagion to a three those which be execute by order of justice to a four but parricide which slay their parent or which slay their wife or child to a five another place be for such as slay their master or religious person s s acosta l. 7. c. 20 acosta seem to deny that the indian believe any punishment after death and yet set down a oration make at Mutezumas election wherein he be say to have pierce the nine vault of heaven which seem to allude to this of Gomara their burial also be diverse as in show before and here may be add that he which die for adultery be shroud like unto their god of lechery call tlazoulterel he that be drown like to Tlaloc he that die of drunkenness like to the god of wine Ometochtli the soldier like to Vitziliputzli but lest you wish i bury in like manner which trouble as much my english reader with New-Spain tedious relation as Old-Spain fastidious insult spirit have sometime do our english nation I will adventure further into the adjoin province chap. 14 of other place betwixt new Spain and the strait of Dariene @. i. of jucatan Acusamil Guatimala and hondura JUCATAN t t lop. de gom. part. 1. pa. 10. and hist cap. 52. be a point of land extend itself into the sea over against the isle Cuba and be first discover by Francis Hernando de Cordona in the year 1517. at which time one ask a indian how this country be call he answer Tectoten Tectetan that be I understand you not which word the spaniard corrupt both in the sound and interpretation call it jucatan james Velasques governor of Cuba send his cousin John de Grijalua the year after who there fight with the indian at Campotan and be hurt the spaniard u u pet. mart. dec. 4. lib. 1. go to a city on the shore which for the greatness they call Cayro of that great city in Egypt here they find turrete house stately temple way pave and fair market-place the house be of stone or brick and lime very artificial compose to the square court or first habitation of their house they ascend by ten or twelve step the roof be of reed or stalk of herb the indian give the spaniard jewel of gold very fair and cunning wrought and be requite with vesture of silk and wool glass bead and little bels. their apparel be of cotton in manifold fashion and colour they frequent their temple much circumcision and cross to the which the better sort pave way with stone from their house they be great idolater and be circumcise but not all they live under law and traffike together with great fidelity by exchange commodity without money the spaniard see cross among they and demanmand whence they have they they say that a certain man of excellent beauty pass by that coast leave they that notable token to remember he other say a certain man bright than the sun die in the work thereof the spaniard sail thence to 10 10 this town be take by m. Will Parker anno. 1596. Campechium a town or three thousand house here they see a square stage or pulpit four cubit high partly of clammy bitumen and partly of small stone whereto the image of a man cut in marble be join two fourfooted unknown beast fasten upon upon he as if they will tear he in piece and by the image stand a serpent all besmear with blood devour a lion it be seven and forty foot long and as big as a ox these thing I mention as testimony of their art in these barbarous place and perhaps of their devotion also Grijalua or Grisalua see a tower far off at sea by direction thereof come to a island call Cosumel agree in private and public manner of life with they of jucatan their house temple apparel and trade of merchandise all one their house somewhere cover with reed and where quarry be with slate many house have marble pillar they find ancient tower there and the ruin of such as have be break down and destroy there be one whereto they ascend by eighteen step or stair the governor who they suppose to be a priest conduct they to the tower in the top whereof they erect a spanish banner and call also the island Santa cruse in the tower they find chamber wherein be marble image and some of earth in the similitude of bear these they invoke with loud sing all in one tune and sacrifice unto they with fume and sweet odour worship they as their household god there they perform their divine ceremony and adoration they be also circumcise Gomara y y Gomar hist cap. 54. say that here and at Xiculanco the devil use to appear visible and that these two be great in estimation for holiness every city have their temple or altar where they worship their idol among which be many cross of wood and brass whereby some conceive that some spaniard have recourse hither when Roderigo be defeat and Spain overrun by the saracen in z z Gomar par. 1. pag. 36. both these place they sacrifice man which Cortes persuade they to cease the temple in Cosumil or Acusamil be build like a square tower broad at the foot with step round about and from the midst upward be straight the top be hollow and cover with straw it have four window and porch in the hollow place be their chapel where stand their idol in a temple by the seaside be a uncouth idol great and hollow fasten in the wall with lime it be make of earth behind this idol back be the vestry where the ornament of the temple be keep the priest have a little secret door hard adjoin to the image by which they creep into his hollow paunch and thence answer the people that come thither with prayer and petition make the simple people believe it be the voice of the god which therefore they honour more than any other with many perfume and sweet smell they offer bread fruit quail blood and of other bird dog and sometime men. the fame of this idol and oracle bring many pilgrim to Acusamil from many place at the foot of this temple be a plot like a churchyard well wall and garnish with pinnacle in the midst whereof stand a cross of ten foot long which they adore for the god of rain at all time when they want rain they will go thither on procession devout and offer to the cross quail sacrifice no sacrifice be so acceptable they burn sweet gum to perfume he with besprinkle the same with water and by this mean they think to obtain rain they can never know say Gomara how that the god of the cross come among they for in all those part of India there be no memory of any preach of the gospel that have be at any time what other think and what some indian answer concern it be say before Benzo b b h. Benzo l. 2. cap. 15. write that they do not eat the flesh of those man which they sacrifice and that they be first subdue by Francis Montegius who cruelty be such that alquinotep a cacique or indian lord above a hundred and ten year old and a christian tell he that when he be a young man there be a sickness of worm that they think all will have die they be not only eject by vomit but do eat out themselves a passage through man body and not long before the spaniard arrival they have two battle with the mexican in which a hundred and fifty thousand man perish but all this be light in respect of that spanish burden Guatimala c c Bot l. 5. part 1. Guatimala or saint Iames come next to our consideration a province of pleasant air and fertile soil where grow abundance of their Cacao which be a fruit that serve the indian for meat drink and money the city which bear the same name be first at the foot of a Vulcano or hill which cast fire but because in the year 1542. d d Benzo and Gomara say sept. 8. 1541. on the six and twenty day of December a lake hide in the bowel of that hill break forth in many place and with a terrible violence ruin the most part of the city it be remove two mile thence together with the episcopal sea and the king council but in the year 1581. there issue from another Vulcan two mile off or somewhat more such a eruption of fire as threaten to consume every thing the day follow follow such a shower of ash that be fill the valley and almost bury the city and yet be not all the throw pass of this hill monstrous travel but the year after for the space of four and twenty hour thence issue a stream of fire that drink up five stream of water burn the stone and rock rend the air with thunder and make it a wave and move sea of fire before e e Gaspar ens l. 3. cap. 6. that first eruption of water some indian come and tell the bishop that they have hear a uncredible noise and murmur at the foot of the hill but he reprove they say they shall not trouble themselves with vain and superstitious fear about two of the clock in the night follow happen that deluge which carry away many house and whatsoever stand in the way in which 520. Spaniard perish and scarce any mention of the house remain it be worthy recital which Benzo f f h. Benzo l. 2. cap 16. Gomar histor gen. cap. 209. and Gomara have record that Peter aluarado the governor who by licence of the pope have marry two sister the lady Frances and the lady Beatrice della Culna have perish by a mischance his wife not only paint her house with sorrow black livery and abstain from meat and sleep but in a mad impiety say God can now do she no great evil yet for all this her sorrow she cause the citizen to be swear unto her government a new thing in the indies soon after this inundation happen which first of all assail the governor house and cause this impotent and impatient lady now to bethink she of a devotion and betake she to her chapel with eleven of her maid where leap on the altar and clasp about a image the force of the water ruin the chapel whereas if she have stay in her bedchamber she have escape death they tell of uncouth noyst and hideous apparition which then be see Benzo observe by his own experience that this country be much subject to earthquake the guatimalans in manner of life resemble the mexican and Nicaraguans fondura g g Benzo lib. 2. cap. 15. or hondura be next to Guatimala wherein be say Benzo at the spaniard first come thither four hundred thousand indian but when I be there scarce eight thousand be leave the rest be slay or sell or consume by the mine and those which be leave both here and in other place place their habitation as far as they can where the Spaniard shall be no eyesore unto they the spaniard in this province plant five spanish colony which all scarce can number a hundred and twenty house @. 2 of nicaragua their plenty and exceed superstition NIcaragua a a chap. 16. extend itself from the Chiulatecan mine of Fonduta towards the south sea this region be not great but fertile and therefore call of the spaniard Mahomet paradise for the plenty of all thing yet in the summer time it be so scorch with heat that man can travel but in the night six month from may to October be pester with continual shower which the other six whole want the parrot be here as troublesome as crow and rook with we and they be force to keep their corn in like manner from their spoil the people be of like condition to the mexican they feed on man flesh to their dance they flock two or three hundred in a company which be perform with great variety of gesture vesture and passion every man in and every man out of his humour thirty and five mile from Legeon or lion a episcopal city in this region be a Vulcano of flame hill the fire whereof may be see in the night above one hundred mile some have a conceit that melt gold be the matter of this fire and therefore a certain dominican cause a kettle and long chain of iron to be let down into this fiery concavity where by the violence of the heat the kettle and part of the chain be melt he make a big and strong but return with like success and this add that himself and his two companion by eruption of fire have almost be consume Gomara b b gom. hist cap. 203. call this fire blasio de Innesta and the hill Masaya it go down two hundred and fifty brace or yard in this country they use sodomy and sacrifice of men. of this name nicaragua Gilgousales that first of the spaniard discover these part find a king with who he have much conference who he persuade to become a Christian although his prohibition of war and dance do much trouble he this nicaragua c c P.M. dec. 6. lib. 4. demand they if the christian have any knowledge of the flood which drown all the earth with man and beast as he have hear his progenitor say and whether another be to come whether the earth shall be overturn or the heaven fall when and how the moon and star shall lose their light and motion who move those heavenly body where the soul shall remain and what they shall do be free from the body whether the pope die whether the spaniard come from heaven and many other strange question admirable in a indian they worship the sun and other idol which nicaragua suffer Gilgousales to take out of the great temple in nicaragua d d gom. ca. 205. there be five lineage and different language the Coribici Ciocotoga Ciondale Oretigua and the mexican though this place be a thousand mile from Mexico yet be they like they in speech apparel and religion they have also the same figure in stead of letter which those of Culhua have and book a span broad and twelve span long double of many colour they differ as in language so in religion of their religious rite thus write Gomara their priest be all marry except their confessor which hear confession confession and appoint penance according to the quality of the fault they reveal not the confession they appoint the holiday which be eighteen when they sacrifice they have a knife of flint wherewith they open he that be sacrifice the priest appoint the sacrifice how many man whether they be to be woman or slave take in battle that all the people may know how to celebrate the feast what prayer and what offering to make the priest go three time about the captive sing in a doleful tune and sudden open his breast anoint his face with the blood take out his heart divide his body the heart be give to the prelate the foot and hand to the king the buttock to the taker the reave to the people the head of the sacrifice be set on tree plant there for that purpose every tree have figure in it the name of the province wherewith they have war under these tree they many time sacrifice man and child of the country and of their own people be first buy for it be lawful for the father to sell his child those which the d d pet. mart. dec. 6. l. 6. and 7. king bring up of their own people with better fare then ordinary for sacrifice be make believe they shall be some canonize wight or heavenly deity and therefore take it glad they do not eat the flesh of these as they do of the captive when they eat their sacrifice captive they make great faast and the priest and religious man drink much wine and smoke their wine be of prune while the priest anoint the cheek and mouth of the idol with the blood the other sing and the people make their prayer with great devotion and tear and after go on procession which be not do in all feast the religious have white cotton-coat and other ornament which hang down from the shoulder to the leg thereby to put a difference between they and other the layman have their banner with that idol which they most esteem and bag with dust and bodkin the young man have their bow dart arrow and the guide of all be the image of the devil set upon a lance carry by the most ancient and honourable priest they go in order the religious sing till they come to the place of their idolatry where be arrive they spread cover on the ground or strew it with rose and flower because their idol shall not touch the ground and the banner be stick fast the sing cease and the prelate beginning all the rest follow and draw blood some from their tongue some from their ear some from their member and every man as (@) devotion like best and with that blood anoint the image in the meant-while the youth skirmish and dance for the honour of their feast they our the wound with the powder of herb and coal in some of these procession they hallow Mayz be sprinkle the same with the blood of their privity and eat it they may have many woman but one be their lawful wife which they marry thus the priest take the bridegroom and the bride by the little finger set they in a chamber at a fire and give they certain instruction and when the fire be out they be marry if he take she for a virgin and find she otherwise he may divorce she many bring their wife to the cacique or lord to corrupt they esteem it a honour their e e pet. mart. dec. 6. temple be low dark room which they use for their treasury also and armoury before the temple be a high altar for the sacrifice whereon the priest play the preacher first and then the butcher adulterer be beat but not slay the adulterous wife be divorce and may not marry again and her parent be dishonour their husband suffer they to lie with other in some feast of the year he that force a virgin be a slave or pay her dowry if a slave do it with his master daughter they be both bury quick they have common brothel a thief have his hair cut off and be make the slave from who he have steal until he have make satisfaction which if he defer long he be sacrifice they have no punishment for he which shall kill a cacique for they say such a thing can not happen @. 3 of the strange creature in these part of and the spanish mystery at their first plantation the riches of nicaragua f f Botero consist much in a great lake three hundred mile long and be within twelve mile of the south sea do disembogue itself in the north-sea a great way off in this lake of nicaragua be many and great fish g g Benzo lib. 2. cap. 14. Gomara part. 2. cap. 32. one strange kind be that which the inhabitant of hispaniola call Manati as for the inhabitant of the place the spanish injury have chase they thence this fish somewhat resemble the otter it be five and twenty foot long twelve thick the head and tail like a cow with small eye his back hard and hairy he have only two foot at the shoulder and those like a elephant the female bring forth young and nourish they with the udder like a Cow I have see and eat of they say Benzo the taste be like swine flesh h h pet. mart. dec. 3. l. 8. they eat grass there be a king in hispaniola which put one of they be present he by his fisherman into a lake of standing-water where it live five and twenty year when any of the servant come to the lake and call matto matto she will come and receive meat at their hand and if any will be ferry over the lake she willing yield she back and perform this office faithful yea she have carrien ten man at once sing or play a Spaniard have once wrong she by cast a dart at she and therefore after that when she be call she will plunge down again otherwise to the indian she remain officious she will be as full of play as a monkey and will wrestle with they especial she be addict to one young man which use to she this proceed partly from her docible nature partly because be take young she be keep up a while at home in the king house with bread this fish live both on land and water the river swell over his bank into the lake this fish follow the stream and be see no more there be another strange creature in nicaragua they call it like a black hog with small eye wide ear cleave foot a short trunk or snout like a elephant of so loud a bray that he will make man deaf Anoth there be with a natural purse under her belly wherein she put her young it have the body of a fox hand and foot like a monkey the bat in these part be terrible for bite the inhabitant near the river Suerus be not differ from the rest but that they eat not man flesh next be that neck or narrow extent of land stretch between the north and south-sea and as it be knit the two great peninsul of the north and south America together de dios signify the name of God occasion by the word of didacus Niquesa who after disastrous adventure elsewhere come hither and here bid his man go on shore in the name of God whereupon the colony and plantation there be so call it have a bad situation and small habitation Baptista Antonio the king of Spain surveyor counsel to bring dios to puerto bello it be remove from the former seat in the year of our lord 1584. sir Thomas Baskervile burn it and go from thence with his army towards panama in the year 1595. darien be call because Ancisus vow to our lady at Seville call Maria Antuqua if she will help he in those indian conquest he will turn the cacique house into a temple there he plant a colony it will be tedious to tell of the stir and civil uncivil brawl betwixt the spaniard in these part Vasques Valboa imprison Ancisus and after recover his credit by discovery of the south-sea for while the spaniard content about the weight and share of their gold which a cacique have give they this cacique be present hurl down the gold not a little marvel as he say that they will so much contend for that as if they can eat or drink it but if they like it so well he will carry they where their golden-thirst shall be satisfy he be deceive in the nature of that dropsy-thirst which as a fire quench with oil receive thence great strength but he deceive not they in his promise bring they to the south-sea where Valboa name one province golden Castille and for that which he speak of their strife a a Benz. l. 1. c. 23. as if they can eat or drink those metal the cruelty of the spaniard be such as the indian when they get any of they will bind their hand and foot and lay they on their back will pour gold into their mouth say in insultation eat gold Christian this Valboa be put to death by Arias his father-in-law but now we have mention the first spaniard which plant these part it shall not be amiss to mention some hardship the spaniard sustain before they can here settle themselves which may be a answer to those nice and delicate conceit that in our virginian expedition cast off all hope because of some disaster how the spaniard deal one with another and how the indian deal with they you have hear worse have not follow from any turbulent emulous spirit of our own or hostile of the virginian in this plantation and as for famine nicuesa man be so pinch that not to speak of those which perish one sell b b p. mart. dec. 2. l. 10. a old lean mangy dog to his fellow for many castellan of gold these flay the dog and cast his mangy skin with the bone of the head among the bush the day follow one of they find it full of maggot and stink but famine have neither eye nor scent he bring it home sod and eat it and find many customer which give a c c seven shilling and six penny Castellan a dish for that mangy broth. another find two toad and sod they which a sick man buy for two fine shirt curious wrought with Gold other find a dead man rotten and stink which putrify carcase they roast and eat and thus from seven hundred and seventy man they be bring so low that scarce forty shadow of man remain to inhabit Dariena much like to this be their success at the river of plate in Florida and other place of the west-indies what John oxenam sir Francis Drake master Christopher Newport and other our worthy countryman have achieve in these part against the spaniard master hakluyt in his voyage relate it be time for we to pass beyond the darien strait unto that other great chersonesus or peruvian America relation of the discovery region and religion of the new world of cumana GVIANA BRASILL CHICA chili PERV and other region of America PERWIANA and of their religion the nine book chap. i. of the southern America and of the country on the sea-coast betwixt Dariene and cumana @. i. of the great river in these part and of Dariene this Peninsula of the new world extend itself into the south be in form somewhat like to Africa and both a a Gas Ens. lib. 3 cap. 24. to some huge pyramid in this the basis or ground be the northerly part call from whence it lessen itself by degree as it draw near the Magellan strait where the top of this spire may fit be place on the east side it be wash with the north ocean as it be term on the west with that of the south call also the peaceable it be b b Botero part. 1 lib c. suppose to have sixteen thousand mile in compass four thousand in length the breadth be unequal the eastern part thereof between the river Maragnon and plata be challenge by the portugal the rest by the Spaniard from the north to the south be ledge of mountain the top whereof be say to be high than that bird will visit the bottom yield the great river in the world and which most enrich the ocean store-house Orenoque Maragnon and plata seem to be the indian triumuiri general of those river-army and Neptune great collector of his watery tribute Orenoque for ship be navigable a thousand mile for less vessel two thousand in some place twenty mile broad in some thirty Berreo affirm to sir Walter Raleigh that a hundred river fall into it march under his name and colour the least as big as Rio grande a a see 5. 2 one of the great river or America it extend two thousand mile east and west and command eight hundred mile north and south plata take up all the stream in his way be so full swell with his increase store that he seem rather with big look to bid defiance to the ocean then to acknowledge homage open his mouth forty league wide as if he will devour the same and with his vomit abundance make the salt water to recoil follow fresh in this pursuit till in salt sweat at last he melt himself in the combat Maragnon be far great who water have furrow a channel of six thousand mile in the length of his wind passage cover threescore and ten league in breadth and hide his bank b b on both side from he which sail in the midst of his proud current make simple eye believe that the heaven always descend to kiss and embrace his wave and sure our more-straitened world will so far be accessary to his aspire as to style he with the royal title of sea and not debase his greatness with the mean name of a river h. girava l. 2. some what otherwise write of these river that plata call by the indian paranaguaeu as one shall say a river like a sea be twenty five league in the mouth place by he in thirty three degree of southerly latitude increase in the same time and manner as Nilus Maragnon he say be in the entrance five league and be not the same with Orellana so call of Francis Orella Vega pag. 2. lib. 3. cap. 4. say that they be fierce woman which follow their husband in the war and fight with the enemy these Orellana to make great account of his discovery report to be amazon and sue to the emperor to be employ in that service and conquest of the land of amazon William davies send hither in the fleet of the duke of Florence tell of a small low island call Morria in this river inhabit only by woman which go naked and use bow and arrow as do the man in the part adjoin for the kill of their own food their hair long their breast hang low he say he have see forty or fifty together go along by the sea side and when they espy a fish to shoot at it and present throw down their bow to leap into the sea after their arrow bring the same to land with the fasten prey in all other thing as lodging meat-dressing etc. like the neighbour inhabitant only they live requestre from man except in one month of the year when the man resort for copulation to they and carry away the male child they find the other they educate they carry their child at their back like tinker budget and give they the breast over the shoulder thus far davies as for that unimammian rite he deny it of their war except against fish and other food no mention and that by their live without man may either be cause by the unwholesomeness to that sex as be report of a island near Zocotori or for some other reason which I leave to the reader search or credit the the first Spaniard that sail in it and amazon of the fabulous report as Girava term they of such woman there see which he say have above fifty league of breadth in the mouth and be the great river of the world call by some the fresh sea run above fifteen hundred league under the aequinoctial thus much he though less than other yet more than can be parallel in any other stream this southern half of America have also at the Magellane strait contract and as it be shrink in itself refuse to be extend further in so cold a climate the manifold riches of metal beast and other thing in the begin of the former book have be declare and in this as occasion move shall be further manifest the man be the worst part as be in the great part thereof inhuman and brutish the spanish town in this great tract and their founder be set down by Pedro de c c Pedro de cieza de leon. chron. Peru Cieza Herera and other I rather intend indian superstition than spanish plantation in this part of my pilgrimage of the town of d d eastward from this town certain negro slave make a head and join with the indian use to rob the spaniard Benzo l. 2. c. 9 seventeen league from panama the one on the north sea the other on the south and of Dariene we last take our leaf as uncertain whether to make they mexican or peruvian be borderer and set in the confine betwixt both the moorish soil muddy water and gross air conspire with the heavenly body to make Dariene unwholesome the miry stream run or creep rather very slow the water e e Linschoten p. mart. dec. 3. lib. 6. but sprinkle on the house-floor engender toad and worm they f f Gomar gen. hist c. 67. have in this province of Dariene store of crocodile one of which kind Cieza say be find fine and twenty foot long swine without tail cat with great tail beast clovenfooted like kine otherwise resemble mule save their spacious ear and a trunk or snout like a elephant there be leopard lion tiger on the right and left hand of Dariene be find twenty river which yield Gold the man g g P.M. dec. 3. lic 4. be of good stature thin haired the woman wear ring on their ear and nose with quaint ornament on their lip the lord marry as many wife as they list other man one or two they forsake change and sell their wife at pleasure they have public stew of woman and of man also in many place without any discredit yea this privilege they from follow the war the young girl have conceive eat certain herb to cause abortion their lord and priest consult of war after they have drink the smoke of a h h tobacco certain herb the woman follow their husband to the war and know how to use a Bow they all paint themselves in the war they need no headpiece for their head be so hard that they will break a sword be smite thereon wound receive in war be the badge of honour whereof they glory much and thereby enjoy some franchise they brand their prisoner and pull out one of their tooth before they will sell their child be excellent swimmer both man and woman accustom themselves twice or thrice a day thereunto their priest be their physician and master of ceremony for which cause and because they have conference with the devil they be much esteem * * p. Cieza chron. per. p. 1. c. 8. they have no temple nor house of devotion the devil they honour much which in terrible shape do sometime appear unto they as I say Cieza have hear some of they say they believe that there be one God in heaven to wit the sun and that the moon be his wife and therefore worship these two planet they worship the devil also and paint he in such form as he appear to they which be of diverse sort they offer bread smoke fruit and flower with great devotion any one may cut off his arm which steal mais Enciso with his army of spaniard seek to subdue these part use a spanish trick tell the indian that he seek their conversion to the faith and therefore discourse of one God creator of all thing and of baptism and after other thing of this nature less to his purpose he tell they that the pope be the vicar of Christ in all the world with absolve power over man soul and religion and that he have give those country to the most mighty king of Spain his master and he be now come to take possession and to demand gold for tribute the indian answer that they like well what he have speak of one God but for their religion they will not dispute of it or leave it and for the pope he shall be liberal of his own neither seem it that their king be mighty but poor that send thus a beg but what word can not their sword effect with the destruction of the indian @. 2 of Uraba Carthagena and the superstition of Dabaiba the soil of Uraba be so fatten with a stream therein that in eight and twenty day the seed of cucumber melon and gourd will ripen their fruit there be l l pet. martyr dec. 3. l. 6. a tree in those country who leaf with the bare touch cause great blister the savour of the wood be poison and can be carry without danger of lift except by the help of another herb which be a antidote to this venomous tree m m pet. martyr dec. 2. l. 4. king Abibeiba have palace in a tree by reason of the moorish situation and often inundation of his land Vasques can not get he down till he begin to cut the tree and then the poor king come down and buy his freedom at the spaniard price Carthagena be so call for some resemblance in the situation to a city in Spain of that name sir Francis Drake take it the indian thereabouts use poison arrow the woman war as well as the man Enciso take one who with her own hand have kill eight and twenty christian they do eat the enemy which they kill they use to put in their sepulcher gold feather and other riches between Carthagena and Martha run a swift river which make the sea-water to give place and they which pass by may in the sea take in of this water fresh it be call of the inhabitant Dabaiba the spaniard have name it Pio grande Rio grande and the river of saint John it pass with a northern discovery into the gulf of Viaba before mention they which dwell on this river observe a idol of great note call by the name of the river Dabaiba whereto the king at certain time of the year send slave to be sacrifice from remote country from whence also be great resort of pilgrim they kill the slave before their god and after burn they suppose that odour acceptable to their idol as taperlight and frankincense say martyr be to our saint through the displeasure of that angry God they say that all the river and fountain have once fail and the great part of man perish with famine their king in remembrance hereof have their priest at home and chapel which be sweep every day and keep with a religious neatness when the king think to obtain of the idol sunshine or rain or the like he with his priest get up into a pulpit stand in the chapel purpose not to depart thence till his suit be grant they urge their god therefore with vehement prayer and cruel fast the people meanwhile macerate themselves also with fast in four day space not eat nor drink except on the four day only a little broth the spaniard ask what god they worship thus they answer the creator of the heaven sun moon and all invisible thing from who all good thing proceed and they say Dabaiba n n they say Dabaiba be a woman of great wisdom honour in her life deify after death to who they ascribe thunder and lightning when she be angry be the mother of that creator they call they to their devotion with certain trumpet and bell of gold the bell have clapper like in form to we make of the bone of fish and yield a please sound as they report which no doubt be a please sound and music to the spaniard covetous heart howsoever it agree with the nature of that metal to ring in the ear one of they say they weigh six hundred o o exceed the ducat a four part a Pezo pensa their priest be enjoin chastity which vow if they violate they be either stone or burn other man also in the time of that fast likewise contain themselves from those carnal pleasure they have a imagination of the soul but know not what substance or name to ascribe unto it to which yet they believe be assign future joy or woe according to their demerit point up to heaven and down to the centre when they speak thereof many of their wife for they may have many follow the sepulcher of their husband they allow not marriage with the sister of which they have a riduculous conceit of the spot which they account a man in the moon that for this incest be thither confine to the torment of cold and moisture in that moons-prison they leave trench on their sepulcher in which they yearly pour maize and some of their wine to the profit as they think of the ghost if a mother die while she give suck the poor nursling must not be orphan but be inter with she be put there to her breast and bury alive they imagine that the soul of their great man and their familiar be immortal but not other and therefore such of their servant and friend as will not be bury with they they think shall lose that priviledge of immortality and the delight of those pleasant place where be eat drink dance and the former delicacy of their former life they renew the funeral pomp of these great man yearly assemble thither with plenty of wine and meat and there watch all night especial the woman sing dreary lamentation with inuective against his enemy if he die in the war yea cut the image of his enemy in piece in revenge of their slay lord this do they fall to drink of maize wine till they be weary if not drunken yet after this they resume their song to his commendation with many dance and adoration when day appear they put the image of the decease into a great Canoa a boat of one tree capable of threescore oar fill with drink herb and such thing as in his life he have love which some carry upon their shoulder in procession about the court and set it down there again and burn it with all the content after which the woman fill with wine and empty of all modesty with loose hair secret not secret and variety of bacchanal gesture sometime go sometime fall sometime shake the weapon of the man and conclude with beastly sleep on the ground the young man exercise their dance and song pierce the middle of their privy member with the sharp bone of the rayfish bedew the pavement with the blood and their Banti who be their physician and priest heal the same again in 4. day they have in those part magician without who advice they attempt nothing and neither hunt fish nor gather gold except the Tequenigua or wizard think it fit to end this Dabaiban story martyr say for I will not further engage my credit for the truth that in camara which be at the head of this river there happen most terrible tempest from the east monstrous harpy which throw down tree and house and in the last act of that tragedy be bring not by representation two foul monster of monstrous fowl such as the poet describe the harpy with woman face one of they so great that her leg be thick than a man thigh so heavy that the bough of the tree can not bear she so strong that she will seize on a man and fly away with he as a kite with a chicken the other be less and suppose to be the young one of the former corales Osorius and Spinosa tell martyr that they speak with many who see the great kill which be do by a stratagem for they make the image of a man and set it on the ground attend in the wood with their arrow till she the next morning seize on this prey and lose herself the young be never see after and happy you think not before neither but they add that the killer of she be honour as god and reward with present @. 3 of Tunia saint Martha venezuela and Curiana in the valley of Tunia p p Linschot l. 2. or Tomana be mine of emerald the people worship the sun for their chief God with such awful devotion that they dare not look steadfast upon it the moon also they worship but in a inferior degree in their war in stead of ensign they tie the bone of certain man who in their life have be valiant upon long staff to provoke other to the like fortitude they bury their king with golden necklace set with emerald and with bread and wine the people about Rio grande be cannibal also about saint Martha the tunian use poison arrow and when they go to the war they carry their idol chiappen with they unto who before they enter into the field they offer many sacrifice of live man be the child of slave or of their enemy paint all the image with blood which do they eat the flesh return conqueror they hold great feast with dance leap sing drink themselves drink and again besmear their image with blood if they be overcome they seek by new sacrifice to appease chiappen they demand counsel of their god for their marriage and other affair for these consultation they observe a kind of Lent two month in which they lay not with woman nor eat Salt they have monastery of boy and girl where they live certain year they correct public fault as steal and kill by cut off the ear and nose hang and if he be a nobleman by cut off his hair in gather emerald they first use certain charm they use to sacrifice bird and many other thing saint Martha stand about fifty league from Carthagena at the foot of certain hill always crown with snow the indian q q nic. Monard cap. 53. Gomar hist gen. c. 71. here be very valorous and use poison arrow they make bread of jucca a root as big as a man arm or leg the juice whereof be poison in the island and therefore they press it between two stone but in the firm land they drink it raw and both here and there sodden they use it for vinegar and be sod till it be very thick for honey this bread be their Cusavi not so good as that of maize I have see a plant of this herb grow in master Gerard r r m. Gerrard garden the picture whereof he have express in his herbal the people be abominable sodomite a badge whereof they wear about their neck a chain with the resemblance of two man commit this villainy in Gayra the sodomite be attire like woman other be shave like friar they have woman which preserve their virginity these addict themselves to hunt with bow and arrow alone they may lawful kill any that seek to corrupt they these people be cannibal and eat man flesh fresh and powder the young boy which they take they geld to make they fat for their table as we do capon they set up the head of those they kill at their gate for a memorial and wear their tooth about their neck for a bravery they worship the s s p. Messia l. 1. cap. 13. sun and moon and burn thereto perfume of herb and gold and emerald they sacrifice slave venezuela be so call because it be build upon a plain rock in the water of a lake the woman of this country paint their breast and arm all the rest of their body be naked except their privy part they maid be know by their colour and greatness of their girdle the man carry their member in a shell there be many filthy sodomite they pray to idol and to the devil who they paint in such form as he appear to they they paint their body in this sort he that have kill one enemy in the war paint one of this arm the second time his breast and when he have kill a three he paint a line from his eye to his ear and this be his knighthood their priest be their physician who be send for by a sick man ask the patient if he believe that they can help he and then lie their hand upon the place where they say their pain be if he recover not they put the fault in he or in their god they lament their dead lord in song in the night time make of their praise that do they roast they at a fire and beat they to powder drink they in wine make their bowel their lord sepulcher in zoupaciay they bury their lord with much gold jewel and pearl and set upon the grave four stick in a square within which they hang his weapon and many viand to eat from the cape Vela the space of 2000 mile alongst the coast be the fish for pearl discover by Christopher Columbus in the year 1498. which sail all along this coast in t t P.M. dec. 1. l. D Gomar c. 74. Tom c. 84. Curiania they receive the spaniard with great joy and for pin needle bell glass and such trifle give they many string of pearl for four pin they will give a peacock for two a pheasant for one a turtle dove and when they ask what they shall do with this new merchandise of pin and needle see they be naked they show they the use to pick their tooth and to pick out thorn in their foot these indian have ring of gold and jewel make with pearl after the form of bird fish and beast they have also the touchstone for their metal and weight to weight the same thing not elsewhere find in India they make their tooth white with a herb which all the day they chew in their mouth chap 2 of cumana and paria @. i. of the people and strange creature in cumana CVmana be a province name of a river call cumana b b gom cap. 76. where certain franciscan 1516. build they a monastery and the spaniard be very diligent in the fish for pearl about c c P.M. dec. 7. lib. 4. that time three dominican go fourscore mile west from thence to preach the gospel and be eat of the indian which hinder not but other of the same order found they a monastery in Ciribici near Maracapana both these order take pain with the indian to convert they and teach their child to write and read and to answer at mass and the spaniard be so respect that they may safe walk alone through all the country but after two year and a half the indian whether for their too much employment in the Pearl-fishing or for other cause rebel and kill a hundred spaniard slay the friar one of which be then say mass and as many indian as they find with they which the spaniard of Domingo soon after revenge the loss of d d gom. c. 78. Cubagua cumana hinder their trade for pearl at Cubagua and therefore the king send james castilion to subdue they by force which he do and begin the plantation of new Calais for the spaniard to inhabit there Cubagua be call by Columbus the finder the island of pearl situate in twelve degree and a half of northerly latitude and contain twelve mile in circuit this little island be exceed great in commodity that accrew by those pearl which have amount to diverse million of gold they fetch their wood from Margarita a island four mile to the north and their water from cumana which be two and twenty mile thence they have a spring of medicinal water there in the island the sea there at certain time of the year be very red which those Pearl-oyster by some natural purgation be say to cause there be fish or sea-monster which from the middle upward resemble man with beard hair and arm the e e cap. 79. people of cumana go naked cover only their shame at feast and dance they pain themselves or else anoint themselves with a certain gum in which they stick feather of many colour they cut their hair above the ear and will not suffer it to grow on any place of their body esteem a beard man a beast they take great pain to make their tooth black and account they woman which have they white they black they with the powder of the leaf of a certain tree call gay these leave they chew after they be fifteen year old they mix that powder with another of a kind of wood and with chalk of white shell burn in manner as the eastern indian use their betele and Arecca with chalk of oyster and this mixture they bear continual in their mouth still chew it that their tooth be as black as coal and so continue to their death they keep it in basket and box and sell it in the market to some which come far for it for gold slave Cotton and other merchandise this keep they from pain and rot of the tooth the maid go naked only they bind certain band hard about their knee to make their hip and thigh seem thick which they esteem no small beauty the marry woman live honest or else their husband will divorce they the chief man have as many wife as they will and if any stranger come to lodge in one of their house they make the fair his bed-fellow their marriage these also shut up their daughter two year before they marry they all which time they go not forth nor cut their hair after which there be make a great feast and very many bid which bring their variety of cheer and also wood to make the new spouse a house a man cut off the bridegroom hair before and a woman the bride and then they eat and drink with much excess till night this be the lawful wife and the other which they marry afterward obey this. they give their spouse to be deflower to their Piaces so they call their priest which these reverend father account their pre-eminence and prerogative the husband their honour the wife their warrant the man and woman wear collar bracelet pendant and some crown of gold and pearl the man wear ring in their nose and the woman brooch on their breast whereby by at first sight the sex be discern the woman shoot run leap swim as well as the man their pain of travel be small they till the land and look to the house while the man hunt and fish they be high-minded treacherous and thirsty of revenge their chief weapon be poison arrow which they prepare with the blood of snake and other mixture all of both sex from their infancy learn to shoot their meat be whatsoever have life as horseleech bat grasshopper spider bee louse worm raw sodden fry and yet their country be replenish with good fruit fish and flesh this diet or as some say their water cause spot in their eye which dim their sight they have as strange a fence or hedge for their garden and possession namely a thread of Cotton or Bexuco as they call it as high as a man girdle and it be account a great sin to go over or under the same and he which break it they certain believe shall present die so much safe be their thread weave with this imagination than all our stonewall the e e P.M. dec. 8. lib. 7. cumanois be much addict to hunt wherein they be very expert their strange creature and kill lion tiger hog and all other fourfooted beast with bow net snare they take one beast which they call that have the sole of his foot like a french shoe narrow behind broad and round before another call Aranata which for the phisnomy and subtlety seem to be a kind of ape it have mouth hand and foot like a man a goodly countenance beard like a goat they go in herd they bellow loud run up tree like cat avoid the huntsman arrow and cast it with clean delivery again at himself another beast have a long snout and feed on ant f f Ouied. call it a bear put his tongue into a hollow tree or rather place where the ant be and as many of they as come thereon he lick in the friar bring up one till the stink thereof cause they to kill it snout like a fox rough-haired which void in the excrement long and slender serpent which present die this beast stink while he live and worse now dead yet be good food to the indian they have one which will counterfeit the voice of a cry child and so cause some to come forth and then devour they the like be write of the Hyana that she will call the shepherd by their name and then destroy they when they come forth they have parrot as big as raven with bill like hawk live on the prey and smell like musk great bat one of which be a physician by strange accident to a servant of the friar which be sick of a pleurisy be give over for dead because they can not raise a vein wherein to let he blood in the night a bat after the custom of that creature bit and suck he whereby so much blood issue that the sick man recover which the friar count for a miracle they have three sort of bee one whereof be little and black and make honey in the tree without wax their spider be great than we of diverse colour and weave such strong cobweb that they ask good strength to break they there be salamander g g Pliny Astolphi and other describe this worm but I can never learn any thing to satisfy myself therein as big as a man head they cackle much like a pullet their bite be deadly I may here hold you too long in view these strange creature we will now return to their strange custom @. 2 of their vice and superstition they take great pleasure in two thing dance and drink their dance and drunkenness in which they will spend eight day together especial at the marriage or coronation of their king many gallant will then meet together diverse dress some with crown and feather some with shell about their leg in stead of bell to make a noise some otherwise all paint with twenty colour and figure he that go worst seem best take one another by the hand they dance in a ring some backward some forward with a world of variety grin sing cry counterfeit the deaf lame blind fish weave tell of story and this continue six hour and then they eat and drink before he which dance most now he which drink most be the most complete and accomplish gallant and now beyond counterfeit drunkenness set they together in brave swagger quarrel other play the swine spew up the former to make way for other liquor and they add hereunto the fume of a herb which have the like drunken effect it seem to be tobacco this perhaps will not seem strange to some see these savage custom of drink dance smoke swagger so common with we in these day it may indeed seem strange to our forefather if their more civil more sacred ghost may return and take view of their degenerate posterity but now he must be a stranger in many company that will not estrange himself from civility from humanity from Christianity from God to become of a man a beast of a Englishman a savage indian of a christian a fiend save that he have a body in the diversify pollution whereof he have advantage and take it to out-swagger the devil these be the gull-gallant of our day to who I can wish that either their progenitor have be some cumanian Indian or that they will leave this usurp gallantry to those true owner and resume spirit true english the god their god of the cumanian be the sun and moon which be take for man and wife and for the great god they have great fear of the sun when it thunder or lighten say that he be angry with they they fast when there be any eclipse especial the woman for the marry woman pluck their hair and scratch their face with their nail the maid thrust sharp fishbone into their arm and draw blood when the moon be at full they think it be wound by the sun for some indignation he have conceive against she when any comet appear they make a great noise with drum and hallow think so to scare it away or to consume it believe that those comet portend some evil among their many idol and figure which they honour as god they have one like a saint Andrews cross which they think preserve they from night-spirit and they hang it on their newborn child they call their priest their priest Piaces who maiden-head-rite we before mention they be their physician and magician they cure with root and herb raw sod and pound with the fat of bird fish and beast with wood and other thing unknown to the people with abstruse and dark word which themselves understand not they suck and lick the place where the pain be to draw out the evil humour and if the pain increase they say that the patient be possess with evil spirit and then rub their body all over with their hand use certain word of conjuration or charm suck after that very hard give they to understand that by that mean they call out the evil spirit present they take a piece of wood the virtue whereof none else know but the piace and therewith rub their mouth and throat so long till they cast all that be in their belly vomit sometime blood with the force thereof the piace in the mean time stamp knock call and gesture after two hour there come from he a thick phlegm and in the midst thereof a black hard bullet which those of the house carry and cast into the field say let the devil go thither if the sick man recover his good die and become the priest if he die they say his time be come the piace be their oracle with who they consult whether they shall have war what shall be the issue thereof whether the year will be plentiful they forewarn they of eclipse and advertise of comet the spaniard demand in their necessity whether any ship will come short and they answer that on such a day a carvel will come with so many man and such provision and merchandise which according come to pass their divination they call upon the devil in this manner the piace enter into a cave or secret place in a dark night and carry with he certain courageous youth that may move question without fear he sit on a bench and they stand on their foot he cry call sing verse sound shell and they with a heavy accent say many time prororure prororure if the devil come not all this Black-Sanctus be renew with grievous sigh and much perplexity when he come which be know by the noise he sound loud and sudden fall down by visage and vary gesture show that the devil be enter then one of those his associate demand what he please the friar go one day with their conjure and conjure holy the cross steal Holywater and when the piace be in that distraction cast a part of the steal on he cross and conjure in latin and he answer they in his native language much to the purpose at last they demand whither the soul of the indian go he answer to Hell these Piaces by their physic and divine grow rich they go to feast and sit by themselves apart and drink themselves drink and say the more they drink the better they can divine they learn these art when they be child and be enclose in the wood two year all that time eat nothing that have blood see no woman nor their own parent come not out of their cave or cell and the Piaces their master go to they by night to teach they when this time of their solitary discipline be past they obtain a testimonial thereof and begin to profess in practice of physic and divination let we bury the cumanois and then we have do their burial be dead they sing their praise and bury they in their house or dry they at the fire and hang they up at the year end if he be a great man they renew the lamentation and after many other ceremony burn the bone and give to his best belove wife his skull to keep for a relic they believe that the soul be immortal but that it eat and drink about in the field where it go and that it be the echo which answer when one call @. 3 of Trinidado and paria in the year 1497. some add a year more g g p. martyr dec. 1. lib. 6. gom part. 2. cap. 84. Christopher Columbus seek new discovery after the suffering of unsufferable heat and calm at sea whereby the hoop of his vessel break and the freshwater not able further to endure the hot indignation of that now-believed burning-zone flee out of those close prison into the lap of that father of water the ocean for refuge he come at last to Trinidado the first land he encounter he call by that name either for devotion now that his other hope be dry up with the heat or wash into the sea by the violent shower above-board and the less but not less dangerous which flow from his cask within or else for the three mountain which he there descry once this discovery of land so ravish his spirit by the inexpected delivery from danger as easy carry his impotent thought into a double error the one in place earthly paradise in this island to which opinion for the excellency of the tobacco there find he shall happy have the smoky subscription of many humorist to who that fume become a fool paradise which with their brain and all pass away in smoke the other be that the earth be not round like a ball but like a pear the upper swell whereof he esteem these part hence Columbus sail to paria and find out the pearl-fishing pearl fish of which Petrus Alphonsus a little after make great commodity by trade with the savage he be assail with eighteen canoas of cannibal h h p. martyr Dec. 1. l b. 8 of the cannibal see chapter 13. one of which he take with one cannibal and a bound captive who with tear show they that they have eat six of his fellow and the next day he must have go to pot too to he they give power over his jailor who with his own club kill he still lay on when his brain and gut come forth and testify that he need not further fear he in Haraia or paria they find plenty of salt which the foreman in nature shop and her chief workman the sun turn and kern from water into salt his workhouse for this business be a large plain by the watersside here the sepulcher of their king and great man seem not less remarkable they lay the body on a kind of hurdle or grediron of wood under which they kindle a gentle fire whereby keep the skin whole they by little and little consume the flesh these dry carcase they hold in great reverence and honour for their household god in the year i i gem. cap. 85. 1499. Vincent pinzon discover cape saint Augustine and sail along the coast from thence to paria but why stand we here peddle on the coast for pearl salt and tobacco let we rouse up high spirit and follow our english guide for Guiana only let i first have leave to mention concern the superstition of these part northward from Guiana what it please sir Walter Raleigh to impart unto i from the relation of a very understanding man of that country who he use for a interpreter these people worship the sun Relat. S.W.R. who they imagine as the fabulous grecian tell of his chariot and horse wherewith young Phacton sometime set the world on fire to be draw into a chariot by tiger which be the most fiery and fierce beast among they in honour therefore of the sun and for sustenance of his chariot-beast they careful wash the carcase of their dead and lay they forth in the night for repast unto the tiger weary with their long and late journey in the day for so they believe that after sunset these beast be to this end dismiss from their labour and that vicissitude wherein David observe the wisdom of divine providence that when it be night the wild beast go forth to seek their prey psal. 104.20 ^^ 22 23. which when the sun arise and call man forth of their house to labour return to their den be blind by they apply to this their superstition they likewise have a tradition among they that their ancestor in time past neglect thus to prepare the corpse of such as die for the tiger diet or not wash they so neat as behove the tiger make hereof a complaint to the sun as not able to do his work if not allow their wont cate whereupon the sun send one among they brandish a terrible fiery sword and so dreadful assault the place of their habitation and the soil cover with long grass that all fall on fire and a hundred thousand of the inhabitant be destroy a terrible warning hereafter to be more diligent in these tiger-devotion which according they perform to this day chap 3 of Guiana and the neighbour nation on the coast and within the land @. i. discovery of Guiana by sir WALTER Raleigh in the year 1595. a a sir Walter Raleigh treatise of Guiana sir Walter Raleigh have before receive intelligence of this rich and mighty empire set forth for the discovery and on the two and twenty of march anchor at point Curiapan in Trinidado and search that island which he find plentiful he take the city of saint joseph and therein Antony Berreo the spanish governor leave his ship he go with a hundred man in boat and a little galley and with some indian pilot pass along that admirable confluence of river as by the corpse du Guardiano unto Orenoque as great a commander of Rivers as the emperor of Guiana of soldier and although we have before mention somewhat thereof yet this his peculiar place require some further consideration this river Orenoque or Baraquan since of this discovery call Raleana run from quito in Peru on the west it have nine branch which fall out on the north side of his own main mouth on the south side seven thus many arm have this giantlike stream to be his purveyor which be always fill his never-filled mouth seem by this their natural officiousness incorporate thereunto and to be but wide gape of the same spacious jaw with many island and break ground as it be so many morsel and crumb in his greedy chap still open for more though he can even in winter when his throat be glibbe altogether swallow these yea these force he for fear of choke to yawn his wide and to vomit out between these cleave morsel into the ocean lap so many stream and so far be it from the northern and southern extreme three hundred mile distant the inhabitant on the northern branch be the tivitivas a goodly and valiant people which have the most manly speech and most deliberate say sir Walter that ever I hear of what nation so ever in the summer they have house on the ground as in other place in the winter they dwell upon the tree b b king Abibeiba dwell on a tree in the country of Dariena pet. martyr Die 3. lib. 6. where they build very artificial town and village for between May and September the river of Orenoque rise thirty foot upright and then be those island overflow twenty foot high except in some few raise ground in the middle this watery store when the cloud be so prodigal of more than the river store-house can hold whereby they become violent intruder and incrocher upon the land and not the violence of cold give this time the title of winter these tivitivas never eat of any thing that be set or sow nature nursling that neither at home nor abroad will be behold to the art or labour of husbandry they use the top of palmito for bread and kill dear fish and pork for the rest of their sustenance they which dwell upon the branch of Orenoque call Capuri and Macureo be for the most part carpenter of canoas which they sell into Guiana for gold and into Trinidado for tobacco in the excessive take whereof they exceed all nation when a commander die they use great lamentation and when they think the flesh of their body be putrify and fall from the bone they take up the carcase again and hang it up in the house where he have dwell deck his skull with feather of all colour and hang his gold-plate about the bone of his arm thigh and leg the arwaca which dwell on the south of Orenoque beat the bone of their lord into powder which their wife and friend drink as they pass along these stream their eye be entertain with a pageant of show wherein nature be the only actor here the deer come down feed by the water side as if they have desire acquaintance with these newcome guest there the bird in unspeakable variety of kind and colour render their service to the eye and ear the land either in large plain of many mile bear their beautiful bosom adorn with Flora embroidery of unknown flower and plant and prostrate themselves to the eye that they may be see or else lift up themselves in hill knit their furrow brow and strut out their goggle eye to watch their treasure which they keep imprison in their stony wall and now to see these stranger the water as the grace dance with mutual and manifold embrace of diverse stream attend with plenty of fowl and fish both land and water feast variety of sense with variety of object only the crocodile a creature which seem vassal now to the land now to the water but to make prey on both wellnigh mar the play and turn this comedy into a tragedy even in their sight feast himself with a negro of their company one level pass hence to cumana a hundred and twenty league to the north wherein dwell the Sayma the Assawai the Wikiri and the Aroras a people as black as negro a a these may descend of those in Careca sup. l. 8. c. 2. but with smooth hair their poison arrow like cruel executioner do not only kill but with uncouth torment make death to be as the last so the least of their fury especial if man drink after they be wound at the port of Morequito they anchor and the king be a hundred and ten year old come afoot fourteen mile to see they and return the same day they bring they store of fruit and a sort of paraquito no big than wren and a b b Ouied. in Summar call it Bardato Armadilla which seem to be all bar over with small plate somewhat like to a rhinoceros with a white horn grow in his hinder-part as big as a great hunt horn which they use to wind in stead of a trumpet they after eat this beast Monardus c c Monard c. 37. say it be in bigness and snout like a pig live under the earth as a mole and be think to live on earth they pass further till they come in sight of those strange overfall of Caroli of which there appear ten or twelve in sight every one as high over the other as a church-tower they have sight at Winicapora of a mountain of crystal which appear a far off like a white church-tower of a exceed height there fall over it a mighty river which touch no part of the side of the mountain but rush over the top fall to the ground with so terrible noise as if a thousand great bell be knock one against another no marvel of these roar out-cry if we consider that double penalty of sense and loss which this river seem to sustain the one in that dreadful downfall bruise and break his unite stream into drop and make it foam and senseless with this falling-sickness the other in leave behind his crystal purchase further enrich with diamond and other jewel which even now he embrace in his watery arm but himself such be the course and curse of covetousness will not suffer himself to enjoy now for the monster of man there be say to be not see by our man but report by the savage and other a amazonian nation further south which Gomara think to be but the wife of some indian a thing common as you have even now read shoot and follow the war no less than their husband once about jucatan about plata about the river call of this supposition amazon about Monomotapa in Africa our age have tell but no man have see this Unimammian nation yet here they speak not of sear of the breast and what need they if there be such d d l. keymis these may rather be say to want neck than head and that cause they thus to seem see the woman be so good archer in other place their breast notwithstanding again c c Monard c. 37. they tell of man with mouth in their breast and eye in their shoulder call Chiparemoi and of the guianian Ewiaponomos very strong and of other head like dog which live all the day time in the sea these thing be strange yet I dare not esteem they fabulous only as not too prodigal of faith I suspend till some eye-intelligence of some of our part have testify the truth @. 2 relation and discovery thereof by other englishman francis SPARREY leave in Guiana by sir w. Raleigh 1595. have also write of these part he relate of a place call comalaha f. Sparrey m. s. ap. Hak. southwards from Orenoque where at certain time they sell woman as at a fair he say he buy eight the elder of which be not eighteen for a red-hafted knife which in England cost a halfpenny he give they to the savage he be afterward send prisoner into Spain 1604. captain Charles Leigh master Charles Leigh set sail from Woolwich on the one and twenty of march for Guiana may 10. he come in water thick and white the next day in fresh and the day after see two island in the mouth of amazon account themselves forty league up the river may 22. they be in the river of Wiapogo which they call Caroleigh in three degree and half northward from the line the people be ready to give they entertainment the jayos and Capayos offer they their own house and garden already plant two of which he accept with some garden undertake to defend they against the charibe and their other enemy they desire he to send into England for some to teach they to pray and give five pledge to be send thither he after intend for England die aboard his ship of the flux they intoxicate the fish with a strong sentedwood call Ayaw whereby they easy take they on the top of the water their bread be Cassavi of which chew they also make drinke they be much trouble with a worm like a flea the spaniard call it which creep into the flesh of their toe under the nail and multiply there with much multiplication of torment except they use speedy prevention one be so pester with they that for remedy they be fain to hold his foot upward and pour thereon melt wax hot which be cold they pluck off and therewith seven or eight hundred the people be of modest countenance naked but will wear clothes if they have they huntly return for England and leave there five and thirty which shall have be succour it discord have suffer 1605. a ship be send for supply but the mariner and land-man quarrel these be leave on land at saint Lucia nichol. a island in twelve degree of northerly latitude to the number of threescore and seven and most of they slay a by the islander these indian go naked have long black hair their body paint red with three stroke also of red from the ear to the eye eleven of our man after much misery and famishment which kill some of they in the way get to Coro and after good and bad intercourse of fortune with the spaniard some return home the spaniard there as John Nichol one of this company testify tell they of a vision of Christ on the cross appear to our king and revoke he from his error at the sight whereof three of our bishop fall into a trance and so continue three day after which they become catholic and preach and the king have send to the pope for learned man to perfect this conversion these be the spanish trick with faithless tale to pervert these man to their faith the mariner give name to the place which they leave according to their conceit of these man rogue bay cape knave river of rascal they come as far as comana or cumana where they observe the weather hot till noon and then a cool breeze and thunder without rain by wind and current they be detain from Wiapogo which they seek a Fleming there tell they fabulous rumour of war with Spain John Wilson of Wansted in Essex another ship of Amsterdam to disgrace our man tell the indian of Wiapoco that they come to inhabit there and to oppress they as the spaniard do see what gain can do without godliness a ship of middleburgh come thither with negro to sell thither come also a ship of saint malos the indian of these part as Wilson report choose their captain at their drunken feast in this sort they set the nominate person in the midst with his hand lift over his head make oration to he to be valiant after which they whip he with a whip that fetch blood at every stroke for trial of his courage he never move thereat they have commerce with the devil for they tell we of three ship in the river of amazon and that one two month after will visit we they call this devil b b legate company 1606. in a voyage to amaze in a mutiny slay their captain and the rest be take at Cuba and fourteen hang four keep prisoner w. adam w. Turner Peyae with who the man have often conference the woman never that they can perceive they suffer not meanwhile a child in the house when any be sick they thus consult of their recovery and if their oracle answer death they will give no physic if life they use their best help for a axe they will travel with they two or three month or find they so long victual at home the jayos be proud ingenious give to flout the Arwakos of better carriage the saspaye crafty the two former hate the spaniard as much as the caribe their house have door at each end the man keep at one end the woman at the other they be like Barnes but long some hundred and fifty pace long and twenty broad a hundred of they keep together in one no rain come in notwithstanding that store which fall in April May june and most of july they paint they when they go to feast against the time of travel the woman have as room apart whereto they go alone and be deliver without help which do she call her husband and deliver it to he who present wash it in a pot of water and paint it with sundry colour I can not hear say Wilson the woman so much as groan all the time of her travel when one die they make great moan ten or twelve day together and sometime long here be store of deer hare coney hog monkey leopard may. 1606. lion porkepine parrot as big as hen blue and red very beautiful etc. he return with the rest in a ship of Amsterdam the indian be loath to part with they they often inquire of sir Walter Raleigh and one come from Orenoque to ask of he allege his promise of return rob. harcourt voyage to Guiano the like remembrance of he be mention by master harcourt in his late publish voyage to Guiana this worthy gentleman an. 1608. with gentleman and other to the number of 97. set forth for Wiapoco the nine of may they fall into the current of that great and famous river of amazon of which they drink fresh and good be 30. league from land the ten day the water become muddy whitish and thick the eleven day they make land and their pinnace be leave dry upon the ebb by the next flood come on be almost spoil thence they stand along the coast to Wiapoco whither they come may the seventeen and settle themselves at Caripo he take possession in his majesty name as captain Leigh have also do of this spacious c c m. harcourt so call the priest and the devil Wattipa country of Guiana bound on the north with Orenoque and the sea on the east and south with the river of amazon on the west with the mountain of Peru the charibe be the ancient inhabitant the other late incrocher there be no settle government among they only they acknowledge a superiority which they will obey as long as they please they common punish murder and adultery by death which be the only offence punish among they and certain person be appoint to execute those punishment the better sort have two or three wife or more the rest but one they be very jealous and if they take they in adultery cause their brain to be beat out their wife especial the elder be as their servant and he which have most be the great man their account of time be by moon or day their number be to ten and then say ten and one etc. they also keep account by bundle of stick contain so many as day be agree on of which they take away every day one they have a certain observance of the sun and moon suppose they to be alive but as far as he can perceive use neither sacrifice nor adoration to any thing at the death of any great man they make a solemn feast their chief provision be their strong drink call m m it be like march beer Parranow and as long as this drink last they continue their feast with dance sing and excessive drink account the great drunkard the brave man during which drunken solemnity some woman be near of kin to the dead party stand by and cry extreme their priest or soothsayer he call they Pecaios have conference with the devil who they term Wattipa but fear he much and say he be naught he will often beat they black and blue they believe that the good Indian when they die go to Caupo or heaven the bad to soy downward when a chief man die if he have a captive they slay he if not than one of his servant to attend he the other world the quality of the land be by the seaside low and will be violent hot if a fresh easterly breeze do not cool it with a vehement breath in the heat of the day the mountain be cold the middle sort most temperate profit may here take pleasure neither need pleasure abandon profit the particular be by this and other our author relate I hunt after rarity to present you such be the fish cassoorwa which have in each eye two sight and as it swim it bear the low sight within the water and the other above the rib and back resemble those part in a man save that it be little big but much dainty than a smell beside the pockiero or small swine with the navel in the back be another call Paingo as large as we in England the sea-cow or manatin eat like beef and will take salt and serve to victual ship it yield also a excellent oil and the hide will make buff there be infinite store of they the Pina for delicacy exceed a fruit taste like strawberry claret-wine and sugar what commodity tobacco n n 1610. the tobacco that come into England amount to at least 60000. pound and not much less in other year and sugar in those part may yield be incredible especial in this smoky humour of the one sex and that dainty of the other their die gum and other commodity I omit of gold and other metal they have good testimony the Marashawaccas be a nation of charibe up high within land have great ear beyond credit they have a idol of stone which they worship as their god in a house erect purposely to it which they keep very clean it be fashion like a man sit upon his heel hold open his knee and rest his elbow upon they hold up his hand with the palm forward and gape with his mouth wide open captain Michael harcourt be leave commander of the country for his brother who continue the possession three year in all which space of thirty person die but six and some of they by casualty among the east indian plant be mention one call sentida the like they find here much like unto Rose tree about half a yard high which if they be touch or a leaf cut from they will present shrink and close up themselves and hang as they be dead and wither vid. l. 5. c 12. a feel plant. within half a quarter of a hour by degree again open Areminta the cacique of Moreshegoro have a rough skin like to Buff-leather of which kind there be many in those part they return by cape Brea which be so call of the pitch there get in the earth whereof there be such abundance that all place of this our world may be store thence it be excellent for trim of ship for those hot country not melt in the sun @. 3 relation of these and the adjoin country by the spaniard it be a hard task to muster all that world of Rivers and name of nation in the part near Guiana which they that will may find in sir Walter and master keymis and master harcourt their own relation as for Guiana this sir Walter have write it be direct east from Peru towards the sea and lie under the aequinoctial it have more abundance of gold than any part of Peru and as many or more great city it have the same law government and religion and Manoa the imperial city of Guiana which some spaniard have see and they call it o o the gild city el dorado for the greatness riches and situation far exceed any of the world at least so much of it as the spaniard know it be found upon a lake of salt-water two hundred league long like unto the caspian sea the emperor of Guiana be descend from the ingas the magnificent prince of Peru for when Francis pizarro have conquer Peru and slay Atabalipa the king one of his young brethren flee from thence and take with he many thousand of those soldier of the empire call Oreiones with who and other his follower he vanquish all that tract which be between the great river of Orenoque and amazon Diego Ordas who be one of the captain of Cortes in the conquest of Mexico in the year 1531. thus say Gomara and that he perish at sea other with more probability say it be a few year after the conquest of Peru make search for Guiana but lose himself be slay in a mutiny before this his provision of powder be fire and one juan martinez which have the charge thereof be therefore condemn to be execute but at the soldier request his punishment be alter and he set in a Canoa alone without victual and so turn loose into the river certain guianian meet he and have never see man of that colour they carry he into the land to be wonder at and so from town to town till he come to the great city of Manoa the seat and residence of Inga the emperor he no soon see he but he know he to be a Christian for the spaniard not long before have conquer his brother and cause he to be well entertain in his palace he live seven month in Manoa but be not suffer to wander any whither into the country he be also bring thither all the way blindfold lead by the indian until he come at Manoa he enter the city at noon and travel all that day till night and the next from the rise till the set of the sun through the city ere he come to the palace of Inga after seven month the emperor put he to his choice whether to stay or go and he with the emperor licence depart he send with he many guianian all lade with as much gold as they can carry but before he enter Orenoque the orenoqueponi rob he of all but of two bottle of gold bead which they have think have be his drink or meat thus escape he to Trinidado and die after at saint juan de puertorico where in his extreme he utter these thing to his confessor he call the city Manoa el dorado the gild or golden because that at their drunken solemnity in which vice no nation under heaven excel they when the emperor carowse with any of his commander they that pledge he be strip naked and their body anoint with a kind of white balsamum and then certain servant of the emperor have prepare gold make into fine powder blow it through hollow cane upon their naked body until they be all shine from the foot to the head and in this sort they fit drink by twenty and hundred and continue in drunkenness sometime six or seven day together upon this sight and for the abundance of gold he see in the city the image in the temple the plate armour and shield of gold use in their war he give the city that name juan p p juan. de Castellanos ap. Hak. de Castellanos reckon twenty several expedition of some or other spaniard for this guianian discovery with little effect save that diverse lose their life therein 1543. Gonzalo pizarro q q Lopez Vaz ap. Hak. Tom 3. girava l. 2. send a captain name Orellana from the border of Peru who with fifty man be carry by the violent current of the river that they can not return to pizarro he descend not in Orenoque the guianian river but in Maragnon call of he Orellana which josephus r r acosta l. 2. c. 6. and 3. c. 20. acosta write from the relation of one of their society who be a boy have be in the expedition of Pedro de Orsua for this discovery and have sail the river through that in the midst man can see nothing but the sky as before be say and the river and that it be seventy league broad under the aequinoctial Martin s s m. fernand. de encisa Hak. fernandez make it seven degree and a half to the north of the line and fifteen league broad and the sea of fresh water to be another river of forty league breadth other have write otherwise which vary proceed from that variety of arm or mouth of Orenoque or Raleana and Marannon or amazon which since have be better discover as t t l keymis t. Masham master keymis master Masham and other employ in this action have find by experience it u u lop. gom. c. 86 rise in quito Orellana sail in it six thousand mile in all these part their great treasure be multitude of woman and child Topiawari make a heavy complaint that whereas they be wont to have ten or twelve wife now they have not above three or four by reason of the war with the Epuremei their enemy whereas the lord of the Epuremei have fifty or a hundred and their war be more for woman then either for gold or dominion after Orellana Pedro de Orsua be employ with five hundred soldier for the conquest of the amazon as they call it but for a beautiful woman which he have with he be slay by conspiracy of lope de Aguirre which love she and Fernando de Guzman who they salute king etc. Veg. pag. 2. lib. 8. c. 14. Berreo in the search for Guiana take his journey from nuevo Reyno de Granado where he dwell with seven hundred horse but travel he lose many of his company and horse at Amapaia the soil be a low marish and the water issue through the bog be red and venomous which poison the horse and infect the man at noon the sun have make it more wholesome for their use this 10 10 lop. Vaz new kingdom of Granada be two hundred league within land southward from cartagena it have that name because the captain that discover it be of Granada in Spain the plenty of emerald in these part have make that gem of less worth the next province to this be call Popayan in both which the spaniard have many town and by the river of Orenoque both may be invade all y y rot. 4. l. 6. the part from the golden castle and the gulf of Uraba to paria yield caribe or cannibal which eat man flesh and geld child to make they more fat and tender for their diet and in all inland part near Peru and in the hill call andes which some call golden Castille they little differ Ciezar z z Cieza part. 1. cap. 15. say that in the valley of Anzerma they keep certain tablet among the reed wherein they carve the image of the devil in a terrible shape also the figure of cat and other idol which they worship to they they pray for rain or fair weather they have commerce with the devil and observe such superstition as he enjoin they they be great man-eater at the door of their house they have small court wherein be their grave in deep vault open to the east in which they bury their great man with all their wealh the curie be not far from they they have no temple nor idol they have conference with the devil they marry with their niece and sister and be man-eater they call the devil Xaxarama they esteem virginity little worth in the province of a a cap. 19 and 4. arma the devil do often appear to the indian in honour of who they sacrifice their captive take in war hang they up by the shoulder and pull out the heart of some of they in Paucora they have like devilish devotion and their priest be their oracle before the house of the chief lord be a idol as big as a man Tuesday holy day with his face to the east and his arm open they sacrifice two Indian every Tuesday in this province to the devil in the province of Pozo in the house of their lord they have many idol in such resemblance as the devil have assume in his apparition and in those idol he will also speak and give answer in Carrapa b b chap. 13. they be extreme drunkard when any be sick they offer sacrifice to the devil for his recovery in Quinbaya be a hill which cast forth smoke but a more hellish smoke be their conference and commerce with the devil like the former in the province of Cali they likewise confer with the devil they have no temple or house of religion they make deep pit for sepulcher of their great man where their armour wealth and food be set about they their lust subject the niece and sister to their marriage in Popayan c c chap. 32. they be man-eater as also in the forename province they observe the same Caninal and devilish rite with the former frame their superstition to the devil direction in their mutual colloquy they bury with their lord some of his wife and provision some of they be great wizard and sorcerer in Pasto they talk also with the devil a thing common to all these part of the indies but let we leave these steep and cold hill these man of the devil who they worship and devil to man who they devour and see if in the low country we can find high and noble spirit chap 4 of brasil @. i. the discovery and relation thereof by MAFFAEUS etc. as Guiana be bound with those mighty river of Orenoque and Maragnon so brasil extend itself north and south between Maragnon and the river of plata or silver which there we have already show to be the great river in the World the western border be not so well discover the eastern be wash by the sea Maffaeus a a p. Maffaeus hist Ind lib. 2. p. bert. Geograp mag. geog. g ens Hist. ind. occident p jarric lib. 3. cap. 22. and d. Bot part. 1. l. 6 have large describe the same who word Bertius maginus and Gasper ens have transcribe the sum whereof jarric and Boterus have insert into their french and italian relation Petrus Aluarius Capralis be send by Emanuel king of Portugal in the year 1500. unto the east-indies to avoid the calm on the Guinnee shore fetch a further compass west and so discover the continent which now of that red wood there plentiful grow be call brasil but by he be name the land of the holy cross because he have there erect a cross with much ceremony since usual name brasil of the store of brasil-wood there grow this brasil be soon after by americus vesputius at the charge of the say king further discover the region be pleasant and wholesome the hill and valley equal agree in their unequalness the soil fat and fertile there be plenty of sugarcane a kind of balm express out of the herb Copaibas the zabucal which yield a kind of nut grow in great hard cup of taste like a chestnut the Auanaz excellent in scent and taste the pacovere a tree so tender that it may be cut with a knife a fathom high the leave two foot broad seven foot long the fruit a foot long like a cucumber call Pacova thirty or forty together in cluster never hear fruit but once the like be in the east-indies as Thevet our author affirm and many other fruit which the country natural produce beside those which our Europe have communicate many sort there be of beast as a kind of swine b b which feed on grass sleep in the water Boterus which live in both element their forefoot be short in proportion to the hinder make they slow in run and therefore be hunt commit themselves quick to the water antae resemble a mule but somewhat less slender-snouted the nether chap very long like a trumpet with round ear and short tail hide themselves in the daytime c c the spaniard call it of the contrary the light dog the portugal sloth the indian hay some have write that it live of air and seldom or never have it be see eat and feed in the night the flesh taste like beef there be also the armadillo the tiger which be hungry be very hurtful be full will flee from a dog there be a deform beast of such slow pace that in fifteen day it will scarce go a stone cast it live on the leaf of tree on which it be two day in climb and as many in descend neither shout nor blow force herto amend her pace the Tamendoas be as big as a ram with long and sharp snout a tail like a squirrel twice as long as the body and hairy where-und they hide themselves will put out their tongue two foot out of the mouth as round as a oil-cruz to gather plenty of ant into their mouth have scrape up the place where they keep with their paw the portugal have there raise plenty of horse and sheep the man worship no god at all but be give to southsaying the man and woman go altogether naked be flatnosed make themselves black with the fruit Genipapi wear their hair hang from the hinder part of the head not suffer it elsewhere to grow in their nether lip wear long stone for a gallantry which be remove they seem in deform manner to have a double mouth they go together by company with great silence the wife go before her husband which some say be do for jealousy they entertain and welcome stranger at first with weep and deep sigh pity their tedious journey and present dry their eye have tear at command woman in travel be deliver without great difficulty and present go about their household business the husband in her stead keep his bed be visit of the neighbour have his broth make he and junket send to comfort he they be ignorant of d d they know no number further than five the rest they supply as they can with their toe and finger and if the thing number exceed they number by the toe and finger of many person assemble together Stad lib. 2. c. 29. number and letter some tradition they be say to have touch No and the flood under the same roof which be like a boat with the keel upward live many family they lie in net or bed hang above the ground which be usual in a great part of the indies to avoid hurtful creature they mind the day and be not careful for the morrow easy communicate what they have be very patient of labour and hunger feast if they have wherewith from morning till night and fast otherwhiles when they want three day together in swim they be miraculous skilful and will dive whole hour to search any thing under the water they believe not any reward or punishment after this life end but think that as man die so they go to the other world maim wound sick or whole and therefore bury the body with a net to lie in and food for some day think that they both sleep and eat they be excellent archer and what enemy they take in their war they feed well many day and then kill and eat they for great dainty they dwell in house scatter and separate from each other their language be almost general the same they have no law nor magistrate the woman call certain thing by one name and the man by another they have no use of three letter e e it seem otherwise by lerius his dialogue of that language c. 20 in the alphabet l f r a reason whereof some have witty give because they have no law i'faith nor ruler they be unmindful of good turn and too mindful of injury impotent of lust and rage and in sum more like beast than man thus far Maffaeus in the year 1503. f f g. da Empoli ap. Ramus a. vesput Giovanni da Empoli a florentine sail thither with the portugal who report the like of their nakedness irreligion and of their man-eating say that they dry it in the smoke as we do Bacon the same do Albericus vesputius report that he have see among they and that he have hear one of they boast that he have in his time eat three hundred man he weigh the long stone which they use to wear in their face seven in number about sixteen ounce he say they live a hundred and fifty year and that their woman be out of measure luxurious that they always have a easterly wind which temper their air let we in the next place hear such as have live in the country of which lerius and Thevet two frenchman and joannes Stadius a German have write several treatise but none have more full describe they than a Portugal friar g g a book take from a friar write in portuguse sell by fr cook to m. Hakluia and Anthony knivet our countryman @. 2 more full relation by STADIUS LERIUS and PETER carder IOannes Stadius h h io. Stad hessi ap. t. de bry in 3 part America in the year 1554. be prisoner to the tuppin Imbas and because he serve the portugal shall have be slay and devour but by God mercy he escape he be the gunner in the fort of saint Vincent and go into the wood to provide somewhat wherewith to entertain some friend than come to he become himself a prey to those men-hunter when they have take he they contend which of they have be the first taker and that controversy end he be strip naked and lead away he be give to one of their king and this victory by they be ascribe to their tamaraka or idol which they say have by oracle prophesy thereof but their king be no other than the chief in every cottage which consist of one kindred and these tamaraka wear certain rattle as shall after appear the manner be that it get they a great name to exhibit this feast of a slay captive and therefore some that have take will credit some other friend with the gift of a captive to this solemn butchery on condition to repay he the next captive he take this be Stadius his case who be thus toss by exchange from one to another till at last he escape altogether but when he have be new take the woman come about he and one while buffet he one say this be for such a friend of i that the Peros or portugal have slay another fix on his flesh the memorial of another friend of she and then lead he with a rope about his neck almost strangle he make he also to dance in the midst of they with rattle tie to his leg but he after grow in some credit and respect among they and see diverse other eat while himself can not be free from fear of the like destiny the savage that they take put on a great show of resolution and little regard in seem that their tragedy support with this comfort that their friend will revenge it in time of sickness or sudden danger they will resort to he to pray to his god for deliverance and this conceit of his god which they observe in his devotion be the principal mean of defer his execution such as be mortal wound in their fight they will spend present or at least kill and dress they for a feast near at hand and one man that have live long among they and be desperate sick lest death shall deprive they of their cheer they slay and because of his sickness hurl away the head and inward eat up the rest they take great pride in these their cruelty and when Konyan Bebe their king have a basket full of piece of man flesh on which he be feed offer Stadius a piece who tell he that it be more than beastly he answer I be a tiger and I delight in these delicacy this Stadius after escape in a french ship Nicolas durantius i i lerius hist Navig in amer. and and. Thevet a knight of Malta surname Villagagnon in the year 1555. malcontent with his estate at home sail into Francia Antarctica or the southern part of Brasill under the tropic of Capricorn and pretend there to worship God according to the purity of the gospel and to fortify both for the habitation of his own and for a sanctuary unto such as at home be persecute for the truth he fortify and send thence to Geneva for assistance in this his holy intent whereupon Richerius and Charterius two minister with diverse other among who be John lerius be send and land there in the year 1557. lerius have write his observation of these part as Thevet also another of villagagnon company but as lerius testify in many thing false the first savage that lerius and his fellow see be the marguiate which hold friendship with the portugal and be enemy to the french and to the tovou pinambaulsij or Tuppin Imbas confederate of the french and as deadly enemy to the former in the mean way they pass by the tapemiry Paraiba Ouetacates all which howsoever they exercise hostility and mutual disagreement yet agree in like barbarous and rightless rite with the tovou pinambaulsij he converse familiar about a year they be in habit of body like the european but strong and less subject to sickness not subject to our bodily distemper by like intemperance or vexation of mind by turbulent and distract passion of covetousness envy ambition they be all naked except sometime the old man rather to hide their disease in those part than their shame cover their privity they wear in their nether lip a k k great at one end and little at the other in their infancy it be a bone and after a green stone in some as long as one finger they will thrust out their tongue at the hole when the stone be remove pyramidal stone which bravery weigh down their lip and subject the face to great deformity some also not content with this add two other in their cheek to like purpose they press down the nose of their infant to make they flat they anoint themselves with a kind of gum which they cover with the down of feather stick thereto they wear also frontlet of feather in their ear they wear bone they which will excel the rest in gallantry and will seem to have slay and eat the most enemy slash and cut their flesh and put therein a black powder which never will be do away they use rattle of the shell of a certain fruit in which they put stone or grain and call they Maraca of which they have some superstitious conceit the woman differ from the man in nourish their hair which the man shave off before and make not those hole in their lip but in their ear wear earring of the form and bigness of a mean candle they paint also their face with diverse colour and wear bracelet of little bone of which the man wear chain or collar they will not wear clothes pretend their custom of nakedness and often wash sometime ten time in a day whereto clothes will be a hindrance and our captive woman further than the whip force they will not accustom themselves to the apparel we give they the woman make two kind of meal of certain root which they use in stead of bread which they do not put but hurl into their mouth without loss their office be also to make their drink of root slice and chew in their mouth and thus prepare boil and stir in a great pot over the fire the like drink they make of chew Maiz which they call auat the man will account it a disgrace to do these thing and that they will not taste so well they call this drink Caovin it be thick and taste like milk I have see they continue say lerius drink this liquor three day and night together they hold it a disparagement not to be able to hold out at this bacchanal exercise which they celebrate with dance and sing especial at their beastly man-feast the woman dance apart from the man one of they report to our author that they have take a ship of the Peros or portugal and eat the man they find therein great vessel which they can not tell what it be but drink so much thereof that they sleep three day after it be likely that it be spanish wine they eat serpent and toad which with they be not venomous and lizard our author see one lizard as big as a man with scale on her back like oyster they have a kind of monkey call Sagovin of the bigness of a squirrel the fore-half in shape resemble a lion they have another strange beast call coaty as high as a hare with a little head sharp ear and a snout or beak above a foot long the mouth so little that one can scarce put in his little finger it feed on ant they take l l the Brasilian Petum be neither in form nor virtue the same with tobacco as lerius say the woman take it not Petum it be not tobacco not in pipe but put four or five leaf in another great and fire it suck in the smoke and therewith in time of war will sustain themselves three day together without other sustenance they wear this herb about their neck when sir Francis Drake make his famous and fortunate voyage about the world in the south-sea he b b Nunbo and their own report Peter carder lose the rest of his company the elizabeth wherein m. winter be which return into England and a pinnace wherein be seven man beside Peter carder the relater of this history this pinnace be alone return back the strait and on the north side of the river of plate six go on shore into the wood to seek food where threescore and ten tapine shoot at they and wound all whereof two die soon after four be take their pinnace also be break only Peter carder and William pitcher remain which live in a island two month on a fruit somewhat like orange and crab without any freshwater the want whereof force they to drink their own urine save in sherd for that purpose till the next morning weary of this life which begin to grow weary of they they with a plank and certain board make shift in three day to set themselves over into the main three league distant where meet with freshwater this pitcher be break and die within half a hour of over eager drink carder encounter certain savage call tappaubasse which lead he away dance rattle taber they sleep on bed of white cotton net tie two foot from the ground and a fire on each side to prevent cold and wild beast the next day they march twenty mile to their town which be foursquare with four house every house be two bow-shoot in length make with small tree like arbour thatch to the ground with palmtree leave have no window but thirty or forty door on each side the square their chief lord be name caion about forty year old he have nine wife the rest but one except the most valiant which be permit two one for the house another to go with he to the war in this town be near four thousand person he find among they good entertainment for certain month they use to go to the war three or four hundred in a company with bow and arrow and have overcome will bring home their captive tie by the arm to so many of their man arm and soon after will tie they to a post and with a club after dance and drink slit their head their drink be make of a root chew by woman and spit into a trough where it stand two or three day and have a yeast on it like ale and then be tun into earthen jar wherewith they drink themselves drink after half a year have learn the language he be request to their war against the Tapwees and much better their martial skill teach they to make a hundred target of tree-bark and two hundred club mark their own company with red balsam of this they have red white black very odoriferous and so march seven hundred together three day to another foursquare town like but less then their own they knock down two hundred take twenty they broil their carcase and after also the prisoner how many man they kill so many hole they make in their visage begin at the nether lip and so proceed to the cheek eyebrow and ear some portugal come to search for he two of which and some negro be take and eat he obtain leave to go to the coast have four to provide he victual for nine or ten week and so come to bahia de todo los santos where he yield himself to Michael jonas a Portugal and arrive in England in November 1586. nine year after his set forth @. 3 most ample relation of the Brasilian nation and custom by master ANTHONY KNIVET master Anthony Knivet have write a treatise of what he have see and suffer in brasil he be one of master candish company in his unfortunate voyage ant. Knivet kinsman to the lord Knivet 1591. who after much misery sustain in the Magellan strait in their return be set on shore at st Sebastian where many of his company die with eat a kind of black venomous pease he see there a great beast come out of the river have on the back great scale ugly claw and a long tail which thrust out a tongue c c some say the crocodile want a tongue which other deny but confess in be very short like a harp iron but return without harm he find a dead whale which with long lie be cover with moss on which he yet live a fortnight his company be knock on the head with firebrand and he like to be eat of the savage but escape this and many other misery and be save by the jesuit from be hang by the portugal where his calamity compel he with another indian in like predicament of slavery to escape by fly swim two mile over the sea and so they travel seven and thirty day through a desert meet by the way as he say lion leopard huge serpent some indian they see with feather of diverse colour fix on their body and head with oil of balsam seem as if they have be so bear not leave a spot bare but on their leg the savage sell their child to the portugal for toy some of they be so haunt with a spirit which they call Coropio like that which lerius his savage call Aignan Aignan that some of they die therewith in much amazement many complain that they be possess with spirit which they call Auasaly and command themselves to be bind hand and foot with bowstring desire their friend to beat they with cord wherewith they hang their bed but most die notwithstanding they have worm which creep into their fundament which consume their gut for remedy whereof they take slice of lemon and green pepper and put therein with salt water he in diverse expedition for war and merchandise with the portugal and escape from they travel through more of those savage nation than perhaps any other before or since out of whole observation buy at so dear a rate I have here muster these many wild people before thou with such rarity as he find among they the Petivares Petivares be not so barbarous as many other they inhabit from baya to Rio grande their body be carve with fine work in their lip be a hole make with a roe-buck horn which at man estate they cut big with a cane and wear therein a green stone otherwise they esteem a man no gallant but a peasant they have no religion use polygamy but the woman be tie to one husband except he give her public leave when they go to war the wife carry all the provision that wife who he give his hunt prey be his bedfellow that night and she go to the water and wash herself after which she lie down in the net and command all the rest to attend on she for that day when they be in travel they go to the door and be deliver the father lie down and be visit as before be say no indian will kill any female creature while his wife be with child think that will be the death of his child they travel with great store of tobacco and have continual a leaf thereof along the mouth between the lip and tooth the rheum run out at the lip-hole they war against the portugal and all other eat all and take so many new name as prisoner they think man flesh make they valiant their house be two hundred yard long without partition they hang their net on beam wash every morning both man woman and child they part their ground they have serpent among they with body like tree which strike two fin out of their forequarter * * see that kill whatsoever they call they d jaboya they have four leg and a tail like a aligator or crocodile which they hide when they lie in the wood for their prey they have monkey as big as a water-dog face like a man with long broad beard which go twenty together on a tree and one of they will always walk up and down with his hand on his beard make a great noise the rest harken still a hour space the maraquite maraquite be between Fernambuc and baya other indian call they tapoye that be wild man which name all but these and the Vaanasses which be like they account a disgrace the man be of good stature the woman very proper and fight with their bow as well as the man they have no dwell religion nor friendship with any nation yet he leave they in peace with the portugal they have hole in their lip but carve not their body use polygamy be swift never come into the field to fight but keep in the mountain they eat man flesh without ceremony the Topimambazes Topimambazes inhabit from r. de s. franc. to baya de todo sanctos they be and speak like the petowares but the woman be of better complexion the man let their beard grow long from baya to Eleoos be the waymoore waymoore man of great stature and swift as a horse five or six of they will set on a sugar-house with a hundred therein I have see one say our author take a man alive and defend himself with this his prisoner as it be with a target they have long hair be without town or house and care not where they come presume of their swiftness they be greedy man-eater and be always foul with dirt and dust by lie on the ground and ash jarric write that they be without governor every one do what seem good in his own eye only he be account most noble that have slay most enemy with who for any of they to speak be punish with death they rove up and down in uncertain dwelling and therefore can by war be conquer this wander be common to many of these Brasilian savage the Tomomymenos Tomomymenos dwell at Spirito Sancto have settle town with great stone set about like pale of a good height and within wall of clay and stone they make the side of their house with loop-holes to shoot out at they deck their body with feather and paint themselves black and red one of these take the Portugal captain Martin de sa and in spite of all his company carry he a stone cast and throw he into a river but he be rescue by Petummyen * * this name signify long tobacco as he interpret lerius otherwise another savage the portugal take sixteen thousand slay the ten parf and part the rest destroy the Country down the river Paraeyva the waytaquaze waytaquaze dwell on the north and south side of cape Frio they be of great stature than the waymoore we take thirteen of they and while we search for more they burn their cord from their hand and flee their woman war with bow and arrow they lie on the ground like hog with a fire in the midst hold no peace with any but eat all they can get here the mountain be full of which stick so fast on their skin that they be fain to take dry straw to singe themselves abausanga-retam Abausanga-retam be captain of a kind of Tamoy a hundred and twenty year old which be take run among the enemy where be shoot in one and twenty place he fall then desire baptism after which within four hour he die his haughty courage can not brook captivity the Wayanasses Wayanasses keep at ila grande they be low great belly coward not carve glory not to eat man flesh the woman ugly with big body and be well face paint red with Urucu which grow in a cod like a bean the crown of both sex be shave like friar the rest of their hair long the Topinaques Topinaques have their dwell at saint vincent be of good stature and complexion the woman paint with diverse colour eat man flesh adore nothing only when they kill a man paint themselves with a fruit call janipano and with feather on their head great stone in their lip rattle in their hand dance three day together drink a filthy liquor whereto they say tobacco make they fresh among they be great store of gold in many hill by the sea the pory pory dwell a hundred mile within land be low like the Wayanasses live on pine-nut and small as big as apple with shell like walnut but hard they call they eyrire they war with none eat not man flesh if they have other meat lie in net of bark have no house but two or three bough tie together cover with Palm-leave for a knife or comb they will give five or six gallon of Balsam-oil the Molopaques Molapaques inhabit here the river paradiva be like dutchman in bigness fair of complexion beard civil cover their privity their town circle with wall of earth and great log have a king call Morivishann which have thirteen wife they have store of gold which they esteem not nor use it but to tie on their fish line this be in the river para fourscore league beyond Paraeyva they take none but what the rain wash from the mountain which be of black earth without tree the woman be goodly and fair like english woman modest never see to laugh and of good capacity they tie their hair about their middle with bark and cover therewith their nakedness their hair also be of diverse colour and they which want long hair use a fur to cover themselves they eat man flesh observe meal at noon and night a thing rare in those part use no religion so far as our author can see in nine or ten day of his abode with they they be very clean the Motayas Motayas meet they with dance and sing the woman sit about they and weep and then set forth their victual they laugh at they for refuse man flesh they be small people and brown wear their hair in fashion as we in England frizzle it round about and in other part of the body pluck it away with a shell the Lopos Lopos or bihero as the portugal call they live in the mountain of pineapple they see no house but bough tie together with the pill of tree they will rob they of their good but not hurt their person here they find many mine of gold and many rich stone no part of America be rich but it be far within land and the country populous that neither Spaniard nor Portugal can inhabit there they be brown and small the woman as shameless as beast the wayanawason wayanawason dwell in small town by the side of a river be the simple of all other will stand and gaze on we like herd of deer without speak word they be big tall clean make lazy here sixteen of their company die with eat a certain yellow plum as big as a horse-plum the root of Mandioca have almost kill they all but by a piece of unicorn horn they be preserve from hence he with twelve portugal determine to travel to the south-sea by land they come to many mountain where they find store of gold and many precious stone and have think themselves in Peru those stone they take up one day they cast away the next to take up better in this country they travel two month till they come to the great mountain of crystal for height seem to tower up itself in the cloud and be impassable for steepness they see it ten day before they come at it and be not able when the sun be aloft to travel against it for the glister reflection they pass alongst it twenty day before they can find passage and at last come to a river which run under it then do they make they provision of great cane three yard and a half broad and six long and kill good store of tamandro roast they and thus provide go into the vault which make such a noise with the water that it seem to they a enchantment they go in on a Monday morning and come out again on a morning they know not whether one for two day after the next savage they encounter be a kind of Tamoy tamoyes which be as proper man as any in Europe most of they fair their head set with feather the woman tall proper slender in the waste fair fine-handed comely face and breast carve they esteem of gold and gem as we of stone in the street here he live eighteen month but his twelve companion they slay and devour he they spare because he profess himself a Frenchman with who they sometime have commerce the tocomans tocomans dwell between the river of plate and saint Vincent they be sandy small but not so little as they say of the pigmee and dwell in cave the Cariyoghs Cariyoghs for two or three glass and a comb with some knife will give the worth of four or five thousand crown in gold or stone their woman be comely and fair the man die their body black these carigij d d Hieron rodericus so rodericus call they dwell in handsome thatch house sixty foot long every house they call a village they have no superior dwell in a barren soil be very fond of every trifle and toy and will travel lade with their ware for such trade thirty league to the portugal and sometime sell themselves slave if they take a enemy alive they commit he to the boy of ten year old to be slay five or six of which smite out his brain with club and this be a kind of knighthood or gentility unto they in sign whereof they cut the skin from the ankle to the neck and fast many day and observe a set Diet. they observe charm and sooth-saying if any die without child all his substance be bury with he the Tamoy his last host by his instruction who be desirous to try if the sea may yield he any succour leave their e e they have so do before or else can not have know the French habitation and 30000. of they adventure themselves to seek new they come into the country of the amazon which the indian call Mandiocusyam but dare not war against they they take a town of the Carijos and eat three hundred of they the rest flee to the river of plate and obtain Portugal succour who take these Tamoy captive slay ten thousand and share 20000. among they for slave and thus come he again into his Portugal slavery from which he have make a escape once before and travel nine month in the wilderness five or six year he serve the portugal and live a year and eleven month with the cannibal he make another escape into angola and serve as a drudge in Mafangana the sickly country under the sun where the portugal die like chicken gape for air like the chameleon live close take physic every week let blood observe certain diet and hour when to go abroad but his hour to go abroad at liberty be not yet come back he be send to Brasile and long it be before his long can be satisfy to review his country and friend some compassion of his passion I think this tedious follow he in this epitomise discourse of his disaster have breed in you wherein as in the follow also be many thing strange some seem doubtful which if any reject let they not blame i who have rather believe more than this then to adventure the search among those cruel barbarian @. 4 of the strange creature in Brasile friar treatise of brasil no man have write so absolute a discourse of Brasile as be that take from a Portugal friar and by Francis Cook sell to master hakluyt out of he I can recite the name of other Brasilian nation ararape Apigapigtanga Vintan which he say be by a magician priest of Portugal convey to Fernambuc Tapuya be a general name of which he reckon threescore and sixteen several nation most of they of sundry language guaymare or waymore as k. and as Stad wayganna the guaymare have hard skin and beat their child with thistle to harden they they be swift and cruel cut off the captive flesh with reed leave nothing but the bone and gut and disbowel woman with child to eat the child roast the Camucuira have pap reach almost to the knee which when they run they bind to their waste the curupetie eat not man but carry the head for show the winter begin in Brasile in March and end in August the beast of brasil beast of brasil he reckon dear elke like unto kine or mule which dive and go but swim not under the water boar of two sort coney pig ounce fox with bag to carry their young under the belly the Tatu or Armadilla which dig as much as many man with mattock the or porcupine of three sort the hirara like Civet cat which eat honey the beard ape black and sometime one yellow which they say be their king have a instrument from his gullet as big as a Duck-egg wherewith he make a loud sound so active that they sometime be say to catch a arrow with the hand and redart it at the shooter and so cunning that they seek a leaf chew it and put the same into their wound there be of they many kind the Cuati be like badger they climb tree no snake egg or bird escape he there be other great as great dog with tusk which devour man and beast there be wild cat which yield good fur and be very fierce the lagoarucu be dog of Brasile the also bark like dog the jaguacinia be a kind of fox which feed on sea-crab and sugarcane the Birataca a kind of ferret of such stink savour that some indian have die thereof yea dog which come near escape not the scent endure fifteen or twenty day in those thing which he have come near to and cause some town sometime to be disinhabit this come of a ventosity which it void and cover in the earth or cast it out be in danger to be take it feed on bird egg and amber ten or twelve kind of rat all good meat other beast be before mention of snake snake without venom he number the Giboya some of which be twenty foot long and will swallow a dear whole crush it with the wind of his tail and bruise it with lick to that purpose the Guiaranpiaquana eat egg go fast on the tree than any man can run on the ground with a motion like swim the Camoiama be all green and live on like food the Boytiapua eat frog the indian strike this serpent on woman hip as remedy to barrenness the Gaitiaepia smell so that none can abide it such be also the boyuma the Bam so term of his cry be great and harmless the Baicupeganga have venomous prickle on his back there be other venomous snake as the jararaca of which be four kind of musky send master Knivet one ten span long with great tusk which they hide and stretch out at pleasure the curucucu fifteen span long which lie on a tree to hunt his prey the Boycimiaga which have a bell in his tail so swift that they call it the fly snake there be two kind thereof the Ibiracua cause by his bite the blood to issue through all part of the body eye mouth nose ear etc. the Ibiboca be the fair but of foul venom among they all the field wood house bed boot be subject to the plenty of snake which without help kill in four and twenty hour there be also many scorpion which ordinary kill not but cause extreme pain for four and twenty hour space lizard cover the wall of house and hole be full of they their fundament-worm be very dangerous which sir Richard Hawkins say he see like a long maggot green with a red head creep in and glue himself to the gut where it grow so great that it stop the passage and kill with cruel colic torment master Knivet speak of one serpent which he kill thirteen span long friar treatise of bird with four and twenty tooth great shell about the neck black and russet like a collar less on her body and dark green under her belly all speckle with black and white with four sharp foot no long than a man finger and a tongue like a harp iron her tail like a strait bull-horn black and white list if they find fire they beat themselves in it till either the fire or themselves be extinguish they use from a tree to fall on their prey pass by thrust their tail into the fundament the indian will not go under five or six to set upon one of they this yet he kill with the helve of a axe of bird there be parrot innumerable more than starling or sparrow in Spain fruit tree and herb the like bee which sleep six month the Tangara which have the falling-sickness the rest dance about that which be fall with a noise from which they will not be skar till they have do etc. of fruit he reckon the jacapucaya like a pot as big as a great bowl two finger thick with a cover in it within full of chestnut be much eat green it cause all hair to fall off balsam tree prick excellent for cure and send oil-tree many one as a well or river grow in dry place where no water be it have hole in the branch as long as one arm full of water winter and summer never run over but always at like stay five hundred person may come to the foot of it and drink and wash their fill without want the water be savoury and clear there be herb which seem to sleep all night and other which make show of sense as we have before observe from master harcourt in Guiana of strange fish in brasil he name the Ox-fish Ox-fish with eye and eyelid two arm a cubit long with two hand five finger and nail as in a man and under the arm the female have two pap inward like a ox it can be long under water it have no fin but the tail which be round and close two stone near the brain of great esteem the innards of a ox and taste like pork master t. Turner who live in brasil and be acquaint with Mr Knivet say the Jesuit tell he the like the Cucurijuba be a freshwater snake five and twenty or thirty foot long the mamma be a great kind tooth like a dog with a chain stripe along the back very fair it catch a man cow stag or any other prey wind it with the tail and so swallow it whole after which she lie and rot the raven and crow eat she all but the bone to which after grow new-flesh by life derive from the head which be hide all this while in the mire which therefore they that find seek and kill they will sleep so be full that they may cut off piece he tell a instance from the tail and they not awaken they find one which be fifty span or twelve yard and a half long have two wild boar in the belly thus much of the creature in Brasile let we now take better view of their war religion and other their rite chap. v. of the custom and rite of the brasilian @. i. of their war and man-eating and of the devil torture they lerius Navig the brasilian for the most part as you have see exercise irreconciliable hostility not to enlarge their dominion but only to be revenge for the death of their friend and ancestor slay by their enemy the elder man as they sit or lie in their hang bed will make a oration of the virtue of their predecessor and of their sustain wrong and so excite the young to take arm these oration last sometime six hour their arm be club or wooden sword five or six foot long and a foot broad a finger thick and very sharp one of these man be thorough move will trouble two of our fencer their bow be as long as we the string make of the herb tocon little yet able to endure the strength of a horse their arrow a ell long which they will shoot twice as fast as our man they have leather shield their elder man lead the rank if they may be so call which have none to marshal or order they and with great shout and show the enemy the bone of their slay friend they enter into a fierce battle their captive they convey in the midst of their army home to their territory unto who the man will not stick to give their sister or daughter to perform all the duty of a wife and feed they with the best till they redemand the same out of their flesh the man be employ if it be long before the slaughter in hunt fowl fish the woman in garden or gather oyster when that dismal day approach knowledge be give and the man woman and child assemble to the place appoint and there pass the morning in drink and the captive although he know the dreadful issue dance drink and frolic it with the best after six or seven hour thus spend two or three of the strong fasten a rope about his middle leave his arm at liberty and so lead he up and down the village in triumph neither do he for all this hang down his head as man here go to be hang but with incredible courage emblazon his own worthiness thus thus say he have I sometime bind your kindred and thy father say he to one have I devour and thy brethren to another have I boucane and eat and what innumerable number of you Tovau pinambausij have these hand take this throat swallow neither will the margaiate suffer this my death unrevenged then they bring he stone and bid he revenge his death he hurl they at those which stand about he whereof there be some four thousand and hurt diverse I see one say our author who leg I have think have be break by the violence of one of those blow after this come one which all this while have be hide with the a a this club they call Iwara pernem which be consecrate to this mischief by certain ceremony of sing and paint fatal club and be thou not one of the margaiate say he and have thou not devour our kindred the other answer o how lusty I have do it how prompt have I be in take they how greedy in eat and therefore reply the other shall thou be kill and roast on the Boucan what then say he my death shall not be b b this confidence be as well in the woman as in the man unrevenged the club end their dialogue with one blow strike he dead his wife if he have any as they sometime use to bestow on their captive come to the carcase and spend a little time and passion in mourn but her crocodile tear be soon dry and the humour fall into her tooth which water for the first morsel the other woman especial the elder which be most cruel and greedy bring hot water and wash the body and rub it till it look like the skin of a pig then come the master of the feast which owe the captive and cut it out as ready as any butcher with we can do a weather they daub the child p p io. Stad lib. 2. cap. 29. with the blood four woman carry about the arm and leg for a show with shout and cry the trunk be divide into two part the upper part be cut and separate from the low the innards be leave to the woman which seethe and make the broth of they call Mingau which they sup up with their child they eat also the flesh about the head the brain tongue and that which within the head may serve for meat be the child share the author of the feast have a new name add to the former for they have so many name as they have slay captive the chief of the cottage brand he on the arm with a honourable marke for the memory thereof and all that day he must spend in quiet the wayganna q q Stad l. 2. c. 3. be a kind of brasilian which hold confederacy with no other nation but kill all which come to their hand and that so cruel that they will cut off their arm and leg while they be alive these live in the mountain they cut they with stone and those which have trade with the christian use knife their Boucan be a grediron of four cratche set in the ground a yard high and as much asunder with billet lay thereon and other stick on they grate-wise on this they roast the flesh put fire under all the people stand about the same and every one get a little piece of he but i think I see horror express in the countenance of he that read this and every one weary of view this tragedy loathe this inhuman feast with human flesh I will therefore leave their shambles and which better beseem a pilgrim will visit their holy and holy place but alas where or what be they Maffaeus have already tell we that they observe no god and lerius confirm the same yet show that they acknowledge a devil who they call Aygnan not that they worship he but be torment by he even in speak of he r r ler. c. 16. they tremble and the remembrance breed a compassionate amazement in the hearer a amaze passion in the speaker while he applaud our happiness free from such tyranny and deplore his own misery he sometime in the form of a beast sometime in form of a bird and otherwhiles deform in some monstrous shape do grievous torment they even while the christian be in conference with they they will piteous cry out hei help Aygnan vex i nor can this be counterfeit in the judgement of any that converse with they they believe the immortality of the soul and that the soul of the virtuous that be in their sense of such as have kill and eat many enemy shall fly beyond the high mountain and be gather to the soul of their progenitor and there live in pleasant garden and perpetual dance and delicacy the cowardly ghost shall be carry unto torment by Aygnan without end they have no name whereby to signify God unto they but wonder to hear what the frenchman tell of the creator of heaven and earth and because they be afraid of thunder which they call Toupan they tell they that God be author thereof Thevet tell otherwise of Toupan as after follow the foolish indian reply that he be then naught which will make they afraid but the fear of Aygnan make they sometime flexible to embrace the christian religion hear that this devil be inferior to the christian God so that even in these the most degenerate of all which I have observe in this long and tedious pilgrimage there be some spark leave of religion even in the acknowledgement of a devil and of eternal reward and punishment @. 2 of their priest or magician this be further confirm by that which be write of certain magician or priest among they which persuade the people that they have deal with spirit that by their mean they have their root and sustenance and may by they have fortitude I say lerius be present at one of their assembly where six hundred be gather together which divide themselves into three part the man go into one house the woman into a second the child into a three the cariabe forbid the woman and child to depart their house but to attend diligent to sing and we say he be command to abide with the woman anon the man in one house fall to sing he he he answer by the woman in the other with the same they howl it out for a quarter of a hour shake their breast and foam at the mouth and as if they have have the fall sickness some fall down in a swoon the devil in seem enter into they the child also follow in the same harsh devotion after this the man sing pleasant which cause i to go thither where I find they sing and dance in three several ring in the midst of each three or four caraibe adorn with hat and garment of feather every one have a Maraca or rattle in both his hand these rattle be make of a fruit big than a ostrich egg out of which they say that the spirit will speak and they continual shake they for the due consecration these caraibe dance to and fro and blow the smoke of Petum on the stander by say receive you all the spirit of fortitude whereby you may overcome your enemy this they do often the solemnity continue two hour the man ignorant of music and yet ravish my spirit with the delight I conceive in their song their word sound this that they be grieve for the loss of their progenitor but be comfort in the hope that they shall one day visit they beyond the hill and then threaten the Ouetacates s s ler. c. 5. which dwell not far from they and be at enmity with all their neighbour as swift as heart wear their hair to the buttock eat raw flesh and differ from all other in rite and language and now prophesy their destruction at hand somewhat also they add in their song of the flood that once have drown all the world but their ancestor which escape by climb high tree that day they feast with great cheer this solemnity be celebrate every three year and then the caraibe appoint in every family three or four Maraca to be adorn with the best feather and stick in the ground with meat and drink set before they and the people believe they eat it they minister unto their Maraca fifteen day after which in a superstitious conceit they think that a spirit speak to they while they rattle their Maraca they be exceed offend if any take away any of this provision as the french sometime do for which and deny other the caraibe lie those priest hate they exceed yet do they not adore their Maraca or any thing else Peter carder t t pet. carder say he can observe no religion among they but the worship of the moon special the new moon whereat they rejoice leap sing and clap of hand Stadius u u Stad l. 2. c. 23. tell as you hear that they ascribe his take to the prediction of Maraca he tell of their consecration that the 10 10 lerius say that the caraibe and the Paygi be two kind Thevet but one and Stadius mention no more but the Paygi Paygi so he call they enjoin that every one shall carry their Tamaraka to the house where they shall receive the faculty of speech every one rattle be pitch in the ground by the steel or stalk and all of they offer to the wizard which have the chief place arrow feather and earring he that breathe Petum on every rattle put it to his mouth shake it and say that be speak if thou be within anon follow a squeak voice which I say Stadius think the wizard do but the people ascribe it to the tamaraka then those wizard persuade they to make war say that those spirit long to feed on the flesh of captive this do every one take his rattle and build up a room for it to keep it in where he set victual require and ask all necessary thereof as we do of God and these as Stadius affirm be their god these Paygi do initiate woman unto witchcraft by such ceremony of smoke dance etc. till she fall as in the fall sickness and then he say he will revive she and make her able to foretell thing to come and therefore when they go to the war they will consult with these woman which pretend conference with spirit Andrew Thevet y y a. Thevet Antarct which be in this Antarctic France with Villagagnon agree in many of the former report he add that for fear of Aignan they will not go out but they will carry fire with they which they think forcible against he he write that they acknowledge a prophet call Toupan which they say make it thunder and rain but they assign no time nor place to his worship they tell of a prophet which teach they to plant their hetich or root which they cut in piece and plant in the earth and be their chief food of which they have two kind the first discoverer they much honour as caraibe or prophet and as much have distaste the christian since call they Mahira the name of a ancient prophet detest by they but Toupan they say go about and reveal secret to their caraibe Thevet add that they observe dream and their Payges or caraibe profess the interpretation of they which be also esteem as witch which confer with spirit and use to hurt other with the poison call Ahovay a kind of nut. they do a kind of worship to these payage and will pray they that they may not be sick and will kill they if they promise false in their consultation they will provide a new lodging for the wizard with a clean white bed and store of Cahovin which be their ordinary drink make by a virgin of ten or twelve year old and of their root-food into the which they convey he be before wash and have abstain nine day from his wife then do he lie on that bed and invocate m. Knivet tell i that one of they be torment by the spirit he hear one of these payge which speak to he and tell he this be contrary to his covenant thus to torment they which death usual follow and if he so continue they will all go the white man and become christian whereupon the devil leave that body present and he recover none be with he in the house and raise his spirit call Havioulsira which sometime as some christian affirm to our author appear so as all the people may hear though they see he not and then they question he of their success in their enterprise they believe the soul immortality which they call cherepiconare with reward to the valiant man-eater in goodly paradise and agnan punishment to other but his boldness make i the less bold in follow he in these and other thing which I know not with what authority he aver against the former witness whereas Thevet sometime take in lie deserve less credit in the rest when there be any tempest in the water he say hay attribute it to the soul of their progenitor and cast something into the water to appease it they have a tradition that one in habit like to the christian have long since tell their progenitor of divine matter but with so little effect as he forsake they and ever since have those bloody war continue among they how little the jesuit can prevail in bring the brasilian to Christianity Maffaeus z z maff. l. 15. pierre du jarric l. 3. 22. have write somewhat and pierre du jarric a jesuite very large which be not so pertinent to our present purpose master Knivet to who relation our former chapter be so much indebt tell of a rock in Brasill call Etooca with a entrance like a door where the indian say it be like they borrow it of some fabulous friar that saint Thomas preach it be within like a great hall hard by it be a stone as big as four canoe support by four stone like stick little big than a man finger the indian say it have be wood and by miracle be thus alter they show upon great rock many foot-print of one bigness and tell that the saint call the fish of the sea and they hear he preach this smell of a franciscan cowl the Portugal friar treatise friar treatise mention in the former chapter deliver many thing worthy our observation they have some tradition of the flood in which they say all be drown one only escape on a with a sister of he which be with child from who they have their beginning they have no knowledge of the creator nor of pain and glory after this life and therefore use no ceremony of worship yet do they acknowledge that they have soul which die not but be convert into devil and go into certain field where grow many fig-tree alongst the bank of a goodly river and there dance they be great afraid of the devil who they call Curupira * * sup. c. 4. Taguain Pigtanga Matichera Auchanga insomuch that often they have die with the imagination of he yet do not they worship it nor any other creature or idol only some old man say that in some way they have certain post where they offer he some thing for fear and because they will not die sometime but seldom the devil appear to they and some few among they be possess there be witch which use witchcraft rather for health then devotion some witch be call Carayba or holiness but like his holiness of Rome be of bad life these will seem to do strange thing raise some to life which have feign themselves dead they be their oracle for their husbandry and other affair sometime cause they to die for hunger while they promise to make the mattock work alone @. 3 of other their rite and a new mongrel sect among they they have no proper name for God but say Tupan be the thunder and lightning which give they mattock and food their marriage be divorce upon any quarrel in time past they tell no young man marry before he slay a enemy nor the woman before she have her term which time be therefore festival at marriage also they use great drink and the feast end they be lay in a clean net after which the father take a wedge of stone and do cut upon a stake or post which they say be to cut the tail from the grand child who be for this cause bear without they after they be marry they begin to drink for till then their father bring they up in sobriety of diet and modesty of speech and then with a vessel the old man give he the first a a their strong drink wine hold his head with their hand for fear of vomit which if it happen be a sign he will not be valiant they eat at all time in the night and day and keep no meat long be no niggard of their store this name be the great disgrace you can offer they and count it a honour to be liberal they be patient of hunger and thirst will eat snake feast toad rat and all fruit which be not poison drink not ordinary while they eat but after meat will drink drink they have some particular festival in which two or three day together they eat not but drink and go about sing call all to the like fellowship sleep not have their music and sometime fall to quarrel they wash not before meat they eat sit or lie in their bed or on the ground they go to bed betimes and rise not early in the morning one chief man make a oration oration to they lie in his net which continue the space of a hour about labour as their forefather do with the substance and circumstance thereof when he be up he continue his preach run through the town this custom they borrow of a bird which sing every morning by they call the king and lord of bird when a man speak with a woman he turn his back to she they shave their hair with a half moon before which they say they learn of saint Thomas be angry they let their hair grow woman when they mourn or when their husband go a far journey cut their hair they go naked and when any wear apparel it be for fashion rather than honesty as on the head or no further than the navel some house have fifty threescore or threescore and ten room and some be without partition ordinary in one house they be of a kindred and one be principal in childbirth childbirth the father or some other who they take for their gossip take it up and cut the Navel-string with tooth or two stone and fast till it fall off and then make drink the woman present after travel wash themselves in their river give suck a year and half without any other thing to eat carry the child on her back in a net to the place of her labour they rock they on the palm of their hand they never strike their wine except in time of drink and sometime will be willing to take this opportunity their child play without scurrility or quarrel imitate the voice of bird and the like they will spare a captive that be a good singer funeral when one die they of that kindred cast themselves upon he in the net sometime choke he before he be dead and those which can cast themselves on the bed fall on the ground with such knock that it seem strange they die not also for company and sometime they prove so feeble that they die likewise if the party die in the evening they weep all night with a high voice call their neighbour and kindred to society of their grief if it be one of the principal all the town meet to mourn together and they curse with plague those which lament not prophesy that they shall not be mourn for they wash and paint the dead curious and then cover he over with Cotton yarn and put he in a great vessel under the earth that no earth may come to he and cover this vessel with the earth make he a house where every day they carry he meat for when he be weary with dance say they he come thither to eat thus for a certain time they go to bewail he every day with he they bury all his jewel if any have give he a sword or other thing now he challenge his gift again the mourner eat not but by night this mourn last a moon after which they make drink but many after this will forbear they they rule themselves by the sun and go two or three hundred league through the wood no horse will hold out with they they fear no sea be able to continue a night and a day swim when they return from victory their woman receive they with shout and buffet themselves on the mouth the keeper appoint to the captive be one give he to be as his wife for bed and board some of these be so resolute that they will not be ransom say it be a wretched thing to die and to stink and be eat of worm sometime their keeper will run away with they when they kill a captive at their feast if he fall on his back it be a ominous sign that the killer shall die which presage they observe in other circumstance the taker have a new name as a title of dignity add to he and must be content to fill his fancy with this new gentility gentility for nothing be leave he to fill his belly every one take from he that which he have he stand all that day on certain log of the tree Pilan with strange silence he be present with the head of the dead the eye pull out his pulse anoint with the string and sinew and cut off the mouth whole they put it in manner of a bracelet about his arm thus lie he down in his net fear if all rite be not accomplish that the soul of the dead will kill he within few day after they give he the habit raze his skin with the tooth of a Cutia in form of some work put thereon Cole and juice of Broom-rape he lie still certain day in silence have water meal and fruit set near he after this they make a great feast and then may he lay aside his mourn and cut his hair and thence forward may kill any without any painful ceremony Abaetes Marnbixaba Moczacara be name of gentility among they the friar have obtain some good like with the brasilian for teach their child to write read and cipher the jesuit will be of esteem every everywhere yet two and fifty of they sail from Lisbon to brasil 1570. by frenchman at b b vid. Epist. 2. diazij henrici sea be take and slay in c c ler c. 17. marriage they abstain say lerius only from mother sister and daughter they observe no Marriage-ceremony but upon consent of her friend and her own take she home it be a credit to have many wife among who be no Leah to envy Rachel great portion of love the husband may kill the adulteress but for their unmarried maiden they be not scrupulous our author hear a woman cry in the night think she have be in some danger of devour by a wild beast but find her husband play the homely midwife to she in her travel bite the navel-string and press down the nose the father wash and paint he they use to put to their male-infant little bow and arrow into one end of the bed and herb at the other which be the enemy his son must be suppose to kill and eat chat out their hope of the child valour in be avenge when he shall be a man upon his enemy they name their child at adventure by the name of a beast bird or otherwise as this child be call Orapacon that be bow and arrow the man be modest in accompany with their wife secret the woman have not the ordinary feminine sickness lerius think that humour be divert in their youth see the mother cut their daughter side down to the thigh at twelve year of age but twice while he be there do he see any in private brawl or contention if such happen as they begin so they be suffer to end it if any hurt or kill other he sustain the like in his own person inflict by the kindred of the party wrong they have their proper piece of ground which they husband with their root and maize when they entertain a stranger the or goodman seem to neglect he a while and the guest sit he down silent on the bed the woman sit by on the ground and hold their hand before their eye weep with many praise that he be a good man a valiant man that if he be a christian he have bring they fine ware the stranger must endeavour in some measure to imitate the like weep gesture the be all this while whitle his arrow not seem to see his new guest till anon he come and be you come say he how do you with many term of his best rhetoric and then ask if he be hungry and if he be set his cheer before he on the ground which kindness be repay with glass comb or the like they be very kind both to their own and to such stranger as they be enleague with they will carry burden or man for the space of some mile when they need their love and hatred be in like extreme the one to their own the other to their enemy they have physician call page they use much mourn at the death of any and make a round pit bury he upright therein six hour after his death with that wealth they have in their village live some six hundred person they remove their village often which yet carry the same name Stadius d d Stad l. 2. c. 5. carder speak of more which as in we may well happen some town great some lesser say there be few village of above seven house but those house be a hundred and fifty foot long and two fathom high without division into plurality of room and therein live many family all of one kindred what our countryman have do on this coast I refer the reader to master hakluyt discovery the jesuit e e p. jarric l. 3. and 5. first come into these part 1549. which while they seek to reduce the brasilian from their man-eating feast have like to have kindle a dangerous contention betwixt they and the portugal whereupon the jesuit seek to be permit to speak with they who they keep for the Boucan instruct and baptise they but then also they complain the flesh be distasteful they say unto they so that the jesuit be forbid that by stealth with a wet cloth follow they to execution will perform a kind of baptism and that also be espy be prohibit since which by school their child teach they to read and write they have most though not much prevail with these barbarian somewhat as themselves write they have be hinder in their Brasilian conversion by the perverseness of some covetous portugal who sometime under colour of peace will betray these silly soul and seize on they to cruel slavery sometime will counterfeit Jesuitical habit and under pretence of religion persuade they to go with they have betray religion and they together sometime will underhand and close threaten servitude to all such as believe the jesuit with all promise of kindness to such as will follow they which in effect prove to the mine or other office of slavish drudgery and sometime by hostile violence have seize on such as the jesuit have convert hieronimus rodericus and make slave of they most strange be that which they write of certain brasilian within the land which either have see the religious rite of the portugal or instruct therein by some fugitive or apostata have set up a new sect of christian Ethnicisme or mongrel-christianity this be about 1583. they choose one supreme in their unholy holy who also they call pope other inferior prelate they call bishop these ordain their priest which observe in a apish imitation their confession absolution bead to number their prayer great gourd or rattle in stead of bell to assemble they together free-schoole for instruction of youth book of bark bind in wood and strange character therein write a kind of baptism also but want the essential word and form all the man they name jesus the woman marry the cross they have but without veneration their priest vow continence they conceive a state of perfection in drink the juice of the herb Petine till they fall down distract as in the falling-sickness quake and stretch out their limb with terrible gesture the devil speak from within they their mouth not open nor their lip move after they have thus continue a while they return to themselves and be wash all over their body he be judge the most sanctify wight that have express most ecstatical gesture the most transcendent degree of perfection they ascribe to the mutter of certain word over they by a enchanter they say that their ancestor long since dead will return by ship and deliver they from the portugal which all shall be slay by they and if any shall escape they shall be turn into fish or beast those of this faith shall inherit heaven and all the unbeliever shall be devour of bird or beast in the year 1602. a jesuite be send among these sectary where their great father or pope come to meet he attend with many weapon man and archer he begin a song which the other brasilian understand not and when he have sing one verse the rest as with we in the choir answer then do this holy father catechise or instruct they with many idle word often mix and repeat Maria Tupama that be saint marry the wife of God etc. kneel he lift up his eye and hand to heaven after the fashion of the priest at mass he and the jesuite embrace each other and then he tell the jesuite that he live in the wood as one that will not be see of men. the next night he cause a youth to be hang that have be familiar with the jesuite a conference be appoint betwixt he and the jesuite where after much boast of his sanctity the jesuite interrupt he and tell he he come to teach he the way to heaven but the other soon after convey himself away and come no more chap 5 of the country from the river of plate to the Magellane strait @. i. the nation inhabit near the river this river we have already mention the indian a a Botero call it Parana and John Dias de solis discover the same in the year 1512. for some show it seem to have of that metal call it the river of plata or silver it be forty league wide in the entrance and prevail so far against the ocean saltness that the taste of the fresh water soon discern his water than the eye can see his bank it overflow the country as Nilus in Egypt and Orenoque Marannon with the other great river in America it ebb and flow a hundred mile up the stream b b sebastian cabot may rather be call the first discoverer Dias who some call the first discoverer be with fifty of his companion there slay and eat but he which have most full discover the nation that dwell near this river be Huldericus c c Navig h. s. schmidel who sail thither in the year 1534. and continue in those part almost twenty year he sail thither with Peter d d Herera tell of one of that name take out of his bed by a tiger and devour in a cave Mendoza who carry with he five and twenty hundred man to discover conquer and inhabit those region they build the city so call of the wholesome air near to a indian town name carendy of three thousand inhabitant if that may be call a town who inhabitant stay not long in one place they will drink the blood of the beast they kill for thirst the spaniard destroy they who part famine seem to take against that cruel people which with invisible dart so pierce their entrails that vile and venomous creature be apply to the cure of their wound stomach and when such medicine fail three of they steal a horse f f these horse so multiply in these part that now they be disperse in wild troop and they will hunt and kill they for the hide and which be a great commodity in angola for the tail mind to flee from famine on that dead beast but be therefore horse on a gibbet where three other that by this example be terrify from horseflesh adventure upon these carcase cut thence large gobbet to pay that cruel tyrant and greedy exactor hunger his tribute another who brother die bury he in his own body half their company be consume with this plague the indian of carendy Bartennis zeechuruas and Tiembus take this advantage assail their town of good air turn it into good fire by shoot arrow fire at the end thereinto they after pass up the river and come to Tiembus where the man be tall and great their woman always deform with scratch and bloody face the Tiembus can make five thousand man of the spaniard be not leave five hundred in a small time and Mendoza die return homeward the Curenda the next people be like the Tiembus the macuerendas live only on fish and a little flesh there they kill a serpent five and twenty foot long and as big as a man the Saluaisco go stark naked and live only on fish flesh and honey the Curemagbas be of huge stature the man bear a hole in their nose in which they wear a parrot feather the woman paint their face with indelible line the cario country be large near to the brasilian in rite and site they go naked they will sell the father his daughter the husband his wife the brother his sister the price of a woman be a hatchet knife or such like they fat such as they take in their war and then devour they with great solemnity the lampere make near unto their town pit with sharp stake set up in they cover with stick and earth these they make for the spaniard but in a confuse flight fall therein themselves here the spaniard build the town of assumption which Herera say have four hundred spanish household and three thousand mestizo the king of the scherue attend with twelve thousand man meet the spaniard and give they friendly entertainment with dance music and feast the woman go naked and paint themselves as artificial as any of our painter can do they wear carpet of Cotton with the figure of indian beast the king ask the spaniard what they seek who answer silver and Gold he then give they a silver crown which he say he have take in the war which he have wage with the amazon that dwell two month journey thence of these amazon the indian tell the same thing that Orellana tell of near that river which have receive name of this supposition the spaniard with some of the scherue for their guide set forth for this amazonian discovery but be encounter by the way with hot water in which they wade up to the waste and so continue diverse day till they come to a nation call Orthuesen who be then infect with a pestilence cause by famine which famine the grasshopper have effect two year together eat up all the fruit which nature or husbandry have provide for their sustenance thus these marshal and venerean war of the spaniard want food to hold out further towards the amazon if there be any such people and that they be not as before I say the warlike wife or haply some gallant virago that by themselves will let the world see what woman can do but yet I can subscribe to the rest of their story but I be weary of lead you any further in this discovery of this great river and the near inhabitant see little be observe in our author of their religion some of these barbarous nation he say hang up the hairy skin of their slay enemy in their temple or house of devotion this people be call jepori to give you a catalogue of the name of the indian nation that inhabit these part will be but tedious these journey of the spaniard be to see what gold and not what god the indian have they pass up through the land into Peru between Peru g g Botero and these more easterly part be the hill andi or andes which lift up their snowy top unto the cloud and reach unto the Magellane strait in they inhabit many fierce nation border upon the nation of Brasill and plata the Ciraguan the viracans the the Varai these last exercise their child unto arm betimes unto they they commit their captive for trial of their bloody forwardness and he which at one blow can kill a captive be of the great hope and reward for his encouragement to this end they name their child tiger lion that their name may teach they the like beastly fury at the new and full moon they wound themselves with sharp bone to enure themselves to thing of war they weep in the entertainment of a friend as the brasilian do in seventeen degree stand the spanish city of holy cross of the mountain the river Vapai in those Valley rise and fall as Nilus do there be a brook at holy cross of a wonderful nature it be but little above two yard broad and shallow withal not run above a league but be drink up of the thirsty sand yet do this brook provide the city water and three sort of good fish and that in great plenty from the end of February to the end of may. at other time there be few they use diverse mean of shave their head which they say they learn of one paicume in the woman lie in the man keep his bed as be say of the brasilian General language more towards the east dwell the Itatini people which call themselves garay that be warrior and other Tapuis or slave the language of the Varrai be common to all these nation with the brasilian that as in the other world latin sclavon and Arabic so in that new world the Varay Cuscan and mexican language will general serve a man turn the kingdom of Tucuma stretch two hundred league between chili Brasill holy cross and paraguay the spaniard have therein five colony it be a plain country the paraguay inhabit along the river so call whereof they take name from plata southwards be the great region of Chica wash on the south east and west by the sea the inhabitant be call patagone @. 2 of giant and other nation near the strait the spaniard h h Pigafetta ap. ram. of mag. see Mariana l. 26. Osor etc. which with Magellane first discover the strait see giant on this coast of which he carry away one with he to sea where after for want of sufficient food he die Edward i i ed cliff ap. hakluyt cliff that write master winter voyage who first of all other return out of the strait by the same way homeward because he see on this coast man of common stature except against that report of giant as a giantlike report exceed the stature and measure of truth but beside that some of our own k k m. t. candish Voyage ap. Hak. Tom 3. write by fr. pretty at another time measure the print of man foot eighteen inch in the sand Oliver l l Navig ol. n. and seb. w. in additan 9 par. America Noort in his world compass voyage have three of his man slay by man of admirable stature with long hair not far from port desire about seven and forty degree of southerly latitude and after in the Magellane strait discomfit a band of savage which neither will yield nor flee from their wife and child which be in a cave just by till every man be slay four boy the hollander carry away one of which learn their language tell they of three family or tribe in those part of ordinary stature and of a four which be giant ten or eleven foot high which war upon the former Sebalt de Weert be detain five month in the strait by foul weather send his man to fish for their provision which exceed fail they who there be sudden assail by seven canoas of giant which they guess to be so high as be mention who be put to flight by their piece flee to land and pluck up tree in their rude manner barricado and fortify themselves against the further pursuit of the hollander who be no less glad that they be rid of such company these man both giant and other go either whole naked or so clothe as they seem not to dread the cold which be yet there so violent that beside the top always cover with snow their very summer in the midst thereof free they not from ice yea at that time of the year those hollander encounter a island of ice in the sea which the cold air have there mount and maintain in despite of Neptune rage or the sun volley of shot in his near approach the tree in these part and the man it seem be natural fortify against those cold the one as be say always in manner naked the other always clothe outbraving the winter violence in their summer-like green livery seem to stoop under the burden of continual frost and snow and in a natural wisdom clothe themselves and hold their leaf the sure those giantly man m m th. Candish m. a. Knivet about port desire when they die be bring to the cliff and there bury with their bow arrow dart and all their almost no substance master Knivet write that he see footing at port desire as big as four of we and two man new bury one of which be fourteen span long he also see one in brasil take by Alonso Dias a Spaniard be by foul weather drive out of saint julian which be a young man and yet above thirteen span high they go naked and be fair and well proportion at port famine in the strait he say they see some dwarfish savage not above five or six span high which be thick and strong with wide-mouthe almost to the ear they eat their meat a little scorch besmear their face and breast with the blood run out of their mouth they lay young feather to this blood which glue they to their body four or five thousand trade with they at the pole end the cold be so extreme that Henry barwell become bald therewith so continue a year or two one Harris a goldsmith blow his freeze nose cast it with his finger into the fire and our author himself go on shore and return wet on his foot the next morning pull off his toe together with his stocking from his benumb foot which be as black as foot without feel and be after cure with word or charm every day some die of cold they see there a kind of beast big than a horse with ear above a span long and a tail like a cow call Tapetyweson he see the like in Manicongo the savage about the strait feed as both the same author and the hollander report on raw flesh and other filthy food and be man-eater @. 3 of the Magellan strait it be no small credit to our nation and navigation that these strait have more enlarge themselves and give often and free passage to we then to any other Drake n n see Hak to. 3. swim through winter both pass and return and so do carder in the pinnace as before be say Candish pass but return as Drake have do about the world in his circuit the delight of Bristol enter they and with small delight spend six week in they and captain davies companion of master Candish in his last voyage three time enter the south sea which three time force he back into the embrace arm of the untrusty strait some other have attempt but not attain they as fenton and Ward and the voyage set forth in the year of our lord 1586. by the earl of Cumberland the land on Larbord side say sir richard Hawkins be without doubt island low sandy break on Starbord be very mountainous the low mountain whereof although they be for their height wonderful yet as we have say of the differ stature of the man they have more giantly overlooker with snowy lock and cloudy look between they may be number three region of cloud these strait be fourscore and ten o o Herera have 110. acosta say 100 of which 70. the north-sea flow in and the south-sea 30. l 3. c. 13 league through of unequal breadth in the narrow place a league over the mouth be in two and fifty degree and a half or as sir Richard Hawkins observe p p sir Richard Hawkins in 52. degree 50. minute his company kill a thousand penguin a day this be a fowl like a goose have no feather on their body but down it can fly but will run as fast as most man feed on fish and grass and harbour in berry seal be many in these part which will fall dead with a blow on the snout some affirm the same of the crocodile otherwise not easy pierce with a sword or fear a musket-shot he say they be like lion that they sleep on land and have ever one to watch which be also report of the Morse he add of the canoe of the savage there q q Lopez Vaz that they be make artificial of the rind of tree sow together with the fin of whale sharp at both end and turn up when these strait be first discover they name they the straight of victory Portoghese ap. ram. because the ship call the victory first descry they a name fit ascribe both to the strait and ship the one first obtain the marine victory and encompass the compass of the earth the other still remain the only know passage whereby that sea-victory can be achieve but the name soon pass from the ship to the general of who still it be call the straight of Magaglianes or Magellan the voyage of sir Francis Drake so vex the Spaniard that he send Pedro sarmiento to inhabit there that he may prohibit other nation to pass that way but tempest and famine hate the spanish insolence who ambitious design always aim at a bring they to a indeed further than ever they have design diverse of the ship which at first be three and twenty with three thousand and five hundred man perish in the devour jaw of the ocean and other in their selfe devour maw of hunger which eat they up with not eat the name of jesus and Philip city be their two new erect colony people with four hundred man and thirty woman which by famine be bring to three and twenty person when master Candish take Hernando one of that company in his prosperous voyage another r r w. Magoth ap. hakluyt who have maintain himself by his piece and live in a house alone a long time be take by the delight of Bristol two year after the english give a name fit to this distress city call it port pamine the last voyage of master Candish prove unfortunate both in the loss of himself and many man the black pinnace be lose in the south sea the desire return but lose diverse of her man surprise as be s s John Iane think and devour by the savage near to port desire the savage here present themselves throw dust in the air leap etc. and either have visard on their face like dog face or else their face be dog face indeed I have see a copy t t ap. Hak. m. s. of a discourse write by master Candish himself to sir Tristram-Gorges who he make sole executor of his last will where he thus affirm the run away of the villain davis be the death of i and decay of the whole action and his only treachery in run from i the utter ruin of all he complain also of mutiny and that by south-west and west south-west wind he be drive from shore four hundred league and from fifty to forty degree that he be take with winter and storm in the strait and such frost and snow in May as he never see the like so that in seven or eight day forty die and seventy sicken davies in the desire and his pinnace leave he in forty seven the robucke keep with he to thirty six captain Barker transgress his direction be slay with five and twenty man on land and the boat lose and soon after 25. other follow the like fortune ten other by the cowardice of the master of the robucke forsake at Spirito Sancto which steal away with six month victual for a hundred and twenty person they be but forty six at Sebastian happen another mutiny by treachery of a irish man here master Knivet and other sick person be set on shore intend again for the strait he beat and be beat up and down the frown sea and come within two league of saint Helena but can not attain it and profess he have rather have put himself on a island if he can not attain it and profess he have rather have put himself on a island if he can have find one which the chart place in eight degree than return and now be scarce able to hold a pen when he write this he die homeward since that sir richard Hawkins pass the strait into the south sea of which his voyage I have read a long discourse write by himself he fall into the hand of the spaniard which take he in the south sea let i add this touch these strait that possession thereof be formal take by turf and twig after the english manner in the first voyage captain Drake deliver the say seisin to captain winter in the name of queen Elizabeth and her successor this do captain winter himself relate to i at Bathe in the presence of many desire to have it publish this last September 1618. forty year after the performance with many other particular of that his voyage chap. 7 of terra australis and chili as for the land on the southern side of the strait it be call a a Botero the land of fire either because the discoverer see fire thereabouts or because that cold climate so much need fire more easterly against the cape of good hope be the land terra di Vista this land about the strait be not perfect discover whether it be continent or island some take it for continent and extend it more in their imagination then any man experience towards those island of Solomon and new Guinnee esteem of which there be great probability that Terra australis or the southern continent may for the largeness thereof take up a five place in order and the first in greatness in the division and part of the whole World inquiry of lang. and relig 4. 14. master Brerewood our learned countryman as be before observe persuade himself that it be as large as the eastern continent which contain Europe Africa and Asia altogether his reason be that touch latitude it be know to approach near if not on this side the and touch longitude to run along in a continual circuit about the earth front both the other continent another reason which he deem of more certain importance be this that the land to the north side of the line in the other continent of the old and new world be at least four time as large as that part of they which lie to the south now for as much as the face of the sea be level so he argue be therefore call and second the earth be equal poise on both side of her own centre and three this centre be but one to the water and the earth even no other than the centre of the world it follow thereupon that the earth shall in answerable measure and proportion lift itself and appear above the face of the sea on the south side of the line as it do on the north. and consequent that what be want in the south part of the other continent towards the countervail of the north part which be about three five part of both the other continent lay together must of necessity be supply in this continent of the south Lopez Vaz write that the governor which the king of Spain send for Peru and new Spain have a custom to discover new country the licentiate Castro be governor of Peru send forth a fleet from lima which sail 800. league westward find certain island in 11. degree to the south of the equinoctial with a kind of people of yellowish complexion and all naked here they find hog dog hen clove ginger cinnamon and some Gold the first island they name Izabella the great Guadalcanal on the coast whereof they sail 150. league where they take a town and some grain of gold hang up in the house they burn their town because they have in a sudden surprise kill fourteen of their man they spend fourteen month in this discovery and name they the island of Solomon that by that name man may be further induce to discover and inhabit they imagine that Solomon have his gold from thence noua b b bot. part. 1. vol. 2. Herera Guinea be discover by villalobos send from new Spain in the year 1543. go to discover the Moluccas Herera say it be discover by Alvaro of Saavedra 1527. and the island of Solomon in the year 1567. by lope garcia of Castro which be many and great but eighteen principal some of they 300. league in compass two of 200. other of 100 and of fifty and less the inhabitant some black some white some brown the great name saint Isabel 150. league in length and eighteen in breadth saint Nicholas 150. league in compass the inhabitant be black of hue and witty the spaniard have coast it 700. league and yet can tell whether it be a i will or continent Hesselius gerardus have large set forth the petition or memorial of c c p. Ferdin Quir. australis Peter Ferdinandez de Quir unto the king of Spain about his discovery of those southern unknown island for the plantation of the same I have since see this his supplication to the king in spanish with other memorial d d by Walsingham Grisley etc thereof wherein he say that he be send with two ship to discover the island of Solomon and take his course about the height of the Magellan strait discover a main land and sail eight hundred league on the coast till he come in fifteen degree southward from the line where he find a fruitful country he discover a bay into which fall two great river where they purpose to settle a plantation order be take that he shall present be send from Peru with commission to take up 1200. man with ship and other necessary and as many the year after out of new Spain he find out three and twenty island 230. league from Mexico Taumaco Chicayma where be great oyster with pearl Guaytopo the people whereof be as white as the spaniard Tucopio Fonofono etc. they pray to the devil which have conference with a indian unseen from a piece of wood and to he and all the rest many time by night he touch the face and breast with cold touch but they can never learn what he be he foretell of the spaniard come this Pedro fernandez de Quiros fourteen year busy himself to no small endamagement of his state and person about this discovery the length thereof he equal unto all Europe and as much of Asia as thence extend to the caspian sea and for the wealth and riches he call it a terrestrial paradise the inhabitant he affirm be innumerable some white some like the Mulatos and some otherwise in colour and habit of body diversify they neither have king nor law nor art they be divide and war one upon another with bow arrow and other weapon all of wood they have their oratory and place of burial their bread be make of three sort of root they have variety of fruit almond of four sort pome-citrons apple date there be also swine goat hen partridge and other fowl and as the indian report kine and buffal he see among they silver and pearl other add gold and the coast country seem to promise great wealth within land many river sugar cane bay haven and other commodity of land and sea make show of another china the air very wholesome and temperate he take possession thereof in the name of the king and set up a cross and a chapel in the name of the lady of Loretto these region trend even as high as the aequinoctial when this discovery be make he mention not only he sue to the king for employment therein it be right call and therefore I will not take upon i to be your guide in another sense e e Mercurius Britannicus one of our countryman have witty and learned according to his wont describe this country and parallel therewith the country of Europe and have let we see that we be acquaint in those coast too much and need a pilot or guide to conduct we out of they but let we come back to our strait of Magellan that we may coast from thence and visit the country of chili and Peru for of the western border of Chica gird in between the salt wave and cold hill little can be say fit our purpose of chil. have sail out of the strait we have a wide sea before we and on our right hand the country be so barren and cold that I will not hold the reader in any cold or tedious narration thereof John Ellis which be with sir Richard Hawkins in his South-sea voyage report that be past the strait they sail northwest and by north forty league into the sea and then due north till they come at Mocha in 38. degree 30. minute and thence hold their course northerly to saint Mary in thirty six and so to Val Paresa in thirty three where they make good purchase and prize if they can have keep it from hence they come as far as Arecca in two and twenty and so pass the line to tacame where they be take but our travel must be by land as be they after against their will where we first encounter with chili this name f f Botero some extend even to the strait where we have place Chica and the patagone g g g. Ens l. 2. c. 4 other straiten it in short bound between Chica on the south Charchas and Collao on the north plata on the east and the sea on the west it be call chili of the chill cold for so the word be say to signify the hill with their high look cold blast and covetous encroching drive it almost into the sea onely a narrow valley upon lowly submission to her swell adversary obtain room h h lop. Vaz for five and twenty league of breadth where it be most to extend her spacious length of two hundred league on that shore and to withstand the ocean fury she pay a large tribute of many stream which yet in the i i l. Apollon. hist Peru l. 1. nighttime she can k k the river of chili in the night time n. hardly perform the miserable hill in their freeze charity not impart that natural bounty and duty till that great arbiter the sun arise and send day with his light-horse-troupe of sunbeam to break up those icy dungeon and snowy turret wherein night the mountain gaoler have lock the innocent water once the poor valley be so hamper betwixt the tyrannical meteor and element as that she often l l earthquake in chili and their effect quake with fear and in these chill fever shake off and lose her best ornament arequipa * * some reckon this Town to Peru it be vex with earthquake 1582. and 1586. one of her fair town by such disaster in the year 1582. fall to the ground and sometime the neighbour hill be infect with this pestilent fever and tumble down as dead in the plain thereby so amaze the fearful river that they run quite out of their channel to seek new or else stand still with wonder and the motive heat fail fall into a uncouth tympany their belly swell into spacious and stand lake the tide see this hold back their course and dare not approach their sometime belove stream by diverse mile distance so that betwixt these two stool the ship come to ground indeed the sick earth thus have her mouth stop and her stomach overlay force new mouth whence she vomit stream of oppress water I speak not of the beast and man which in these civil war of nature must needs be subject to devour misery these be the strange effect of cold and earthquake not strange in chili where we be now arrive the people be fierce and cruel and some as be report giant almagro one of the first conqueror of Peru in hope of gold pass from thence hither but be deceive by the indian which lead he the wrong way in pass the desert of chili the air be so pierce as before be observe m m accost l. 3. c. 9 that man fall down dead or else lose their member sudden in manner without feeling Jerome Costilla the general one of acosta acquaintance have lose three or four toe which fall off without any pain many of his army die who body at his return he find lie there without stink or corruption and one boy remain alive which have maintain himself by eat horseflesh the horse also be find whole as Apollonius n n l. Apollon. hist Peru l. 3. write and the man sit on they as if they have be alive with the bridle in their hand in six and thirty degree be that famous valley of Arauco which defend their person and freedom maugre all the force and fury of the spaniard o o Nuno da silua these kill two of sir Francis drake man and wound himself they destroy also three and twenty hollander of the company of cordes both which they do in detestation of the p p oliu. de Noort spaniard of who they esteem the english and dutch because of their apparel they have destroy many of the spaniard they take the city Baldivia in the year 1599 and slay the spaniard twice before if not often they have burn and spoil it yea Baldivia himself the first conqueror of chili for almagro stay not and of who that city receive name be take by these indian his horse be slay under he they bid he fear nothing he shall have gold enough and make a great banquet for he bring in the last service which be a cup full of melt gold which they force he to drink say now glut thyself with Gold this Baldivia have enter chili with four hundred horse and easy conquer that part which have be subject to the king of Peru but the other which be the rich part hold out the spaniard send they word they be the son of God and come to teach they the word of God and if they will not yield to they they will shoot fire among they the indian will try this argument in the field and there the great ordnance so well plead the cause that they believe and subject themselves the spaniard employ they in the mine whence they gather such plenty of gold that other have twenty thousand but Baldivia himself have three hundred thousand peso by the year the indian after perceive the spaniard to be but mortal man rebel and whereas they have use to carry grass into the fort for the spaniard horse they convey in the same weapon by which mean be assist by their fellow without they win the fort and when Baldivia will have recover it he lose himself as you have hear ever since q q adam and the dutch fleet lose many of their man in fight with the indian 1608. about s. marry this hostility have continue and the araucan be the list and bar to the spanish conquest their country to consider Arauco by itself be but small about twenty league in length neither can the Inguas or king of Peru conquer it their manner of war be much like the christian in pitch battle place their bowman among their rank of pikeman to speak of other town which the spaniard have build in this coast be not our purpose when they sack Baldivia 1599 they feast the spaniard with the like golden cup pour hot down their throat they r r oliu. de Noort cut off the image head triumph over the spaniard god as they term they they be then at the siege of imperial another spanish city have before take Baldivia they pluck out the heart of the spaniard which they kill and drink in their skull late the hollander have not only take the bay and town of all saint on the eastern shore of brasil but be also report to have do much harm to the spaniard in Peru the particular whereof partly I have express in the second part of my pilgrim after the relation of the Amboyna tragedy partly have leave to more full discovery by time the mother of truth likewise since the last edition of this work that expedition of mayre and Schouten round about the globe have be publish and in the second book of my pilgrim be extant in which the coast of be best notify but let i give the reader warn that sir Francis Drake have discover those strait in 57 be force by tempest out of the south sea through they and name that Elizabeth island in 1578. which these hollander call barnevelt as in a old map in his majesty privy gallery dedicate to queen Elizabeth be yet to be see chap 8 of the conquest of Peru by the spaniard and of their ingua or emperor @. i. of pizarro his discovery and take the king of Peru FRancis pizarro s s Gomar c. 144. vid. general Peru Escrita Ynca garcilasse de la Vega in 8. lib. be the bastard son of Gonzallo a captain in the kingdom of Navarre he be bear at Trusiglio and expose at the church door and none be find that will give he the breast he be nourish by suck a sow for certain day at last his father acknowledge he and when he be grow set he to keep his swine which be one day stray and lose he dare not return home for fear and therefore go to Seville and thence pass to the indies in this swinish education he have not so much as learned to read he go to Urava with Alonso de Hoieda with Valuoa to the discovery of the south sea and with Pedrarius de auila governor of golden Castille to panama in this city t t gom. c. 108. Benzol 3. c. 1. l. apol. l. 1. be diverse which affect golden discovery Pedrarius intend nicaragua but Diego di almagro Hernando Luche or luque a rich priest and this pizarro now grow rich agree to join their purse and best industry to search southwards where they have hear be store of wealth they provide a navy and two hundred and twenty soldier and almagro with pizarro in the year 1525. or as Benzo have it 1526. set forward almagro and he part company pizarro offer to land his man be wound and force to retire to panama almagro in another place have better success the indian use he kind and give he three thousand ducat of Gold but seek to land in that place of pizarro misfortune he be set upon by the indian and lose in fight one of his eye they meet at panama and have cure their wound repair their force and with two hundred man and many slave set sail and land in another place but a repel to their ship by the inhabitant and go to Gorgon a little island six mile from the continent where pizarro stay while almagro go back for better supply at his return pizarro and his company be almost starve but be refresh and all of they now together attempt the indian shore be repel with loss to the i will which they call Galli almagro be again send back for new aid the soldier will have pass with he and curse this land and their covetousness pizarro and his company agree to search further and have sail five hundred mile come to Chira a province of Peru and take some of the inhabitant to learn they the spanish tongue return to Tumbez have learn of the indian the great wealth of those part he set one Peter a candian on shore who be kind entertain of the governor that show he a temple dedicate to the sun wherein be unspeakable riches which when he relate to pizarro at his return the spaniard go back with these news to panama his two fellow almagro and the priest call after the fool because he have spend his estate on this business and at last be exclude by his companion agree with pizarro to go to Spain to get licence for this conquest and borrow one thousand and five hundred ducat to set he forth pizarro seek and obtain this faculty only for himself never mention his partner and with letter patent return to panama with his four brethren Hernando Gonzalo John and Martin di alcantara his brother by the mother side his two partner be not a little grieve when they hear how thing pass but after much stir almagro and pizarro become friend and agree to communicate purse and title pizarro go before with a hundred and fifty soldier take order that almagro shall follow with all the strength he can make and land in Peru u u Peru why so call a river so call which give name to those mighty and rich province because the spaniard by this way discover they they go by land endure much misery by the way to coach where they be well refresh but a disease worse than the french pox there war upon they call Pori yet do pizarro hold on his resolution he pass over to Puna where the governor entreat the spaniard well till the abuse of their wife cause the indian to take arm and so make their riches become a prey to the prevail spaniard there have pizarro the first intelligence of Atabaliba the governor of this island to satisfy his jealousy cut off the nose the member and the arm of his eunuch or keeper of his woman pizarro send to Tumbez six hundred prisoner which the governor of this land have take of the party of Atabaliba who at that time maintain war against his brother Guascar about the sovereignty and this governor have take Guascar part this civil discord be much to the spaniard advantage pizarro 10 10 gom. c. 112. apol. l. 2. ben. l. 3. c. 3. send three messenger to Tumbez to demand peace and safe entrance but they notwithstanding the freedom of their captive deliver they to the priest to be sacrifice to their idol of the sun he take Tumbez and sack the temple and city from thence he proceed in his way to Caximalca and Guascar send some unto he with great promise to demand his aid against his brother Atabaliba soon after Atabaliba send one to he to charge he to return to his ship pizarro answer that he come not to hurt any but for their good as his emperor have give he in charge nor can he now be the ambassador of the pope and emperor lord of the world return without great dishonour before he have see his royal person and communicate to he such instruction as may be good for his body and soul as he pass the province of Chira the lord thereof provoke he against Atabaliba who have late conquer their country and on the river of Chira he found the colony of saint Michael for the safe keep of his spoil and for his ship he march on to Caximalca and send messenger on horseback to give he notice of his come this strange beast make the indian afraid but Atabaliba be nothing move therewith more move to see those beard man give he so little reverence Atabaliba send pizarro a pair of shoe cut and gild that as he pretend he may know he other think that he may be know and design to imprisonment or slaughter the next day the king be carry as in solemn triumph upon man shoulder guard with five and twenty thousand indian in rich pomp and magnificence vincentius de valle viridi a dominican * * the friar preach this oration be express more at large by Vega p. 2. l. 1. c. 22. divide into two part and Philipillus the interpreter want fit word which the cuscan language have not to express his oration falsify the sense as by their Quippos have appear so for Trinity and unity he interpret four for our sin in Adam that on a time all man be assemble lay their sin on Adam nothing of the divinity of Christ but that he be a great lord etc. and that their force which they threaten be superior to those of heaven as if they have god not man to fight against whereupon Atahuallpa so he call he fetch a deep sigh and after make a answer far differ from this which author have relate but this be write by the spaniard to the emperor to clear themselves which have offer abuse to the Inga neither will they suffer the truth to be write his answer he relate at large and be worth read the spaniard weary of his prolixity make a rout and take he no man resist miguel Astete lay first hold but pizarro carry the credit such as it be his fringe or diadem remain with Astete till 1556. when he restore it to the Inga Sayritupac the friar be after a bishop and last slay by the indian friar hold in one hand a cross in the other his breviary or as some say a bible come before he with great reverence and blessing he with the cross say excellent lord it behove you to know that God in Trinity and unity make the world of nothing and form a man of the earth who he call Adam of who we all have beginning Adam sin against his creator by disobedience and in he all his posterity except jesus Christ who be God come down from heaven and take flesh of the virgin Mary and to redeem mankind die on a cross like to this for which cause we worship it rise again the three day and after forty day ascend into heaven leave for his vicar in earth saint Peter and his successor which we call a a gom. c. 113. pope who have b b this he speak according to the bull of Alexander the six which have give the southern and western world to the spanish king the horn of the bull and not of the lamb be the popish weapon give to the most puissant king of Spain emperor of the roman the monarchy of the World obey the pope and receive the faith of Christ and if you shall believe it most holy and that most false which you have you shall do well and know that do the contrary we will make war on you and will take away and break your idol therefore leave the deceivable religion of your false god this preach of the friar may well seem strange to Atabaliba which it seem he learn of the mahometans and not of the apostle he answer that he be free and will not become tributary to any nor do acknowledge any great lord than himself and for the emperor he can be please to be the friend of so great a prince and to know he but for the pope he will not obey he which give away that which be not his own and take a kingdom from he who he have never see as for religion he like well his own and neither will nor ought to call it in question be so ancient and approve especial see Christ die which never befall the sun or moon and how say he do you know that the god of the christian create the world friar Vincent answer that his book tell it he and give he his breviary Atabaliba look on it and in it and say it say no such thing to he hurl it on the ground the friar take it up and go to pizarro cry he have cast the gospel to the ground revenge it o christian see they will not our friendship nor our law or to use the word of a spanish captain there present in his relation c c rel. Peru ap. ram. Tom 3. xeres ibid. thereof come forth christian come forth and come to these enemy dog that will not accept the thing of God and the cacique have cast our holy law to the ground Francisco di Xeres who be Pizarro secretary write that the friar will have open the book because Atabaliba can not and he in disdain smite he on the arm and object to the spaniard their abuse and rob of his cacique say he will not depart thence till all be restore pizarro command to bring forth the standard and the ordinance the horseman in three band assail atabaliba people and slay many he himself arrive with his footman which lay about with their sword all charge upon Atabaliba slay they which carry he who room be present supply by other till at last pizarro pull he down from his litter by the clothes all this while not one indian fight because they have no commandment or as Xeres say for fear and amazement to see their cacique so use d d Vega say Atahuallpa forbid they who command be a religion to they and death to transgress and there perish 5000. of which 3500. soldier other of all age and both sex which have come in great multitude to hear and solemnize this embassage of they which they take for Go and therefore no Spaniard be slay and many indian perish upon the thrust for so the friar have bid they fight for fear of break their sword neither be any wound but only pizarro by one of his own thrust at Atabaliba in his take and wound pizarro therewith in the arm thus be the indian chase their king with other great spoil remain with the spaniard of which xere reckon 80000. castilian in hold and 7000. mark every mark be eight ounce in silver of the household plate of Atabaliba and in Caxamalca they rifle house full up to the roof of garment beside armour and weapon of which some be axe and Pole of gold and silver @. 2 the huge treasure take by the spaniard the next day the spaniard scour about for spoil and find five thousand woman of the king with much treasure Atabaliba be much grieve with his imprisonment especial in regard of the chain which they put upon he a a lop Vaz and when they have spend much reason about his ransom a soldier name Soto of who you have hear in our history of Florida say unto he will thou give we this house full of gold and silver thus high b b Gomara say that it be a great room and they make a line about it it be all of wrought metal in vessel etc. lift up his sword and make a stroke upon the wall Atabaliba answer that if they will give he liberty to send into his kingdom he will fulfil their demand whereat the spaniard much marvel give he three month time but he have fill the house in two month and a half a matter scarce credible yet most true for I say Lopez Vaz know above twenty man that be there at that time who all affirm that it be above c c gom. have 252000. pound of silver and 1326000. peso of Gold ten million of gold and silver that spanish captain in ramusius relate that he promise to give they so much gold as shall reach up to that mark a span high than a tall man can reach the room be five and twenty foot long and fifteen wide and the governor ask how much silver he will give he answer he will fill up a enclosure which shall be make there with vessel of plate for his ransom which be promise he this captain be appoint guardian of that golden room and see it melt and reckon up the parcel and particular that be bring in vessel and plate of gold and silver and the governor send to the emperor his five part and part the rest to every d d Xeres say they be 102. footman and horseman footman 4800. piece of gold which make 7208. ducat to every horseman twice as much beside the advantage that belong to any to Almagros company which be 150. that come after the victory he give 25000. peso and give 2000 to the inhabitant of saint Michael many other gift he give to merchant and other and yet after the governor be go there be bring more gold then that which have be share this also be affirm by xere that ten or twelve day after pizarro be go the spaniard which have be send to cusco bring as much gold which be take from the wall of a house and roof of a temple in cusco be plate of ten or twelve pound weight a piece and other like as amount to two million and a half and be melt prove on million 326539. peso of fine gold and 51610. mark of silver he add that Atabaliba be by sound of trumpet free from his promise but be keep still under guard for the spaniard security howbeit they kill he notwithstanding e e they baptize he before his death threaten otherwise to burn he alive Vega l 1. c. 36. the gold and silver which Atabaliba pay come to 4605670. duc. blas Valeca have 4. million 800000. duc. a sum not now marvellous when every year 10. or 12. million enter the Guadalquibir the natural strength of the country be such that have there not be contention betwixt the brethren etc. Peru can never have be subdue and in a night strangle he but God the righteous judge see this villainous act suffer none of those spaniard to die by the course of nature but bring they to evil and shameful end during the time of Atabalibas f f gom. c. 115. imprisonment his captain have take his brother Guascar g g the spanish captain in Ramus call cusco and say he promise 4 time as much who speak with captain Soto and promise that if they will restore he to his liberty and to his kingdom he will fill up the room at Caximalca to the roof which be thrice as much as Atabaliba have promise and add that his father Guaynacapa on his deathbed have command he to be friend to the white and beard man which shall come and rule in those part Atabaliba hear of these thing feign himself sorrowful for the death of Guascar who he have hear that Quisquiz his captain have slay this he do to try how the spaniard will take his death which when he see they little respect he send and cause he to be slay indeed this be do in the year of our lord God 1533. he have before slay another of his brethren and drink in his skull as he have swear to deal with Atabaliba the indian hereupon hide the treasure of gold silver and gem that be in cusco and other place and have belong to Guaynacapa which be far more than ever come to the spaniard hand chilicuchima one of Atabalibas chief captain which visit he in his imprisonment with great reverence for he and the chief of his company lay burden on their shoulder and so enter into his presence lift up both his hand to the sun with thanks to he for this sight of his lord and then with much crouch kiss his hand and foot tell the spaniard that Quisquiz h h he keep cusco with 30000. indian another chief captain have convey away those treasure of Guaynacapa or cusco the elder as he call he and be force by torment of fire put to he i i they after burn he confess where Atabaliba have a tent full of plate and treasure the spanish captain which report this say that he see a great house full of vessel of gold and other piece as a shepherd and his sheep all of gold as great as the live which be not share among they and he see 10080. peso of the emperor five part over and above that which pizarro send by his brother so that both Caesar and soldier be deceive he hear Atabaliba say that in a island in a river of colas be a very great house all cover with gold and the beam with all whatsoever in the house be cover with plate of gold yea and the pavement also but in such a divide state where be so many indian captain of the two brethren Inguas the spaniard be but a handful and jealous of each other the country be so wide and rich that they can not so much as see and take view of the same in short space there be easy opportunity offer to convey away the great part of their treasure especial religion add a help hand both to convey and to conceal from they which thus spoil their temple idol and altar the spaniard so abound with gold that they will give k k f. xere and p. Sancto of their treasure see inf @. 3. and c 9 @. 3 c. 11. @ 1 etc. 1300. one give 1500. castilian or peso for a horse 60. for a small Rondlet of wine forty for a pair of shoe likewise a sword and other thing after the same rate and debtor seek out their creditor with indian lade with gold from house to house to pay they they carry into Spain one vessel of gold another of silver each sufficient wherein to boil a kow beside a huge eagle and other like image as a idol of gold as big as a child of four year old Drum of gold and at the conquest of cusco Xeres tell of many image of woman of gold and as great which they worship and diverse like of silver sheep also in like portraiture of fine gold all well wrought @. 3 the king of Peru their original proceed and treasure the quarrel between the two brethren grow about their inheritance Guascar succeed his father in the rest and quito be assign to Atabaliba who seize on Tumebamba a rich province provoke his brother force against he which take he prisoner but he escape to quito make the people believe that the sun have turn he into a serpent and so he escape through a hole in the prison and on conceit of this miracle draw they into arm against Guascar with which he make such slaughter of his enemy that to this day there be great heap of bone of the slay he slay 60000. of the Canari destroy Tumebamba and conquer as far as Tumbez and Caximalca he send a great army with Quisquiz and Calicucima two valiant captain with such success as you have hear against Guascar who they take and by his direction slay Gomara attribute the death of Atabaliba to Philippillus the spanish interpreter who to enjoy one of his wife accuse he of conspiracy against the spaniard but Benzo l l Benzo l. 3. c. 5 with more likelihood affirm that pizarro from his first take have intend it for he may have send he into Spain as Atabaliba request if he have fear such secret practice but his request and purgation be reject and four negro which he use for that purpose strangle he at his command he have many wife whereof the chief be his sister name Pagha he see the glass of Europe marvel much as before be say that they have so fair a thing will go so far for Gold his murderer die the like bloody end almagro be execute by pizarro and he slay by young almagro and he vacca de castra do likewise put to death John pizarro be slay of the indian Martin another of the brethren be slay with Francis Ferdinandus be imprison in Spain and his end unknown Gonzales be do to death by Gasca Soto die of thought in Florida and civil war eat up the rest in Peru before the time of the ingua their government m m accost l. 6. c. 19 20. 21. 22. in these part be as still it be in Arauco and the province of chili by cominalty or the advice of many the government of the ingua continue between three and four hundred year although for a long time their signiory be not above five or six league compass about the city of cusco where the original of their conquest begin and extend from Pasto to chili almost 1000 league in length between the andes and the south sea the canary be their mortal enemy and favour the spaniard and at this day if they fall to comparison whether the ingua or Canari be the more valiant they will kill one another by thousand as have happen in cusco the practice which they use to make themselves lord be a fiction that since the general deluge whereof all the indian have knowledge the world have be preserve people and restore by they and that seven of they come out of the cave of Pacaricambo and that they also be the author of the true religion the first of these ingua be Mangocapa original of the Inguas which come out of the cave of Tambo six league from cusco of he come two family the Hanancusco of who come these lord and the Urincusco Ingaroca the first lord be no great lord but be serve in vessel of gold and silver and die he appoint that all his treasure shall be employ for the service of his body and for the feed of his family his successor do the like and this grow to a general custom that no ingua may inherit his father good he build a new palace their king in the time of Ingaroca the indian have image of Gold yaguaraguaque succeed Virococha the next successor be very rich Gonzale pizarro with cruel torment force the indian to confess where his body be for the report of the treasure bury with he the body he burn and the indian reserve and worship the ash they take it ill that this Ingua call himself Viracocha which be the name of their god but he to satisfy they say that Viracocha appear to he in a dream and command he to take his name succeed he who be a great conqueror politician and author of their ceremony he reign 70. year and feign himself send of Viracocha to establish his religion and empire after he follow Guaynacapa the father of Guascar and Atabaliba which bring this empire to the great height the indian open he after his decease leave his heart and entrails in quito the body be carry to cusco and place in the temple of the sun he be worship of his subject for a god be yet alive which be not do to any of his predecessor when he die they slay a thousand person of his household to serve he in the other life all which die willing for his service insomuch that many offer themselves to death beside such as be appoint his treasure be admirable he use always n n gom. c. 120. Mariana lib. 26. Guaynacapa prophesy by revelation of his oracle of the come of beard man command at his death that they shall yield subjection to they have a better law custom etc. then they as Atahuallpa in his answer to valle his oration ap. Veg. to have with he many Oregioni which be his man of war and ware shoe and feather and other sign of nobility he be serve of the elder son and heir of all his chief subject every one clothe after his own country rite he have many counsellor and courtier in differ degree of honour every one at his entrance into the palace put off his shoe and may not look he in the face when they speak to he all the vessel of his house table and kitchen be of gold and silver and the mean of silver and copper for strength and hardness of metal he have in his wardrobe hollow statue which seem giant and be of gold and the figure in proportion and bigness of all the beast bird tree and herb in his kingdom and of the fish likewise he have rope budget trough and chest of gold and silver heap of billet of gold that seem wood cut out for the fire there be nothing in his kingdom but he have the counterfeit in Gold yea they say that the ingua have a garden of pleasure in a island near Puna which have all kind of garden herb flower and tree of gold and silver he have also a infinite quantity of silver and gold wrought in cusco which be lose by the death of Guascar which the indian conceal as be say from the spaniard Xeres say he have three house full of piece of gold and five full of silver and a 100000. plate or tile of gold every of which weigh fifty Castlins what honour be do to he after his death appear by that his golden temple or chapel where he be bury where he have continual attendance of dancer and musician and such as stand with fan to scar away the fly when any come to see the cacique they come first to perform their ceremony to this image he have 200. child by diverse woman acosta o o accost l. 6. c. 22. 23. say that he have descend from his own loin above 300. child and grand child when his son Guascar and Atibaliba be dead another of his son call Mangocapa p p his son sayri Tupac be baptize by the name of Diego Amaru be his brother continue the war a while with the spaniard and after retire himself to villa Bamba where he keep in the mountain and there the ingua reign until Amaro be take and execute in cusco some remnant of they have since be q q one of which have write a general history of the indies in two part in the former of the perwian antiquity and act in the late of the spanish viz. garcilasso de la Vega natural of cusco his mother be Palla Isabel daughter of Huallpa Topac Inga one of the son of Topac Inga yupangui and of Palla mama Ocllo his lawful ife his father be garcilasso de la Vega one of the conqueror of Peru a captain who go thither with Pedro de aluarado 1531. and there continue till his death 1559. Francisco de Toledo be viceroy enter process against the Ingas and all the mestizo of that blood but will not execute they instead whereof he send and disperse they lest by their father conquest or mother blood they shall challenge that empire into chili Pinama new Granada nicaragua and into Spain 36. Indian of that blood they send to Loy reyes there to remain of which 35. die in little more than two year with grief etc. other also elsewhere die don Carlos have a son in Spain which there die 1610. of grief and soon after a little infant which he leave and so all Guaynacapa prophesy touch his posterity be accomplish in Mexico they take not that course because the kingdom pass by election not succession the present Inga they present sentence to lose his head who desire to be send into Spain protest his innocency and that if his father can do nothing against 200. spaniard in cusco with 200000. indian what can they fear of he so poor he appeal to the king and to Pachacamac be baptize also by the name of Philip his Inga as he call he move pity in the spaniard who will have beseech for he to be send into Spain there to remain exile but may not be suffer on pain of death to speak to the viceroy thus be Amaru or Philip bring forth on a mule his hand fasten the crier proclaim he a tyrant and traitor with a halter about his neck 300000. be gather together in the street and way to this sad spectacle with much tear and cry the priest desire he to enjoin they silence whereupon he lift up his hand and lay it on his ear and thence by degree to his thigh there follow such silence as if there have not be a man in the city and thus with protestation of his innocence he sustain their cruelty with great magnanimity the last of that race which have continue as blas Valera reckon almost 600. year in that sovereignty after his death follow that dispersion before relate of his child and kindred the viceroy return with 500000. peso get in his government which be arrest and himself discountenance by the king who tell he that he be send into Peru to serve king not to kill king wherewith aggrieve he die in few day garcia Loyola which take Amaru marry his niece the daughter of sayen Tupac and be make governor of chili who one night be slay with all his company by the araucos he leave only one daughter which be marry to don juan Enriquez de Boria in Spain who the king entitle marquess of Oropesa a town found by Toledo in Peru christen the other family of the ingua which descend of the first Mangocupa call Urincusco have their succession also and government which here to discourse of be to my propose scope impertinent leave therefore the conqueror and conquest of Peru let we consider the country itself with such observation as we shall there find touch their religion chap. 9 of the country of Peru natural economical and political observation @. i. of the wind hill plain lake raines season the kingdom of Peru extend b b p De Cieza part. 1. c. 36. seven hundred league in length in breadth a hundred in some place in some threescore in other forty more or less according unto the difference of place quito and plata be the utmost city thereof the one border on Popayan the other upon chili it be not here mean of that spacious kingdom of the ingua for that reach twelve hundred league whereof this of Peru be but a part acosta c c accost l. 3. c. 20 number diverse strange specialty except from the general rule of nature wont course the first the wind and weather that it blow continual on all that coast with one only wind and that also differ from that which usual blow between the Tropic namely the south and Southwest the second that this wind in other place unhealthful be here so agreeable that otherwise it can not be habitable the three that it never rain thunder snow nor hailes in all this coast and yet which be a four wonder a little distance from the coast it snow and rain terrible five there be two ridge and mountain which both run in one altitude and the one in view of the other almost equal above a 1000 league and yet on the one part be great forest the hill and it rain the great part of the year be very hot the other be all naked and bare and very cold so that Peru be divide into three part which they call Llanos Sierras and andes the first run alongst the sea coast the Sierras be hill with some valley and the andes be steep and craggy mountain the Llanos or plain on the sea coast have ten league in breadth in some part less and in some a little more the Sierra contain with equal inequality twenty league and the andes as much sometime more and sometime less they run in length from north to south and in breadth from east to west and in this so small a distance it rain almost continual in one place and never in the other in the plain never on the andes in a manner continual though sometime it be more clear there then other the Sierra in the midst be more moderate in which it rain from September to April as in Spain but in the other half year when the sun be further off it be more clear the Sierras yield infinite number of vicague which be like wild goat and Pacos a kind of sheep-ass profitable for fleece and burden the andes yield parrot ape and monkey some d d Botero report that monstrous birth do sometime proceed as by nature unwilling hand from the copulation of these barbarian and these monkey the Sierre open themselves cause valley where be the best dwelling in Peru and most plentiful of Maiz and fruit it be e e Cieza p. 1. c. 72 strange that in the valley of Pachacama neither the high element yield rain nor the low any stream and yet there be plenty of root Maiz and fruit they have large and deep ditch in which they sow or set and that which grow be nourish with the dew and because the Maiz will not grow except it first die they set one or two pilchard head which fish they take with their net very plentiful in the sea therewith and thus it grow abundant the water which they drink they draw out of deep pit f f accost l. 3. c. 21. come from the mountain to the valley they do usual see as it be two heaven one clear and bright the other obscure and as it be a gray veil spread underneath which cover all the coast and although it rain not yet this mist be wonderful profitable to bring forth grass and to raise up and nourish the seed and where they have plenty of water which they draw from the pool and lake yet if this moisture fail there follow great defect of grain and which be more worthy of admiration the dry and barren sand in some place as in the sandy mountain near the city de los reyes be by this dew beautify with grass and flower in some place they water their field out of the river Lake beyond the city of cusco the two ridge of mountain separate themselves and in the midst leave a plain and large champain which they call the province of calas where there be many river and great store of fertile pasture there g g Acost. ib. c. 16. Cieza p. 1 c. 103. be also the great lake of titicaca which contain fourscore league in compass and rob ten or twelve great river of their water which they be carry to the sea but here be drink up by the way of this lake they sail in it with ship and bark the water be not altogether sour nor salt as that of the sea but be so thick that it can be drink upon the bank of this lake be habitation as good as any in Peru the great lake pass by a river into a less lake call Aulagas from whence it have no manner of passage except there be any under the earth there be many other lake in the mountain which seem to arise rather from spring then from raines or snowes and some of they yield Rivers at the end of the valley of Tarapaya near to Potozi there be a round lake who water be very hot and yet the country be very cold they bathe themselves near the bank for further in it be intolerable in the midst be a boil above twenty foot square it never increase nor decrease although they have draw from it a great stream for metal Mils no rain the cause but to return from this plenty of water in lake to that want thereof in the plain of Peru the natural reason which some yield of this want of rain be partly their sandy and dry quality which of themselves can yield no further exhalation then to produce those mist or dew partly the height of the hill which shadow the plain and suffer no wind to blow from the land upon they but intercept they whole with their vapour and cloud so that their wind be only from the sea which find no opposite do not press nor strain forth the vapour which rise to engender rain this seem the rather to be probable for that it rain upon some small hill along the coast which be least shadow in the same coast also where the easterly or northerly wind be ordinary it rain as in Guayaquill the south wind in other place be h h Austro ovid. account a causer of rain which here reign without rain as strange be the difference of season after the indian account for in the i i Cieza c. 59 Sierras their summer begin in April and end with September October begin their winter which not the absence but the presence of the sun do cause contrariwise in the plain just by in site they have their summer from October to April the rest their winter the like be note in the east indies at the hill of Balegate where that ridge part winter and summer in the same nearness to the sun at the same time and a few mile distant the rain in the hill be cause why they call it winter and the dew or mist in the plain so that when the rain fall most in the hill it be clear weather in the plain and when the dew fall in the plain it be clear on the hill and thus it come to pass that a man may travel from winter to summer in one day have winter to wash he in the morning and ere night a clear and dry summer to scorch he yea in some place say Alexandro Ursino within six mile space both heat and cold be intolerable and enough to kill any man from saint Helen to Copiapo it never rain which coast extend forty mile in some place fifty in breadth and twelve hundred league in length @. 2 of the first inhabitant their Quippos art marriage about the point of saint Helena in Peru they k k Cieza c. 25. tell that sometime there live giant of huge stature which come thither in boat the compass of their knee be as much as of another man middle they be hate of the people because that use their woman they kill they and do the same to the man for other l l the like do Apolodorus and the poet tell of Typhon and other giant ap. de Ded. Orig l. 1. and Hyginus fab. 152. cause these giant be addict to sodomy and therefore as the indian report be destroy with fire from heaven whether this be true or no in those part be find huge and giantlike bone Cieza write that John di Holmos at Porto vicio dig and find tooth three finger broad and four long contrariwise in the valley of chincha m m Cieza c. 74. they have a tradition that the progenitor of the present inhabitant destroy the native people which be not above two cubit high and possess their room in testimony whereof they allege also that bone-argument concern the indian conceit of their own original we have mention their opinion of a flood and the repeople of the world by they which come out of a cave n n accost l. 1. c. 25 they have another legend that all man be drown there come out of the great lake titicaca one Virococha which stay in Traguanaco where at this day be to be see the ruin of very ancient and strange building and from thence come to cusco and so begin mankind to multiply they show in the same lake a small island where they fain that the sun hide himself and so be preserve o o Cieza p. 1. c. 103. and for this reason they make great sacrifice unto he in this place both of sheep and men. they hold this place sacred and the Inguas build there a temple to the sun and place there woman and priest with great treasure some p p accost ibid. learned man be of opinion that all which the indian make mention of be not above four hundred year which may be impute to their want of writing in stead of writing they use their Quippos Quippos these Quippos be memorial or register make of cord in which there be diverse knot and colour signify diverse thing these be their book of history of law ceremony and account of their affair there be officer appoint to keep they call Quipocamayos which be bind to give account of thing as notary and register they have according to the diversity of business sundry cord and branch in every of which be so many knot little and great and string tie to they some red some green and in such variety that even as we derive a infinite number of word from the letter of the alphabet so do they from these kind and colour and at this day they will keep account exact with they I do see say acosta a handful of these string wherein a indian woman do carry as it be write a general confession of all her life and thereby confess herself as well as I can have do in write paper with string for the circumstance of the sin they have also certain wheel of small stone by mean whereof they learn all they desire by heart thus you shall see they learn the paternoster creed and the rest and for this purpose they have many of these wheel in their churchyard they have another kind of Quippos with grain of maize with which they will cast hard account which may trouble a good arithmetician with his pen in the division they be no less witty q q id. ibid. c. 26. if not more in thing whereto they apply themselves than the man of these part they teach their young child all art necessary to the life of man every one learn what be needful for his person and family and not appropriate himself to one profession as with we one be a tailor another a weaver or of other trade every man be his own weaver carpenter husbandman and the like but in other art more for ornament then necessity they have goldsmith painter potter and weaver of curious work for nobleman and so of the rest no man may change the fashion use in his own country when he go into another that all may be know of what country they be for their marriage they have many wife but one be principal which be wed with solemnity and that in this sort the bridegroom go to the bride house and put Ottoya which be a open shoe on her foot this if she be a maid be of wool otherwise of reed and this do he lead she thence with he if she commit adultery she be punish with death when the husband die she carry a mourn weed of black a year after and may not marry in that time which befall not the other wife the Ingua himself with his own hand give this woman to his governor and captain and the governor assemble all the young man and maid in one place of the city where they give to every one his wife with the aforesaid ceremony in put on the Ottoya the other wife do serve and honour this none may marry with his mother daughter grandmother or grandchild and Yapangui the father of Guaynacapa be the first Ingua that marry his sister and confirm his fact by a decree that the Inguas may do it command his own child to do it permit the nobleman also to marry their sister by the father side other incest and murder theft and adultery be punish with death such as have do good service in war be reward with land arm title of honour and marriage in the inguas lineage they have chasquis or post post in Peru which be to carry tiding or letter for which purpose they have house a league and a half asunder and run each man to the next they will run fifty league in a day and night @. 3 the regal rite right work and of RUMINAGVI and alvarado when the Ingua be dead his lawful heir bear of his chief wife succeed and if the king have a legitimate brother he first inherit and then the son of the first he inherit not the good as be say already but they be whole dedicate to his oratory or Guaca and for the maintenance of the family he leave which with his offspring be always busy at the sacrifice ceremony and service of the decease king for be dead they present hold he for a god make image and sacrifice to he the ensign of royalty be a red roll of wool fine than silk which hang on his forehead which be a diadem that none else may wear in the midst of their forehead at the ear the nobleman man may when they take this roll they make their coronation feast and many sacrifice with a great quantity of vessel of gold and silver and many image in the form of sheep of gold and silver and a thousand other of diverse colour then the chief priest take a young child in his hand of the age of six or eight year pronounce these word with the other minister to the image of Viracocha lord we offer this unto thou that thou may maintain we in quiet and help we in our war maintain our lord the Ingua in his greatness and estate that he may always increase give he much knowledge to govern we there be present at this ceremony man of all part of the realm and of all guaca and sanctuary it be not find that any of the inguas subject ever commit treason against he he place the governor in every province some great and some small the Inguas think it a good rule of state to keep their subject always in action and therefore there be see to this day long causey of great labour divide this large empire into four part have conquer a province they present reduce they into town and commonalty which be divide into band one be appoint over ten another over a hundred and another over a thousand and over ten thousand another above all there be in every province a governor of the house of the Inguas to who the rest give account of what have pass and who be either bear or dead at the feast call Raymar the governor bring the tribute of the whole realm to the court at cusco all the kingdom r r Cieza pag. 1. cap. 29. be divide into four part Chinchasuyo Collosuyo Andesuyo and Condesuyo according to the four way which go from cusco east west north and south when s s accost l. 6. c. 15 the Ingua conquer a city the land be divide into three part the first for religion every idol and Guaca have his peculiar land appropriate to their priest and sacrifice and the great part thereof be spend in cusco where be the general and metropolitan sanctuary the rest in that city where it be gather which all have Guacas after the fashion of cusco some be thence distant two hundred league that which they reap on the land be put into storehouse build for that purpose the second part of that division be for the ingua for the maintenance of his court kinsman nobleman and soldier which they bring to cusco or other place where it be needful the three part be for the commonalty for the nourishment of the people no particular man possess any part hereof in proper as the family increase or decrease so do the portion their tribute be to till and husband the land of the Ingua and the guaca and lay it up in storehouse be for that time of their labour nourish out of the same land the like distribution be make of the cattle to the same purpose as that of the land and of the wool and other profit that thence arise the old man woman and sick folk be reserve from this tribute they pay other tribute also even whatsoever the Ingua will choose out of every province the Chicas send sweet wood the Lucanas Brancar to carry his litter the Chumtilbicas dancer other be appoint to labour in the mine and all be slave to the Ingua some he employ in building of temple fortress house or other work as appear by the remnant of they where be find stone of such greatness that man can conceive how they be cut bring and lay in their place they have no iron or steel to cut engine to carry nor mortar to lay they and yet they be so cunning lay that one can not see the joint some of eight and thirty foot long say acosta eight broad and six thick I measure and in the wall of cusco be big none so little say Sancho in some building there as three cart may carry and some thirty span square John Ellis which late be there say some of they be twenty ton weight strange join without mortar they build a bridge at chiquitto the river be so deep that it will not admit arch they fasten bundle of reed and weed which be light will not sink which they fasten to either side of the river they make it passable for man and beast it be three hundred foot long cusco t t gom. c. 124. their chief city stand in seventeen degree it be subject to cold and snow the house be of great and square stone it be besiege by Soto and by pizarro and by he enter where they find more treasure than they have by the imprisonment of Atabaliba quito u u gom. c. 125. 126. be say to have be as rich as cusco hither Ruminagni flee with five thousand soldier when Atabaliba his master be take by the spaniard and slay Illescas his brother that withstand his tyrannical proceed flay he and make a drum of his skin slay two thousand soldier that bring the body of Atabaliba to quite to be inter have in show of funeral pomp and honour before make they drink and with his force scour the province of Tamebamba he kill many of his wife for smile when he tell they they shall have pleasure with the beard man and burn the wardrobe of Atabaliba that when the spaniard come and enter quito which have almost dispeople panama nicaragua cartagena and other their habitation in hope of perwian spoil they find themselves disappoint of their expect prey and in anger set fire on the town aluarado with like news come from Guatimala into those part with four hundred spaniard but be force to kill his horse to feed his famish company although at that time horse be worth in Peru above a thousand ducat a piece be almost kill with thirst be assault 10 10 not far from lima on the south sea Oliver Noort be bemist two day on the sea with such a shower of ash which make they seem as they have be sprinkle with meal the spaniard say they be there common with shower of ash which the hot Vulcan of quito disperse two hundred and forty mile about with terrible thunder and lightning which Pluto have seem to steal from jupiter and here to vent they and after with snow on the cold hill which exact seventy spaniard for tribute in the passage find many man sacrifice by the inhabitant but can find no gold till pizarro buy his departure with a hundred thousand ducat he give thank he say to God for his deliverance by that tract by which he have pass to the devil this be he that afterward be bruise with the fall of his horse whereof he die and ask where he be most pain say y y Benzo l. 2. c. 17 in his soul as guilty to himself of his former cruelty and covetousness this be the profit of unsanctified and ill-sanctified gold the one whereof we see in these perwian temple thus spoil by the spaniard who in the other respect be more spoil by this spoil and purchase what golden day these be to the spaniard this history in diverse place show from one palace of cusco say Xeres they take seven hundred plate of gold each whereof weigh five hundred Castlins from another house the weight of two hundred thousand two house of gold he speak of the very thatch be counterfeit in gold the straw with the ear artificial wrought z z f. Xeres ortel theat but every where be these relation wrought and embroider with cusco Gold Aluarados army which he bring into Peru have perish as Cieza relate with drought but for certain cane as big as a man leg which between the knot contain a pottle of water strange cane extract from the dew for there fall no rain in those part girava say that the inhabitant of Anzerma be in their war arm with complete harness of gold and that about quito there be mine whence more gold be take then earth I tie no man credit to these report but sure it be that they have these metal in abundance which the spanish war have make our european world to feel more manage and maintain by indian wedge than spanish blade but let we come from their mine to their mind which for heavenly thing be as full of dross as the other be of pure metal chap. x. of the many god of Peru their opinion of the creation flood and end of the World @. i. of their god the perwians acknowledge a supreme lord and author of all thing a a accost l. 5 c. 3. Viracocha which they call Viracocha and give he name of great excellency as Pachacamas or Pachayachachis which be the creator of heaven and earth and Usapu that be admirable and other the like he they do worship as the chief of all and honour he in behold the heaven yet have b b no name in the Culcan or mexican tongue to signify God they no proper name for God no more than the mexican but such as in this sort may signify he by his attribute or work and therefore be force to use the spanish name Dios c c which they pronounce tius want the letter d in their language Veg. l. 1. c. 40. in the name of Pachacamac or creator they have a rich temple erect to he wherein they worship notwithstanding the devil and certain figure the name of Viracocha be of the great sound in their devotion and so they call the spaniard esteem they the son of heaven Benzo d d Benzo l. 3. c. 21 allege another cause of that name give to the spaniard it signify say he the froth of the sea e e Vega say they call the spaniard Viracah because they resemble a spectrum which appear to Inga Viracocha with a beard etc. they therefore think they send from heaven to do justice on Atabaliba for his tyranny and be further confirm in this error by their harquebuss and ordnance which they call Yllapa thunder and Hatun Yllapa great thunder the proper weapon of the sun they call they also Inca or Ingua but after experience of their wickedness they forbear to call they so any long and call they cupay 1. devil the people be so loyal and subject as they hold the spaniard their conqueror as god and observe they as they use their idol be froth Cochie the sea because they think they engender of sea froth and nourish therewith in regard of their covetousness and cruelty devour all thing apply that name to they in respect of their wicked practice and not for divine original yea they curse the sea which send such a curse brood into the land the spaniard come thither by sea as you have hear if I say Benzo ask any of they for any christian by that title they will neither look on i nor answer but if I inquire for they by the name of Viracochie they will present make answer and there will the father point to the child go a Viracochi in this they agree with the ancient grecian ethnic which term the most inhuman monster of humanity and the cruel tyrant the son of Neptune as procreate of the sea such be f f a. gel. l 15. 21. i. hygin fab. Procrustes Polyphemus and other to reconcile these two whole be impossible not so to show some reason why the same name may be give both to their idol and the spaniard these may be so term as come thither at first by sea and haply because at the first they think somewhat more than human to be in they and that which at first they give for honour may now be continue in a irony or antiphrasis while they think they better than man and find they little inferior to devil Viracocha their great author of nature may be call by this sea name g g see c. 12. for some especial sea rite observe in his honour or for the same cause that the mythologians ascribe to Venus h h Coelo-Venus Ansonius her sea-generation for they picture Venus swim on the sea as Albricus i i Albricus imag. affirm and the poet sing Venus Mari which the mythologians apply to the motion and moisture require to generation and to that frothy nature of the sperm so say Phornutus k k Phornuti nat. dier. with im. de. i dai. vinc. Sartan therefore say l l Fulgentij Mytholog l 2. fulgentius she be call aphrodite for Aphros be Froth and so be lust in regard of the vanity and so be seed in regard of natural quality perhaps also the first master of Viracochas mystery which teach they first in Peru come thither by sea but to return to acosta m m ac. l. 6. c 21. he tell that the to make himself more respect devise that be one day alone Viracocha the creator speak to he complain that though he be universal lord and creator of all thing and have make the heaven the sun the world and man and rule all yet they do not yield he due obedience but do equal honour the sun thunder earth and other thing give he to understand that in heaven where he be they call he Viracocha Pachayachachia which signify universal creator promise also that he will send man invisible to assist he against the Changuas who have late defeat his brother under this colour he assemble a mighty army and overthrow the Changuas and from that time command that Viracocha shall be hold for universal lord and that the image of the sun and thunder shall do he reverence and thenceforth they set his image high yet do he not dedicate any thing to he n n so have some reason in Pers say that he be lord of all have no need as for those invisible soldier a conceit like that which we have mention of the turk he say that no man may see they but himself and since they be convert into stone and in that regard gather a multitude of stone in the mountain and place they for idol sacrifice they he call they Pururaucas and carry they to the war with great devotion make his soldier believe that they have get the victory through their help and by this mean he obtain goodly victory next to Viracocha they worship the sun and after he the thunder which they call by three name Chuquilla Catuilla and Intijllapa suppose it to be a man in heaven with a sling and a mace in who power it be to cause raine haile thunder and other effect of the airy region this Guaca so they call both their idol and temple be general to all the indian of Peru and in cusco they sacrifice to he child as they do to the sun these three Viracocha the sun and thunder have a more especial worship then the rest they put as it be a gauntlet or glove upon their hand when they lift they up to worship they they worship the earth in the name of pachamama and esteem she the mother of all thing the sea also and call it Mamacocha and the rainbow which with two snake stretch out on each side be the arm of the inguas they attribute diverse office to diverse star and those which need their favour worship they so the shepherd sacrifice to a star by they call Urcuhillay which they hold to be a sheep of diverse colour and two other star call catuchillay and Urcuchillay which they feign to be a ewe and a lamb other worship a star which they name machaevay to which they attribute the power over snake and serpent to keep they from hurt they to another star call Chugninchinchey which be as much as tiger they ascribe power over bear tiger and lion they have general believe of all the beast in the earth there be one like unto they in heaven which have care of their procreation and increase many other star they worship too tedious to rehearse they worship also river fountain the mouth of river entry of mountain rock or great stone hill and the top of mountain which they call Apachitas they worship all thing in nature which seem to they remarkable and different from the rest they show i it be o o accost l. 5. c. 5 acosta speech in Cazamalca a hill or mount of sand which be a chief idol or Guaca of the ancient I demand what divinity they find in it they allege the wonder it be a high mount of sand in the midst of the thick mountain of stone in the city de los reyes for the melt of a bell we cut down a great deform tree which for the greatness and antiquity thereof have be their Guaca they attribute the like divinity to any thing that be strange in this kind as stone or the root Papas and Lallatrecas which they kiss and worship bear also lion tiger and snake that they shall not hurt they and such as their god be such be the thing which they offer unto they in their worship they have use as they go by the way to cast in the cross way on the hill and top of mountain old shoe feather and Coca chew and when they have nothing else they cast a stone as a offering that they may pass free and lusty hence it be that they find in the high way great heap of stone offer and such other thing they use the like ridiculous offering in pull off their hair of the eyebrow to offer to the sun hill wind or any other thing which they fear they report of one of the Inguas that say he do not take the sun to be a God because he labour so much in his daily journey in fine p p gom. 1^1 every one worship what like he best the fisher worship a shark or some other fish the hunter a lion Fox or other beast with many bird the countryman the water and earth they believe that the moon be wife to the sun when they swear they touch the earth and look up to the sun many of their idol have pastoral staff and mitre like b shop but the indian can tell no reason thereof and when they see the spanish bishop in their pontificalibus they ask if they be Guacas of the christian they worship also as before be say the dead body of the Inguas preserve they with certain rosin so that they seem alive the body of Yupangui the grandfather of Atabaliba be thus find have eye make of a fine cloth of gold so artificial set as they seem natural have lose no more hair then if he have die the same day and yet he have be dead seventy eight year there also the spaniard find his servant and Mamacomas which do service to his memory in some province q q Cieza c. 50. they worship the image of a bull in another of a cock and in other other in the principal temple of Pachicama they keep a she fox and worship it the lord of Manta keep a great and rich emerald as his ancestor also before he have hold it in great veneration on some day it be bring forth in public to be worship they which be sick come in pilgrimage to visit it and there offer their gift which the cacique and minister turn to their own profit the devil in many place do appear unto they and he indeed be author of all these superstition they have a tradition concern the creation r r gom. hist cap 122. Apollon. l. 1. that at the begin of the world there come one from the north into their country call Con which have no bone go very light and swift cast down mountain lift up the hill only with his will and word he say he be the son of the sun and fill the earth with man and woman which they create give they fruit and bread and other thing necessary for human life but be offend with some he countermand all that former good and turn the fruitful land into barren sand as they be now in the plain and take away the water that it shall not rain hence it come that it rain not only leave they the river of pure compassion that they shall maintain themselves with labour afterward s s calueto in benz l. 3. c. 28. come another from the south call Pachicama the son also of the sun and moon who banish Con and turn his man into cat monkey bear lion parrot and other bird and create the progenitor of the present indian and teach they to husband the earth and the tree they again to gratify he turn he in their imagination and superstition unto a god Cieza c. 72. and name the province four league from lima of his name he t continue till the christian come to Peru he be their great oracle and as some indian affirm he still continue in secret place with some of their old man and speak to they of this temple we shall after speak they hold opinion u u gom. sup. also that on a time it rain so exceed that it drown all the low country and all man save a few which get into cave upon high hill where they shut up themselves close that no rain can get in there they have store much provision and live creature and when they perceive that it have do rain they send forth two dog but they return all miry and foul they know that the water have not yet cease after that they send forth more dog which come back again dry than do they go forth to people the earth but be mighty afflict with multitude of great serpent which have spring up out of those miry relic of the flood 10 10 this be like Guid tale of Tithon etc. Mel. 1. but at last they kill they they believe also that the world shall have a end but before the same shall go a great drought and the sun and moon which they worship shall be consume and therefore they make grievous lamentation when there be any eclipse especial of the sun fear the destruction of it and the World they believe the immortality of the soul as as we shall more fit see when we come to their burial rite chap 11 of the religious person and place confession and sacrifice in Peru @. i. of their priest oracle and temple no man may come to the a a Apollon. l. 1. guaca or idol but priest these be clothe in white and when they come to worship they prostrate themselves on the ground and hold in their hand a white cloth do speak to their god in a strange language that the people shall not understand these have the authority in their holy and consecrate both the thing live and the offering of other thing in the sacrifice they divine by inspection of the inward part especial by view of the heart if it be of a man and if they find not sign answerable to their expectation they never cease off from sacrifice till they do find they believe and make the people believe that God be not till then please with their sacrifice they bear incredible show and be have in great reputation of holiness when they be to sacrifice they abstain from woman and if they have commit any trespass they do expiate and purge the same with fast in sacrifice they do bind and blind their eye and be sometime so transport with zeal that with their nail they scratch or pull out their eye as have be see neither do the people alone admire their holiness but the prince also who will do nothing of moment without their advice they also without fear or flattery declare unto they what they have receive from their oracle the manner of their devil consultation be this in b b accost l. 5. c. 12 the night time common they enter backward to their idol and so go bend their body and head after a ugly manner and thus consult with he the answer he make be for the most part like unto a fearful hiss or to a gnash which do terrify they these oracle be now cease Apollonius c c Leu apoll. l. 1 speak of two mighty prince not far from chili one of they name lychengorme they be able to bring into the field two hundred thousand man and be very rich but the cause why I here mention they be that number of priest which he say be report to belong to one of their temple to the number of two thousand Cieza write that the door of their temple be eastward that in every temple be two image of the bigness and likeness of goat before which they burn sweet wood there be also image of serpent every profession have their several God in some temple be hang the dead carcase of man sacrifice in every province of Peru there be one principal house of adoration the ruin d d gom. c. 121 of the temple of Pachacama be still to be see that and the temple of Collao and cusco be line within with plate of gold and silver and all their service be of the same which prove great riches to the conqueror in Pachacama the sun be worship with great devotion there be keep in the same many virgin Francis pizarro e e Cieza cap. 72. send his brother Hernando when he have take Atabaliba to spoil this temple but the priest and chief man have carry away above four hundred burden of gold before he come and none do know what become of it yet do he find there some quantity of gold and silver remain they sack the sepulcher also and thence draw abundance of the say metal from that time hitherto the temple go to ruin the temple of cusco f f accost l. 5 c. 12 be very sumptuous the pavement and stone yet remain witness of the ancient splendour and magnificence this temple be like to the Pantheon of the roman for that it be the house and dwell of all the god for the Inguas do there behold the god of all the nation and province they have conquer every idol have his proper place whither they of that province come to worship it with excessive charge for the same and thereby they suppose to keep safe in obedience those province which they have conquer hold their god as it be in hostage in this house be the Pinchao which be a idol of the sun of most fine gold wrought with great riches of stone the which be place to the east with so great art as the sun at his rise do cast his beam thereon which reflect with such brightness that it seem another sun they say that at the spoil of this temple a soldier have for his part this goodly Pinchao and lose the same in a night at play whence grow a proverb of gamester in Peru they play the sun before sunrising this temple towards the east if our spanish captain in Ramusio deceive not be cover with gold which the spaniard religion forbid indian help take away there be many boil pot and other vessel of Gold in the house of the city be great store of Gold in one house or temple where they sacrifice be a seat of gold which weigh nineteen thousand peso in which two man may sit the house wherein old cusco g g Guaynacapa lie bury the pavement and wall be cover with gold and silver many pot and jarres be cover with like metal xere also report the same who be Pizarros secretary and his relation subscribe by pizarro and other chieftain that this temple be on the pavement wall and roof cover with plate of gold and silver wrought one into another and that there be twenty other house in that city the wall whereof within and without be cover with plate of Gold both these author eye-witness report that at Caximalca be a temple of the sun into which they enter unshod wall and plant with tree round about the like be also in every great town here be many other temple beside in the midst be the stately place of Atabaliba with pleasant garden and lodging in one of which be a golden cistern whereto be by two pipe from contrary passage bring both cold water and hot to use they mingle or asunder at pleasure the town have about two thousand house sever by street as straight as a line about two hundred pase long with wall of stone ten day journey from hence Atabaliba tell the spaniard that in the way towards cusco be a temple general to all the country which be very rich with offering of gold and silver much honour by his father and himself other temple have their particular idol this idol be general and that the custody thereof be commit to a wiseman which they think can foretell thing future by revelation of the say idol the city of Pachacama be famous for perwian devotion their idol be place in a darksome paint room stink and close shut make of filthy wood have at his foot many offering of gold none but the minister of his holy dare enter nor touch the wall of the house three hundred league they come thither on pilgrimage with rich offering first speak to the doorkeeper who go in and consult with the idol concern they and return his answer his priest be of his own appointment and may not approach to he without preparation of fast and abstinence from their wife through all the street of the city and on the principal gate and round about the temple be many idol of wood which they worship all the country about pay a yearly tribute hereunto the spaniard tell they this their god be a devil and teach they to defend themselves from he with the sign of the cross near to this temple be a house or oratory of the sun on a high place engird about with five wall at Tichicasa be a temple and oracle of the sun which have above six hundred man and a thousand woman that do service therein and make Chica there much gold and wealth be here offer in some part of Peru h h Cieza c. 64. sodomite as at old port and Puna they use the detestable sin against nature yea the devil so far prevail in their beastly devotion that there be boy consecrate to serve in the temple and at the time of their sacrifice and solemn feast the lord and principal man abuse they to that detestable filthiness and general in the hill-country the devil under show of holiness have bring in that vice every temple or principal house of adoration keep one man or two or more which go a tire like woman even from the time of their childhood and speak like they imitate they in every thing under i i tantum pretext of holiness and religion their principal man on principal day have that hellish commerce a friar deal with two of these ganymede about the filthiness of this vice and they answer that they hold it no fault for from their childhood they have be place there by their cacique both for that employment as also to be Priest and to keep the temple thus far have they banish nature to entertain religion and thus far have they exile the soul of religion retain only a stink carcase at Ganada in k k Cieza c. 77 and 80. Caximalca the Inguas build a temple in honour of the sun there be virgin keep which intend nothing but to weave and spin and die clothes for their idolatrous service the like be in other place in Guanuco be a stately palace of great stone and a temple of the sun adjoin with a number of virgin and Minister which have thirty thousand indian for the service thereof the service which most of they do be like to be the till of the ground feed of cattle and such like before mention which they be bind to do for the inguas and also for the guaca that be idol and idol-house but it be a wearisome pilgrimage to go and lead my reader with i to every of their temple which for the most part have the same rite according to that proportion of maintenance which belong to they @. 2 of their nun sorcerer confession and and penance Gomara l l gom. c. 121. report that their house of woman be as cloister or monastery enclose that they may never go forth they geld man which shall attend on they cut off also their nose and lip that they shall have no such appetite it be death for any to be find false and incontinent the man that enter into they be hang up by the foot these make robe for the idol and burn the overplus with the bone of white sheep and hurl the ash into the air towards the Sun if they prove with child and swear that Pachacama do it the issue be preserve of these monastery or nunnery thus write acosta there be in Peru many monastery of virgin m m accost lib. 5. cap. 15. but not any for man except for the priest and sorcerer at the least one in every province in these be two sort of woman one ancient which they call Mamacomas for the instruction of the young the other of young maiden place there for a certain time after which they be draw forth either for the god or for the ingua they call this house or monastery Aclaguagi that be the house of the choose every monastery have his vicar or governor call Appopanaca who have liberty to choose who he please of what quality soever be under eight year of age if they seem to be of a good stature and constitution the Mamacomas instruct these virgin in diverse thing needful for the life of man and in the custom and ceremony of their god afterward they take they from thence be above fourteen send they to the court with sure guard whereof some be appoint to serve the Idol and idol-temple keep their virginity for ever some other be for ordinary sacrifice that be make of maiden and other extraordinary sacrifice they make for the health death or war of the inguas and the rest serve for wife and concubine to the Ingua or such as he give they to this distribution be renew every year these monastery possess rent for the maintenance of these virgin no father may refuse his daughter if the Appopanaca require she yea many father do willing offer their daughter suppose it be a great merit to be sacrifice for the ingua if any of these Mamacomas or n n the young Virgin Nun Aollas be find to have trespass against their honour it be a inevitable chastisement to bury they alive or to put they to death by some other cruel torment the Inguas allow a kind o o accost l 5. c. 26 sorcerer of sorcerer or soothsayer which they say take upon they what form and figure they please fly far through the air in a short time they talk with the devil who answer they in certain stone or other thing which they reverence much they tell what have pass in the further part before news can come in the distance of two or three hundred league they will tell what the spaniard do or suffer in their civil war to work this divination they shut up themselves up into a house and become drink till they lose their sense a day after they answer to that which be demand some affirm they use certain unction the indian say that the old woman do common use this office of witchcraft especial in some place they tell of thing steal or lose the Anaconas which be the servant of the spaniard consult with they and they make answer have first speak with the devil in a obscure place so as the Anaconas hear the sound of the voice but understand it not nor see any body they use the herb Villea with their Chica drink make of Mayz and therewith make themselves drink that they may be fit for the devil conference the conference with these witch be one of the great let to the proceed of the gospel among they among their religious person I may reckon their confessor they p p c 25. Confession like the popish hold opinion that all adversity be the effect of sin for remedy whereof they use sacrifice moreover they confess themselves verbal almost in all province and have confessor appoint by their superior to that end with some reservation of case for the superior they receive penance and that sometime very sharp when they have nothing to give the confessor this office of confessor be likewise exercise by woman the manner of the Ychuyri ychuyri be most general in the province of Collasuio they discover by lot or by the view of some beast if any thing be conceal and punish they with many blow of a stone upon the shoulder until they have reveal all after that they enjoin they penance and do sacrifice they likewise use confession when their child wife husband or cacique be sick or in any great exploit when the Ingua be sick all the province confess themselves chief those of Collao the Confessor be bind to hold their confession secret but in certain case limit the sin which they chief confess be kill one another out of war steal to take another man wife to give poison or sorcery to do any harm to be forgetful in the reverence of their guaca not to observe feast to speak ill of or to disobey the Ingua they accuse not themselves of secret sin the Ingua confess himself to no man but to the sun that he may tell they to Viracocha of he to obtain forgiveness which do he make a certain bath to cleanse himself in a run river say I have tell my sin to the sun receive they then river and carry they to the sea where they may never appear more other that confess use likewise those bath when any man child die he be hold for a grievous sinner say that it be for their sin that the son die before the father such therefore after they be confess be bathe in the say bath and then come a deform person to whip they with certain nettle if the sorcerer or enchanter by their lot or divination affirm that any sick body shall die the sick man make no difficulty to kill his own son though he have no other hope by that mean to escape death say that in his place he offer his son in sacrifice the penance enjoin they in confession be to fast to give apparel gold or silver to remain in the mountain and to receive many stripe upon the shoulder @. 3 of their sacrifice the sacrifice of the indian may be reduce q q gom c 121 accost l. 5. c. 18. into three kind of insensible thing of beast of men. of the first sort be their sacrifice of Coca a herb of much esteem of Mayz feather gold and silver in figure of little beast or in the form of that which he seek for also of sweet wood and diverse other thing Sacrifice and Offering whereby their temple become so rich they make these offering to obtain a good wind health fair weather and the like of the second sort of sacrifice be their cuye which be like rabbit and for rich man in matter of importance Pacos the great camel-fashioned sheep with curious observation of the number colour and time the manner of kill their sacrifice be the same which the moor now use hang the beast by the right fore-leg turn his eye towards the sun speak certain word according to the quality of the sacrifice for if it be colour they direct their word to the thunder that they may want no water if white to the sun that he may shine on they if gray to Viracocha in cusco they do every year kill and sacrifice with this solemnity a shear sheep to the sun and do burn it clad in a red wastecoate cast small basket of Coca into the fire they sacrifice also small bird on this manner they kindle a fire of thorn and cast the small bird in certain officer go about with round stone wherein be carve or paint snake lion toad tiger and say that be let the victory be give we with other word they draw forth certain black sheep call Urca which have be keep certain day without meat and therefore use these word so let the heart of our enemy be weaken as these beast and if they find that a certain piece of flesh behind the heart be not consume by fast they take it for a bad sign they sacrifice also black dog which they slay and cast into a plain with certain ceremony cause some kind of man to eat the flesh which they do lest the Ingua shall be hurt with poison and for this cause they r r fast fast from morning till the star be up and then glut themselves this be fit to withstand their enemy god they offer shell of the sea to the fountain say that the shell be the daughter of the sea the mother of all water these shell they use in manner in all sacrifice they offer sacrifice of whatsoever they do sow or raise up there be Indian appoint to do these sacrifice to the fountain spring and river which pass through their town or by their farm that they may not cease run but always water their ground Gomara s s gom. sup. say that their priest marry not go little abroad fast much although no fast last above eight day and that be in their seedtime and in harvest and in gather of gold and make war and talk with the devil yea some of they I think for fear because they be blindfold when they speak with he put out their eye they enter into the temple weep and lament which the word t t Guaca signify mourn Guaca signify they touch not their idol with their hand without clean and white linen they bury in the temple the offering of gold and silver in their sacrifice they cry aloud and be never quiet all that day nor night they anoint with blood the face of their idol and door of their temple they sprinkle also their sepulcher the u u accost sup. sorcerer do conjure to know what time the sacrifice shall be make which be end they do gather of the contribution of the people what shall be sacrifice and deliver they to such as have charge of the sacrifice in the begin of winter at such time as the water increase by the moisture of the weather they be diligent in sacrifice to the fountain and river which run by their city and farm they do not sacrifice to the fountain and spring of the desert and even to this day continue this their respect to these spring and Rivers they have a special care to the meeting of two river and there they wash themselves for their health first anoint themselves with the flower of Mayz or some other thing add thereto diverse ceremony which they do likewise in their bath their three kind of sacrifice be the most unkind and unnatural namely of men. we have show before of their butchery at the burial of their great lord beside this they use in Peru to sacrifice young child from four or six year old to ten the great part of sacrifice be for the affair that do import the Ingua as in sickness for his health for victory in war at the coronation or give he the royal roll. in this solemnity they sacrifice two hundred child the manner of sacrifice be to drown and bury they with certain ceremony sometime they cut off their head anoint themselves with the blood from one ear to another they do likewise sacrifice virgin of such as be bring from their monastery the common sort as you have hear be like to die will sacrifice their own son to the sun or Viracocha desire he to be so content and spare the father life Xeres xeres relate that they sacrifice their child and with their blood anoint their idol face and their Temple-door and sprinkle the same also on the sepulcher of the dead and that those which be sacrifice go thereunto voluntary with dance song and mirth when they sacrifice they y y Gomara observe the heart and other the inward part for divination and if they see a good sign after their bad construction z z Sansovin and Selua p. 5. they dance and sing with great merriment if a bad they be very heavy but good or bad they will be sure to drink deep they eat not their human sacrifice but sometime dry they and preserve they in coffin of silver it be a endless toil to reckon up all the superstition of Peru in which be so many nation agree in disagree from truth yet disagree in their diversify error to let pass Paucura which fat sacrifice and eat their captive and every Tuesday offer two indian to the devil and the drunken province of Carapa where they eat little and drink much at once drink in and piss out the mitimae which be early at their meat and make but one drink in the day which last from morning till night by Bacchus privilege enjoy without control any woman they like the Canari put their wife to the drudgery abroad while themselves spin weave trick up themselves and perform other womanish function at home the Galani make their captive drink and then the chief priest cut off their head and sacrifice they general in the mountain they be more cruel but all observe bloody beastly diabolical ceremony the recount whereof must need weary the patient reader chap 12 of their feast sepulcher and other perwian superstition @. i. of their calendar and holiday before we speak of the perwian festival time it be not amiss to take some more general view of their calendar they a a accost l 6. c. 3. divide their year into so many day just as we do and into so many month or moon to make the computation of their year certain they use this industry upon the mountain about cusco there be twelve pillar set in order and in such distance as every month one of these pillar do note the rise and set of the sun they call they Saccanga by mean whereof they teach and show the feast and the season fit to sow and reap and for other thing they do certain sacrifice to these pillar of the sun every month have his peculiar name and feast they sometime begin the year in january but since a Ingua call Pachacuto which signify a reformer of the temple begin their year in December by reason as it seem of the sun return from Capricorn their near tropic I read not of any week they observe for which they have not so certain a rule as the sun course be for the year and the moon for the month they observe in Peru two kind of feast some ordinary which fall out in certain month of the year and other extraordinary which be for certain cause of importance every month of the year they make feast and sacrifice and have this alike the offering of a 100 sheep but of unlike colour and form according to the month in the first month they make their first and principal feast therefore call capacrayme that be to say a rich and principal feast in it they offer a great number of sheep and lamb in sacrifice and burn they with sweet wood then they cause gold and silver to be bring upon certain sheep set upon they three image of the sun and three of the thunder the father the son and the brother in these feast they dedicate the b b knight of Peru Inguas child put the guara or ensign upon they and they pierce their ear then some old man do whip they with sling and anoint their face with blood in sign that they shall be true knight to the Ingua no stranger may remain in cusco during this month and this feast but at the end thereof they enter and be make partaker of the feast and sacrifice after this manner accost l. 5. c. 23. the Mamacomas or nun of the sun make little loaf of the flower of maize die and mingle with the blood of white sheep which they do sacrifice that day b b a rare resemble the christian communion in a devilish apishness then they command that all stranger shall enter who set themselves in a certain order and the priest which be of a certain lineage descend from give to every one a morsel of these small loaf say that they give it they to the end they shall be unite and confederate with the Ingua and that they advise they not to speak or think any evil against the Ingua but always to bear he good affection for that this piece shall be a witness of their intention and if they do not as they ought will discover they they carry these small loaf in great platter of gold and silver appoint for that purpose and all do receive and eat those piece thank the sun and the Ingua this manner of communicate they use likewise in the ten month call coyarayme which be September in the feast call Cytua they likewise send of these loaf to all the guaca of the realm whither the people assemble to receive they to who they say that the sun have send they that in sign that he will have they honour he and the cacique this continue from the time of Ingua Yupangui who we may call the perwian Numa till the spaniard substitute in place thereof their mass a mass of c c more monstrous absurdity in their transubstantion bread-worshipping god-eating which they can also use to combine subject not to their inguas or lawful prince but against they as our Powder-traitor powder-traitor do then the former notwithstanding the fair pretext of christian and catholic title Vega pag. 2. lib. 8. c. 1. tell of the solemnity in cuzco observe by the spaniard carry in procession sumptuous hearse with image in they of Christ our lady etc. attend by the indian their cacique and noble honour the feast after their wont pagan rite viz. some clothe with lion skin their head enclose in those of the beast because they say the lion be beginner of their stock other with the wing of the great bird Condore or as angel be paint from which they suppose themselves descend other with other device paint with Rivers fountain lake hill mountain cave because their first progenitor come forth of such other with strange device of apparel plate with gold and silver other with garland thereof other in monstrous shape with vizor with skin of diverse beast with strange gesture and feign themselves fool etc. one counterfeit riches another poverty and every province with that which seem to they the best invention with great variety they can imagine to give content thus have they use to solemnize the feast of their king and thus in my time say Vega they solemnize the feast of the most holy sacrament the true God our redeemer and lord every division of the indian sing in their own language and not the general of the court with flute and musical instrument some have their wife also to help they sing praise to God and the spanish priest and secular for their conversion after they ascend seven or eight step to worship the sacrament each squadron division or company sever from the rest ten or twelve pase descend another way each nation according to their antiquity as they have be conquer by the Ingas the last first and the Ingas themselves last of all these go before the priest in the least and poor company as have lose their empire and inheritance these squadron be go the canary succeed in a squadron with their hearse etc. the Ingas and they be ready to quarrel and the spanish officer force to quiet they by reason the canary carry a head of a indian which he have slay in a duel in a battle betwixt the spaniard and the indian which the Inga say be not by his own force but by the power of our lord Pachacamac here present and the spaniard blessing etc. the justice be fain to take away the head from the canary the other cry Auca against they the covent of saint Domingo in cuzco be sometime the temple of the sun of a procession from thence on saint mark day with a tame bull. see cap. 2. seq. which take up a excommunicate person and cast he forth of the church etc. 1556. the indian call the sacrament Pachacamac but to return to our capacrayme it be strange that the devil have not only bring in a apish imitation of christian sacrment but of the trinity also in their pagan rite for the father son and brother call Apompti Churunti and Intiquacqui that be father sun son sun brother sun have some show of that great Mystery in like manner they name the three image of the Chuquilla or God of the air whence be thunder rain and snow they have one guac where they worship a idol call Tangatanga which they say be one in three and three in One. thus do the devil despite the truth which he will seem to imitate in the second month call Camey beside the sacrifice which they make they cast the ash into the river follow five or six league after pray it carry they into the sea for that the Viracocha shall there receive this present in the three four and five month they offer a hundred sheep black speckle and gray with many other thing in the six month they offer a hundred sheep more of all colour and then make a feast bring Mayz from the field into the house which they yet use this feast be make come from the farm to the house say certain song and pray that the Mayz may long continue they put a quantity of the Mayz the best that grow in their farm in a thing which they call Pirua with certain ceremony watch three night then do they put it in the rich garment they have and be thus wrap and dress they worship this Pirua hold it in great veneration and say it be the mother of the Mayz of their inheritance and that by this mean the Mayz augment and be preserve in this month they make a particular sacrifice and the witch demand of this Pirua if it have strength enough to continue until the next year and if it answer no than they carry this maiz to the farm whence it be take to burn and make another Pirua as before and this foolish vanity still continue in the seven month they make the feast Intiraymi and sacrifice a hundred guanaco in honour of the sun they make many image of quinua-wood carve all attire with rich garment they dance and cast flower in the highway and thither come the indian paint and sing in the eight month they burn a hundred sheep all gray of the colour of Viscacha with the former solemnity in their nine month they burn a hundred sheep of chesnut colour and likewise a thousand cuye a kind of rabbit to the end the frost air water and sun shall not hurt their farm in the ten month call Coyarami they burn a hundred white sheep that have fleece and then they make the feast Situa in this manner they assemble together the first day of the moon before the rise thereof carry torch in their hand and when they see it they cry aloud say d d they which do this be call panconcos let all harm go away strike one another with their torch which be do they go to the common bath to the river and fountain and every one to his own bath set themselves to drink four day together in this month also the Mamacomas make their loaf as be say of communicate with the sun and the Ingua the bath drunkenness and some relic of this feast Situa remain still with the ceremony a little different but very secret in the eleven month they offer also three hundred sheep and if they want water to procure rain they set a black sheep tie in the midst of a plain pour much Chica about it and give it nothing to eat till it rain Chica what it be this e e accost l. 4. c. 16. Chica be a drink or wine make of Mayz steep and boil and will soon make one drink then wine of grape they have another way to make it by champ the Maiz which they hold then best when it be do after the beastly manner by old wither woman this drunken people will spend whole day and night in drink it and it be therefore forbid by the Law but what law can prevail against the devil and the drunkard we need not go to Peru to prove this the twelve and last month they sacrifice a hundred sheep and solemnize the feast call Raymacantar rayquis in this month they prepare what be necessary for the child that shall be make novice the month follow the old man make a certain show together with the child in round and turn which they common do when it rain too much or too little and in the time of plague among the extraordinary feast feast extraordinary which be many the most famous be that which they call this have no time prefix but by necessity or distress and then the people prepare themselves thereto by fast two day during which they do neither company with their wife nor eat any meat with salt or garlic nor drink any Chica all do assemble together in one place where no stranger nor any beast may be admit they have garment and ornament which serve only for this feast they march very quiet f f procession in procession their head cover with their veil sound of drum without speak one to another this continue a day and a night the day follow they dance and make good cheer for two day and two night together say that their prayer be accept even still they use one which be somewhat like this call Ayma with garment only serve to that end and make procession with their dumme have fast before conclude with good cheer and although the indian forbear sacrifice because of the spaniard yet they use many ceremony still which have their beginning from their ancient superstition @. 2 of the funeral in Peru and the place adjoin and somewhat of the present estate of those part the indian g g accost li. 5. c 7. of Peru believe common that the soul live after this life and that the good be in glory and the bad in pain they use a wonderful care h h funeral to preserve the body which they honour after death their successor give they garment and make sacrifice to they especial of the Inguas of who we have speak before in their bloody funeral the woman he love best be slay and multitude of other attendant of all sort for his new family in the other world and that after many song and drunkenness they sacrifice to they many thing especial young child and with the blood they make a stroke on the dead man face from one ear to another this cruelty be common through a great part of the east and west indies as in their place this history do show you witty avoid once by a i i witty escape Portugal who be a captive and to be slay at the funeral of his lord and have but one eye see better to save his life then if he have both for he tell they that such a deform and maim fellow will be a disgrace to his master in the other life and so persuade the executor or executioner if you will to seek a new choice the indian have another ceremony more general which be to set meat and drink upon the grave of the dead imagine they do feed thereon at this day many indian infidel do secret draw their dead out of the churchyard and bury they on hill or upon passage of mountain or else in their own house they have also use to put gold and silver in their mouth hand and bosom and to apparel they with new garment durable and well line they believe that the soul of the dead wander up and down endure cold thirst hunger and travel and for this cause they use their anniverssary carry they clothes meat and drink Pedro de Cieza k k Cieza p. 1. c. 62 report that in cenu in the province of cartagena which we here mention for proximity of rite rather than of place near to a temple build in honour of the devil there be take forth a innumerable quantity of sepulcher more than a million of they old and new himself be there present much treasure be find in the grave juan de la torre take forth of one sepulchre l l rich sepulcher more than five hundred thousand peso the great man adorn their sepulcher with vault and tower and have with they inter their woman servant meat Chicha arm and ornament he add that the devil in the shape of some principal person decease will sometime appear and show they news out of that other world how he live and fare there and hence it seem come that spoil of so much wealth and so many person for their funeral but take heed reader that you do not believe it be the devil that be wont to appear in some habit of afflict soul and demand dirge and mass for their manumission out of purgatory purgatory alas the devil be confine to the indies and will never have be so good a purveyor for the pope Kitchin and certes if our christian ancestor have not their wife and good bury in their grave with food raiment and ornament yet these thing be also bury with they while the fear of purgatory make they willing to endow the priest and monastery and bestow on light and other rite that which shall have maintain their house their wife and child but how come we from Peru to Rome nay how come Rome if not from Peru as more late discover yet with Peru and with and from other heathen nation in the world in her manifold ceremony and superstitious rite as this relation of Peru for their confession procession and many other rite will show and one day I hope more full to acquaint the world when we come in our pilgrimage to visit christian-antichristian Rome worse sepulcher than the former to return to our american history be those which Herera mention within fifty league of Popayan where the husband have be see to eat the wife father and son brother and sister have renew a near proximity and butcherly incorporation where captive be fat and bring forth with song his member by piecemeal cut off and eat while himself live and see it since the inhabit of saint james of arma they have eat more than eight thousand indian and some spaniard this our author testify let we a little view the present state of Peru that los reyes in twelve degree consist of three thousand household it be one of the best climate in the world not subject to plague hunger rain thunder but always clear it be the seat of the viceroy and royal council and inquisition John Ellis which be partaker of sir Richard Hawkins his aduentre be say that lima be near as big as London within the wall the house be of lome there be nigh a hundred thousand Negros it rain not there but it do within twelve league there be maintain a hundred m m 1000 ducat a year a piece horseman and a hundred carbine at paricavo it be as cold as in England in winter they pass to cusco in those way before mention make by Guainacapa cusco be now without a wall as large as Bristol at Potossi there work near a hundred thousand indian bring in course thither to the mine by the casique between cusco and Potossi be continual trade the lord by the way will entertain man with abundance of plate and guard if they like they with three or four hundred indian imperial village of Potosi be in nineteen degree it have five hundred household of spaniard and about fifty thousand indian go and come Alexandro ursivo al. ursivo who say he live in Peru thirty and four year and have travel through all the kingdom have write that in Potosi and Porto be three hundred mine of spaniard and five thousand of indian and that the king part there be two million of silver in chili one and one and a half of gold all the gold and silver which yearly come to lima be twelve million this lima be the same n n ortel theat with los reyes before mention and be a Archiepiscopal see and have under it the bishop of quito cusco Guamanga arequipa pax plata trugillo Guanuco Chachapoia portas vetus Guaiaquil Popaian Carchi saint Michael and saint Francis @. 3 observation of american rite out of Jeronymo ROMAN IEronymo Roman a spanish friar de la repub. de las India occident l. 1. c. 2. he have write 3. whole book of American rite and custom have write somewhat large of the indian ceremony in his second tome of the commonwealth of the world especial of new Spain and Peru but therein and in other his relation differ from other perhaps more understand writer from Florida to panama he affirm there be little religion or polity that they acknowledge one true God immortal and invisible reign in heaven who they call Yocahwaguamaorocoti which they say have a mother name atabex and a brother call Guaca he tell of their image that a indian go through a wood see the tree shake which strike he in fear he approach to that which make most noise and ask what he will have and who he be the tree the devil or the liar make answer that he shall first go call a or priest which come to the tree demand why he be send for and be by the tree instruct how to make thereof a image and temple and ordain sacrifice and ceremony which by cut of that tree be present effect and the dedication yearly solemnize the truth of the history I know not of the mystery be plain that they which make they be like unto they and such block may best be teach of block their blockish devotion in new Spain the sun he say be their chief God and they erect to he the most sumptuous temple in the world beside other artificial deity innumerable in matter and form infinite diversify like bird beast serpent one kind like the picture of Eve with the serpent like the grecian Bacchus like their mitre bishop like frog degree of Priest in Cholola be a metropolis which have as many temple as be day in the year one the most famous he say in the world the foot or foundation of the spire contain a crossbow shoot in breadth and much more in height the spire itself be a league or a lie in height etc. or other natural or imaginary form any thing which can either hurt or benefit they they observe as Go in Mexico they have he say diverse degree of their priest the first of the high bishop or pope in the mexican language call Ilchuatecotl in the Totona tongue Papa as also we have before observe the second be as a bishop and have other inferior priest subordinate when the spaniard erect their devotion in Mexico they do not pray for the Papa lest they may be interpret of this ethnic pope but call he the high bishop their bishop they call hupixe which signify the great minister of God their priest Tetuy that be God officer other function bare name of their particular office treasurer vestry-keeper and the rest some province in new Spain have six priest which be as it be patriarch or archbishop all under the pope aforesaid all addict to abstinence and chastity not drink strong drink and cast their eye to the ground if they see a woman profess much gravity and mortification esteem as saint and of great authority and sway in the s eat the elder son of lord succeed in their temporal estate the second be make a priest and the pope be son to the king or some chief lord in the country after who death the most ancient succeed be solemn anoint by the priest with a ointment mix with the blood of circumcise infant the temple be all call Tehutlamacax a word compound of Tehu which signify God and Tlamacax a house or mansion many inferior office in the temple be execute by citizen or honourable person and other which live near the temple under a special master of ceremony call Telpuchitlato many other thing he write of the Religion of new Spain partly agree with our former relation partly diverse or contrary the like also of Peru where the chief priest he say be style Vilaoma the temple be most magnificent which they erect on high ground or hil top make four round Mount of earth high each and lesser than the former in the midst build the temple in four square like cloister of monastery within which be altar and in the most eminent place the rich and pompous image of the sun their temple have two door to which they ascend by thirty step they be rich on the inner side be for the most part gold silver or other rich metal on the eastern part be a oratory or chancel against the sunrising ascend by six step with a thick wall and a hollow part therein which contain the image of the sun with ray of gold as we paint it by reflection of the sunbeam yield a sunlike lustre of all their temple those of Pachicama and cusco be most famous to which be pilgrimage from the province as to saint james our lady and other famous holy in Christendom three hundred league distant if I shall follow this friar in his large observation of the american rite I may soon out-go your patience and somewhere perhaps the truth content myself therefore with that before observe out of the most judicious author if your author be judicious I remit those that will further know his relation to himself have choose a little and that here by itself insert and thus we take our leave of this continent and must into the adjoin sea to observe matter of principal note we shall there find chap 13 of the sea and island adjoin to America @. i. of the ladrone Margarita and Cubagua and the sea betwixt they a a ben. l. 3. c. 22 and now I must obey the spaniard law which will admit no stranger traffic in Peru and be jealous of any corrival which shall hold long and more familiar discourse with America although they have rather force she to their lust than woo she to their love I also begin to grow weary of this travel in another world b b to Leigh and London too siluest. in Du Bartas willing to look homeward and therefore be now embark on the perwian coast where the peaceable sea may free i of those former danger whereto my pilgrimage be subject in pass along snowy and fiery hill deceitful unwholesome bog scorch sandy plain wilderness inhabit with wild beast habitation people with wild and more beastly man and now by this commodity of my Paper-bark I may both direct my course homeward and yet walk as intend another contrary or diverse voyage and even as those heavenly planet c c Planeta signify a wanderer in their wander and yet most constant course be guide by the general motion of that universal wheel and yet forget not their own peculiar so I in my wander discovery propound all and every place of the world to be the place of my exercise and subject of my labour but yet the smoke of Ithaca d d Ithaca be the place where vlysses dwell which after many year travel he so much desire to see be sweet and my know all will be but a melancholy maze if I shall not come home to fill english ear with the news the reader also by this time weary will be glad to hear of a end in this sea we may see many island which nature have seem to set as sentinel along the coast to hold their watch as skowt to espy and as garrison to defend their sovereign earth lest the ocean by secret undermine or by violent and tempestuous force shall be too busy a encrocher the earth also on this e e the tide be strong on the south sea then on the north and high by many degree pet. mart. dec. 3 lib. 2. side find herself more strong assail then on the other have summon they all home to her border and place they for her better defence in station near she not suffer they to stay abroad as in other sea be usual so that there be almost no island in this wide of sea the peaceable but near the main if there be any they be obscure small and not worthy our relation as for those of Solomon and new Guinea with their neighbour they be reckon to f f terra australis another Continent if they be not continent themselves and for the Arcipelago of saint Lazaro these island may be reckon unruly borderer which while it be uncertain whether they shall acknowledge the sovereignty of Asia or America be loyal to none and therefore where they be best know be know by the name of g g the Ladrones or island of thief thief a name fit their nature and disposition thus do Magellane h h a Pigafetta pet. mart. dec. 5. lib 6. find they from who beside other thing they steal his boat which by force he be force to recover such do our countryman i i Navig thom. Cand sh ap. Hak. in master candish renown voyage find they who see also their image of wood in the head of their boat like the image of the devil temple and saint best fit their devotion and such do k k Navig Ol n. in additament 9 p. Americ Oliver Noort find they who come cry about he iron iron offer he fruit in exchange for piece of iron and if any opportunity offer itself steal close or open any thing they can lay hold on they shoot at they in vain so active be they in dive under the water and continue there as if they have be fit alike to both element the woman also no less than the man they be a beastly people pollute themselves in promiscuous lust and brand many of they with the mark of their intemperance the pock have eat their nose and lip they be brown fat long of stature the man go naked the woman wear a leaf before they so that they bear some resemblance to the picture of Adam and Eve their boat be twenty foot long and but a foot and half broad cunning wrought they be extreme greedy of iron of which metal the hollander cast five piece into the sea to try they and one of they fetch they all out but lest these thief rob we of our intend devotion and our reader of patience in long stay here we will look back towards the strait and so compass the other side of America many island we may see here near the shore all along as we pass but what shall we trouble the reader with name I have small devotion to they unless I have some intelligence of some devotion in they further than that wherein they agree with the perwian rite wherewith you be last tire in the strait be some island of small quantity of small dignity and who will stay there where the pengwin l l certain fowl which breed on the island be your best host the rest be giant or man-eating savage and in the next out of the strait but seal who all can yield but a inhospitall hospitality neither have provident nature in all those coast of Chica or Brasill be prodigal of her island store foresee that they will either be usurp by seal and sea monster or other more unnatural and monstrous inhuman shape of devilish inhumanity from the land it seem she have be the more spare in the number nobleness or quantity of island in all those sea which we have most swift furrow that she may in the great bay more bountiful impart her plenty and show her excellence in that kind this be a great field as it be sow with island of all sort the earth seem a love mother which hold open her spacious lap and hold out her stretch arm between paria and Florida the ocean also as jealous of the earth more natural inheritance and claim unto they seem to neglect his course to the southward and here set in with a violent current always force his watery force to walk or rather to run and fly these round to see that the continent keep her hand off and not once touch his conquer possession that though like Tantalus she seem always to be close her open hand and mouth upon they yet be they keep by this officious watchfulness of the sea that she can never incorporate and unite they to herself easy can they unfold this mystery that be acquaint with the of the earth m m pet. mart. dec. 3. l. 6. and the swiftness of the current in this vast space of earth and sea set in at paria and after out again at Florida with admirable and incredible violence to begin then at paria for of Orenoque and his mouth full of island and of trinidad that have escape the river and betake herself whole to Neptune love we have already speak here two row and rank of island make show and muster of themselves the one extend east and west the other north and south of the former be Margarita which like many a gallant who back rob his belly who bowel empty of necessary always be croak and complain of superfluity in ornament and fashion so have she a n n mundus world of pearl to adorn she but want water to satisfy her thirst store of pearl she can communicate of her plenty water she be fain to borrow of her neighbour the like we may say of Cubagua her next neighbour that by her store of Pearl have win suitor from our and the american world who she can neither bid eat or drink of her Land-hospitality where grass and water be want but as it usual come to pass with these fashion-monger which neglect necessary must at last be neglect of their ornament too so this island which sometime be so rich notwithstanding all her pearl she pawn for her diet in so much that the king o o Botero Isole l. 3. five amount ordinary to fifteen thousand ducat a year yet now seem almost beggar her Pearl-fis and pearlefisher most of they go and now it be time for we to be go from she too yet let we hear this relation of Herera p p description of the indies before we go of a earthquake which happen there the first of September 1530. which raise the sea four fathom overthrow the fortress open the earth in many place whence issue much salt-water as black as ink stink of brimstone the mountain of Cariaco remain open many die of fear and some be drown captain William Parker 1601. have take puerto bello and Melendes the governor land in Margarita and receive five hundred pound in pearl for ransom of prisoner take a ship which come from angola with three hundred and seventy negro Ouiedo have write in his nineteenth book of the island of Cubagua it have no tree and but little grass there be a fountain on the east part thereof near the sea which cast forth a bituminous substance like oil which be say to be profitable for medicine and may be find two or three league float in the sea @. 2 of the cannibal island the whale thresher swordfish shark and other fish and observation of those sea little business can we find any further in follow that western rank Orchilia Oruba and the rest and therefore will look northwards to that other rank we speak of where leave tobago on the right hand we see before we Granata saint Vincent saint Luciae dominica and then circle to the northwest desiderata saint Christopher holy cross and other who name without other matter of history will be but tedious to the reader these and a multitude of other unmention be call the island of the caribe or cannibal the inhabitant q q pet. mart. dec. 8. l. 6. eat man flesh and pass to other island with their boat to the hunt of man as other hunter do for beast Carib signify stranger for so the more innocent indian esteem they at home they only cover their privity but in time of war they use many ornament they be nimble beardless use little pincer to pull out the hair shoot poison arrow bear hole in their ear and nostril for elegancy which the rich sort deck with gold the poor with shell from the ten or twelve year of their age they carry leaf to the quantity of nut all the day in either cheek which they take not out but when they receive meat or drink with that medicine they make their tooth black they call other man woman for their white tooth and beast for their hair their tooth continue to the end of their life without ache or rottenness when the man go on man-hunting which they do sometime in long and far expedion the woman manful defend the coast against their enemy and hence it be in martyr r r pet. mart. dec. 3. l. 9 judgement that the spaniard tell of island inhabit only with woman which may be s s Palephatus fab. l. 1. say the amazon be thracian man close shave in long garment and therefore call woman but deny that there be ever any such amazonian expedition as history speak of the true interpretation happy of I know not how many place in America beside those of Asia and Africa report amazonian Pontius t t pet. mart. dec. 1. l. 2. Ouied. hist l. 3 will war upon the cannibal but on the island of Guadalupea his woman be take his man slay himself force to depart from that both place and enterprise Columbus in his second voyage land on this island where he see their round house hang bed of Cotton and certain image which he have think have be their god but by interpreter after learned that they be but for ornament and that they worship nothing but the sun and moon although they make certain image of Cotton to the similitude of such fantasy as they say appear to they in the night they find earthen vessel like we also in their kitchen man flesh duck flesh and goose flesh all in one pot and other on the spit ready to be lay to the fire enter into their inner lodging they find faggot of the bone of man arm and leg which they reserve to make head for their arrow they find in their village one hall or palace to which they assemble as to their theatre or play place the inhabitant at the sight of the spaniard be flee in their house they find about thirty child captive which be reserve to be eat but they take they for their interpreter here they have parrot bigger than pheasant with back breast and belly of purple colour they use to prey on hispaniola and saint john island or Buriquen and if these in their war with the cannibal take any of they they be sure to go to pot eve in the first sense and to be eat master Percy say in Guadalupa they find a bath so hot that it boil they piece of pork in half a hour in menis also they find a bath like we in England in Mona they kill two wild boar and see a wild bull which be a ell between the horn three league from thence be Monetta where the fowl fly over they as thick as hail and make they deaf with their noise they can set foot on the ground but shall tread on fowl or egg wherewith they lade two boat in three hour master challenge m h. challenge say that in the seven antile of saint Vincent Granado Lucia Matalina dominica Guadalupa and Ayscy be not above one thousand indian they bring away a friar name blaseus which have be sixteen month slave in dominica who they save his fellow be slay because he teach they to make sail a little before master Hawkins be there in the year 1564. u u nau. m. John Hawkins ap. Hak tom. 3. a spanish caravell come to water at dominica one of the cannibal island the savage cut her cable in the night and so she drive on shore and all her company be surprise and eat by they master George Percy relate of the dominican which they visit in their Virginia voyage that they paint themselves to keep off the Muskitas that they wear the hair of their head a yard long plait in three plait suffer none on their face cut their skin in diverse work or embroidery they eat their enemy lap spital spit into their mouth like dog worship the devil poison their arrow when they be here they have sight of the chief game which nature yield the fight of the whale with the sword fish and thresher which kill he in two hour fight the swordfish be not 10 10 s r. Hawkins great but strong-made his sword grow upright out of his neck like a bone four or five inch broad and above a yard long sometime they be great with prickle on both side the thresher have a broad and thick tail both these hold a natural conspiracy against this grant of nature the one on the top y y the like sea-hawking be between the fly fish which have as it be bat wing and the bird alcatraz and the Bonito the one in the air the other in the sea pursue he of the water thresh he upon the head with violent blow that sound as a piece of ordnance and may be hear two league force he to hide his head in his mother lap which yet betray he there to the swordfish who be ready to receive he on his natural blade and stain the sea with his blood the whale have no remedy but with bellow groan hear further than the thresher blow to seek to the shore and there embay to make his part good without danger of a underminer otherwise become prey to these his adversary thus we see greatness not always exempt from danger yea perish by fine force of weak enemy this our author for we can pass from island to island but by sea and may not be whole idle by the way tell that betwixt the Tropic they be attend continual with three kind of fish dolphin bonito and shark the first like to the rainbow his head differ from other fish be half a span straight up erect from his mouth the great four foot long a school of these follow they near one thousand league know to be the same by some hurt wherewith they have mark they the bonito be like mackril but great some as big as a man can lift the shark have their mouth under their belly that they can bite their prey without a half turn and the help of his tail these be the most ravenous and some hold ominous they have find in their belly hat cap shoe rope end and whatsoever hang by the ship side they have thirteen row of tooth they spawn not but whelp like the dog or wolf and at night or towards storm receive their young into their mouth for safety I have see they say sir Richard go in and out be above a foot and half long little fish always accompany they and feed on the scrap they be less than a pilchard streak black and white as in colour livery keep on the head fin and back of the other another observation of this our author be the scurvy or scorbute a a orange lemon and the like be excellent remedy to this disease whereunto they be much subject in navigation near the line the cause he ascribe the weakness of the stomach in immoderate heat salt meat special fish calm and the sea-water which can not but infect the world if it be not otherwise affect and move with wind tide and current a instance whereof he show in the queen navy in the year of our lord 1590. at the asore many month becalm the sea thereby be replenish with several sort of jelly and form of serpent adder and snake green yellow black white and some particoloured whereof many have life be a yard and half or two yard long and they can hardly draw a bucket of water clear of some corruption withal in twenty year wherein he use the sea he can give account of two thousand consume with this disease in this voyage they be force for want of fresh water to distil sea-water which they find wholesome and nourish I may follow our author in his observation of these sea which he say under the line be best to cross in january February and march and of the island of cape verde b b the flame of Fuego he say be see twenty league in the night elsewhere by we observe be in the height of these island where now we be discover which he say be the most unwholesome in the world and have half his people on this coast sick of shake burn frenzy-fever a man can scarce go on the earth though well shod when the sun shine and the breeze which in the afternoon cool they from the north-east pierce they also with sudden cold so that the inhabitant go thick clothe with cap and kercher beside their hat their suit of thick cloth and gown well line or fur to prevent danger sleep in the open air or in the moonshine be there very unwholesome the moon shine on his shoulder on the coast of Guinee leave he with such pain that for twenty hour space he be like to run mad but what moonshine have make i lunatic to run from these american island to those and the coast of Africa patience reader and I will bring thou back in a fresh pursuit in dominica where we be last on shore it be relate by one which write the earl of Cumberland his voyage to port rico that they have their several house to other use private but have a common hall or diet for to eat in together as Lycurgus institute to prevent riot among his spartan the maid in this island be say to wear no garter and the first night of their marriage they tie they so hard that the flesh hang over in Tortuga they toll certain spaniard ashore under pretence of traffic and then eat they @. 3 of Boriquen jamaica Cuba and the lucayae BOriquen c c Botero vol. 2. or saint john be three hundred mile long and seventy broad traverse with a rough mountain which yield many river the spaniard have there some town the earl of Cumberland in the year 1597. have by his sea force stay the go of five carike to the indies whereby the king of Spain lose three million and the merchant four time as much sail to saint John port rico in this island and take it with diverse fort here be a bishop see d d Ouied. l. 6. c. 1. mention this bishopric and monastery and cathedral church with a friary four hundred soldier in pay beside three hundred other it be account the maiden town and invincible and be the spanish key and their first town in the indies he bring from thence near fourscore cast piece and much other wealth this island be first conquer by John ponce and by he inhabit the natural be altogether like in religion and manner to the inhabitant of hispaniola and so be the plant and fruit also Ouiedo have write hereof large in his sixteen book there grow the tree call santo more excellent than Guaiacan for the neapolitan and many other disease there be also white gum good for ship in stead of pitch and there be bat which the inhabitant do eat these island be not so well people as in former time and many of they be retire place of rebel and fugitive which take this shelter against the spanish cruelty hispaniola be the next island of name but shall have a place by itself as a map and Summarie of all the other jamaica be almost as large as Boriquen e e of it read Ouied. l. 18. it be extreme subject to the Uracani which be such terrible gust of wind that nothing can resist they they turn up tree overturn house transport the ship from sea to land and bring with they a most dreadful and horrible confusion they reign or tyrannize rather in August September and October f f mar. dec. 1. l. 2 the inhabitant be of quick wit than the other island Cuba be more northerly and g g of this island read Ouied. l. 17 part extend itself three hundred league in length and twenty in breadth full of mountain wood fen river lake both salt and fresh this h h ortel Thea. island have have many name give by the spaniard fernandina joanna Alpha and Omega the wood be replenish with swine and kine the river yield golden sand it have six spanish colony saint jago a bishop see be the chief town in the island and havana be the chief port of the indies Ouiedo reckon two thing most admirable therein one a valley trend between two hill three league which produce abundance of stone enough to lade many ship of a perfect round form like bullet the other a fountain whence bitumen or a certain pitchy substance flow and float even to the sea excellent for pitch of ship in this island the common people be prohibit the eat of serpent as be reserve for royal dainty and the prerogative of the king table Columbus i i mar. dec. 1. l. 2 sail by this island light into a navigable river the water whereof be so hot that none may endure his hand long therein he espy also a Canoa of fisherman which after a strange fashion use to hunt fish and take they by the help of another fish which they keep tie in a cord by the boat side and when they espy a fish loose the cord this hunt fish present lay hold on the prey and with a skin like a purse grow behind her head grasp it so fast that by no mean it can be take from she till they draw she up above the water and then not able to abide the air she resign her prey to the fisher which leap out into the water and take it in recompense whereof they give her part of her purchase he find also in this coast water for the space of forty mile white and thick like milk and as though meal have be strew through that sea other water he find k k Botero spot with white and black and other all black a old man of fourscore year be a governor in island come to Columbus and with great gravity salute he and counsel he to use his victory well remember that the soul of man have two journey after they be depart from their body the one foul and dark prepare for injurious and cruel person the other pleasant and delectable for the peaceable and lover of quiet many other island may be here mention and but mention little to our purpose I find in they of Acusamil near jucatan be already speak of the Lucatae or jucatae the great thing be their great number which some l l p. m. dec. 7. 1. esteem above four hundred Lucaio be a general or collective name as Zealand Lequio Malucco the spaniard have carry the inhabitant as martyr signify into servitude to satisfy their insatiable desire of Gold the woman of these island be so fair that many of the border country forsake their own country and choose this for their love these woman wear nothing till the time of their menstruous purgation at which time the parent make a feast as if she be to be marry and after that she wear before those part net of Cotton fill with leaf of herb they obey their king so strict that if he command they to leap down from a high rock allege no other reason then his will they perform the same but they be now and be long since desolate m m dec. 7. 8. be waste in the mine of hispaniola and Cuba or by disease and famine to the number of twelve hundred thousand but I be loath to wild myself further in this wilderness of island for so have the spaniard make they n n dec. 1. l. 2. Columbus in one voyage give name to seven hundred island of which I can report little fit this our pilgrimage hispaniola be the lady and queen of they all and as it be the common storehouse of all their excellency and therefore we will there make some long stay chap 14 of hispaniola and a touch homeward at bermuda @. i. the name natural rarity and creature thereof HIspaniola or Spagniola o o ortel theat be eastward from Cuba it be of the first inhabitant call quisqueia afterward haiti and by Columbus p p Columbus call it Cipanga think it to be that island which Marcus Paulus call by that name in the east Ens. l. 2 he call it also Ophir think it to be that whence Solomon have his Gold mart. dec. 3. l. 7 Cipanga and Ophir the spaniard call it as we first mention and also saint Dominike or Domingo of the chief city a Archiepiscopal See it contain in compass five hundred and fifty league they call the island Quisqueia which signify great and all think that the sun give light to no other world than this and the other island adjoin haiti signify craggie and such be the island in many place with high craggie hils overlook the deep and dark valley but in many place it be most beautiful and flourish it seem to enjoy a perpetual spring the tree always flourish and the meadow clothe in green the air and the water be wholesome it be in manner equal divide with four great river descend from high mountain whereof junna run east Attibunicus west Nabiba to the south and jache northward some divide it into five province Caizcimu Hubaba caibabo Bainoa Guaccaiarima in the first of these there be a great cave in a hollow rock under the root of a high mountain about two furlong from the sea the entry be like the door of a great temple many river steal their water from the sight of the sun the use of man and the ordinary officer of Neptune customhouse and by secret passage come and hide themselves in this cave so the islander imagine see diverse river swallow up of the earth after they have run fourscore and ten mile and such a sink or channel of water in the cave the islander believe that the island have a vital spirit and that there it do breathe and a hole therein be the female nature thereof for of that sex they deem it even as antiquity conceit the ebb and flow of the sea to be the breath of Demogorgon dec. 7. 8. Andrea Moralis enter in with his ship which be almost swallow with the whirlpool and boil of the water cloud engender of those watery conflict and darkness lay hold on his eye terrible noise as of the fall of Nilus make dear his ear that when with labour he have get out he seem to have escape the bark of Cerberus and the obscure vault of hel. upon the top of high mountain the same Moralis see a lake three mile in compass into which many little river run without any other apparent issue in Bainoa be a lake of Salt water notwithstanding it receive four great fresh river from the east west north and south and twenty small and within a furlong of the lake on the northside be two hundred fresh-spring it be think to have a large intercourse with the ocean because they be shark great sea-fish which devour man in the same here be storm and tempest which seem to be the cater and purveyor for those fish in drown many diverse other lake be mention in this island one whereof partly salt partly fresh be five and twenty mile long and eight broad they be all in a large plain 120. mile in length and breadth between 18. and 25. there be another vale 200. mile long and broad than the former another as broad as that which be 180. mile long bart. de las casas tell of a kingdom in hispaniola call magua which signify a plain compass about with hill which water the same with 30000. river and brook twelve of they be very great and all which come from the west twenty thousand in number be enrich with Gold cotobris a plain on the top of hill so high that it be subject to the four season of the year there be also another region of the same name most barren and yet most rich full of mine otherwise unfruitful a thing common in nature that great mine undermine fertility and not strange among man that the great hoorder of treasure be the most unfruitful and barren in good work the gold they say be as a live tree which root in the centre of the earth send forth branch unto the uppermost face of the earth and there show forth certain beautiful colour in stead of flower round stone of golden earth in stead of fruit and thin plate in stead of leave from this island q q dec. l. 4. be yearly bring four or five hundred thousand ducat of Gold they imagine some divine nature to be in gold and therefore never gather it but they use certain religious expiation abstain from woman delicate meat and drink and all other pleasure there be a island a little from hispaniola which have a fountain in it come by secret passage under the earth and sea and rise in this island which they believe because it bring with it the leaf of many tree which grow in hispaniola and not in this island the spaniard call the i will Arethusa l. 6. c. 12. Ouiedo mention a little island between this and jamaica call Navazza half a league from which be many rock in the sea about five foot cover with water out of which issue and spout above the water of the sea a spout of fresh water as great as a man arm that it may be receive and take sweet and good this be see by Stephano della Rocca a man of good credit the i will r r r. Tomson ap. Hak. tom. 3. of hispaniola be much infest with fly or gnat who prick cause wonderful swell also there be a worm call Nigua which creep into the sole of man foot and make they grow as big as a man head with extremity of pain for which they have no remedy but to open the flesh sometime three or four inch and so dig they out the gnat s s mart. dec. 7. 9 Ouied. l. 15. c. 8. be so troublesome that the inhabitant do therefore build low house and make little door which they keep close and forbear to light candle nature have to this disease ordain a remedy namely certain creature call which be a kind of beetle these have four light which shine in the night two in the seat of his eye and two which he show when he open his wing the people get these and bring they to their house which there do they a double service they kill the gnat and give so much light that man may see to read and write letter by the light of one and many of they seem as so many candle they have but three sort of fourfooted beast and those very little now man be exhaust and beast multiply in so strange manner increase of kine and dog that one which be Deane of the conception carry a cow thither she be alive six and twenty year after and her fruitful generation be multiply in the island to eight hundred they be now grow wild as their dog also they kill their kine for the hide five and thirty thousand be transport to Spain when acosta return in the year of our lord 1587. aunt hurtful Ouied. l. 5. c. 1. 1 ant have be as noisome to hispaniola as grasshopper in many part of the world in the year 1519. and two year after they ruin their Farm-house and spoil their orange cannafistula and their fruit-tree they can keep nothing in their house which be fit to be eat from they and if they have continue in like quantity they will have dishabit the island and leave it desolate but they choose by lot a saint to who tuition they may commit themselves in that extremity which fall upon Saturninus who be fain to become their patron against the pismire these ant be little and black another sort be enemy to these and wrought against they and chase they out of their hold and be not hurtful but as good benefactor if Ouiedo say true of they as I can believe of Saturninus other sort there be many of which some become wing and fill the air with swarm which sometime happen in England on Bartholomew day 1613. I be in the island of foulness on our Essex shore where be such cloud of these fly pismire that we can no be fly from they but they fill our clothes yea the floor of some house where they fall be in a manner cover with a blakee carpet of creep ant which they say drown themselves about that time of the year in the sea Ouiedo tell of other ant with white head which eat through wall and timber of house and cause they to fall there be some caterpillar a span long and other less but more venomous there be worm which do so much harm in timber that a house of thirty year in this island will be ruinous and seem as old as one of a hundred in Spain and those which can not be old when he write this seem as if they have stand 150. year many other small creature this our author mention but my Relation will be too great if I shall follow he @. 2 of their idol song and dance priest oracle superstitious opinion and custom before the discovery of this island by Columbus and the spaniard these islander of hispaniola be forewarn thereof by oracle their t t mar. dec. 1. l. 9 Ouied. hist lib. 5. cacike and Buhiti that be their king and priest report to Columbus that the father of Garionexius the present king and another cacike will needs be importunate demander of their Zemes or god of future event and therefore abstain five day together from all meat and drink spend the time in continual mourn the Zemes make answer that there will come not many year after unto that island a strange nation clothe beard arm with shine sword that will cut a man asunder in the middle which shall destroy the ancient image of their god abolish their rite and slay their child to remember this oracle they compose a mournful ditty which they call Areito which on some solemn day they use to sing their priest be physician and magician or divinour Ouiedo say that they dance at sing of their Areiti or ballad which word I use because it have that derivation which argue dance aswell as sing these dance be general through America in this island they dance sometime man alone and sometime woman alone but in great solemnity they be mix and dance in a circle one lead the dance the measure whereof be compose to the Areito of which one sing a verse and all the rest follow sing and dance and so through every verse of the same till it be end which sometime continue till the next day Anacaona the widow of the cacique Caonabo entertain the spaniard with a dance of three hundred maid thus these areito be their chronicle and memorial of thing pass as we read of the bard in these part they use sometime drum or taber to these dance make only of wood hollow and open right against that place where they do strike in some place they cover they with dear skin but here be no beast in this island that can yield any for such purpose they have tobacco in religious estimation not only for sanity but for sanctity also u u as Ouiedo write the smoke whereof they take in at the nose with a fork pipe fit to both nostril hold the single end in the smoke of the herb burn in the fire till they become senseless their priest most use this which come to themselves after this sleepy fume deliver the oracle of their zeme or devil which sometime speak by they now concern the Zemes which can foretell that which they can not avert and the superstition of hispaniola 10 10 mart. ibid. the spaniard have be long in the island before they know that the people worship any thing but y y they worship the sun and pray to it at sunrising the light of heaven but after by further converse and live among they they come to know more of their religion of which one Ramonus a spanish eremite write a book and martyr have borrow of he to lend we it be apparent by the image which they worship that there appear unto they certain illusion of evil spirit these image they make of Gossampine Cotten hard stop sit like the picture of the devil which they call Zemes who they take to be the mediator and messenger of the great God which they acknowledge one eternal infinite omnipotent invisible of these they think they obtain rain or fair weather and when they go to the war they have certain little one which they bind to their forehead every king have his particular Zemes which he honour they call the eternal God by these two name jocanna and Guamanomecon as their predecessor teach they affirm that he have a father call by these five name Attabeira Mamona Guacarapita Liella Guimazoa they make the Zemes of diverse matter and form some of wood as they be admonish by certain vision appear to they in the wood other which have receive answer of they among the rock make they of stone some of root to the similitude of such as appear to they when they gather the root whereof they make their bread think that the Zemes send they plenty of these root they attribute a Zemes to the particular tuition of euery thing as sometime the pagan and now the popish roman some assign to the sea other to fountain wood or other their peculiar charge when the boitij consult with the Zemes they go into the house dedicate to he and with the powder of the herb Cohobba snuff into their nostril be distract after which return as out of a tran he tell that the Zemes have speak to he and utter his revelation they say that a certain king call Guamaretus have a Zemes who name be Corochotum which often use to descend from the top of the house where Guamaretus keep he close bind the cause of his break loose be either to hide himself or to go seek for meat or else for the act of generation and that sometime be offend that the King Guamaretus have not honour he diligent he be wont to lie hide for certain day in this king village be some child bear with two crown which they suppose to be the issue of this zemes. and when this village be burn by the enemy this Zemes break his band and be find a furlong off without any harm he have another Zemes call Epileguanita make of wood be in shape like a fourfooted beast which go often from the place where he be honour into the wood when they perceive that he be go a great multitude gather together to seek he with devout prayer and when they have find he bring he home religious on their shoulder to the chapel dedicate unto he but after the spaniard come into the island he flee for altogether and can never be find whereby they divine the destruction of their country they honour another Zemes in the likeness of a woman on who wait two other like man one of these execute the office of a messenger to the Zemes that have authority of cloud wind and Rain and be at command of this woman the other perform the like to the Zemes of the water that fall from the hill that be loose they may break into flood and overflow the country if the people do not give due honour to her image let we add to this relation of the Zemes of hispaniola a a mart. dec. 2. lib. 6. a accident in Cuba a mariner be sick be there leave on shore who recover grow into favour with the king and be employ in his war with great success against the enemy he attribute his victory to the virgin Mary who picture he have in his bosom the king by his persuasion reject his Zemes and dedicate a chapel and altar to this picture whither he and all his family resort a little before the sunset bow their head and say further they can not say they beset the same with jewel and many earthen pot some with sundry meat some with water round about the tabernacle which they offer in stead of sacrifice as before they have do to their zemes. be demand why they do thus they answer lest it shall lack meat for they believe that image may hunger and do eat and drink they tell of this picture that be carry with they into the war as they use to bring their zeme with they into the battle this make the Zemes of the enemy turn his back yea a woman a lie or a devil descend in the sight of they all to play the Bellona for her follower and in a contention betwixt they whether the Zemes or this lady be more excellent two young man of each side be bind and whether deity shall loosen her party that shall be their God both invoke the devil appear in ugly shape and by and by a fair virgin whereat the devil vanish do you believe it and the virgin with touch of a rod loose her man hand which be find on the other adverse party be now double bind thus can the devil transform himself into a angel of light at Loretto in hispaniola and where else soever he can be entertain the name of saint and promise of heaven shall further his hellish design they have festival solemnity in hispaniola b b dec. 7. 10. to their Zemes whereunto the king summon their subject by public crier and they neat dress after their manner paint with diverse colour of herb resort thither with their arm thigh leg adorn with shell to make music in their dance thus they present themselves before the king who sit drum at the entrance of the gate when they be to sacrifice sacrifice they purge themselves first thrust down a sacred hook into their throat and by vomit empty their body after they go into the king court and all sit in a ring about the idol crosslegged like tailor and wry-necked for reverence pray that their sacrifice may be accept the woman in another place when the priest give warning fall to dance and sing in manner as be before express the praise of their Zemes and offer cake in basket conclude with song in praise of their ancient king and prayer for future prosperity after this both sex kneel down and offer their cake which the priest receive cut in piece give to every man a portion which he keep untouched the whole year for a holy relic esteem that house in danger of fire and whirlwind that be not preserve with this reserve piece of cake they seem sometime to hear a voice from their Zemes whether by the illusion of the priest or the devil which the priest interpret by their behaviour for if they dance and sing all be well but if they go sorrowful the people go forth sigh and give themselves to fast even to extreme faintness with weep until they think their Zemes reconcile in this island they have c c Ouied. hist l 5. c. 3. as many wife as they be able to sustain the cacique Beheccius have thirty two of which be bury with he perforce some of they be addict to lust of sodomy and other more if more may be unnatural general they be very luxurious both man and woman yet they abstain from mother sister and daughter other degree they spare not think that such incest will bring they to a evil death in their buy and sell they weigh not the worth of thing but only their own fancy as we see in child thief they cruel punish impale they on sharp stake alive touch the original of man thus they fable there be in the island a region call Caunana where they feign that mankind come first out of two cave of a mountain call and that the big sort of man come forth of the mouth of the big cave and the least sort out of the least cave this cave they name Amaiauna the great Cazibaxagua before man may come out of the cave the mouth thereof be keep and watch nightly by a man who name be Machochael who depart further to look abroad be by the sun the sight of who he be forbid turn into a stone they feign the like of other turn into tree for go so far a fish in the night that they can not return before the rise of the sun a certain ruler also call Vagoniona send one forth of the cave a fish who by the sun surprisal be turn into a nightingale which therefore in the night bewail his misfortune Vagoniona sore trouble with this loss leave the man in the cave bring forth the woman and suck child and leave the woman in a island of that tract call Mathinino carry the child away with he which be oppress with famine faint and remain on the bank of a certain river where they be turn to frog and cry toa toa as child with they use to cry for the dug and hence also come those pitiful cry of the frog in the springtime as for Vagoniona he by special privilege be not transform wander in diverse place he descend to a certain fair woman who he see in the bottom of the sea and receive of her bright plate of Latin and a kind of stone which their king great esteem another cave they have for the former tale be endless as superstition common be call jovanaboina adorn with picture of a thousand fashion in the entrance be two grave Zemes whereof one be call binthaitel and the other Marohu out of this cave they say the sun and moon first come to give light to the World they make as religious concourse to these cave as they which go on pilgrimage to Rome compostella or jerusalem they have a superstitious conceit of their dead who they think walk in the night and eat the fruit Guannaba which be like to a quince and that they will deceive woman in take the shape of man make as though they will have to do with they and sudden vanish away if any feel a strange thing in his bed make doubt whether it be a dead body he may be resolve by feeling on his belly because these ghost can take all other member of man body but not the navel as some with we imagine that the devil can take the whole shape of a man only his claw except these dead man they say often meet they by the way and if a man be not afraid they vanish but if he be afraid they will assault he and many hereby have be take with the loss of their limb these superstition be leave they by tradition in rhythm and song from their forefather which it be lawful for none to learn but only the king son they sing they before the people on solemn feast play on a instrument like a timbrel their boitij or priest instruct they in these superstition these be also physician make the people believe that they obtain health for they of the zemes. they tie themselves to much fast and outward cleanliness and purge especial where they take upon they the cure of great man for than they drink the powder of a certain herb which bring they into a fury wherein they say they learn many thing of their zemes. much ado they make about the sick party deform themselves with many gesture breathe blow suck the forehead temple and neck of the patient sometime also say that the Zemes be angry for not erect a chapel or dedicate to he a grove or garden or the neglect of other holy and if the sick party die his kinsfolk by witchcraft enforce the dead to speak and tell they whether he die by natural destiny or by the negligence of the boitij in not fast the full due or minister convenient medicine so that if these physician be find faulty they take revenge of they they use in minister their physic to put certain stone or bone in their mouth which if the woman can get they keep religious believe they to be profitable for they in travel and honour they as they do their zemes. when their king die they bury the best belove of their concubine with they who also have other woman bury for their attendant together with their jewel and ornament they have in the sepulchre beside they a cup full of water and some of their cassavi-bread hispaniola be say Herera in 19 degree and a half have ten spanish town and have sometime have in it fourteen thousand castilian Ouiedo report of a huricano or tempest which 1508. throw down all the house except some which be build of stone in Domingo and the whole town of buona ventura change his name into mala ventura be hereby quite overthrow twenty sail and more be lose in the harbour of Domingo many man be lift up and carry in the air many bowshot some be thereby miserable bruise in july the next year happen another more terrible than the former but now say he these Huracanos be nothing so fierce since the sacrament be place in the church @. 3 of the bermuda or summer island have thus weary you with this long stay in hispaniola by which you may guess of the neighbour island we will haste homeward and not touch in any island by the way for we can but touch and away we may adventure notwithstanding the wont danger upon bermuda danger have make it now not so dangerous nocument have be document for while some have be wrack there they have make virtue of Necessity and so well observe the coast that skill have almost secure that which nature have seem to set there in defiance both of habitation and navigation to both which it be now subject by our nation it be call bermuda as d d Ouiedo lib. 2. hist ind. Ouiedo say of jobn Bermudez which first discover it and garza of the ship name wherein he then sail Ouiedo write that he be just by it and have think to have send some hog on shore there to have multiply but by force of tempest be drive thence and other either of like purpose or by force of shipwreck have since do it it e e Botero be also call the island of devil which they suppose inhabit there and the enchant island but these be enchant conceit job f f job Hortop ap. Hak. Hortop relate that in the height of bermuda they have sight of a sea-monster which three time show himself from the middle upward in shape like a man of the complexion of a Mulato or tawny indian but this name be give it not of such monster but of the monstrous tempest which here they have often sustain sir g. Summer have deserve that it shall bear his name by his endeavour thereabouts testify in life and death he with sir Thomas gate as before be say be wrack on the island which loss turn to some gain as if God will give they this into the Virginia-bargain before 1593. Henry g g Henry may ap Hak. tom. 3. May a Englishman in a french ship be wrack thereon and have give we some discourse thereof more full have Sylvester h h syl. jourdan jourdan one of that virginian company one of the company of those worthy knight in a treatise of that shipwreck and the discovery of bermuda the commodity whereof he reckon variety of fish plenty of hog which it seem have escape out of some wrack diverse fruit mulberry silkworm palmito cedar pearl Ambergrise but the most strange thing seem the variety of fowl of which they take a thousand of one sort in two or three hour be as big as a pigeon and lay speckle egg as big as hen egg on the sand where they come and lay they daily although man sit down among they when sir Thomas gate his man have take a thousand of they sir George Summer man have stay a while by they and bring away as many more another fowl there be that live in hole like cony-hole their egg like in quantity and quality to hen-egg other bird be so gentle that whistle to they they will come and gaze on you while with your stick you may kill they other egg they have of tortoise a bushel in the belly of one very sweet they take forty of they in a day and one will serve fifty man at a meal two be there bear and other two marry to make the most natural possession thereof for our nation which now in hope of good success have there plant a habitation that wrack company build there a ship and a pinnace and set sail for Virginia William Strachie w. Strachie in a large discourse with his fluent and copious pen have describe that tempest which bring they to this island affirm that there be not a hour in four day in which they free not out of their almost captive ship twelve hundred barricoe of water each contain six gallon and some eight beside three pump continual go every four hour they bestow a hundred tun of water on the cruel sea which seem the more hungry after their body or thirsty for their blood from Tuesday noon till Friday noon they bail and pump two thousand ton and be ten foot deep nor can have hold out one day long when they first have fight of the bermuda these he say be a Archipelagus of break island not few than five hundred if all may be so call which lie by themselves the great which lie like a half moon be in 32. degree 20. minute at their first land they kill with bat seven hundred fowl like to gull at one time the island seem rend with tempest of thunder lightning and rain which threaten in time to devour they all the storm in the full and change keep their unchangeable round winter and summer rather thunder then blow from every corner sometime 48. hour i i my friend master Barkley a merchant report better of the bermuda seasonableness etc. and the plantation itself testify the health and wealth thereof together especial when the halo or circle about the moon appear which be often and there four time as large as with we the north and northwest wind cause winter in December january and February yet not such but then young bird to be see without knowledge a boat of ten tun can be bring in and yet within be safe harbour for the great ship they find there for their sustenance wild palmito the top of which tree roast do eat like fry melon sodden like cabbage with the leave they cover their cabin Berry black and round as big as a damson ripe in December and very luscious in the winter they shed their leaf no island in the world have more or better fish of fowl be great variety they kill a wild swan some there be which breed in high island in hole to secure they from the swine they have their season one kind succeed another beside this relief of fowl they have plenty of tortoise egg which they lie as big as goose egg and commit to the sun and Sands hatch nursery they have sometime five hundred in one of they even here lest the island shall lose that former name of devil some enter into devilish conspiracy three several time some be banish and after reconcile Henry paine be shoot to death some flee to the wood but all reduce except Christopher Carter k k he continue there till the colony be plant and Robert water but these island have now be possess diverse year by a english colony and my friend master Barkley which have be there and be now l l 1614 onward on a second voyage thither seem ravish with the natural endowment both for health and wealth of these island which now be to be share among the adventurer and fortify against all invasion nature itself be herein ready to further their security against the great foreign force muster wind which some say be violent further off but calm near the island and rock many league into the sea for their defence which now yet they be go to strengthen both with man and munition the colony that be there have not only send verbal but real commendation of the place as may appear by a treatise m m news from bermuda or summer island there be report of some english this winter come home which come from bermuda to Ireland in a little boat etc. which I write not for want of certain intelligence neither for that cause of the present state of the colony which some say be near 701. english etc. thereof late set forth by one which in the ship call the plough sail thither 1612. wherein be declare the commodity there find as mullet breame lobster and angel-fish hog-fish rock-fish etc. as before be say the air be very healthful as their experience the best argument have find and agree well with english body the ground as fertile as any they say in the world ambergris pearl cedar and other unknown timber store of whale and other commodity which will be tedious to rehearse which I hope and pray may further prosper to the profit of this and the Virginia plantation from hence and thence I be now pass in a english ship for England where to pass away tediousness of the voyage I will entertain my reader with a discourse of the more than tedious and fastidious spanish cruelty chap. 15 of the spanish cruelty in the west indies and of their perverse conversion of the indian unto Christianity for as much as the papist do usual glory in the purchase of a new world unto their religion and will have man believe that since this Scripture-heresy have make new Rome to tremble now no less than Hannibal do her pagan-mother they have a new a a alan cop. n. Harpsfield io. hart. supply with much advantage in this western world of America and they make this their indian conversion one of the mark of b b Bellar. not. lib. 4. costeri Episcop. Possevin l. 16. c. 6. Hill reason 5. the trueness and Catholicisme of their church which have gain if possevine lie not a hundred time as much in the new world towards the west south and east by new convert as it have lose in the north part by heretic where through both the hemisphere say hill these thousand year nay as far as the sun shine there be no tongue nor people nor climate which have not in some measure such a measure perhaps as he measure his truth and wit withal in this assertion the catholic roman religion I will we can borrow the height of this hill whereon to stand and overview so many part of the world yet unknown and learn of this giant Atlas how easy may this mute become a liquid which bear thus the hemisphere of his roman heaven on his mount shoulder archbishop abbot a new geography but his impudency be already sufficient whip and expose to the world derision by he the nearness of who presence do now so much glad i after so long and far a pilgrimage his learned pen have show the like bold brag of Bristol and Stapleton his master and prove they fable for further confutation whereof it shall not be amiss to observe the proceed of the spaniard in these part and herein we will use the witness of man of their own romish religion josephus c c acosta l. 4. procurand ind. salute c. 3. acosta a jesuite write that the indian conceive a implacable hatred against the faith by the scandal of the spaniard cruelty and that they have baptize some by force Vega d d and. Vega de f. and quast. 3. accuse they of baptise without make they know the faith or take knowledge of their life and how can it otherwise be when * * ed. Brerewood of religion and lang. c. 10 and light mart. de Valentia n. di g. ap. Rev. 3. Ouied. lib. 17 c. 9 we find it record of sundry of their preacher that baptize each one of they above a hundred thousand and that in few year in so much that as be story by Surius it be to be find among the record of Charles the five that some old priest have baptize seven hundred thousand another three hundred thousand some of these be so good christian that they still continue as Nunno de Guzman write to the emperor the sacrifice of human flesh Ouiedo write that they have but the name of christian and be baptize rather because they be of age then for devotion to the faith and none or very few of they be christian willing he that will read what they late have do in Spain with the remnant of the moor may perhaps satisfy himself with the reason of e e f. Damiano Fonseca Moreschi da Spagna which be also express in the king proclamation to be heresy apostasy treason conspire with the Turk etc. friar Fonseca in defence thereof but for the poor indian bartholomaeus de las casas a f f bar. cas Hispan Dominike friar of the same order with Fonseca and after a bishop in America have write a large and unanswerable treatise of the enormous cruelty and unchristian antichristian proceed in the new world the sum whereof be this that the indian be a simple harmless people loyal to their lord and such as give no cause to the spaniard of dislike till they by extreme injury be provoke they be also docible and pliant both to good doctrine and live to these lamb say he the spaniard come as cruel and hungry tiger bear and lion intend nothing those forty year he write this 1542. but blood and slaughter to satisfy their avarice and ambition insomuch that of three million of people which be contain in hispaniola of the natural inhabitant there scarce remain at that time three hundred and now as Alexandro Ursino report none at all only two and twenty thousand negro and some spaniard reside there Cuba and the other island have endure the like misery and in the firm land ten kingdom great than all Spain be dispeople and desolate and in that space there have not perish less than twelve million by their tyranny and he may true say that fifty million have pay nature debt in the island hispaniola the Spaniard have their first Indian habitation where their cruelty drive the indian to their shift and to their weak defence which cause those enrage lion to spare neither man woman nor child they rip up the great belly woman and will lay wager who can with most dexterity strike off a indian head or smite he asunder in the middle they will pluck the infant by the heel from their mother breast and dash out their brain against the stone or with a scoff hurl they into the river they set up gibbet and in honour of Christ and his twelve apostle as they say and can the devil say worse they will both hang and burn they other they take and cut their hand almost off bid they carry those letter their hand drop blood and almost drop off themselves to their countryman which for fear of the like lie hide in the mountain the noble and commander they broil on gridiron I once say our author see four or five of the chief of they thus roast which make a lamentable noise the nice captain bid they shall be strangle but the cruel tormentor choose rather to stop their mouth so to prevent their outcry and to continue their broil till they be dead they have dog to hunt they out of their covert which devour the poor soul and because sometime the indian thus provoke will kill a Spaniard if they find opportunity they make a law that a hundred of they shall for one Spaniard be slay the king of magua offer to till the ground for they fifty mile space if they will spare he and his people from the mine the captain in recompense deflower his wife and he hide himself be take and send into Spain but the ship perish in the way and therein that admirable g g p. mart. mention this grain of gold and likewise the spanish cruelty though not so large as casas grain of gold which weigh in the first find be pure so many thousand crown as in the first chapter of the eight book be mention in the kingdom of Xaraqua in hispaniola the governor call before he three hundred indian lord which he partly burn in a house and put the rest to the sword and hang up the queen as they do also to Hiquanama the queen of hiquey of all which cruelty our author a eyewitness affirm that the indian give no cause by any crime that have so deserve by any Law and for the rest that remain after these war they share they as slave they which shall have instruct they in the catholic faith be ignorant cruel and covetous the man be spend in the mine the woman consume in tillage and both by heavy burden which they make they carry by famine by scourge and other misery and thus they do in all other part wheresoever they come in the isle of saint John and jamaica be six hundred thousand inhabitant whereof then when the author write this there be scarce leave two hundred in either island Cuba extend further in length of any of these island here be a cacique name Hathuey which call his subject about he and show they a box of gold say that be the spaniard God and make they dance about it very solemn and lest the spaniard shall have it he hurl it into the river be take and condemn to the fire when he be bind to the stake a friar come and preach heaven to he and the terror of hell Hathuey ask if any spaniard be in heaven the friar answer yea such as be good Hathuey reply he will rather go to hell then go where any of that cruel nation be I be once present say casas when the inhabitant of one town bring we forth victual and meet we with great kindness and the spaniard without any cause slay three thousand of they of every age and sex ay by their counsel send to other town to meet we with promise of good deal and two and twenty cacique meet we which the captain against all faith cause to be burn this make the desperate indian hang themselves which two hundred do by the occasion of one man cruelty and one other Spaniard see they take this course make as though he will hang himself too and persecute they in the region of death which fear detain some from that self-execution six thousand child die say our former author in three or four month space while I be there for the want of their parent which be send to the mine they hunt out the rest in the mountain and desolate the island neither do the other island speed better the lucaiae they bring to a utter desolation and ship multitude of man for the mine in hispaniola want food for they the three part common perish in the way so that a unskilful pilot may have learn this way by sea by those float mark of indian carcase this spanish pestilence spread further to the continent where they spoil the shore and the inland country of people from Dariena to nicaragua they slay four hundred thousand people with dog sword fire and diverse torture their course h h mark this way of convert infidel of preach be to send under pain of confiscation of land liberty wife life and all to acknowledge God and the spanish king of who they have never hear yea they will steal to some place half a mile off the city by night and there publish the king decree in this sort be alone by themselves you cacique and indian of this place or that place which they name be it know to you that there be one God one pope and one king of Castille who be lord of these land come quick and do your homage and then in the night while they be asleep fire their house and slay and take captive at their pleasure and after fall to search for Gold the first bishop that come into these part send his man to be partaker of the spoil a Cacique give the spanish governor the weight in gold of nine thousand crown he in thankfulness to extort more bind he to a post and put fire to his foot and force he to send home for a further addition of 3000. they not satisfy persist in their torment he till the marrow come forth at the sole of his foot whereof he die when any of the indian employ by the spaniard fail under their heavy burde or faint for want of necessary lest they shall lose time in open the chain wherein he be tie they will cut off his head and so let the body fall out the Spaniard rob the Nicaraguans of their corn so that thirty thousand die of famine and a mother eat she own child five hundred thousand be carry away into bondage beside fifty or sixty thousand slay in their war and now say casas remain four or five thousand of one of the most populous region of the World here do vaschus i i p. mart. dec. 3 l. 2. Cortes accustom himself to have 4. king attend on he dec. 8. lib. 3. he burn 60. king their heir look on give at one time four king to be devour of dog in new Spain from the year 1518. to 1530. in four hundred and eighty mile about Mexico they destroy above four million of people in their conquest by fire and sword not reckon those which die in servitude and oppression in the province of Naco and honduras from the year 1524. to 1535. two million of man perish and scarce two thousand remain in Guatimala from the year 1524. to 1540 they destroy above four or five million under that alvarado who die by the fall off his horse as be before say complain when he be ask where his pain be most of his Soul-torment and his city Guatimala be with a threefold deluge of earth of water of stone oppress and overwhelm he force the indian to follow he in his expedition in army of ten or twenty thousand not allow they other sustenance than the flesh of their slay enemy maintain in his army shambles of man flesh in Panuco and Xalisco their state be much like one make eight thousand Indian wall about his garden and let they all perish with famine in Machuacan they torture the king that come forth to meet they that they may extort gold from he they put his foot in the stock and put fire thereto bind his hand to a post behind he and a boy stand by baste his roast foot with oil another with a crossbow bend to his breast and on the other hand another with dog of these torture he die they force the indian to deliver their idol hope they have be of gold but their golden hope fail they force they again to redeem they yea where the friar have in one place make the indian to cast away their image the spaniard bring they some from other place to fall they in the province of saint Martha they have desolate four hundred and fifty mile of land the bishop write to the king that the people call the spaniard devil or yare for their diabolical practice and think the law God and king of the christian have be author of this cruelty the like they do in the kingdom of venezuela destroy four or five million and out of that firm land carry to the island for slave at time in seventeen year a million of people but why do I long trace they in their bloody step see our author that relate much more than I yet protest that it be a thousand time worse or what shall I tell their spare (@) person pluck the child from the breast to quarter it to his dog torture king with new device borrow either from the inquisition or from hell cut off the nose and hand of man and woman that live in peace with they sell the father mother child to diverse place and person lie with the woman as one of they brag that be with child they may yield more money in the sale how be nature become degenerate in these prodigious monster even the nature of thing may be abash with the sense of this unnatural senselessness the tiger will but devour his prey and not curious torment it the lion sometime spare it nay their dog have sometime be less dogged than their doggish devilish master how may we admire that long suffer of God that rain not a flood of water as in Noah time or of fire as in lot or of stone as in josuas or some vengeance from heaven upon these model of hell and how can hell forbear swallow such prepare morsel exceed the beastliness of beast inhmanity of wont tyrant and devilishness if it be possible of the devil but these you will say be k k Lucan soldier let we leave the camp and look to their temple there perhaps you shall see their priest read pray and this they most glory of preach to convert the indian by their word and work ask Colmenero a priest of saint Martha who be ask what he teach the indian say that he devote they with curse to the devil and this suffice if he say to they Per signin Santin cruces you have hear what good divinity the dominican preach to Atabaliba king of Peru which want not her want of million by their cruelty as well as the former they teach they say l l accost proc. ind. sal. l. 4. c. 4. acosta a few prayer in the spanish tongue which they understand not and they which be more painful a catechism without explanation their teach be but a jest and shadow to get money they follow dice hunt whore in so much that baptism be scorn and the indian be force to it against their will and a sincere and m m io. metal Seq. praefat. in Osor upright judge be wont to say that if he come into Spain he will persuade the king to send no more priest into America such be their dissoluteness they have then indeed three archbishopric that of Dominico which have six suffragan bishop the second of Mexico which have 7. the three of los reyes to which be subject three bishop yet these teach the people vice by their practice and ill example insomuch that the indian say casas be of opinion that the king of Spain which have such subject as the spaniard show themselves be himself most cruel and life on man flesh and that of all god the god of the christian be the worst which have so bad servant long for their own god of who they never receive such ill as now by this of the christian the spaniard can endure the indian to hear a sermon think it make they idle as Pharaoh say n n exod. 5.8.17 of the israelite and captious they learn they usury lie swear blasphemy and thing repugnant to their nature thus do a cacique o o Benzo l. 2. c. 16 describe a christian to Benzo by the unchristian course of the spaniard Christian say he look Benzo on the face what be christian they imperious demand Maiz hony silk raiment a indian woman to lie with they they call for gold and silver they will not work be gamester dicer wicked blasphemer backbiter quarreller and conclude that christian can not be good Benzo say that evil christian do such thing not the good one he reply where be those good for I never see any but bad he be seventy year old and speak spanish perfect Benzo say that they will not look on the christian but curse they and as before be say call they p p Viracochie sea-froth he be very inquisitive to see what they think of our faith report that some of they take a piece of gold will say loe here the christian God for this they kill we and one another for this they play blaspheme curse steal and do all manner of villainy q q cap. 18. a franciscan public say that there be neither priest monk nor bishop good in all India and the priest themselves will say they come thither for gain a cacique son which be towardly in his youth and prove after dissolute be ask the reason thereof say since I be a christian I have learned to swear in variety to die to lie to swagger and now I want nothing but a concubine which I mean to have short to make i a complete christian these indeed be the miracle that the spaniard work in the indies say our author I ask a indian once if he be a christian he again ask i if he shall be the bishop groom a dozen year to keep his Mule other of the indian save a little wash and some cold ceremony know nothing of our religion you have hear what commerce and conference many of they be wont to have with the devil and r r vid. ap. Hak. how the spaniard have teach they now to scare he away with the sign of the cross and this be the report of a certain spanish treatise of prelate that the devil be now fray away with the presence of the holy Sacrament of the eucharist and of the holy cross weapon spiritual in pretence carnal in the invention but neither prevail like the spiritual which s s 2. cor. 10.4 Paul mention nor effect so much as some say t t zanch. op. p. 1. of those which be indeed carnal and whole material yea these thus use with denial of the power of the cross and godliness be the sceptre of his empire among they and for those carnal weapon which Paul disclaim the spaniard do not only acknowledge but glory off Nunno u u ap. Ramus vol. 3. di gusman aver in a write to the emperor that howsoever some find fault with their war upon the indian so to bring they to the faith yet he account it a most worthy and holy work and of so great merit that in the service of God none can be great the indian have live at more quiet with the spaniard since the king proclaim they free yet still hate they and for their christianity Franciscus 10 10 f. a Vic rel. 5 indis a Victoria protest that it do not appear to he that christian religion have be propound in meet sort to the indian miracle he hear not of but on the contrary scandal villainy and many impiety this be the preach and conversion the romist boast of and gull our european world with muster of their Miracle and thousand of their proselyte which we rather pity then envy how the case be alter since that new generation of the Ignatian brood have teach especial the spaniard who they be and who they serve a better Catholicisme let Arnauldus y y against the jesuit tell you he say that they have indeed wrought miracle among indian among which he reckon convert the pagan by butcherly subvert and root they out in hispaniola by keep the husband and wife in diverse work asunder the old generation be thus wear out and a new prevent in Peru they have public place of torture within the march wherein they may put a thousand at once by torture to draw forth confession of their hide treasure such as escape hang themselves in the mountain and their wife by they with their child at their foot by their dog at land they worry they and in their Pearl-fishing expose they to the raven shark themselves more dogged and shark then the brute creature by fire and sword consume 20. million of the people I will give the devil his due and therefore will not ascribe all this to those late locust the jesuit who be yet account the most cunning and zealous architect in set up the roof of that aspire spanish monarchy these and the like bloody foundation notwithstanding and therefore may be call accessory after as for the spaniard we see they by testimony of their own accuse of the same thing and how the ignatian wash their hand not from but in blood our Europe can testify what devil bring into America the inquisition his fair daughter much resemble his accurse presence I know not our countryman z z miles phil. joh. hort. ap. Hak. Philips Hortop and other know it to their cost but what shall we speak of the spanish cruelty to other look on their deal with each other in civil broil thus deal they with Columbus reward he with chain and send he prisoner to Spain by that way which he first of all and for Spain have discover what Roldanus and his rebellious faction do in hispaniola and vaschus in the continent martyr relate but the bloody butchery pass in Peru where covetousness which before have join now divorce the heart of pizarro and almagro and after that that near conjunction of the head and body of almagro a a see Gomara Apollonius Benzo etc. of these civil war in Peru revenge in the person of all the Pizarri which again retort the like vengeance upon the almagrist their ghost seem or some hellish fury rather to be loose on that perwian stage and to have bring like mischief to the beholder and actor in this tragedy vengeance seem to have break forth of Atabalibas tomb arm with sword fire halter chain yea the spaniard themselves offer themselves her officious vassal to become cruel executor of her bloody will in mutual execution upon themselves the awful name of viceroy governor and captain be no less subject to imprisonment and death than the poor soldier but for these civil uncivil cruelty among themselves they require a good orator to describe they and those former tyranny upon the indian be beyond all oratory and description thunder from heaven have need be the voice to utter such hellish and unheard-of massacre devil from hell be fit scribe with the fiery character of their infernal work-house to register they the read whereof may astonish the sense of the reader amaze his reason exceed his faith and fill his heart with horror and uncouth passion for i I want fit word to paint they in their black colour my hand with reluctation tremble at the writing my tongue falter in the speak and whole I seem to myself surprise with distraction and not to be myself while the view of this spanish Medusa transform i into a stone the rather when I think such shall our english conversion have be if in that dismal year 1588. England have as well succeed to they as the indies or if since our catholic preacher have prevail in their Powder-project powder-treason in the year 1605. who for a temple choose a vault that their work of darkness may be do in the dark and their workhouse may be near to hell thence to borrow at hand supply of devilish device and in near familiarity to consult with the devil for word they have prepare a sulphurous breath the smoke whereof may darken the heaven the fire may rend the tremble and ashonished earth the noise may make the hearer past hear and be together once those hellish Cerberi by such preach have intend there to have open the mouth of hell upon we which shall have swallow our law our religion our sun moon and morning star the king queen and prince our fair sky of fix and well order light then shine in their great splendour of Parliament-brightness the giant of old be say to be the son of the earth but these as they be engender of earth so have they incestuous violate that their mother whether you understand it in a literal or mystical sense and beget in her womb this hel-monster of their bloody Catholicisme they have design the time of her travel and themselves will have be the midwife the devil have bid themselves as gossip and at that open of the earth womb in her fiery travel will have send that way into the world to attend the babe all the blackguard of hell treason superstition atheism ignorance fire sword and all confusion in a revolution of a worse chaos than that b Tohu and Bohu of old can have effect the word of Moses gen. 1. interpret without form and void then shall it have be no marvel if Rome France Spain or any other have exercise tyranny or cruelty see all must have come short of the first cruelty which our english catholic have execute to open the floudgate of blood unto they and all this be the catholic cause and these the preacher or the usher rather to the preacher for the jesuit will be angry if we take from they their bloody privilege of this new Catholicisme which the devil till now he be a old and cunning serpent have never learn himself nor can learn other before he have get Ignatian usher in his hellish school but whither be your pilgrim transport friend I draw near my port and leave America behind i still red with this blood now also have England in sight which as from a great height be near to a more dangerous fall and in this subject which be of the spanish cruelty not write in hatred of their nation because they be spaniard but of their Pseudo-catholic religion under show whereof they there do and here will have execute those butchery and for thankfulness to God for our late deliverance of which the time when I relate these thing be the return of that very day c c November 5. on this day this in the first impression come in due order without any special appointment to the press wherein those thing shall have be effect just demand my testimony I have thus tell out my story and now i think I see the shore of England from which my linger pilgrimage have long detain i I hear the bell and see the bonfire with public acclamation of thankfulness for that deliverance all sing their hallelujah and say d d psal. 118.24 this be the day which the lord have make we will rejoice and be glad in it and now I see a better sight than all my pilgrimage can yield Christian church without heathenish jewish or antichristian pollution a royal king true entitle defender of the faith a learned clergy wise and honourable counsellor peaceable and loyal commons in a word England present itself to my eye represent to my mind a map of heaven and earth in the freedom of body and soul yea where our subjection and service be freedom which I have not elsewhere find in all my perambulation of the world I feel myself herewith ravish and in a joyful ecstasy can but cry out e e matth. 17.4 it be good for we to be here in the true church and suburb of the true heaven here then reader let i rest i till I see whether thy kind acceptation of this will make i willing to accept another and near but hard european pilgrimage trin-uni extract out of sir Jerome HORSEYS observation in seventeen year travel and experience in Russia and other country adjoin have before see france and the low country by sir EDWARD HORSEYS mean and in the company and charge of master William Mericke agent for the company I arrive in Muscovia a. 1573. and have some smack in the greek by affinity thereof in short space attain the ready knowledge of their vulgar speech the sclavonian tongue large extent of the sclavonian tongue the most copious and elegant language of the world with some small difference of dialect come near the polish Lettois and Transylvanian and all those country adjacent be use by merchant in Turkey also Persia and in India I read their chronicle write and keep in secret by a great prince of that country Knez Misthislofskie russian chronicle who out of his love and favour impart unto i many secret observe in the memory of his fourscore year time of the nature and government of that State vasy or Basilius great Duke of Russia to omit thing of former age vasy Andreowich have enlarge his dominion upon the pole and Swethen and special on the crimme tartar leave his people strong and rich his country divide into four part and two son the elder of five year call volica Knez juan Vasilliwich which reign after he the other of two year duke of vaga juan grow up comely in person endue with excellent gift his two son juan and Andrew juan succeed at twelve year age he marry Nastacia Romanova which become so wise and virtuous that she be much love and fear a long time carry the whole sway her husband be young and riotous she rule with admirable wisdom so that he cast off the yoke of homage to the crym conquer diverse tartarian prince the empire of Casan and Astracan 2700. mile down the Volga from Moscow and by a general council of his prince prelate entitle emperor and noble be crown and style the emperor and great duke of Volladamiria Muscovia Cazan and Astracan etc. his conquest grow with his year he take from the king of Poland the famous city of Pollozca the great city of Smolensca Doragabus Vasma and many other town with much riches and infinite number of captive seven hundred mile within their confine Lituania and bela Russia goodly town of traffic and country yield wax flax hemp tallow hides corn and cattle in abundance he grow puissant and proud overmighty for his next neighbour and bloody in all his conquest when his good queen Nastacia die Nastacia the Empress make a saint second wife a Tartar she be canonize a saint and to this day worship in their church by she he have two son juan and Theodore the emperor after this marry one of the chirca by who he have no issue that he will be know of the manner of this marriage be strange and heathenish which I forbear out of their own history to relate by this marriage he be much strengthen by the tartar better soldier than the native of who he make use to curb his prince and noble which be discontent with his cruel rob and incessant murder of his nobility he set forward with 100000. horse and 50000. foot with provision of cannon and munition towards livonia and Swethia kill man woman and child in his way to Novogrod and Plesco the two great town of traffic in all the east with the narve which three stand triangle wise at the end of the Baltic sea within the sound in this last he build a castle call juan Gorod and cause the eye of the architect to be bore out thence he enter the confine of livonia Narue castle Architect blind that he may not do the like to other send Knez juan Grinscoy to besiege Newhous which be take with all the town in the way to dorp this also yield and the tartar carry away eight thousand captive the merchandise and treasure be send to Nogrod for the emperor use he proceed divide his army into four part ten thousand be appoint to draw the ordnance over the freeze lake take all in his way thirty wall town and castle near the eastern sea within two hundred mile compass drown cruelty burn ravish maid and wife strip they naked notwithstanding the cold tie they by two and three at their horse tail and drag they some alive some dead the way and street lie full of carcase of every age and sex these livonians be account the fair people in the World infinite number be send into Russia with infinite treasure six hundred church be rob and destroy he and his tartar at last come to revel besiege and batter it with twenty cannon the inhabitant by night make up the breach by carry and cast hot and cold water which freeze so thick ice-fortification that after six week siege and 20000. cannon shoot spend with loss of 7000. he haste away the sudden thaw also make he to leave much of his artillery behind with former booty baggage and 30000. man in his retire enrage with fury for this repulse and loss he come back to the narve spoil the town of all the riches and merchandise kill man woman and child and give the spoil to his tartar which breed no small emulation in his ruff captain thence he march to plescove alias Vobsco where he intend to do the like easy believe those which report that these two town and Novogrod have practise against he that by their mean he have sustain his loss at revel Plesco by a magician deliver but there meet he a magician Mikula sweat which that town hold their oracle who with bold imprecation and exorcism call he bloodsucker and devourer of christian flesh swear by his angel that he shall not escape death by a present thunderbolt if he or any of his do touch the least child hair in that city which God by his angel do preserve for better purpose than his rapine that therefore he shall get he thence before the fiery cloud of God wrath be raise which he may behold hang over his head it be a very great and dark storm at that instant the emperor tremble at these word desire prayer for his deliverance and forgiveness of his cruel thought I see this impostor a foul creature he go naked winter and summer endure extreme frost and heat his holiness can not endure i he do many strange thing by magical illusion and be much follow and fear there of prince and people novogrod spoil with horrible cruelty the emperor return to Novogrod where all his captive and prisoner remain in exceed discontent he charge it with 30000. tartar and 10000 gunner of his guard who without respect ravish the woman and maid rob and spoil all that be within it murder young and old burn the household stuff and merchandise with warehouse of wax flax cordage tallow hides salt wine cloth of gold silk fur all set on fire the wax and tallow melt run down the kennel of the street together with the blood of 700000. man 700000. slay woman and child as some affirm beside beast insomuch that with blood and carcase the river Volca be as it be stop he vaunt that this massacre shall exceed those of ninive and jerusalem the city be thus destroy and desolate he return towards Musco and in the way employ his captain to take the people in the town and village within a hundred mile compass gentleman another cruelty add peasant merchant and monk old and young with their family good and cattle to go and inhabit this ruin Novogrod expose they to a new slaughter for many of they die with pestilence and poison of that infect place which can not be replenish to any purpose not long after God empty the emperor kingdom and chief city of his people by pestilence famine fire and sword and this his cruelty breed such discontent that many practise to destroy he which be still discover he countenance the rascality and the most desperate soldier against the chief nobility he settle his treasure in Moscow and the principal monastery many of the nobility he put to shameful death and torture and now suspect his cherca tartar also the crimme invade Russia he place they in his new conquest of Leefland and Sweathland the crim tartar his ancient enemy invade he incite by his nobility as he find out against who he levy out of remote province a huge army of stranger with his own hundred thousand horse and fifty thousand foot he discard his cherca wife and put she in a monastery and among many of his own subject juan three wife choose Natalia daughter to Kneaz Pheodor bulgalove a great commander in his war who soon after lose his head and his daughter within a year be shear a nun news come of his enemy approach God suffer this wicked people who live and wallow in the height of their wickedness and lust of cry sodomitical sin to be thus punish both by so bloody a king and this scythian enemy who come with two hundred thousand horseman within fifty mile compass on the river occa near Circapoe and upon secret intelligence as be think he pass the river without repulse of the emperor army who dare not on pain of death stir beyond their bound upon whatsoever advantage the enemy approach the great city of Musco the ruff emperor fly with his two son treasure servant and his guard of twenty thousand gunner towards a strong monastery troiet or the trinity sixty mile off upon ascention day the enemy fire the high steeple of saint john church at which instant happen a tempestuous wind whereby all the church house monastery and palace within the city and suburb thirty mile compass 1571. build most of fir and oak be set on fire and consume in six hour space with infinite thousand of * * d. Fletcher express this number to be 800000. which may seem credible not only by the multitude of inhabitant at that time but also the neighbour village and country flee thither for refuge Musco never recover that loss Simon monast man woman and child burn and smother to death by the fiery air few escape without and within the three wall castle the river and ditch about Musco be stop and fill with multitude of people lade with gold silver jewel earring chain bracelet ring and other treasure which go for succour to save their head above water all which notwithstanding so many thousand be there burn and drown that the river can not with all mean and industry that can be use be in two year after cleanse those which be leave alive and many from other place be daily occupy within great circuit to search and drag for jewel plate bag of gold and silver I myself be somewhat the better for that fish the street of the city church seller and vault lay so thick and full of dead carcase as no man can pass for the noisome smell long after the Crim and his army behold this fire solace himself in a fair monastery four mile off and take the spoil of such as flee from the fire beset all the way about the city and return with much treasure and store of captive pass over the river the same way they come the ruff emperor flee further to Vologda five hundred mile from Moscow accompany with his clergy in who he have most confidence he summon a council royal dissolve his army which fight not a stroke for he examine rack and torture many of his chief captain execute confiscate destroy their race and family a strange ambassador from the Crim. take order for cleanse repair and replenish Musco in the midst of this parliament Chigaly Mursoy send a ambassador attend with many mursoy in their account nobleman all well horse clothe in sheep skin coat gird to they with black cap of the same have bow and arrow with curious scimitar by their side they have a guard to keep they in dark room stink horse flesh and water be their best diet without bread beer bed or candle at the time of their audience bad usage be offer they which they puff at and scorn the emperor sit with his three crown before he in great royalty his prince and noble attend rich adorn with jewel and pearl he command the ambassador sheep skin coat and cap to be take off and a golden robe and rich cap to be put on who laugh aloud thereat enter the emperor presence his follower be keep back in a space grate with iron the ambassador chase with a hollow hellish voice look fierce and grim on the emperor be otherwise a most ugly creature four captain of the guard bring he near his seat and then without reverence he thunder out that his master and lord Chigaley great emperor of all the kingdom and Cham that the sun do spread his beam over have send to he juan Vassilliwich his vassal and great duke over all Russia by his permission to know how he like the scourge of his displeasure by sword fire and famine and withal have send he for remedy a present of his indignation pull out a foul rusty knife to cut his throat with all this do he haste out of the room without answer they will have take off his golden gown and cap but he and his company strive with they and will not permit it the emperor fall into a agony tear his hair and beard send for his ghostly father the chief captain desire leave to cut they all in piece but he give no answer after he have detain he some time his fury be allay he send he away with better usage and this message tell the merchant and unbeliever thy master it be not he it be my sin and the sin of my people against my god and Christ he it be that have give he a limb of the devil this power and opportunity to to be the instrument of my rebuke by who pleasure and help I doubt not of revenge and to make he my vassal the tartar have no city etc. though he be now but a runagate and have no place of abode to be find out in he answer he will not do he so much service to speak so arrogant a message from he whereupon not long after he do address a noble gentleman alfonasy Phedorowicz Nagoy in that embassy who be there detain and endure much misery for seven year space the emperor be loath to come to Musco but send for the chief merchant handicraft and tradesman from all other city and town within his kingdom to build and inhabit there and further to draw traffic thither take away all imposition and grant freedom of custom set seven thousand mason and workman to build a fair stone Wall round about the Musco stone wall about Musco which be finish in five year space strong and beautiful and furnish with fair brass ordnance he also settle his office and officer of justice therein as before himself keep much at Vologda on the river Dwina Vologda on Dwina the centre and safe place of his kingdom he confer much with one Elesius Bomelius Bomelius a mathematician come out of England he also send for skilful Architect carpenter joiner mason goldsmith physician apothecary and such like out of England he build a treasure-house of stone great bark and barge to convey and transport treasure upon any sudden occasion to Sollavetzcoy monastery stand on the north sea the direct way to England he fleece his merchant by take their commodity to exchange with merchant stranger for gold rapacity dollar jewel and pearl which he take into his treasury pay little or nothing he borrow great sum of city town and monastery exhaust all their wealth by great imposition and custom to augment his own treasure which he never will diminish upon any occasion whatsoever whereby he become so odious that in a desperate resolution he devise to prevent and alter his estate to annul and frustrate all these engagement of his crown strange policy to frustrate debt by resign his empire he make a division of his subject call the one Oproswy and the other Soniscoy and establish a new king or emperor name Char spinon son to the emperor of Cafan transfer on he his stile and crown with the authority incident but crown he without any solemnity or consent of peer he cause his subject to address their person suit and affair to he and in his name all privilege charter and write to be call in and new to be grant in this emperor name and under his seal in his name be all court plead coin custom fine revenue for the maintenance of his house officer and servant he sit in majesty and be liable to all debt and matter concern his treasury the old emperor and his son prostrate themselves and his bishop nobility and officer be cause to do the like ambassador also to resort to he which some refuse and he further marry he to the daughter of a prime prince of the blood royal name Kneaz Misthisloskoie now will the old emperor take no notice of debt owe in his time letter patent and privilege of town and monastery be make void state of inheritance for want of confirmation and other thing be at a stand his clergy nobility and commons for remedy hereof after a year discontinuance must petition juan Vassilewich that he will be please to resume the crown and government upon many condition and authentical instrument confirm by act of parliament in a very solemn new inauguration he be content infinite gift and present of worth be seek to bestow on he his old debt and former encumbrance discharge now he be again invest regrant privilege to town monastery nobleman and merchant upon new composition whence a portion be make for his niece daughter to Knez Andrew his late brother who in jealousy as be think of the people love to he be make away in pledge the emperor in a cup of mead which he have drink to he emperor brother make away this his daughter be marry to Hartique Magnus brother to Fredrick king of Denmark bear before his father christianus duke of holst be elect king of that country to pacify dissension betwixt they king Fredrick be content to exchange for the Dukedom of holst all his town castle and land during his life which he have in Liesland this emperor make up the match and marry they in Moscow give he in dowry with his niece Elona all the interest he have in the town and castle conquer by he in livonia king Magnus a Roble be about a mark english three dollar establish he therein and still he coral that be king Magnus give he a hundred good horse well furnish 200000. Robles in gold silver plate jewel and rich apparel with liberal gift to all his follower send 2000 horse to see this king and queen settle in their estate at the city of dorp but in steed of expect amity war follow from Denmark and Swethia those two king join with stephanus that valiant king of Poland who not long after get from he the narve and besiege plescove the Dane and Swethen be also competitor with he in certain territorite on the north coast wardhouse Cola Sollaversca U^rsague etc. put he from his custom and traffic there offer also to debar the english merchant in their passage for fish on those coast and trade with they at saint Nicholas and Colmogro the emperor notwithstanding these incursion send for all his noble and gentleman fair daughter virgin through his kingdom out of who he choose a wife for himself and another for his elder son Charewich juane her name be Nastacia daughter to juan sherimitten a viovod of a good family the emperor live in fear his four wife * * necesse daily discover treason and spend much time in torture and execution one Knez Pheodor Curakin governor of Wendon in livonia when king stephanus come to besiege it and find drink as be pretend be strip naked lay in a cart whip through the Musco with six whip of wire which cut his back belly and bowel to death juan Chiglicone be hang naked by the heel on a gibbet I see it the skin and flesh of his body from top to toe cut off and mince with knife by small gobbet four pallarinke be executioner one of which thrust his knife too far it seem purpose to dispatch he be present have to a block and that hand cut off whereof not well sear he die the next day many other be knock on the head and cast into the pool and lake at Slobida their flesh feed on by overgrow carp pike and other fish who fat be such that hardly any thing else can be see on they knez boris Telupa a great favourite fish feed sit on man flesh be set on a long sharp stake enter at his fundament and come out at his neck on which he languish fifteen hour and speak unto his mother the duchess which be bring to behold that woeful spectacle after which sight she be give to a hundred gunner of his guard which one after another defile she to death her body swell and lie naked in the field open to the view of all which pass by abominable execution he command his huntsman to bring their hungry hound to devour her flesh and bone drag up and down the emperor at this fight say such as I favour I have honour and to such as be traitor I will do thus I can enumerate many more like object but I forbear his chief exercise be to devise and execute new torture especial on his nobility best belove of his subject but his estate still grow daily more dangerous he inquire of Elysium bomelius doctor of physic a rare mathematician or magician and of other of queen Elizabeth year and what hope there may be if he shall be a suitor unto she for himself notwithstanding that he have three wife then live and many king can not prevail in that suit present he put his last wife into a nunnery and think to make England in case of extremity his safe refuge build and prepare many goodly bark large boat or barge at Vologda and bring his rich treasure thither to be embark in the same to pass down the river Dwina and so into England by the english ship upon a sudden his purpose for England leave his elder son Charrewich juan to govern and pacify his so trouble estate to this purpose he experiment a rare project which increase his treasure and hatred together he call for the principal prior abbot archimandrite and egomen of the rich monastery of his kingdom which be very many and tell they that what he have to say be best know unto themselves he have spend the most part of his time wit new Policy vigour and youth in warfaring for their wealth and safety who have receive increase by that which have exhaust his treasure and safety by his danger from foreign enemy and disloyal practiser nor can he or they long subsist without assistance their prayer prevail not whether for his their or his people sin supply out of their infinite abundance must be the trial of their fidelity which urgent necessity of the time exact the soul of their patron and donor saint and wonderworker for redemption of their sin and soul command and they must prepare their best thought without sophistical refusal upon these rhetorical threat at the provincial convocation call in the great consistory of the holy ghost the oath of sovereignty be minister in the city of Moscow some fear there be that he do aim at all after many dispute and allegation which appear in the original prepare for the king audience he have intelligence by privy spy from their register frame delay of audience mean while thunder threat to be carry by his instigator to their ear he call forty of the most pragmatical tell they he understand of their consultation and that they be the principal who his mild relation of his disadventure and the people misery have not mollify what shall we render you for reward the nobility and people cry out that you have get all the treasure in the land by trade in all kind of merchandise take the benefit of all other man travel be privilege to pay no custom to our crown nor charge of war and by terrify the best sort of our subject you have get by due computation the three part of the town royalty and village of this kingdom into your possession by your witchery enchantment and sorcery you buy and sell the soul of our people you live a most idle life in all pleasure and delicacy commit most horrible sin extortion bribery and excessive usury you abound in all the bloody and cry sin oppression gluttony idleness sodomitry and worse if worse may be with beast we have much to answer before God to suffer you to live and so many more worthy to die for you God forgive my take part with you do not the pope of late by his nuncio * * ant. Posseuinas earnest persuade to have the supremacy over you and to dispose of all your place and revenue have not the greek church often solicit we for the change of your metropolitan sea by mediation of the patriarch of Alexandria yea and often I have be move for your dissolution to the reparation of thousand of my ancient and poor nobility from who ancestor most of your revenue come and to who it most just belong that have spend their living and life for your safety and enrich and my rich subject be impoverish through your rapine and devilish illusion a fair example we have of that valorous king of England henry the eight your revenue be much more beside your stand treasure than your prodigal and luxurious can expend by which mean our nobility and serviceable subject be decay and our treasure so exhaust that we be enforce by the secret inspiration by the soul and holy saint the holy worker of wonder from who you profess to hold that infinite treasure not you that lie as a dead talon in your custody put to no religious use in their name and all the donor and benefactor we conjure and command that by such a day lest you be all then through the plague of God just wrath devour by wild beast of the forest who attend the execution of your judgement with a more sudden and fearful death than befall the falsehood of ananias and Saphyras denial you bring we a faithful and true inventory what treasure and yearly revenue every of your house have in possession necessity will not permit delay nor excuse for the contrary by that time we intend to call a parliament royal to be judge of our urgent necessity for defence of our realm against the king and prince of Poland Swethia Lituania and Denmark all combine and our rebel confederate with the crimme and to be witness also of the discharge of our duty to God and his angel to incite you in their name and his poor distress people for who necessity and preservation of you all we be thus earnest their so miserable estate lie yet in your hand and power in time to remedy and sustain the chief of the clergy often assemble and dissemble devise with the discontent nobility to make war and resist but they want sufficient commander and be otherwise unprovided of arm hereof the emperor take advantage and proclaim the head of those house to be traitor endite twenty of the principal and charge they with treason and other odious crime have fit pregnant proof to manifest the same to be true execution by bear he command his great wild bear to be bring out of their dark cave keep of purpose for such pastime at Slobida velica upon saint izay day in a spacious place wall about seven of the principal fat belly friar be bring forth one after another each with his cross and bead in one hand and through the emperor great favour a boar-spear of five foot in length in the other hand for his defence a wild bear be let loose which range against the wall scent the friar and make more mad with the people shout and cry run at he fierce and crush his head body bowel leg and arm as a cat do a mouse and have thus devour or tear the friar be shoot and kill by the gunner then be another friar and a fresh bear in like sort commit and likewise serve and so the rest of which only the last have so much skill and agility that set the end of his spear in the ground and guide it to the breast of the bear he run himself through on it the friar kill the bear with his spear and be kill by she and both die in the place this friar be canonize for a valiant saint by the rest of his live brethren of Michalla swett in Susdal seven other friar be condemn to be bury alive hereupon the metropolite bishop monk and friar of all house resort with petition and prostration to pacify the emperor not only suffer his ghostly father to absolve he but acknowledge the other to have suffer just hope that it will be example to all which profess holy order they all their treasurer and head of all the chief monastery and nunnery do in the name of themselves and the soul of their holy founder present a true and perfect inventory of all their treasure money town land and revenue particular belong to any saint which commend the same to their trust and custody successive for the everlasting maintenance of those holy seminary and sanctuary hope and assure believe that his sacred soul in commemoration of all other will not suffer any violation in his age which must pass away with account before the trinity of thing in all age do if otherwise that it will please he to give they some authentical discharge to remain to posterity I have with my best skill translate thus much verbatim out of the original these enchantment prevent their dissolution but prevail not against the emperor resolute demand of 300000. mark sterling bring speedy in coin unto his treasury beside the resignation of many precinct town land village and royalty at lest as much more worth to dispose of though with great grudge to the discontent noble who house be thereby make to serve his turn in all his design here have he raise a new treasure without diminish any part of his old be most prepare for England but neither his ambassador Andrew saven nor master Authenie jenkinson do so thorough express his mind be dark and cautelous make know to they or else queen Elizabeth will not apprehend the message but this secrecy notwithstanding his elder son and favourite take knowledge of it which breed such jealousy in the emperor that he be fain to dissemble his affection and cover his purpose therein with a new marriage at home one Feodor Nagois daughter a subject of his own juan five wife mother of Demetrius by who afterward he have a three son call Demetrius he spend now his time in pacify his discontent nobility and people keep two army on foot with small charge his prince and noble go most on their own charge the gentleman and Sinobarskeys have portion of money corn and land certain revenue be put a part for that purpose beside escheat robbery and custom pay they whether they go to war or no without diminution of his crown revenue or great stand treasure the one army consist most of tartar employ against the pole and Sweden which seek to recover livonia the other army consist common of 100000. horse must his own subject some few pole sweden Dutch and scot employ against the crimme which common do not last above three month May june and july every year his tartar notwithstanding king stephin prevail livonia commend bring away many captive out of Liefland the fruitful land in all the east flow with milk and honey the fair woman and best condition people in the world to converse and commerce with but give much to luxury idleness and pleasure for which sin they themselves say that God have thus plague and root they out and plant stranger in their country it be my fortune by special favour to buy and redeem diverse man woman and child of these captive for small sum of money some be merchant of good quality and get leave to convey some to Liefland again some to England some to Hamborow and Lubeck among they be take some dutch french scot and english which have serve under Pontus a french captain who be place about the suburb of the Musco and by my mediation have leave to build a church i contribute well thereto english and scots and get they a learned minister their assembly be at least two thousand every Sunday their rite after the lutherane fashion of these eighty five be scot soldier leave of seven hundred send from Stockholme and three english in their company capt. silk of Bristol I get they well house at boluan near the Moscow I appease the emperor fury against they cause to be tell he the difference of these remote adventurer ready to serve any christian prince for pay and the native sweden and that they will be of good use against the crimme Tartar some use be after make of my advice and 1200. of they do better service against the tartar than 12000. Russ with their short bow and arrow the tartar not know before the use of pistol be strike dead off their horse with shot they see not and cry away with those new devil that come with their thunder puff of fire whereat the emperor laugh and wish for more of they and they have pension and land allow and marry with the livonian woman increase into family I be glad he take no notice of the english which may have yield he a opportune quarrel to myself and to the merchant good in his country worth 100000. mark m. t. glover father to sir Th. glover the ambassador into Turkey a little before he have sell master Thomas glover a chief agent for the english company a wife bear of a noble house in Poland Basmanava take captive with her sister at Pollotzca for 10000 hungarian ducat in gold and yet short after on displeasure take from he 16000 pound more in cloth silk and other merchandise and send he with his wife empty out of his land the emperor expect some return and answer of his letter out of England the queen address one Daniel Sylvester there with who arrive at saint Nicholas pass up to colmogro and there make clothes for his pass up to the emperor Daniel Sylvester send from q. Elizabeth he can well speak the language his death july 15. 1575. while the tailor be put on he his new suit in the english house a thunderbolt strike he dead pierce down his neck and collar in the inside of his new coat not outward see a flash of lightning kill also his boy and dog by he burn his desk letter and the house at that instant at which news the emperor much perplex say god will be do but rage and in desperate case his enemy beset three part of his country the pole and Sweden eastward and crimme southward king Stephen threaten also short to visit the Moscow he make preparation but pretend that he can no way he furnish of powder saltpetre lead and brimstone the narve be shut but out of England he send for i and tell i he have a message of honour weight and secrecy to employ i in to the queen majesty perceive that I have attain the familiar knowledge of his language the polish and dutch tongue juan discourse with the author be question i of diverse thing like my answer ask if I have see his great vessel at Vologda I tell he I have what traitor have show they you I venture in company of thousand more I say to behold their beauty etc. he say you shall see double the number ere long but much more to be admire if you know what inestimable treasure they be inward to be beautify with it be report that your queen my sister have the best navy of ship in the World it be true say I and enter into a large discourse and description of they sir jerom horsey send from the emperor to q. Elizabeth he give i charge to prepare myself and to be silent and secret and to attend every day till he be prepare for my dispatch he command his secretary to take in write of i a description of the queen navy royal to which I add the picture of a ship with all her glorious and martial accoultrement about this time the emperor be much busy in search out a treason against he plot by Bomelius and the archbishop of Novogrod with some other discover by their servant on the rack letter send in cipher three sundry way to Swethen and Poland the bishop confess all and Bomelius deny all but be rack Bomelius roast his back and body cut with wire whip he confess more than the examiner be willing the emperor shall know he send word they shall roast he be take from the pudky and bind to a wooden spit which be do till they think no life leave they bring he in a sled through the castle where I with other see he and he espy i call upon Christ they throw he into a dungeon where he miserable end his life he have live in pomp and be author of much mischief have convey much treasure out of the country by way of England to Wesel in Westphalia where he be bear though bring up in Cambridge a enemy always to our nation he have delude the emperor with tale of queen Elizabeth youth and hope by his calculation of obtain she but the emperor out of hope hereof hear that there be a young lady of the blood royal the lady Mary Hastings daughter to the earl of Huntingdon who he now affect the bishop of Novogrod be condemn of coin and send money to Swethen and Poland of keep witch bugger boy and beast confederate with Bomelius etc. all his good be confiscate and himself throw into a dungeon with iron on his head and leg where he make paint image comb and bead live with bread and water eleven of his confederate servant be hang in his palace gate at Moscow and his woman witch shameful dismember and burn I behold all this the emperor pass over those which have be accuse and now consult about marry his second son Chariwich Theodor be of great simplicity the elder have no issue but have his prelate and noble together can not but evaporate some of his conceit from the former confession of their treason be ascension day on which before Musco have be burn he spend some hour in rhetorical enlarge the dismalness of that day with great eloquence dart still with his eye at many confederate in the late conspiracy protest to leave they a naked disloyal and distress people and a reproach to all nation of the World the enemy be at hand God and his prodigious creature in the heaven fight against we scarcity and famine witness it and yet no judgement move remorse in you the original be too long to recite little be do but all prostrate themselves to his majesty Theodore marry Irenia sister to boris who story follow bewitch and mercy desire God to bless his holy purpose for the marriage of his son for who he choose Irenia daughter of Theodor juanowich godonove and after the solemnisation of the marriage with great feast dismiss the noble and prelate with better word and countenance which be take for a reconciliation but the nuptial can not be perform by usual cohabitation which much distemper the king it be not decent to write the course take therein the emperor letter and instruction be ready himself and his chief secretary Savelly frowlow while I be present close they up in one of the false side of a wooden bottle fill with to hang under my Horse-mane not worth one penny letter send to the queen enclose in a bottle by sir jeroma Horsey appoint i four hundred hungarian ducat in gold to be sow in my boot and quilt in some of my worst garment he say he forbear to tell i of some secret of his peasure fear leave I pass through his enemy country may be enforce to discover what he will not have know the bottle you carry with you shall declare what you shall say to queen Elizabeth my love sister of which you must have care as of your life until you come in safe place to open it in mean while and always be thou my sweet sunshine Eremiska trusty and faithful Eremiska be their name for Jerome and thy reward shall be my goodness and grace from i hereafter I fall prostrate lay my head on his foot with a heavy heart to be thus expose to unavoidable danger Doeafie Ulanon a gentleman of good rank and daily waiter on the king attend i my sled and horse and twenty servant be ready at the postern gate I post that night to otuer ninety mile where victual and fresh horse be prepare and so to Novogrod and Plesco 600. mile in three day where enter into livonia my gentleman and servant take their leaf by mile vnderstand russian mile which be about three quarter of we and desire some token to the emperor of my safe come thither they leave i with a poor guide only within three hour after the sentinel take i upon the border and bring i to new house into the castle before the state-holder or lieutenant who straight examine and search i suspect i as one come from their enemy country I say I be glad to come into their hand out of the veil of misery the moscovite country not without loss on the three day upon some mediation they appoint i a guide and suffer i to pass the guard expect gratuity but I excuse as pinch by the ruff I pass three day by land and freeze mere to Osell in Liefland a island large and spacious under the king of Denmark ragamuffin soldier take i and use i rough Osell a island in the Baltike sea in 59 deg. and carry i to sow Burgh and so to Burgh the chief town and castle in those part and there deliver i to the state-holder lieutenant I attend his pleasure keep hardly as a spy the snake creep in my lodging on bed and board and milk pan the soil be such they do no harm I be call before the chief governor a grave gentleman in good favour with the king many halberd attend who examine i with many question I answer I be a subject of the queen of England who have peace with all christian king special with the king of Denmark but be commit again to custody whence have dismiss his company he send for i again by his son and be private hold a letter in his hand say I have receive sundry letter from my friend and one of late from my daughter captive in Moscow which show of much friendship she have find at a english gentleman hand which negociate in that court for the queen of England my lord say I be your daughter call Magdalen urkil yea sir say he I answer I be the man and that within these ten day she be well he say he can not procure her ransom and clasp i about the neck cry as do his son likewise God angel have bring your goodness thus to i how ever disguise in this turbulent time that I may render you thanks and furtherance I desire free pass and safe conduct he feast i joyful and make ready his letter and passport to captain of town and castle give i a fair German strike clock offer his son and servant arm to guard i out of danger which I can not accept of and commend his daughter to i I pass on to pilton a strong castle where king Magnus lie who use i rough pilton because I can not drink with he excessive he have riotous spend and give most of his town and castle jewel plate etc. to his follower and adopt daughter which he receive in dowry with the emperor niece and not long after die miserable leave his queen and only daughter in very poor estate I ride through the duke of Curlands country and Prussia to Konninsburgh Meluin and Danzike in Polond gratitude pomerania and Mickelburgh to Lubeck where I be know and honourable entertain I have now get four or five servant Dutch and english the burgomaster send i a present of fish flesh and wine take notice of the favour I have do to they and they diverse come with thankful acknowledgement of their redemption by my mean and purse from Moscovite and tartarian captivity and present i with a boll cover guilt in it ricks dollar and hungarian ducat which coin I return again they bring i their town book and pray i to write my name and place of birth and abode that they and their posterity may honour my name in record for ever at hamburgh likewise they for like cause present i their thanks and present and the burgomaster feast i I land at Harwich open my aquavitae bottle which have be gird close under my caffocke by day and my best pillow by night and take thence the emperor letter which I sweeten aswell as I can but yet the queen smell the aquavitae-savour I have access three or four several time and some discourse by mean of my lord treasurer sir Francis Walsingham and some honourable countenance of my lord of Leicester by sir Edward horsey my kinsman his mean I be well entertain by the Muscovy company to who the queen have give command to prepare those thing for which the emperor have give direction with which and her majesty letter and gracious favour swear her servant esquire of the body give i her picture and hand to kiss I depart in company of twelve tall ship sir jer. Horseys return into Russia we meet with the king of Denmark his fleet of ship and galley near the north cape fight with they and put they to the worst and after arrive at s. Nicolas I post over vaga and come to Slobida Alexandrisca where I deliver the queen letter to the emperor with her pleasure by word of mouth short of his expectation he command my silence commend my speed and business do for he give i allowanance and promise his goodness for recompense of my service he command also that those commodity shall be bring up to the Musco and receive into his treasury viz. copper lead powder saltpetre brimstone etc. to the value of 9000. pound and ready money pay for they he come to the city of Musco and cast his displeasure upon some he send a parasite of he with 200. gunner to rob his brother in law mekita Romanowich our next neighbour the emperor excess this Mekita be brother to Nastacia the emperor first wife and grandfather to the present emperor which take from he all his armour horse plate money land and good to the value of 100000. mark sterling he send the next day to the english house for as much course Cotton as will make himself and his child gown to cover they the emperor send likewise Simon Nagoy another of his instrument to squeeze or sponge Andrew Shalkan a great bribe officer who bring his fair young wife Solumaneda out of her chamber defile she cut and gash her naked back with his cemitar kill his trusty servant juan Lottish take all his horse good and land and beat out of his shin 10000 Robles or mark sterling in money at that time do the emperor also conceive displeasure against the dutchman and livonians before mention to who a church and liberty of religion have be give by my mean and appoint certain captain with 2000 gunner in the night to take the spoil of all they have who strip they naked ravish and deflower the woman and virgin carry away diverse of the young and fair to serve their lust some escape come to the english house where they be clothe and relieve not without danger of displeasure among who be that daughter of the governor of Osell in Liefland commend to my favour who freedom I also afterward procure and convey she to her father the emperor strike his son some say with his staff on his head his cruelty grow now ripe for vengeance and he not long after fall out with his elder son for his commiseration to those distress christian and for grieve at his uncle wrong jealous also of the people affection to he give he a box on the ear as it be term which he take so tender that he fall into a burn fever and in three day depart this life whereat the emperor tear his hair and beard like a mad man lament too late for that irrecoverable loss not to himself so much as to the empire who hope be bury with he be a wise mild and worthy prince of three and twenty year death and burial of young juan. he be bury in Michala archangel church in the Musco with jewel and riches put in his tomb value at 50000. pound watch after by twelve citizen in course every night devote to his saint John and Michael to keep both body and treasure till his resurrection now be the emperor more earnest to send into England about his long conceit match his second son be weak of wit and body without hope of ability for government and the three not only young but disallow in sanctity and according to the fundamental law illegitimate bear out of wedlock of the five unlawful wife not solemnize with the rite of their church but in the churchyard by a deprive and excommunicate prelate so say the original in which respect neither she nor her issue be capable of the crown the emperor peruse the queen last letter and address one of his trusty servant in embassage Theodore Pissempskeie a wise nobleman about the lady Mary Hastings aforesaid and that her majesty will be please to send some noble ambassador to treat with he therein ambassador to the queen for lady Mary daughter to the earl of Huntingdon this ambassador take ship at saint Nicolas and arrive in England be magnificent entertain and admit audience her majesty cause that lady to be attend with diverse lady and young nobleman that so the ambassador may have a sight of she which be accomplish in York house garden there be he attend also with diverse man of quality bring before she and cast down his countenance fall prostrate before she and rise run back with his face still towards she the lady with the rest admire at this strange salutation he say by a interpreter it suffice he to behold the angelical presence of she which he hope shall be his master spouse and empress seem ravish with her angelical countenance state and beauty she be after that by her familiar friend in court call empress of Mosconia sir William Russell three son to the earl of Bedford a wise and comely gentleman be appoint her majesty ambassador to the moscoune but he and his friend consider of the business and not so forward thereto the company of merchant entreat for sir Jerome Bowes move theretowith his presence and tall person he be well set forth most at their charge and with the russian ambassador arrive at s. Nicolas sir jer. Bowes ambassador into Russia you have his voyage etc. in m. hakluyt the emperor ambassador post over land and deliver his letter with the account of his embassage which be joyful accept sir i. b. pass slow up the Dwina 1000 mile to Vologda the emperor send a pensioner Michael preterpopove well attend to meet he and make his provision at yeraslave another equerry of the stable meet he at Musco he be honourable entertain knez juan suetzcoie attend with 300. horse bring he to his lodging savelle frollove the secretary be send to congratulate his welcome with many dish of dress meat and promise of best accommodate the next day the emperor send a noble man ignatie tatishove to visit he with fair word and promise of speedy audience which be on Saturday follow about nine of the clock the street be fill with people and a thousand gunner attire in yellow and blue garment set in rank by the captain on horseback with bright harquebuse in their hand from the ambassador door to the emperor palace Knez juan sitzcoie attend he mount on a fair jennet rich bedeck with a fair gelding well furnish for the ambassador attend with three hundred gentleman gallant adorn the ambassador be displease that the duke horse be better than he mount on his own horse and with his thirty man livery in stammel cloak well set forth each have a part of his present be most plate march onward to the king palace where another duke meet he and tell he that the emperor stay for he he answer that he come as fast as he can by the way the people guess at the unpleasingness of his message cry Carenke that be cranes-leg in mockage of he whereat he storm much the passage stair and room through which he be conduct be all beset with merchant and gentleman in golden coat his man enter before he with their present into the room where the emperor sit in his robe and majesty with his three crown before he four young noble man call rind shine in their cloth of beat silver with four sceptre or bright silver hatchet in their hand on each side of he the prince and other his great duke and noble in rank sit round about he the emperor stand up and the ambassador make his courtesy deliver the queen letter which he receive and put off his imperial cap ask how his love sister queen Elizabeth do his answer make he sit down on a side form cover with a carpet and after some little pause and mutual view be dismiss in manner as he come and his dinner of two hundred dish of dress meat send after he by a gentleman of quality I be forewarn by my secret and best friend not to intermeddle in those business some secret and public conference pass but good note be take that none of the great family of the godonove be consult with therein the king feast the ambassador grant great allowance of daily provision and nothing will please he yea he make great complaint about frivolous matter the merchant and the emperor officer be reconcile in their account grievance remedy privilege grant and a ambassador to the queen resolve on if sir i. b. can have conform himself to the time any thing may have be yield yea he promise that if his marriage with the queen kinswoman take effect her issue shall inherit the crown but England be not so happy for assurance whereof he have a mass of ready treasure present to be transport with his ambassador unto queen Elizabeth trust the clergy and noblity especial the near ally to the old empress the prince wife and her family of the godonove find mean to cross all these design the king much distract in fury cause many witch magician or bad present to be send for out of the north where there be many between colmogro and Lappia threescore of they be bring post to Musco where they be guard juan consult with witch Bodan Belscoy the emperor minion 1584. diet and daily visit by the emperor great favourite Bodan Belscoy to receive from they their divination or oracle on the subject give they in charge by the emperor note that a great blaze star and other prodigious sight be see a month together every night over Musco that year this favourite now seek to serve the turn of the rise sun weary with the wicked disposition of the emperor the soothsayer tell he that the heavenly planet and constellation will produce the emperor death by such a day but he not dare to tell the emperor so much say to they that on that day they shall be all burn the emperor begin grievous to swell in his cod wherewith he have offend so long boast that he have deflower thousand of virgin and a thousand child of his beget destroy be carry every day in his chair into his treasury one day two day before the emperor his death the prince beckon to i to follow and I adventurous stand among the rest and hear he call for his precious stone and jewel he then hold discourse to the noble about he direct his eye and speech most to boris Godovona of the nature and property of his gem of the world compass loadstone cause the waiter to make a chain of needle therewith touch of the coral also and Turkess who beautiful colour say he lay on my arm poison with inflammation you see be turn pale Vasiliwich his discourse of gem a unicorn horn cost 70000. mark and declare my death reach out my staff royal a unicorn horn garnish with very diamond ruby saphire emerald and other precious stone it cost 70000. mark sterling buy of David gowell of the fulker of Ausburge seek out some spider cause his physician johannes Eiloff to scrape a circle thereof upon the table and put within it one spider and after another which burst present other without the circle run away from it alive it be too late it will not preserve i behold these precious stone the diamond most precious of all other I never affect it it restrain fury and luxury the powder be poison then he point to the ruby this comfort the brain and memory clarify congeal blood that emerald of the nature of the rainbow be enemy to all uncleanness and though a man cohabit in lust with his own wife this stone be about they will burst at the spend of nature the sapphire I great delight in it preserve and increase nature and courage rejoice the heart be please to all the vital sense sovereign to the eye strengthen the muscle he take the onyx in hand etc. all these be god wonderful gift secret in nature reveal to man use and contemplation as friend to grace and virtue and enemy to vice I faint carry i away till another time in the afternoon he peruse over his will and yet think not to die his ghostly father dare not put he in mind of anoint in holy form he have be witch in that place and often unwitch again he command the master of the apotheke and the physician to prepare a bath for his solace inquire the goodness of the sign send his favourite to his witch to know their calculation he tell they the emperor will bury or burn they all quick for their illusion and lie the day be come he be as heart-whole as ever he be sir they answer be not so wrathful you know the day be come and you know it end with the sunsetting he haste he to the emperor make preparation for his bath about the three hour of the day the emperor therein solace himself and make merry with pleasant song after his use come out about the seven hour well refresh sit down upon his bed call rodovone birken a favourite of he to bring the chessboard set his man his chief favourite and other with boris Federowich godonove be then about he he in his loose gown juan Vasiliwich his death shirt and linen hose faint and fall backward great be the stir and outcry one send for aquavitae another to the apotheke for vinegar and rose-water with other thing and to call the physician mean time he be strangle * * suppose the act of Belskoy and boris and stark dead some show of hope be make of his recovery to still the outcry Bodan Belscoy and boris to who the dead emperor have bequeath as the first of four prince to take charge of his son and kingdom be brother to the successor wife go out on the accompany with so many of the nobility his familiar friend as be strange so sudden to behold they call out to the captain and Gunnera to keep their guard strong and the gate sure with their piece and match light whereupon the gate of the great castle be present shut with watch and ward I offer myself my man powder and pistol to attend the prince protector he accept i among his familiar and servant pass by with a cheerful countenance towards i speak aloud be faithful and faint not Eremiesca the metropolitan bishop and nobility flock into the inner castle hold it a day of jubilee for their redemption press who can first to the book and cross to swear to the new emperor Feodor juanowich Theodore or feodore emperor boris protector it be admirable what dispatch there be in six or seven hour the treasury seal up and new officer add to the old twelve thousand gunner with their captain set for a garrison about the wall of the great city of Musco a guard be give i to keep the english house the ambassador s. i. b. tremble and expect hourly nothing but death from the rage of the nobility and people his gate window and servant be shut up his former plentiful allowance take away boris and three other of the great peer join assistance with he in the emperor will for the government of the kingdom viz. the protector and chief commissioner course of government Knez Misthisloskie Knez juan Suskoy and Mekita Romanowich begin to manage and dispose of all affair they proclaim the emperor feodore in his late father stile through all the kingdom take inuentory of all the treasure every where gold silver jewel which be infinite make a survey of all the officer and book of the crown revenue new treasurer counsellor and officer in all court of justice be make new lieutenant also captain and garrison in all place of charge and importance most out of the family of the godonove best to be trust for attendance and service about the king and queen by which mean the protector become strong he be with great observation magnify of all and so be haved himself to the prince nobility and people as he increase their love after some pause I be send for and ask what they shall do with s. i. b. his business be at a end he be not now say they to be repute a ambassador I answer it stand with the honour of the king and kingdom to dismiss he with honour and safe according to the law of nation otherwise the queen who servant he be will take it ill etc. they shake their head revile he say he have deserve death by the law of nation practise so much mischief in a State they will have send a message to he by i to prepare his present dispatch with some other terrible word of displeasure I be seek that I may not be the messenger which somewhat offend they the lord protector send for i at evening who I find play at the chess with Knez juan Gemskoy a prince of the blood and take i aside say I wish you to speak little in defence of bow the lord take it ill go show yourself from i and pacify such and such your answer be well consider of but many persuade revenge upon he for his ill behaviour I hope say I your greatness and wisdom will pacify their fury i will do my best he say to make all well and so tell he from i I go to those nobleman according which complain of their suffering for his arrogance will i to be quiet in the business yet do not I leave to deal effectual under hand for he entreat he may be send for and dispatch be coop up and keep close as a prisoner and allowance take from he at last he be send for attend but with a mean messenger lead into a with draw room where the lord use he with no respect charge he with heinous matter practise against the crown and state will not spend time to hear his answer rail on he especial the two shalkan great officer and some other who have suffer displeasure and beat from the emperor through his complaint say it be requisite to make he a example cut off his Crane-leg and cast his wither carcase into the river point out of the window under he but God have now give we a more merciful emperor who eye he shall see for queen Elizabeth sake but put off your sword which he refuse to do say it be against his order and oath they will enforce he else come into the presence of so peaceable a prince who soul be clothe with mourn be not prepare for the sight of arm and so he put on patience and be bring single to the presence of the emperor who by the mouth of his chancellor commend he to queen Elizabeth wherewith sir Jerome Bowes be convey to his lodging three day give for his departure out of Musco perhaps he shall have a letter send after he he have now little mean less money and none to supply he but myself who make mean to get he thirty cart to convey he and his servant stuff and as many post-horse for he can be allow none of the emperor charge I ask leave of the lord protector to speak with he and to bring he out of the city watch and ward be appoint in the street that the people shall not stir at he a mean Sinoboarscoie be appoint to conduct he who use he with small humanity and much against the height of his mind to endure I with my servant and good friend accompany he well mount out of Musco cause my pavilion to be pitch by a river side ten mile off and with my provision of wine and Mead take leave of he and his company he sad pray i to have a eye a ear to his safety doubt of some treachery and much perplex with fear as be the gentleman with he I procure the lord protector to send his letter after he to the queen and a Tunber of sable a gift from himself when he come to saint Nicolas aboard the ship he use intemperate word to the gentleman that conduct he for he to telle be emperor and his counsel cut his letter and sable in piece etc. the nobility hear hereof after he be go lay much blame on i especial the shalkan now be the government much alter have put on a new face russian government under Theodore the great treasure which Basiiwich gather see doctor Fletcher tract in my three part l. 3. c. 1. justice administer and every man live in peace man capacity can comprehend how the infinite treasure which the former emperor leave behind he can be get together and much less how it shall be so soon consume and this kingdom prince and people so ruin his stand revenue and my collection out of their own record in my description of the ruff commonwealth may be worth read the traffic attract many nation persian armenian turk italian german french dutch english polonian which bring store of gold and silver coin precious stone jewel and pearl which be take into his treasury for the commodity of that country by he take from his subject to serve his turn at easy rate leave they their traffic beside for cloth silk velvet ounce-gold tissue cloth of gold and silver wine fruit spice sugar copper lead tin paper indigo Brasill calico etc. which that country most need this course of traffic and treasure with the surplusage of his revenue amount yearly unto 1300000. mark sterling beside all charge for his house and ordinary salary of his soldier this have he continue to lay up near sixty year beside the great treasure leave he by his predecessor never exhaust nor diminish myself have see many thousand bag rot of old silver and gold coin and plate in great bar chest pile up in many vault seller and stone house and many trusty merchant continual weigh number and new bag up the same so that I be confident have converse much and many year with those nation that all the king in Christendom have not like riches and quantity of treasure now to add some thing of his act conquest and condition he conquer Casan juan Bas his Conquest Astracan the nagay and Chorcas tartar and many other of that kind inhabit above two thousand mule on both side the Volga southward to the caspian sea he free himself from tartacian homage he conquer Pollotzka Smolensca and many town and castle seven hundred mile south-west from Moscow into the country of bela Russia Lituania etc. belong to the crown of Poland as much and as many town and castle eastward in Linonia and the part belong to Swethan and Poland the kingdom of siberia also bring away the king who I see in Musco and the adjacent country northward 1500. mile his act for justice he reduce the ambiguity and uncertain rule of their law and plead into a more perspicuous and plain form of a write law for every man to understand and plead his own cause without any advocate and to challenge under great penalty and mulct to the crown judgement without delay his act ecclesiastical for religion he establish and publish one uniform confession of faith doctrine and discipline consonant to the three symbol or creed profess the religion of the greek church derive their antiquity from their apostle saint Andrew and their patron saint Nicolas and in regard of late dissension in doctrine and ceremony in that church he have acquit the see of Musco from that society and the synodal and oblation * * twelve thousand Robles annual heretofore contribute to that church the patriarch jeremy resign the patriarchship of Constantinople to the metropolitan of Musco he utter disclaim the doctrine of the pope hold it the most erroneous marvel that any christian prince will yield he any secular authority which he cause his clergy to declare to friar Anthony Possevinus the pope nuncio at the church door at Prechesta 1582. he have build in his time forty fair stone church rich adorn within and the turret all gild with fine pure gold without he have build and dedicate above sixty monastery and nunnery and endow they with bell ornament and maintenance to pray for his soul he build a goodly steeple of hew stone in the inner castle of Musco call Blanasenia Collacalitza with twenty greatsweet sound bell in it which serve to all the cathedral church stand about it ring all together every festival day which be many and every midnight prayer his charity one deed of his charity I may not omit a great famine follow the pestilence of the better sort of people the town street and way be pester with rogue idle beggar and counterfeit cripple 1575. nor can any riddance be make of they proclamation be make that they shall resort to Slobida Alexandrisca to receive the emperor great alm on such a day out of some thousand that come seven hundred of the vile and most counterfeit rogue be all knock on the head and cast into the great lake for the fish to receive the dole of their carcase the rest be disperse to monastery and hospital to be relieve his castle and colonies he build above 100 castle in his time in diverse part of his kingdom and plant they with ordnance and garrison he build 200. town in waist and dishabit place through his kingdom to replenish those part be a mile or two mile in length call Yams give every inhabitant a portion of land and money to keep so many speedy horse for his use and for post he build a goodly strong stone Wal about the city of Musco and plant it with ordnance and garrison his person describe his burial he be a goodly man of presence well favour of a high forehead and shrill voice a right scythian full of ready wit and wisdom cruel and merciless his own experience rule state cause and affair public he be sumptuous entomb in Michael archangel church where his memory be still dreadful though guard day and night they which pass by or hear his name cross and bless themselves from his resurrection again the empress Anna five wife to the late emperor with her young son Chariwich Demetrius and their family Nagais be confine to onglet to reside in that castle at the emperor pleasure with royal allowance for their maintenance new ambassador be choose by boris the protector such as he best affect to illustrate his greatness to be send from the new emperor to all king and. prince his ally the coronation be first solemnize whereof I be a eye and ear witness as master hakluyt and doctor Fletcher discourse in this and other relation of that state and commonwealth procure at my hand sir i. horsey send ambassador from the emperor to q. Elizabeth declare myself be nominate to be send to queen Elizabeth the substance of our embassy be much alike to make know that by the providence of God feodore juanowich be crown and settle in the imperial throne of his late father juan vasilowich of famous memory who think good out of his tender care of peace to make know to their princely wisdom how desirous he be of their alliance and brotherly amity promise all correspondence trade and commerce with they and they letter also and commission to treat of such other matter as fall proper in question for the good of both side I be dispatch with extraordinary grace term and title from the emperor but especial from the protector in private and public and with instruction and commission apart have take my leave of the principal prince and officer I set forth well attend and accommodate in the reputation of a ambassador wheresoever I come my journey be over-land from Musco the twenty of August six hundred mile to Vobsee 1584. and thence to Dorp in Liefland Perno libo Wendon in curland and so to riga chief city of that province where my commission be to treat with queen Magnus the next heir to the russian crown she be now in great distress and have small allowance issue from the crown treasure of Poland she be keep in the castle of riga whereby leave of the cardinal Ragavile very hardly obtain I speak with she find she dress her daughter head both of they in old garment of cloth of silver I tell she her brother so cousin germane call the emperor Feodor have take notice of the distress wherein she and her daughter live and desire she return into her native country there to hold her estate according to her birth and the lord protector boris Fedorowich with due remembrance of his service do vow the performance of the same king Magnus his widow seduce by boris his policy I be interrupt and haste away by the lieutenant and get leave a second time she complain of her small allowance not a thousand dollar a year which I say she may remedy if she please she say she have no mean to escape the king and state mind to make use of her birth and blood and know their fashion in Russia she have small hope there to be otherwise deal with than they use to do with their queen widow which be to shut they up in a hellish cloister to which I prefer death I answer her case be different and time have alter that course none that have a child be thereunto enforce after other word and promise of mean to effect her escape within two month I leave with her a hundred hungarian ducat and your grace say I shall receive four hundred more this day seven week or thereabouts her highness receive they very thankful and her daughter then ten year old twenty more and I take my leave the next day as I pass out of the town gate a gentlewomanlike maiden in she pleat hair present i a curious white wrought handkerchief in the corner whereof be a little hoop-ring set with ruby but tell i not from who I hie out of the cardinal jurisdiction through curland Prussia Meluin Danzike whence I send one of my servant to the narve with my letter handkerchief and relation to the emperor and protector all sew up in his quilt doublet he pass so speedy and safe that this queen and her daughter be send for steal away very secret and post with thorough livonia before she be miss the lieutenant send diverse horseman after she but too late and be therefore displace at her first come as I learn after my return she be much esteem by the empress and lady have her officer land and allowance appoint according to her state but not long after she and her daughter be dispose into maid monastery within two mile of Musco among the rest of the queen whereupon she exclaim that she be betray and that she have give faith to i but neither can I be permit to see she or she i this piece of service be very acceptable whereof I much repent i from Danzike I pass cassubla Pomorenia Statine Meckelburgh rostok wismar where I escape death miraculous Lubek where I have honourable entertainment again and from hamborough arrive in England have gracious access to the queen at Richmond her majesty profess much joy that a subject of she have attain to knowledge trust and ability for so weighty employment from so great a prince I after translate the letter and master secretary read they to the queen I be well house attend provide and feast by the Musconie company be call again to Greenwich and deliver to her majesty what I be to say and what it please she to inquire of i in fine she say well Jerome we have lose a fair time and a great deal of treasure that our realm may very opportune have be possess of harsh censure bow his want of temperance etc. one be commit to the marshal the other forbid her majesty presence such be the lord treasurer good husbandry answerable to her majesty frugality that though this business have be keep ten year a foot and the emperor still uphold in hope yet all the charge of ambassador and messenger be lay on the merchant both for entertainment and gift give and send of which the queen bear the name and countenance receive thence many and rich present for that which at time cost the company 20000. pound the imputation and aspersion cast on i by false suggestion and subornation of finch a hangby of sir Jerome Bowes who first falter and after the other be remove out of presence confess that he be set on by he I omit so repay the courtesy in release he when he have be take as a spy etc. with much help of friend sir Francis Walsingham and sir George Barnes provision be make of lion bull dog gild halbord pistol piece curious armour wine drug of all sort organ virginal musician scarlet pearl curious plate and other thing of good value according to my commission I take my leave of the queen receive her highness letter to the emperor and protector with letter patent of grace and title for my passage with many good word and gracious promise instruction also from the lord and the company with some recompense for favour already do for they in the emperor Court I depart well accommodate in company of ten good ship arrive at saint Nicolas post twelve hundred mile to the Musco come to the lord protector now style prince of the province of vaga who receive i glad send for i again the next day tell i of many strange alteration since I have go from thence practice of the mother of Demetrius and that family discontent betwixt he and his joint commissioner for the government by the emperor will he be now loath to have any competitor you shall hear much say he believe little more than I tell you on the other side I hear much discontent of the nobility dissemble work on the advantage etc. I be bring before the emperor the counsel sit in state and deliver the account of my employment as do other his ambassador with the queen letter commandment be give to a gentleman with fifty huntsman to attend the speedy bring up of the present I have commendation for the service do about queen Magnus boris his bloody stair to the throne Bodan Belscoie the chief favourite to the old emperor be now send to a remote town and castle call Casan in displeasure as a man fear to sow discontent in the nobility Peter gollanine chief treasurer to the old emperor and peremptory against boris be likewise send away under the conduct of juan voiacove a favourite of the protector and on the way to Musco be dispatch of his life Kneaz juan Suscoy a prime prince of the blood one in commission for the government be command to depart the court and city of Musco to his own repose surprise with a colonel guard and not far off the city be smother in a cottage with wet hay and stubble set on fire thus be the chief block remove out of the godonove way many more be quarrel and by degree have the like measure I be sorry to see in what hatred the protector grow with the people he take i out with he at the postern with small attendance beside his falconer to see his gerfalcon fly at the crane Herne and swan princely pastime for their hardy hawk not care for their kill have such choice but a beggarly friar wish he to haste home speedy all be not his friend some five hundred horse young noble and courtier be come to meet the protector for honour to attend he as be say to the city his meaning be that none shall know of his go out he follow the friar advice venture the ford a near way and be at the castle gate before that company can come about I see he perplex and glad that he have recover the palace where bishop duke gentleman and other suitor attend he and can not at other time come in his sight in three or four day together he pass by a privy way I pray he to look back the rather because they shall not envy my pass with he to show himself on the he cast a displease countenance on i yet stay and go towards they salute many and take their petition great acclamation be make God save boris Fedorowich his health he tell they he will present their petition to the emperor they answer thou most noble lord be king say thou the word and it be do I recite this because I perceive his like and aim at the crown public audience to sir i. horsey my present be now come the day appoint that I must again appear before the emperor from her majesty with a gentleman of good esteem and be as well mount as he attend with twenty man in fair livery myself attire after their fashion stay in a withdraw room till the emperor and empress have view out of the palace window the bull dog and lion a goodly white bull all spot with natural black dapple his gorge hang down to his knee wash with soap and sleeked over with a green velvet collar stud and a red rope make to kneel before the emperor and empress and stand up look fierce on every side appear some other strange beast which they call Buenall twelve goodly masty dog with rose and collar in like fashion lead by twelve man two fair lion bring forth of their cage draw on sled etc. the emperor be set in his chair of state I be send for in my man carry their present in their hand most piece of curious plate I deliver my speech the emperor say little show good countenance and the chancellor whisper in his ear stand up put off his cap and say he be glad to hear that his love sister queen Elizabeth be in good health and therewith I be dismiss in manner as I come the particular of the present be deliver in a schedule to the lord treasurer there follow i juan Shamadaiao a kinsman of the lord protector with a hundred and fifty dish of all sort of meat for my dinner from the emperor drink bread and spice send by one hundred and fifty gentleman through the street to my lodging I present the chief a cloth of scarlet garment and reward each of the other the next day my friend their priest officer etc. come as the manner be to make merry with that cheer the protector spend a whole day in view the provision send he he and the empress his sister like all admire nothing more than the organ and virginal never have see or hear the like before ready money be send 4500. pound and my choice of one of three horse send by the master of his horse esteem worth 300. mark he send i by another three thousand pound in fine silver coin of his free gift and earnest of his favour I be continual remember with other gift in bountiful measure so that town monastery officer merchant native and foreign make use of my favour to procure freedom and exemption the emperor I may say the lord protector be possess of so great a treasure know not how to make use thereof to illustrate his fame the persian and georgian both invade by the Turk be suitor for aid he lend the persian 200000. pound for five year gratis and half so much to the georgian king hereupon grow a quarrel betwixt the Turk and the Moscovite the protector ambitious of great rule or title rather send Knez Pheodor Forresten in embassage to the king of Denmark about a match with his daughter and Hartique Hans the king three son little be resolve till four year after Alphonaze masolove secretary of state be send to Maximilian the emperor with great and rich present and offer of aid against the Turk in Hungary if he will procure passage for a army through Poland of king Stephen which the emperor can not effect and in lieu thereof desire by his ambassador send into Russia the lone of 300000. rial such hostage be desire for assurance that the effect be frustrate and prove ridiculous and unfortunate the Turk set the crimme on the ruff with a huge army which cost the Moscovite infinite charge and loss of man the pole and Swethen combine also and recover their ancient territory the ruff at that time be employ in new conquest in siberia whence chiglicaloth the emperor with his mother and best mursey be bring to the Musco where they live with better maintenance then in their own country I see the king there do many feat of activity on horseback and Foot he tell i of man of like complexion to i in his country take with a ship two year before intend to pass up the ob to seek cathay the discontent nobility now practise against the protector greatness which he dare not then take notice of soon after a practice be discover to poison the young prince Demetrius his mother and all that family guard in ouglet also Mekita Romanowich the emperor only uncle trust in the three place for the government in the old emperor will with boris who can endure no competitor two prime prince make away be bewitch his speech take sudden from he I come to visit he he set pen to paper and writ that he be bewitch and by who and shall not live the protector tell i also that Mekita Romanowich be not like to disturb he long he die soon after and the silly emperor his nephew fear his turn next desire he may be shear a friar that nobleman leave three son of great hope Feodor the elder for who I have make aswell as I can a kind of latin grammar in the sclavonian tongue and letter he be now enforce to marry and have a son the protector be jealous of he he also not long after his father death be make dead to the world and shear a friar he be now their patriarch make archbishop of Rostova his next brother of no less generous spirit not able to dissemble his discontent long take opportunity to stab the protector though not so dangerous as he intend and escape into Poland where he and Bodan Belscoy and other at home practise the utter ruin of boris and all his family mean while I procure many privilege for the english merchant with release payment ratification etc. the protector jealous and fearful send treasure silver and gold coin to Sollavetzca monastery on the sea side near the davish and Swethen confine that it may be ready as himself tell i to transport into England hold that his sure refuge in case of necessity it be of infinite value and not pertain to the crown I be now suspect by the discontent nobility who show i not wont countenance which cause i to haste away have speed my business and instruction from the counsel and merchant rich present be send from the emperor for the queen and boris send with secret message a curious robe for i of cloth of silver wrought without seam make in Persia with a fair embroider tent wrought handkerchief shire towel etc. bring by his near kinsman i intreatel two favour for a farewell the freedom of the livonian man woman and child send before to nonogrod in displeasure a catalogue of their name be take and they free by the letter of Irenia the empress the other be the liberty of a nobleman son of Gilderland here Sacarius Gilfenberg Sir i. horsey be send again for England which neither the king of Denmark nor state letter can before procure which his mother well recompense after rich allowance by the way honourable attend and ample provision add at saint Nicolas I be ship in the centurion and after five week arrive in England at P^e^imond have audience of the queen deliver the emperor letter and merchant privilege with golden spread-eagle seal at they and account of my whole employment to her good satisfaction and approbation of i she observe the character by the affinity they have with the greek and ask if they have not such and such signification say she can quick learn it and bid my lord of ess learn it when the ship with the present be come I have a second audience her majesty much like to handle the present after this I weary of court Holywater be willing to retire myself to a private life but by reason of my skill in those language a more dangerous employment be commit to i he be again employ to the king of Denmark and Poland and to Russia etc. Fredrick king of Denmark have embark the english merchant ship in the sound about custom and they sue to the queen for redress likewise diverse in Poland which there have obtain privilege and protection have refuse to pay debt to the english merchant etc. I be appoint to take Collen in the way where the imperial Dyee be appoint thither to accompany sir Heratio palavicine the queen ambassador and de freze the french king ambassador and thence I to the Dane and the Pole I come to copenhagen have access to the king of Denmark deliver the queen letter and after have audience and propound what be give i in commission an. 1589. the king of Denmark answer with a sad countenance our sister the queen majesty of England require at our hand too great a loss we be possess of forty thousand pound and twenty tall ship forfeit to our crown by the treachery and falsehood of her subject etc. but in fine he make his mind know to the queen by his letter require a exchange of certain ship of the easterling * * these ship be of Lubek Danzik Stetine Meluin Quinborough load with munition for the queen enemy and therefore stay etc. embark in England for the freedom of the english ship and good this be beyond my commission to conclude and I haste away have dine with the king who bestow on i a gold chain I return to Lubek and thence to danzik where master Barker deputy and other substantial merchant * * master William cockayne since lord of London invite my way by Meluin where they reside but I take my way by tear and come to Warsonia where Sigismundus king of Poland then hold his court and after some disgust at last obtain the merchant suit against diverse debtor which have their seek protection the great chancellor Zameitscoy the principal statesman of that kingdom send unto i a friendly message offer also for my solace his hound hawk or any other pastime for recreation I be invite and dine with the king receive his letter patent and dismission and after feast by the lord high chamberlain Pan Lucas Obrosemone I also have sight of queen Anne daughter to Sigismond the three and wife to king Stephen Batore but private have to that end put on one of my servant livery which notwithstanding I be discover and have conference with the queen who seem much to magnify queen Marie a popish queen distaste queen Elizabeth and no less disaffect to queen Elizabeth for the death of story Campion etc. which I say have be unnatural subject and practiser of rebellion she then object but how can she spill the blood of the lord anoint a better queen etc. which I answer be do by the parliament without her royal consent she shake her head with dislike and will have reply have not possevine the pope legate as they term he who skirt I have before press in Musco be there the pope nuncio come in whereupon I with a glass of hungarian wine which I refuse till she have take the same into her own hand be dismiss a kind of crocodile on that evening in which I depart from Warsonia I pass over a river by the side whereof there lay a dead serpent like a crocodile with four foot hard scale and in length about six or seven foot which my man break with boar-spear the stench whereof so poison i that I lay sick many day in the next village when I come to Vilna Vilna the chief city in Lituania I present myself and my letter patent from the queen which declare my employment a protestant prince magnify queen Elizabeth unto the great duke Ragavil a powerful prince and religious Protestant he give i great respect and say though I have nothing to say to he from that renown queen of England the mirror of all the queen that ever reign yet he do so much honour and admire her excellent virtue and grace that he will also hold i in the reputation of her majesty ambassador and that it be in his supreme power and pleasure to allow or not allow of the king his letter patent for my passage through that great principality his inheritance and differ from the crown of Poland that his subject may think I negotiate with he he take i with he to his church hear divine service the great duke feast psalm fling and a sermon the sacrament also be administer as in the reform church whereat his brother cardinal Ragavill do murmur his highness invite i to dinner honour with fifty halberdier through the city gunner place and five hundred gentleman his guard to bring i to his palace where himself accompany with many young nobleman receive i upon the and then bring i into a very large room where be organ with sing a long table be set with lord and lady himself under a cloth of state and I be place before he in the midst of the table with sound of trumpet and kettle drum the first service be bring in and after prayer say by his almoner jester and poet dicourse merry instrument of loud and other of low music be add twenty dwarf * * pardon this prolixity in narration of a feast I do it partly for q. Elizabeth sake to whole honour it be intend and partly to express the magnificence and custom of Lithuania little know to most man and woman attire curious make sweet harmony with mournful pipe and song use also David timbrel and Aaron bell as they call they and dance devidng themselves man and woman hand in hand his highness drink for the majesty of the angelical queen of England her health illustrate her greatness and grace with many good word the prince and lady every one with their glass of sweet wine pledge and I do the like for his highness health then be serve in strange portraiture of lion unicorn spread eagle swan etc. make artificial of sugar past gild with spicket in their belly fill some with sack other with Rhenish or hungarian wine every one thence to fill his glass other also have sucket to be take out of their belly with their silver Fork it be tedious to relate all the particular after six hour spend in this feast I be conduct to my lodging in manner as I have be bring and afterward have my letter parens and a gentleman to conduct i through his country I pass by smoleuske to Musco 1200. mile from Vilna my entertainment at Vilna and negotiate with the king of Poland now make i suspect to the russian nobility the bishop of susdale house be appoint for my lodging where I be guard and attend by mean gentleman the pretence be lest I shall have conference with the polish ambassador the protector be not present when I have audience of the emperor and after private send for i profess himself sorry he can not be so favourable as in former time to i but promise that a hair of my head shall not fall to the ground etc. I perceive many of my good friend be go and make away have warning of many article frame against i which against their will be divulge I answer so as I gain reputation thereby yet the water which be daily bring i from the river be poison as also my drink herb and musk melon send to my house my laundress be hire likewise to poison i which she confess with the circumstance I have a servant practise to poison sir Ier horsey a lord son of Danzike which break out with blain and escape narrow my cook and butler both die of poison I write to the lord protector hereof but receive no answer I must remove to yeraslave till the polish ambassador be go and the three night after I come to this town I commend my soul to God expect death one tap at my gate at midnight and I with my servant well appoint come to inquire the cause alphonasy Nagoy brother to the emperor mother of Demetrius which be place at onglet five and twenty mile off cry out and say Demetrius slay and his mother poison o sweet Yereme the Charowich Demetrius be dead his throat be cut about the six hour by the deak son one of his page confess upon the rack by boris his set on and the empress poison and upon point of death her hair nail and skin fall off help help with some good thing for the passion of God this out cry do not a little astonish i till I see his face over the wall I dare not open my gate say I have nothing worth the send yet give a little vial of balsam which queen Elizabeth have give i as a antidote against poison give she by sir f. dr. with a box of Venice treacle some three day before the suburb of Musco be set on fire and 12000. house burn boris his guard have the spoil it be give out that Demetrius his mother her brother and that family of the nagoy have practise to kill the emperor and protector and to burn the whole city of Musco five desperate soldier be suborn to endure the rack and confess there that they be the man which shall do this exploit this be publish to make the name of Demetrius hateful to the people with that whole family the bishop of Orutesca be send accompany with five hundred gun and diverse noble and gentleman to see Demetrius bury under the high altar of saint john in ouglet in ouglet castle little do boris think that his ghost shall after root out he and his family the sick poison empress be present shear a nun all her ally her brother uncle friend and officer disperse in displeasure to diverse secret den not to have community with man or see the light I be haste away also I have letter from boris he can not do as he will but time will work i more grace as ample as ever if I want money or provision he will impart of his own some secret he have commit to i which now make a dangerous impression in his memory I arrive in England deliver my letter to the queen which I find much more favourable than I expect the company of merchant pay i 1845. pound in ready money for my good in their hand a general release pass on both side etc. i furnish master hakluyt and doctor Fletcher with intelligence etc. thus the race of juan Vasiliwich which have continue above 300. year be race out and extinguish in blood the emperor soon follow as I receive by letter from thence from my worthy friend and have since have conference with two ambassador and a friar of good intelligence boris have make away most of the chief and ancient nobility and now remove the emperor Theodor place his sister the empress in a monastery cause the patriarch boris be make emperor description of his person and quality Metropolites bishop and new spring nobility his officer merchant and other his own creature to petition he to take the crown upon he he be solemn inaugurate according he be of comely person well favour affable easy and apt to ill counsel but dangerous in the end to the giver of good capacity and ready wit about forty six year of age much affect to necromancy make show of great devotion and religion not learned of a sudden apprehension very precipitate subtle a natural good orator revengeful not much give to luxury temperate in diet heroical in outward show one which give great entertainment to foreign ambassador send rich present to foreign king to illustrate his own greatness he now desire league by his ambassador send with letter and present to the emperor pole Dane and Swethen which the three last refuse but upon condition to his laugh to they adhere those which love he not and procure his ruin he continue the same course of government but make show of more security and liberty to the subject still fear his own safety and continuance he desire to match his daughter with Hartique Hans the king of Denmark three son condition be agree on time appoint for the marriage but this valorous hopeful prince on that day whereon he shall have be marry die in the Musco not long after he be put to extreme exigent by the crimme the pole and Swethen all invade the near confine Bodan Belskoy the old emperor minion upon who he serve boris his trusty turn make he away and so open a way to that which boris aim at none be also better able to bring in subjection the adverse nobility and other be reward with such recompense as usual follow such treacherous instrument boris his ruin boris and the empress fear his subtle wit find occasion and place he remote with he confederate sure as they think but he in the time of his greatness have convey infinite treasure now use it to revenge and join with many discontent noble stir up the king and palatine of Poland with the power of Lithuania and with a mean army hope of assistance in Russia give out that they bring the true Dmetrius son to juan vasilowich boris want courage to fight notwithstanding sufficient preparation he his wife son and daughter take poison whereof three present die the son live to be proclaim but quick die he poison himself the counterfeit Demetrius reign and now the counterfeit Demetrius be admit and crown son to a priest sometime carry aquavitae to sell about the country marry the palatine daughter and permit the pole to domineer over the ruff nobility and to set their course of religion and justice out of joint have root out boris his faction and family etc. the Russ conspire and kill Demetrius he be slay take he out of his bed drag he on the the gunner and soldier thrust their knife in his body hack hue and mangle his head body and leg carry it to the market place show it for three day about the city the people curse he and the traitor that bring he the palatine and his daughter be convey away Suskoy be crown and captive by the pole a new election be make two propound Knez juan Mishtelloskoy and Knez vasy Petrowich Suskoy this be choose and crown but summon as a vassal by a herald of arm to yield obedience to the crown of Poland the pole strike the iron while it be hot have get good foot among they invade Russia repossess the Musco take Suscoy and diverse noble which be carry captive to Vilna chief city of Lituania now the pole tyrannize over the ruff more than before seize on their good money and best thing which they convey into Polaud and Lituania but those hide by juan vasilowich and boris in secret place doubtless remain undiscovered by reason the party which have be therein employ be still make away the ruff submit to the pole desire stanislaus his son to live and reign over and among they but that king and state will not herein trust they with their hope of succession nor do they so much honour but rule by their precedent the pole expel by the tartar etc. the luganoy nagoie and Chercas Tartar long settle in obedience to the ruff and best use by they now straighten of their wont salary and usage hate the pole take arm in great number rob spoil kill and carry away many of they with their rich booty before get the ruff nobility take heart again and bethink they of another emperor the son of the archbishop of Restona now patriarch of Moscow son to Mekita Romanowich before mention bear before he be make a bishop Michael Fedorowich be elect and crown by general consent of all estate God send he long to reign with better success than his predecessor relation of the kingdom of GOLCHONDA and other NEIGHBOURING nation within the gulf of Bengala Arreccan Pegu Tannassery etc. and the english trade in those part by master WILLIAM METHOLD the gulf of Bengala famous for its dimension extend itself from the cape call comorijne lie in 8. degree of north latitude unto Chatigan the bottom thereof which be in 22. degree be not less as the coast lie then a 1000 english mile and in breadth 900. limit on the other side by cape Singapura which lie in 1. degree of south latitude wash the coast of these great and fertile kingdom viz. Ziloan Bisnagar Golchonda Bengala Arreccan Pegu and Tanassery and receive into its * * sinus Gangeticus bosom many navigable river which lose their note and name in the eminent neighbourhood of the famous Ganges who unknown head pleasant stream and long extent have among those heathen inhabitant by the tradition of their forefather gain a belief of cleanse all such sin as the body of those that wash therein bring with they for which cause many be the pilgrim that resort from far to this last jubilee with some of who I have have conference and from their own report I insert this their belief the island of Zeloan our nation have only look upon passant the portugal that claim all east India by donation hold a great part of this in subjection Zeloan or Zeilan and with such assurance that they believe they can make it good against all their enemy yet be not they the only lord thereof for the natural inhabitant have also their king common call the king of Candy with who the dane have not long since a fruitless treaty for commerce which fall short of their expectation they fortify upon the main Candy not far from Negapatnam at a place call Trangabay with what success or hope of benefit I can relate the first kingdom upon the main be that ancient one of Bisnagar rend at this time into several province or government hold by the p p captain governor naicke of that country in their own right for since the last king who decease about fifteen year since there have arise several competitor for the crown unto who the naicke have adhere according to their faction or affection from whence have follow a continual civil war in some part of the country and such extreme want and famine in most of it that parent have bring thousand of their young child to the sea side sell there a child for five d d two shilling six penny sterling s. Thome see before in Balbie etc. fanum worth of rice transport from thence into other part of India and sell again to good advantage if the gain be good that arise from the sale of soul in this kingdom lie the town of saint Thome inhabit and govern by portugal who notwithstanding must acknowledge some dependency from the Naicke that hold that part of the country of who after some siege endure by they they be enforce about three year since to buy their peace with a sum of money for their town be only fortify towards the sea but to landwards no otherwise then with their house which be build strong close and defensible palecat possess by the duchess not far from saint Thome lie pallecat a bad neighbour to the Portugal since the dutch possess their castle in that place for with ship great and small which they constant keep upon that coast they so scour it that a Portugal frigate stir not but in the confidence of her better sail nor dare anchor before the town for fear of be fetch from thence but if they escape at sea either unseen or by their speed they present unlade hale their ship on shore close under the wall from whence it follow the trade of that place be so much decay that the Portugal inhabitant be become much impoverish wherein it be worth the observation to consider their malice punish in the effect of it for the hollander after some experience of the trade in India find commodity of saint Thome and that coast to be very vendible and to good profit in the moluecoe Banda Amboyna java sumatra and other those eastern part procure from the last king of Bisnagar free commerce in his country and to that purpose settle at first a factory in Pallecut where they leave six or seven hollander to negotiate their affair but the portugal of saint Thome not brook any christian corrival so near they in the same course of trade come down with their whole power of frigate and land at Pallecut they assault the dutch house which be for a time resolute defend until some be slay the rest yield after promise of life and good quarter but be carry prisoner to saint Thome sir Adolfe thomason from whence with much difficulty some escape and among they the chief factor from who relation I insert this discourse the king upon knowledge of this assault and the hollander instant suit to be better secure permit they to build a fort conditional that the one half of the soldier shall be of his subject which take place and the fort be finish it be divide and halue betwixt the gentile and hollander until many difference arise among so different cohabitant the king call away his people leave the fort whole in the duchess power which since they have enlarge and strengthen and now call it Gueldrea wherein since the treaty of 1619 our nation for the moiety of a oppress trade have bear the uttermost charge of half the garrison without participation of such benefit as in equity ought to ensue but my affection to that nation and the condition of the time forbid i to aggravate or add to our just quarrel for their unjust and cruel proceed in Amboyna so that now the portugal in place of neighbour merchant who they disturb be gall with a garrison of profess enemy who they can remove for their own power be not sufficient and assistance from the viceroy they shall not have if their present ruin be in question because they neither assist in person or contribution the general affair of India but be with their consort the portugal inhabit Bengala account levantadoe Rey exempt from their prince protection Portugal weakness within the gulf only they have to their power incense some of the naicke against the hollander who about four year since with six thousand man besiege Pallecut but at such distance and with so little advantage that a easy composition raise the siege and little of that give by the hollander but from the native subsist under their protection over who they pretend no sovereignty exact no duty nor prescribe no law content themselves in confront the Portugal and negotiate their affair of merchandize Musulipatnam or Musulipatan p. w. Floris see p. 1. l. 3. in sixteen degree and a half lie Musulipatnam the chief port of the kingdom of Golchonda where the right worshipful east indian company have their agent and several factory in that place and Petapoley first protect and settle by Peter Willemson Floris and Lucas anthonison who in the employment of english adventurer arrive there about thirteen year since in the globe of London since which time commerce have be continue in those part and among other their servant myself receive their employment and from almost five year residence in that place at the request of the author of this laborious volume be embolden to publish such remarkable thing as have fall within the compass of my observation it be a small town but populous unwall ill build and worse situate within all the spring be brackish and without overflow with every high sea for almost half a mile about it be first a poor fisher town from whence it take the name it yet retain afterward the conveniency of the road make it a fit residence for merchant and so continue with increase of trade since our and the dutch nation frequent this coast the climate be very healthful climate and season hight and kill wind and the year divide in their account into three different season whereof march April May and june they call the hot season and not without good cause for the sun be return into their hemisphere do not alone scorch the earth with his pierce beam but even the wind which shall assuage his fury add great fire and yearly about mid may with a strong westerly gale bring off the land a sensible heat as when a house be on fire such as be near to leeward can hardly endure and this so penetrate that the door and window be shut the house be notwithstanding so warm that the chair and stool admit hardly the use they be make for without cool they and the place where we abide by often sprinkle of water but the extremity hereof neither last long nor come often only five or seven day in a year and then but from nine or ten a clock in the forenoon until four or five in the afternoon at which time a cool breeze from off the sea qualify again this intolerable heat wherein many of the native be in their travel suffocate and perish and of christian a Dutchman as he be carry in his palamkeene Peter jacobson r. Stower and a Englishman walk but from the town to the bar little above a english mile die both in the way the rest of these four month be very hot far exceed the hot day in our climate and will so continue but that in july August September and October the rain be predominant which with their frequent violent and long cnntinue shower cool the earth and revive the parch root of the sun burn plant of the earth sometime rain so long together and with such fierceness that house lose their foundation in their currant and fall to the ground from whence also follow great land-floud to this country no less commodious than the inundation of Nilus to the egyptian by receive the flood into their rice ground commodious flood and there retain it until the earth drink it in become the better enable to endure a eight month abstinence for in eight month it never rain November December january and February they account their cool time and be so indeed compare to the former yet as hot as it be here in England in may. from which constant heat all tree be here continual green all tree continual green fertility and their fruit ripe in their several season the earth in some place afford two crop of rice in a year rare three crop and in most place but one yet there with very great increase they so we other sort of pulse different from we and far up into the country they have good wheat but not much for it be little eat of the gentile rootes they have of most sort which we have here and good store of potato yet but few herb or flower which defect they supply in their betele who frequent use among they many have already discourse in brief it be a very fruitful country and occasion by many of the inhabitant abstinence from any thing that have life all kind of victual be very cheap and plentiful as eight hen for twelve penny a goat or sheep for ten penny and for eighteen penny or two shilling a very good hog the like of fish and all other provision in the town but in the country much better cheap this kingdom as most other in India receive its denomination from the chief city or residence of the king call by the native Golchonda Golchonda describe by the moor and persian hidraband distant from Musulipatnam eight and twenty gentive league every such league contain nine english mile and in the common course of travail ten day journey a city that for sweetness of air conveniency of water and fertility of soil be account the best situate in India not to speak of the king palace which for bigness and sumptuousness in the judgement of such as have travel India exceed all belong to the mogul or any other prince it be twelve mile in circumference build all of stone glorious palace and within the most eminent place garnish with massy gold in such thing as we common use iron as in bar of window bolt and such like and in all other point fit to the majesty of so great a king who in elephant and jewel be account one of the rich prince of India he be by religion a mahometan descend from persian ancestor the king a mahumetan and retain their opinion which differ in many point from the turk be distinguish in their sect by term of seaw and sun and have be at large and true to my knowledge particularise in your pilgrimage whereunto I only add in confirmation of their mutual hatred what in conference I receive from a meene one of Mahomet own tribe if we may believe his own heraldry who open profess he can not find in his heart to pray for a Sunnee for in his opinion a christian might as easy be save their sect a charity well befit his religion that will not pray for those he may not pray with King title wife concubine this king as all other his predecessor retain the title of Cotubsha the original whereof I remember to have read in Linschoten he marry during my be in his country the daughter of Adelsha king of Viziapore and have beside her three other wife and at least 1000 concubine a singular honour and state among they to have many woman and one of the strange thing to they I can relate and in their opinion lamentable that his excellent Maiesty our gracious sovereign shall have three kingdom and but one wife three Decan King enemy to the mogul king reveue the cotubsha Adelsha and negaim shall oppose the mogul in a perpetual league of mutual defence yet so as their yearly present prove their best weapon choose rather to buy peace then to hazard the event of war against so mighty a enemy his revenue be report to be five and twenty lack of pagode a lack be a 100000. and a Pagoda equal in weight and alloy to a french crown and worth there seven shilling six penny sterling which huge treasure arise from the large extent of his dominion (@) subject be all his tenant and at a rack rent for this king as all other in India indian monarchy be the only freeholder of the whole country which be divide into great government as our shire those again into lesser one as our hundred and those into village the government be farm immediate from the king by some eminent man who to other inferior farm out the lesser one and they again to the country people at such excessive rate miserable people that it be most lamentable to consider what toil and misery the wretched soul endure for if they fall short of any part of their rent what their estate can satisfy their body must so it sometime happen they be beat to death or absent themselves their wife child father brother and all their kindred be engage in the debt and must satisfy or suffer and sometime it happen that the principal fail with the king receive from he the like punishment as it befall to one Bashell raw governor at Musulipatnam since the english trade thither who for defect of full payment be beat with cane upon the back foot and belly until he die yet hold they not these their government by lease for yearly in july all be expose in sale unto he that bid most from whence it happen that every governor during his time exact by tolles take in the way and other oppression whatsoever they can possible extort from the poor inhabitant use what violence within their government they shall think fit for in they during their time they reign as petty king not much unlike the bashaw and ^ the turkish monarchy castle 66. there be in the confine and heart of this kingdom sixty six several fort or castle all of they command by * * captain or governor naick and guard by gentile soldier of the country unto which soldiery these be allow but four shilling the month and that also ill pay they be for the most part situate upon very high rock or hill unaccessible but by one only way three of which I have see viz. cundapoly Cundauera and in that language signify a hill and in the town of Cundapoley have occasion to visit the governor it be so curious as to require the sight of the castle who reply that even himself although the governor of that part of the country can not be permit ^^d^ande without the king Firmaen with much trouble procure castle describe from who I understand that this castle be of great circuit be divide into six several fort one command another according to their situation which be furnish with great pond of water store of tree as well fruit as other and large field to plant rice in lodge in they continual 12000. soldier thus much his relation what I can so which be enough to hide a great part of the heaven be a huge mountain which be apart by nature have invite art to make it a retreat for the king of this country if a battle loss or other adverse fortune force they to that extremity for beside the mountain itself steep in most place be wall with a hand some seem stone wall with bulwark and battlement according to the ancient order of fornification whereunto have but one way that admit a ^^ent it be think impregnable not to be undermine but by treachery scale without wing or batter but by famine and betwixt this castle and cundevera which be at least five and twenty english mile there be a light correspondence hold by show each other torch intelligence by torch lift they up sometime more sometime less according to the order contrive betwixt they religion be here free and no man conscience oppress with ceremony or observance only he king religion be predominant in the authority and quality of the professor not in number of soul for the ancient natural of the country common call gentile or heathen exceed they in a very great proportion the moor be of two sort as I former mention but they only which be term have their * * mahometan churches mesgit and publike exercise of their religion the rest give no offence be not interrupt in their opinion or practice but of these their ceremony or difference I forbear to discourse well know that beside our near neighbourhood with Turkey and Barbary your pilgrimage have a ply delineate both their beginning and continuance the like consideration may silence my purpose relation of the gentile who differ little in habit complexion manner or religion from most of the inhabitant of the main of India have already from able pen past your approbation and the press so that yet encourage by your request I add to that treasury this myte of my observation submit all that dislike or appear superfluous to your suppression the gentile in the fundamental point of their little religion do hold the same principle which their learned clergy the Bramenes have from great antiquity relgion of the gentile in those part and do yet maintain but with a implicit faith not able to give a account of it or any their custom only that it be the custom of their ancestor concein God they do believe he first to have be only one but since to have take to his assistance diverse that have sometime live upon earth unto who memory they build their temple term Pagodes and style they demigod or saint direct most of their worship to such of they as they stand most particular affect unto support their deity with most ridiculous legendary fable of miracle do by they in the likeness of ape ox kite or the like many year since past all memory or belief they hold the immortality of the soul and the transmigration of it from one body to another according to the good or bad quarter it keep in the last mansion from whence follow much abstinence from kill or eat any thing that have life their difference in wash meat drink and such like arise rather from the tradition of the father enjoin to their posterity then in point of religion as we read of the rechabite who from their father injunction Jer 35. be commend for their constant continuance in their custom their morality appear best in their conversation murder and violent theft their morality be stranger among they and seldom happen but for cozenage in bargain caveat emptor polygamy be permit but not general practise unless in case of the first wife barrenness adultery be not common but punishable in woman fornication venial and no law but that of modesty restrain the public action they be divide into diverse tribe or lineage they say forty four all which according to their degree be know each to other and take place according their tribe forty four wealth in this point be no prerogative for the poor Brahmin will precede the rich committee and so the rest in their several order the Brahmin be priest unto they all the Brahmin and wear always three or four twist thread over one shoulder and under the other arm and in his forehead a round spot whereon there stick corn of Rice die yellow in turmeric they be very good and ready accountant and in that office much employ by moor of great affair their writing write and keep their account in Palmito leave with a pen of iron and if in that general deluge of pagan ignorance there remain any knowledge of art or learning these preserve it and entire to themselves without participation to other tribe learning involve in verbal tradition or conceal manuscript and be indeed indifferent astronomer observe exact the course of the seven planet through the twelve house superstition and consequent the certain hour of eclipse and other astrological prediction wherein they have gain so good credit that none either gentile or Moor will undertake any great journey or commence any important business without first consult with his Brahmin for a good hour to set forward in from whence I have know it happen that a Moor which come governor to Musulipatnam have attend without the town ten day before he can find a fortunate hour to make his triumphant entry into his new government and of this tribe they forget not to tell you there be two king the samorijue king of Callecut and the king of cochijne both upon the coast of malabar the next d d Casta signify a tribe cast in account be the Fangam the Fangam who be of the Bramenes diet in all particular eat nor kill any thing that have life abhor wine but drink butter by the pint content themselves with milk from the reverend cow and such pulse herb root and fruit as the earth produce the onion only except which for certain red vein in it resemble blood find favour in their merciful mouth and these also in a inferior degree have some priestly power over such as by wear sanctify stone tie up in their hair be bury when they die all other be burn if these be of any trade they must be tailor and such many of they be but more profess beggar and no wonder for the constancy of that country fashion and the little or no needlework belong to the make up of a garment can find all of they work if they stand affect to undertake it but other work than tailor work they may not meddle withal the next tribe be there term a committee the committee and these be general the merchant of this place who by themselves or their servant travel into the country gather up calico from the weaver and other commodity which they sell again in great parcel in the part town to merchant stranger take their commodity in bartar or at a price other be money changer wherein they have exquisite judgement and will from a superficial view of a piece of gold distinguish a penny worth of difference without who view no man dare receive gold it have be so falsify the poor sort be plain chandler and sell only rice butter oil sugar honey and such like belly stuff and these man for their general judgement in all sort of commodity subtlety in their deal and austerity of diet I conceive to be natural banian transplant and grow up in this country by another name they also not eat any thing that have life nor at all until they have fresh wash their body and this ceremony be also common to the former tribe the next they call Campo Waro the Campo Waro and these in the country manure the earth as husbandman in the city attend upon the rich sort as serve man in the fort be soldier and be for number the great tribe these spare no flesh but beef and that with such reverence that torture can enforce they to kill and eat and their reason for this beside the custom of their ancestor be that from the cow their country receive its great sustenance as milk and butter immediate than all the fruit of the earth by their assistance in till it so that it be the great inhumanity to feed upon that which give they so plentiful whereon to feed and unto we that will take liberty in this case they will not sell a ox or cow for any consideration but from one to another for six or 8. shilling the best Boga Waro be next in english the whore tribe the whore tribe and of this there be two sort one that will prostitute themselves to any better tribe than themselves but to none worse the other meet none bad enough to refuse and these with their predecessor and offspring have and do still continue this course of iniquity for the daughter if handsome be bring up to the trade if otherwise they be marry to the man of this tribe and their child if handsome than their mother supply their parent defect from whence there never want a sinful succession of impudent harlot who the law of the country do both allow and protect but this be not always heathenish for in most christian commonwealth such creature either by permission connivency or neglect find mean to set up and customer to deal with all be child they be teach to dance and their body then tender and flexible screw into such strange posture that it be admirable to behold impossible to express in word as for a child of eight year of age to stand upon one leg raise the other upright as I can my arm then bring it down and lay her heel upon her head yet all this while stand lose the wonder in my imperfect relation but to behold be true strange the like for their dance and tumble which do as far in activity exceed our mercenary Skip-jack as the rope-dancing woman do a caper courtesan or a usher of a dance school a country plough-iog the homage they owe the king be once a year to repair to Golchonda to the court and there be meet together to make proof of their activity where the best deserve be guerdon with some particular favour all of they gratify with bettelee and so return home again to their several mansion the governor of the place where they dwell exact nothing of they but their attendance as often as he sit in the public place at which time they dance gratis but at all other meeting as 10 10 Moor circumcise their child circumcision wedding ship arrival or private feast they assist and be pay for their company they be many of they rich and in their habit clean and costly upon their body they wear a fine calico or silken cloth so bind about they as that one part be make fast about the waste cover downward another part come over the head cover all that way wear also a thin waistcoat that cover their breast and arm unto the elbow all the rest of their arm cover almost with bracelet of gold wherein be set small diamond ruby and emerald in their ear they wear many ring and jewel and some of they one through the right nostril wherein a pearl or ruby be common set as also about their finger and toe about their middle one or two broad plate of gold for girdle and about their neck many chain of small pearl and coral or worse bead according to their estate without other ornament on their head then their own hair which be smooth combde be tie on a knot behind they and these also in their bestial liberty forbear to eat cow flesh all other meat and drink be common to they and they themselves common to all mechanike the carpenter mason turner founder goldsmith and black-smith be all one tribe and match into each other family all other Mechanike trade be tribe by themselves as painter weaver saddler barber fisherman herdsmen porter washer sweeper and diverse other the worst whereof be the abhor piriawe their piriawe who be not permit to dwell in any town by any neighbour but in a place without by themselves live together avoid of all but their own fraternity who if any man shall casual touch he will present wash his body these flea all dead cattle for their skin and feed upon the flesh the skin they dress make thereof sandal for the gentile and shoe for the moor othersome they use to embale merchandise to defend it against wet to conclude they be in public justice the hateful executioner and be the base most stink ill favour people that I have see the inhabitant of cape bona esperanza except who be in these particular unparallelled and so I leave they add only one word of the porter who carry the palamkeene a litter so contrive every way as to carry a man his bed and pillow which eight of these porter will carry four of those league in a day which be 36. of our mile support it on their bare shoulder and run under it by turn four at a time from which continual toil aggravate by the extreme heat their shoulder be become as hard as their hoof yet this their education make easy to they for when their child can but go alone they lay a small stick on their shoulder afterward a log which they make they carry with proportionable increase until roman Milo like they be able to run under a palamkeene and in that sometime perchance a ox but all these thus distinguish be in religion one body and have their pagode or idol temple their idol and temple common to all but not of all equal affect some incline in their devotion to one saint some to another of which pagode I have see many some of they for the material and structure worth the gaze upon and may well be as they report the ancient work of great king within they be very dark as have no other light but the door and they stand always open and prove in some place the best receptacle for traveller one small room only reserve which the Brahmin that keep it will with small entreaty unlock and show a synod of brazen saint gild the tutelar saint of the place be seat in most eminency unto which the heathen themselves perform very little adoration well know their substance and want those k k doulia Latria feastival distinction which some christian find out to cozen themselves withal only once a year on their anniversary day they keep their festival and to some of they repair many thousand of people as I myself have see some for devotion and they fast 24. hour wash their body and burn lamp within or as near the pagode as they can get some to see their friend child or kindred which will not fail to meet they in such a general liberty other for profit as pedlar to a great fair the whore to dance puppet-player and tumbler with their exquisite trick one whereof I will mention with the admiration of such as see it or understanding shall read it a tumbler tumbler fetch his run do the double sommersel without touch the ground with any part of his body until he fall again on his foot keep his body in the air until he turn twice round a strange activity and with i and other which see it shall not loose the wonder it carry with it other bring charm snake and viper in basket strange activity which they let loose and with their hand put in again pipe unto they and receive their attention very many beggar there be and they practice several way to move compassion for such as have not natural defect as blindness lameness etc. some lie upon thorn with their naked body other lie bury in the ground all but their head some all but their hand and diverse other such trick they put upon the poor people charity who reward be for the most part a handful of rice or a small piece of money that may be the half part of a farthing Idol-procession about midnight the saint be draw forth in procession handsome cart and well clothe with much clamour of drum trumpet oboe and such like that country music and very artificial firework wherein they have a singular dexterity follow without order or distinction of place sex or person and have circle their limit they draw he back again and there leave he without guard or regard until that time twelvemonth come again one saint they have and none of the least neither in their account who they express by a plain round stone not much unlike the block of a high crown hat block-saint and their reason be because the incomprehensible subsistence of this deity admit no certain shape or description they liken it to he which have the likeness of nothing build thus a temple as those of Athens a image to the unknown God act 17. four feast in the year they celebrate to the sea and in the sea many people at those season resort to the appoint place wash their body in the salt wave and receive the Bramenes benediction sea-feast who be with they in the sea pour water on their head with his hand mumble certain orison over they they know not what then take their reward and apply themselves to the next comer where the great pagode be there be common many little one which they report to be the work of one day or no long time the founder after some dream other saint or satanical suggestion vow not to eat until it shall be begin and finish and to some of these the Bramanes persuade the people there belong some miraculous power I have see the image of a man in black story stand upright not above a yard high idol-miracle upon which if a whole bushel of Rice shall be cast it will all stick upon the image and not one corn fall to the ground and this the country people have rather believe then part with so much rice to practice it another before who if a man shall eat out his tongue it will present grow again yet have they rather venture for a blister in the relation than the whole tongue in the experiment these two I have be with a three I have see at distance as I travel that way whereof they report that whatsoever milk * * water sugar and juice of lemon mingle sharbol or fair water be bring thither by the devout visitant and pour into a little hole by the saint he will take just half and will do so if it be a hecatomb of hogshead but take no more though it be but a pint yet be full satisfy and will receive no more but it run over the hole a excellent sociable quality and well become a alehouse can devil-saint another saint they have or rather devil for in their opinion it be a malign spirit and bring upon they such disease as befall they especial the small pox which fury the better to express they form it a great angry woman have two head and no doubt as many tongue g. Ball t. jones with four arm yet be she hospitable to stranger for in her house two other englishman and myself repose part of one night for want of other harbour where whilst we stay the founder tell we that to appease her angry deity he build this house to her service and so the small pox cease in his family other less able promise in their sickness if they may escape they will be hang in her honour which with the two englishman former mention vow I go purposely to behold it happen upon a day it seem mark in their calendar for her service and this exploit to which purpose they have a long beam of timber place on a axletree betwixt two wheel like to the brewer beam by which they draw water and can so let it down and raise it up upon the upper end whereof be tie two hook unto which the vow oblige patient be fasten have first with a sharp knife two hole cut through the skin and flesh of each shoulder through which the hook be thrust bloody rite see the like before in balby and a sword and dagger put into his hand he be lift up and draw forward by the wheel at least a quarter of a mile thus hang in the air and fence with his weapon during which time the weight of his body so tear the flesh and stretch the skin that it be strange it yield so much yet it be tough enough to hold they and after this manner be fourteen draw one after another not once complain during the time of their flight but be let down their wound be bind up and they return home with sour face and sore body a sufferance sure not inferior to a self-whipping no less meritorious no better ground household-god they have all of they their Penates or household god which the chief of the family as the elder brother keep always at his house for which they once a year make a feast marriage but the kindred be assemble eat it up in marriage it be the child duty to attend upon the parent care who find in their own tribe and as near as they can in their own kindred no degree of consanguinity hinder but brother and sister a fit wife for their son he though of full age submit his consent without see she account it unreasonable to recompense his parent care and trouble in his education with distrust of their proceed in this point or to imagine his own judgement more or their circumspection less they give no portion with their daughter but rather take for the bridegroom or his parent must give earring bracelet and other jewel according to her quality unto the bride two or three wear clothes unto the mother with some present to the father and then bear the whole charge of the wedding from which large expense it sometime happen that want keep many a long time unmarried until their endeavour in the world have supply they with mean to defray the charge but this not hinder the rich sort they common marry their child very young the husband five year of age the wife not above three year and many such couple have I see put together wherein the parent conceive they have do a act of wonderful providence in dispose of their child in their life time so endear they to other care if they themselves shall leave they yet this young couple be present separate until the man be 12. or 13. year of age and the woman 10. or 11. they meet again and become so well acquaint that many be mother at 12. year of age and some I have hear no virgin at nine to proceed of what year soever they be whether thus young or full grow they be both in one palamkeene with most of their friend about they carry about the most public place of the town with music firework and the dance company of the whore who before every great man house make a stand participate their sport and from those house receive gift if from they they have any dependency or acquaintance then proceed until their progress be end they return home where the Brahmin attend they and separate they a cloth hang betwixt they he mutter none hear what orison while the marry couple be teach to tread upon one another bare foot so mingle leg and make these first short step a introduction to their future better acquaintance the feast be finish which last three day at the least the kindred depart the bride carry back again and if she be young reserve to more maturity howsoever she must back again for some time for when she once depart from her friend she reside always with her husband at his father house if he be live if not at his elder brother if he himself be not elder for seldom do brethren divide themselves but all of they though many live together in own family bring their gain whatsoever it be unto the common stock cherish with a admire duty their old indigent parent and live together in most commendable unity widow if the husband die the wife may not marry again and which be most unreasonable not the young one though never know of man who happen to be widow in their infancy must not only continue so but be make the drudge to the whole family not permit to wear their jewel good or clean clothes or upon occasion to go abroad at least upon pleasure and this with most of they together with a reverend respect they bear to the reputation of their house mortify then after a strange manner yet some it can contain but they fly out and forsake their father house brand it with a last obloquy by their loose life keep themselves at distance for if convenient their kindred will poison they their young child they neither christian circumcise nor use other ceremony unto infant but give they different appellation in their infancy which be common the name of their idol they be know by they with the addition of their trade tribe of some defect or quality most eminent about they they come into the world without much trouble to their mother for they be up again about their business in three or four day travel with little labour some the same day they be bring up with as little charge for many until they be seven or eight year of age foul not a clout as cheap as they be but be young tumble in the dust and grow strong walk still stark naked and if they be foul two or three pale of cold water pour upon their head run down their body and make all clean again and thus be most child bring up until they be in some measure capable to begin to practice in their father profession the best man child may be better look unto but stark naked unless upon some festival be the best and general habit apparel full grow man and woman be devout and civil clothe the woman all over as you have hear of the whore the man most of they from the middle downward and on their shoulder a loose white calico cloth in use like our summer cloak sometime a coat close to their body unto the middle from thence downward to their ankle full of cloth like to a pair of base their hair long as woman bind up and over it a turban in their ear ring of gold with small pearl and about their neck a chain of Ginetra or silver for few can attain unto Gold they be not black but tawny or rather a wainscot colour colour some much white than other as some wainscot be new or brown than other but many of they very well favour and straight limbde and in their acquaintance and conversation kind and affable among who our nation have during the time of their residence with they find much good respect and little affront or injury small wage all mechanic person whereof the multitude consist work in their several trade for the same salary or little difference the blacksmith and goldsmith make iron nail and chain of gold for three penny a day find themselves and be great wage to a master workman their servant be pay with one penny and some less the like of all other trade and person for we be serve faithful and officious in our house for a rial of eight a month without allowance of diet and the porter which carry the palamkeene have no more yet out of this all pay somewhat to the governor where they live or do his work gratis from whence it be little wonder they live so poor yet the plenty of this country and their content courser diet afford they a live until they die than some be burn and their ash cast into the next river other bury sit crosslegged in either of which kind I next relate my own sight of two woman voluntary sufferance yet unresolved whether their love to their dead husband be more to be admire or pity it be among these indian a receive history burn of wife whence that there be a time when wife be general so luxurious that to make way for their friend they will poison their husband which to prevent a law be make that the husband dead the wife shall accompany they in the same fire and this law stand yet in force in the island of Baly not far from java but from this necessity of die there ensue so great a reformation that the succeed age abolish the rigour of this law and the dead man wife be only adjudge to a perpetual widowhood as it be at this day yet be there some few leave that in pure love to their decease husband die voluntary in solemnize their funeral believe their soul shall keep company in their transmigration of the two which I have see the first be wife to a weaver who be dead and by his profession to be bury she a young woman about 20. year of age will needs go with he and in this order she be clothe in her best garment and accompany with her near kindred and friend seat on a green bank by a great pond side there enterayn such as come to look and take leave on she with Bettele a herb which they much eat mere accommodate her word action and countenance to the music which stand by and play no dump but in the same measure and strain they be occasion at wedding news hereof be bring to our house three of we take horse and post a mile out of town to be partaker of this spectacle but come into her sight before we come at they they fear by our speed we have be send from the governor to hinder their proceed hasten to her death and be then cover with earth when we come in first sit down by her husband embrace his dead body and take leave of all her friend they stand round about the grave with each of they a basket of earth bury she at once yet after we come in one of they stroke upon the grave lay his head close unto it and call she by her name and tell we she answer and express her content in the course she have take over who there be erect a little thatch cover and her kindred not a little glorify in be ally to so resolute and love a wife the other be a Campowaro wife and she after the same solemn preparation fetch she run and cry all the way i i the name of one of their idol Bama Narina Bama Narina leap into the pit where her husband lie burn upon who her by-standing friend throw so many log that she feel not so much fire for the fuel unto who I add a three a goldsmith wife who husband be dead and she willing to accompany he come attend with her friend and kindred unto the k k be a officer among the moor not much unlike to the sheriff of London cotwall who be then with i at the english house with much importunity desire his consent allege her husband death and the few friend she have leave behind whereunto the cotwall reply that he himself will provide for she at his own house dissuade she by what other argument he can use from so desperate a course but she neglect they and his offer he also deny her request and she depart discontent utter these word that he can not hinder she to die by some other mean and within a short time after I hear she have hang herself and this happen in Musulipatnam where the officer be all mahometans restrain the gentile especial in these cruel and heathenish custom a four I have whole by relation yet from a english factor of good account in that place who travel in the country about such affair as be impose upon his performance and be well attend according to the custom of that country espy not far out of his way a concourse of people unto who he make and be come near he be inform by his servant that it be a woman about to burn with her dead husband he present draw his sword ride in among they whereupon they all flee but the woman herself who he persuade to live promise to secure she against her friend if their importunity have wrought she to this course but she beseech he not to interrupt she it be she own most earnest desire wherein we do constant persist whereupon he put up and her friend come in and present in his sight with the like ceremony and duty former recite she become the same ash with he to who she have be one flesh and here abrupt in the order and imperfect in the relation I leave they and their custom intend only to touch at their marine trade and the commodity of that country transport to other part diamond how find first of diamond late discover in this kingdom most man say by this accident a silly goatherd keep his flock among those mountain stumble by chance upon a stone that shine somewhat bright which he careless take up not much value sell it to a committee for meal rice the committee again for no great profit and so forward until it come to those owner which know the worth who question the last seller trace out from one to another the true original and make further trial thereabouts find in the bowel of the earth a plentiful i whereof the king be advertise he take order for the safe keep and rumour thereof be blaze jeweller of all the neighbour nation resort to the place and some store of diamond begin to be disperse and expose to sale insomuch that sir Andrea socory governor of the fort guide in pallecat sir Adolfe thomason a free merchant the author journey to the i and myself resolve to make a voyage thither to see at least the place and order of it so that after four day travel through a desolate mountainous country we come at last to the place and find it distant from Musulipatnam about twelve gentine league which be 108. english mile where we harbour ourselves in a handsome hogsty and according to custom address ourselves to visit the governor who be a Brahmin name Ray Raw and lay there for the king as well to receive his profit as to administer justice to the rabblement of different nation that frequent this place from who we receive indifferent good respect with the sight of certain fair diamond appertain to the king and among they one of 30. carract point but not perfect and after knowledge of our several quality and our purpose only to see the mine he dismiss we and we next day go thither distant from the town about two english mile where by their own report there work not daily few than 30000. soul some dig some fill basket some lave out water with bucket other carry the earth unto a certain square level place whereupon they spread it four or five inch in thickness which be dry by that day sun some of they the next day with great stone in their hand bruise the clod of earth and gather from thence the pebble stone throw they by and sift the rest they find the diamond among the dust sometime none as it happen while I look on sometime more sometime less according to the earth they work in which they well know some say by the smell other more probable by sight of the mould howsoever that they know it be most apparent i of diamond describe see that in many place we find the ground only break and not further seek into in other place dig 10. or 11. fathom deep the earth be reddish with vein of white or yellowish chalk intermix with pebble-stone which be deep dig come up in small clod and those lay in the sun become hard but be easy pound with stone as former of which earth I take a small piece and yet reserve it for satisfaction of the more curious these mine be not as with we in Europe carry under ground and support with timber but dig right down in square large pit whether it be that all the earth afford more or less profit whereas we only run in vein or whether they want prop or judgement to take this course I can determine but be sure that in free of the water and bring up the earth they go the further way to work for in place or pulley and such like device they with many people set one above another hand up from one to another until it come to the place it must rest in and from hence proceed the use of so many people see that beside the earth the place where overnight they wrought dry be next morning a fathom deep under water such as it be thus imperfect describe the king then rent it unto one Marcandoo of the d d or tribe cast of the goldsmith for three hundred thounsand pagode a year reserve all diamond of above ten carract to himself he again rend it out to other by square measure according as they agree in which course some gain other lose as in all other adventure the king to assure himself of the great stone keep his governor there publish extreme penalty against such as shall conceal they but neither the terror of they nor his many spy can so watch such as there attend such hazard but that I have hear diamond of forty carract have escape their guard I have see two of near twenty carract a piece and diverse of ten eleven and twelve but very dear prize it be situate at the foot of a great mountain not far from a river call Christena a place natural so barren that before this discovery it be hardly inhabit now people with a hundred thousand soul consist of miner merchant and such other as live by follow such concourse sufficient furnish with all provision bring thither from the country round about but at excessive rate occasion by the many exaction raise upon they in their passage through several government and village the house be very poor as not intend for continuance but only the present occasion for in 1622. the my be shut up and all person restrain from frequent the place the reason some imagine to be their care to keep the commodity in request not to dig more until those already find be disperse other affirm the come of the mogul ambassador to this king court with his peremptory demand of a e e a vyse be three pound english weight vyse of the fair diamond cause this cessation until that pretence and some competent present shall content the mogul for since I come from thence I hear it be open again but almost exhaust and very few find in this country be also much crystal and many other sort of transparent soft stone of little value as garnet amethyst topass agate and such like likewise great store of iron and steel iron and steel transport into many place of India buy in the place it be make for two shilling the hundred of iron and three shilling steel but be bring upon the back of ox fifteen day journey before it come to the port it become much dear yet be sell for five shilling and eight shilling but either gold silver tin copper or other metal this country produce not bezoar stone in some plenty be take from the goat in one only part of this country bezoar how take out of goat for which and their skin they kill so many that the flesh be most throw away and their maw only search into where they find two three and sometime four small bezoar some long some round all of they grow upon a stalk or kernel as be easy perceive by such as be break such as be great come from other country the best out of Persia and be say to be find in ape all of all sort so well know and much use in India that they can be buy there to yield profit in England proportionable to the time and adventure of these goat this conclusion have be experiment four of they have be take from the place of their breed and transport fifty or a hundred mile of which two have be immediate kill and in those have be find perfect bezoar a three reprieve for ten day and then slay some show of bezoar remain but apparent waste the four live but a month after there will be neither bezoar nor sign of any that ever be from whence they conclude with great probability that it be some herb plant or tree peculiar to that place whereof the goat feed the bezoar be form calico calico of all sort be in this kingdom as cheap and plentiful as in any other part of India but different in their make and easy distinguish from those of other country the paint of this coast of Choromandel famous throughout India paint and durable colour and be indeed the most exquisite that be see the best wrought all with the pencil and with such durable colour that notwithstanding they be often wash the colour fade not whilst the cloth last and this happen principal by a plant which grow only in this country call by they Chay which die or stain a perfect red with they in as great account as scarlet with we and be the king particular commodity indigo be also make in this country in some plenty indigo see finch voyage lib. 4. in form like to that sort which be call lahore indigo whereof the dutch have buy store and transport it for Holland and continue so to do but our nation upon good experience of the condition and value of it content themselves with such as be make in the mogul dominion and lade from surat they have within few year plant store of tobacco and much of it be export to Mocha and Arrecan and not a little drink among themselves it be but weak yet sure more care in cure and make it up will help that fault they only dry the leaf in the sun and use it so without further sophistication these be the general commodity of this country which be disperse in some measure through the world but be best know in indian traffic and produce constant certain profit in their exportation to other part to which purpose they build great ship and good one too consider in their burden and material but not comparable to we for beauty conveniency or defence some of they not less than 600. ton substantial build of very good timber and iron whereof we have have upon some occasion good experience in careen the globe their traffic Solomon and claw in the river of Narsoporpeta with these their ship they traffic ordinary to Mocha in the red sea to achijne upon sumatra to Arrecan Pegu and Tannassery on the other side the gulf and to many port alongst their own coast as far as Zeloan and the cape Comorijne voyage to Mocha and Mecca to Mocha they set sail in january and return in September or October follow and thither the king send yearly a proportion of rice as a alm to be distribute among the pilgrim which resort to Mecha and Medina where their prophet Mahomet shrine be visit with much devotion he send also a adventure the proceed whereof be invest in arabian horse which be return not above six or eight in a ship whereof they make great account for in this country there be no race of good horse tobasco they send in great quantity many small rocans to make lance certain sort of calico proper for turban iron steele indigo Benjamin and gum lack for which they return some few water chamblet but the most part ready money in Sultannees or rial of eight in September the ship for achijne Arrecan Pegu and Tannassery set all sayie for it be to be understand that alongst this and all other coast of India the wind blow constant trade six month one way and six month another which they call the monson alternate succeed each other not miss to alter in April and October only variable towards their end so that take the last of a monson they set sail and with a forewind arrive at their desire haven and there negotiate their affair they set sail from thence in February or March follow and with the like favourable gale return in April unto their own port to Acheene they export much steel and some iron diverse sort of calico both white and paint and of late time when the i be first discover store of diamond which be sell to great benefit from whence they return Benjamin and Camphora of barouse pepper of Priaman and tecoo Brimstone and all sort of porcelain and China commodity if to be have to sell again to profit to Arrecan they send store of tobacco some iron and few sort of paint clothes and return from thence some gold and gum lack but most part Rice which they sell about pallecat and that coast of Narsinga to Pegu they export much silver in rial of eight Cotton yarn and beethyles die red with several sort of paint and bring from thence the perfect ruby and saphire which be disperse through the world much gold the best gum Lackwit with some tin and quicksilver to Tannassery they carry red Cotton yarn red and white beethyle paint of several sort befit that country wear and land they at Tannassery carry they from thence to syam fourteen day journey over land from whence by the like conveyance they bring all sort of China commodity as porcelain satin damask Lankeene silk aloe Benjamin of Camboia and great store of tin and a wood to die withal call Sapan wood the same we here call Brasill along their own coast they trade with small ship lade rice and other grain where it be cheap sell it again on the coast of Bisnagar to great benefit take child in exchange which cost not they above three or four shilling a child and they sell again in Musulipatnam and other place for forty shilling and thus much shall suffice to have write of this kingdom wherein I have be the more prolix because my own knowledge fortify with almost five year experience assure i of the truth of what I have write where this country end the kingdom of Bengala Bengala begin subsist at this time under the monarchy of the great mogul which he rule by his governor dispose into several province who powerful neighbourhood cause the king of Golchonda to keep constant garrison which with the advantage of river and desert secure he on that side of his kingdom in this country we be mere stranger the coast be too dangerous and our ship too great to adventure they among so many shelf and sand yet be we inform by such as come from thence and confirm by the price and abundance of such thing as that country produce that it be the most plentiful of all the east for once a year there arrive at Musulipatnam a fleet of small vessel from thence of burden about twenty ton the plank only sow together with cairo a kind of cord make of the rind of coconut and no iron in or about they in which bark they bring rice butter Sugar wax honey gum lack long pepper calico lawn and diverse sort or cotton-cloth raw silk and Moga which be make of the bark of a certain tree and very curious quilt and carpet stitch with this Moga all which consider the plenty of the place whereunto they bring they shall come hither as we say of coal carry to Newcastle yet here they sell they to content profit many portugal decay in their estate or question for their life resort hither and live here plentiful bad people yet as banish man or outlaw without government practice or almost profession of religion to conclude it may true be speak of this country as it be abusive of another it be the best country people with the worst nation of who this repute runn currant in India the man be all thief and the woman whore here the famous Ganges disimboqu into the sea fructify it seem the country but little sanctify the inhabitant whereof I can speak very little as have always live at great distance from it only I have hear it be full of crocodile and so be most river within the gulf crocodile charm where I have see many of immense bigness which the ferriman that pass man and cattle over those river know how to charm and then with safety ferry over the passenger in the body of one or two Palmito tree join and swim over the cattle the order of which charm have once see I think good to insert be at a river side and ready to pass it we espy a very great crocodile show himself above water and swim down the stream in our way whereupon the ferryman enter the river to the calf of his log he stand upon one of they mutter to himself certain word and withal tie knot upon a small cord he hold in his hand to the number of seven which cord he leave hang on a bush thereby and confident push we and our horse over the crocodile lie all this while still in our sight not able as he say to open his jaw so have ferry we over he make haste to return and untie the cord affirm that if the crocodile shall be starve by the power of this charm his charm will from thenceforth lose its power and effect Arrecan Arrecan border upon Bengala and participate in its plenty from whence there come yearly ship to the coast of Choromandel the king be by religion a gentile but such a one as hold all meat and drink indifferent he marry constant his own sister and give for reason the first man practice in the infancy of the world affirm that no religion can deny that Adam son marry Adam daughter he be very kind to stranger give good respect and entertainment to moor persian and arabian which live in his country profess public the practice of their mahometan superstition he have also diverse time invite the dutch and english to resort unto his country but the dutch by good experience have have sometime a factory there the english not by their example but true knowledge of the little trade and less benefit avoid his importunity yet continue good correspondence with he and his people as know it a plentiful country and not inconvenient to supply themselves with many necessary if difference with other nation shall enforce they to that extremity betwixt this king and the mogul there be continual war both by sea and land defensive on the king of arrecans part secure his own country that border upon Bengala from thence confront in small skirmish the opposite party but any set or great battle I have not hear of to have be fight betwixt they in which war he give so good entertainment to stranger that I have know diverse hollander that have expire their covenant time of service with the east indian company and so purchase then freedom have go to serve this king and receive good countenance and content in his employment of they Pegu * * Pegu of the late miserable state thereof and former glory see l. 10. cap. 5 6 7 8. where other country of this gulf of Bengala and ghost of coromandel be relate border upon Arrecan and be a most plentiful and temperate country yet hardly recover from the desolation where with war plague and famine have within few former year infest it which be most visible in the vast country the city be always first and best replenish and that all other place may the better be so it be death to export a woman from thence and certain profit to bring they the king be a gentile by his religion agree in all point of opinion and practise with the king of Arrecan Tannassery and Syam all of they in probability receive their rudiment from the chineset who without question sometime command those country their vicinity resemblance in physiognomy and conformity in many custom be my best reason to go along with these thus far that be of opinion the chinese sometime monarchise as far as Madagascar the king which now reign be nephew to the last notwithstanding he have child which this have suppress and have in his time recover from the king of Syam what he have enforce from his predecessor Zangomay or jangoma Thomas Samuel a Englishman his trade there and in Pegu among other the town and kingdom of Zangomay and therein a Englishman name Thomas Samuel who not long before have be send from Syam by master Lucas anthonison to discover the trade of that country by the sale of certain good send along with he to that purpose which Thomas Samuel together with all other stranger be by the king take from Zangomay and carry to Pegu where not long after Samuel die the king seize upon what he have by inventory with purpose as by the sequel to give account thereof to the lawful proprietor the kingdom of Pegu beginng to be better establish merchant of diverse nation begin to repair thither again about their negotiation where some of Musulipatnam by conference with moor that be samuel associate understand his death and the king take his good into his hand with the probability of recovery if seek after which they make know to the english at their return to Musulipatnam it happen that master Lucas anthonison who employ Samuel from Syam to Zangomay be then agent at Musulipatnam who apprehend this encouragement other english send consult with his assistant and resolve to send two english with a letter and present to the king and some small adventure to bear the charge of the voyage and make trial of the trade which take place and they embark at Musulipatnam the ten of September arrive at Siriam the port of Pegu the three of October follow who entertainment I give you in their own word as I find they write in their letter to Musulipatnam a letter relate the king of pegus entertainment to the english the king hear of our come send four Galliots with present to the ambassador and unto we send we word that he do much rejoice at our come into his country these galley have 50 oar of a side with eight nobleman in they cause our ship to come to a anchor before the town of Siriam the 7. of October the king of pegues brother be chief governor send two nobleman aboard of our ship write our name and our age of year and the cause of our come we assure they that we be messenger send from Musulipatnam by our chief captain have a present and a letter unto the king which when his highness shall be please to receive shall understand the effect of our business and the cause of our come the ten day of October we be send for on shore by the king brother who sit in a large house of Bamboson in great state bedeck with jewel in his ear with gold ring with rich stone on his finger be a white man and of very good understanding demand of we the question the nobleman before do and we answer he as we do before because that our speech shall be find always as one we give he at that time a fine for a present to the intent that he may speak and write to the king his brother in our behalf that we may have access unto the king the soon that our business may have effect the eight of November the king send for we and the king brother provide for we a beat with six man to row and also a nobleman with we to Pegu to be our guard have narsarcan and Hodges Ishmael with we unto which nobleman we give a present for in this place here be nothing to be do or speak or any business perform without bribe gift or present arrive in Pegu the eleven of November have our present with we Bany bram send his man unto we write our name as before time they also bid we choose any ground where we will for to build we a house but at our own cost and charge as all other man custom be our house be finish straight order be give that we must not walk any where out of our house to speak with any man until the king have speak with we and our present deliver the king send we a present of victual with two nobleman with it which be some grace to we though it be not of much value and our comfort be that all man report that the king be very well please as our come into his country the seven and twenty of December the king send for our present and send two horse for we and be come to a gate of the town to stay for his come when he come out he send for we what speech or conference he have with we Narsarca can certify you but it be to no purpose concern our business nor can we get none to move the king in our business for none of his subject dare move the king in our business more than he demand the next our letter be send for and interpret by a Portugal a slave to the king but one that speak Pegu we have much trouble with he about the true understanding of it be not write in Portugese the next day we deliver that present you send to Bany bram peguan tyranny who give we many fair speech like to other but we have find they all to no purpose the country be far from your worship expectation for what man soever come into his country he hold they but as his slave neither can any man go out of his country without his leave for he have watch both by land and water and he of himself be a tyrant and can eat before he have draw blood from some of his people with death or otherwise for the business of Thomas Samuel and the mallayor they have a fall out some 12. month before he die and he take all the company good into his hand and the mallayor have narsarcan in his hand and come to Pegu he fall sick by the way and die in short time after he come to Pegu but before his death the mallayor be call for to give account what man be indebt to Samuel and the pegues and bermane that be indebt pay it to the king but the moor that be indebt say when the english come they will pay they we go with other to Nichesa and request he to move the king in our behalf for our dispatch who return answer come we to demand our good and the english have never come to trade in his country when our ship come he will give all the good and what the english can demand to give they content in another letter the first of march we have word send we the king will not let we go until some english ship come to Pegu for the money we bring with we it be all spend and we be here in a most miserable estate and know no way to help ourselves for the king have neither give we any of our good nor leave to recover none of our debt nor take our cloth but we be like lose sheep and still in fear of be bring to slaughter therefore we beseech you and the rest of our countryman and friend to pity our poor distress estate and not to let we be leave in a heathen country slave to a tyrannous king though the king give we nothing yet have he but give we leave to come away we can have certify your worship of mean to help to have recover all the money and good we come for lead and tin here be none to be sell but if we receive any money we do mean one of we to go into the country to buy some if any profit may be make of it the coast of Pegu be clear and water enough on the bar for any ship and for pilot there be many to be have in Musulipatnam that know the coast very well we entreat you for God sake to be mindful of we and to pity the poor estate we be here in and send some ship to release we and we shall be bind to pray for your worship good health and prosperity this be the substance of their advice deliver in their own word which may be true at that time for then indeed they be enforce to stay but not long after the ship departure they find good sale for their cloth and it shall seem better vent for the money for before the ship come again in October follow their unfaithfulness and unthrifty course they have consume their capital and take up beside what their credit can supply for which they can give no other account but that most be lose at play and the rest profuse spend whereof the right worshipful east indian company be most sensible and myself at that time in that place have some reason to be acquaint withal but leave they nameless according to the obscurity of their quality and irregularity of their proceed the king restore most of the same good Samuel die possess of at the instant of the ship departure and not before lest their riot shall have consume all he then enforce they to depart towards Musulipatnam that can have be well content to have stay behind king of pegus letter where they arrive in April an. 1619. bring with they a letter from the king write upon a Palmito leaf signify his desire to give free trade and entertainment to the english nation if they will with their ship repair unto his country and with all he send as a present a ring set with a ruby two mat two Betele box and two narrow piece of damask all worth twenty noble or thereabouts and so end this negotiation the ruby and saphire which be bring from hence be find in the kingdom of Ana subject also to this king and much esteem in all part of India Tannassery lie next to Pegu a small kingdom and tributary to the king of Syam Tannassery for which place this be but the port and that only to the inhabitant of this gulf for we find a way with our ship into the river of Syam Syam where the right worshipful east indian company have at this time their servant to who able relation I leave the description of those part add only from the credible report of our own the dutch and that nation the strange increase of the swine of that country among which here be find no boar now in Holland yet have they pig according to the custom of other swine and one sir drift a Dutchman of good account and another that live long in that place affirm unto i the truth hereof both in that country belief and his own experience for at his come from thence sow fruitful without box he take certain pig which he keep aboard the ship and within six month they farrow pig yet not a boar among they and here I take leave to repose have make this light discovery of the country coast this bay of Bengali which I can not more exact perform have take my station in Musulipatnam such as it be I submit it equal to all man survey or censure and rest please whosoever be otherwise the saracenicall history contain the act of the r r Musleman or Muslim signify a believer see of that doctrine of Muhammed the name which all of that religion give themselves saracen and Moor etc. which we give they they know not MUSLIMS from muhammed to the reign of ATABACaeVS in the succession of forty nine emperor write in Arabic by GEORGE ELMACIN son of abulias elamid the son of ABULMACAREM the son of Abultib in the name of God merciful p p gracious and merciful their usual beginning of prayer book and work mercy-shewing the author preface in who be my help praise in all language be the holy God glorify in the height of his throne of all creature distinct in necessity of essence from every thing be separate by the  e of name and nobleness of attribute superexcellent in power and greatness of majesty above all comparison in his strength greatness and immensity I will praise he with thanksgiving for benefit give and gift abundant bestow have read the history of that learned and famous man muhamed Abugiafar son of Giarir the Tabarite of happy memory and see the narration and allegation very prolix Mahomet first author of Islamisme that be the mabumetan faith praise by this author a mahometan have also read the abridgement thereof by the learned Kemaluddin and many other brief I gather a history out of they contract the word but retain the thing and order omit no case or exploit of moment beginning with the beginner of Islamism of glorious memory rehearse his birth genealogy and act till he flee to Medina and after that his war victory and fortune till his death I proceed in order with the orthodoxal chaliph observe the course of time and year add the king of other province and the occurrent of their time according to the computation of the Hegira unto the reign of sultan Rucnuddin the holy king of happy memory the first emperor of the musleman be Muhammed Abulcasim of t t we say odious and just yet here and like case follow the author the birth and genealogy of Mahomet glorious memory Muhammed Abulcasim say Muhammed u u this m. Abugiafar be a prince and learned historian which die a h. 316. A.D. 922. our of he principal be this history to that time gather his education his vocation Abugiafar first manifest and observe the religion of Islamism he be son of Abdalla which be the son of Abdulmutalib the son of hasiem the son of abdumenaf his mother name be Emina the daughter of Waheb son of abdumenaf now Muhammed of glorious memory be bear in the stony valley of the city of Mecca early on a Monday morning the eight of the former month rab in the 882. year of Alexander the great his father die two month before he be bear his mother when he be six year old his grandfather Abdulmutalib bring he up till he be eight year old and then die age 110. year after which he be educate by his uncle Abutalib when he be forty year old he be call to the prophetical office on Monday the second of the former rab in the 922. of Alexander the great which be the twenty of the reign of Cosroas son of Hormisda son of Nusierwan the first that believe in his prophecy be Chadigia his uncle daughter the next be his servant Zeid son of Harith and after he Ali the son of Abutalib all of happy memory after they be add Abubecr with five other all which be call by he to Islammisme viz. Otsman son of Affan Zubeir son of Awam Abdurrahman son of Aufi Saad son of Abuwaccas and Obeidalla son of algiarab these nine be the first which enter Islamisme his doctrine in the four and forty year of his age he manifest his vocation for before he only invite man privy to Islamism and publish his vocation he command to believe in God alone and he to worship and adore he destroy idolatry command circumcision establish the fast of the month Ramadan the five praying cleanness pilgrimage to the temple of Mecca that blood shall not be eat nor that which die alone nor swine flesh and those which observe not these thing he vex with war and fight against they the christian also come to he both arab and other and he receive they into his fidelity give they a writing of security so also the jew magi * * magi be those which profess the ethnic religion use in Persia Christ blaspheme with hypocritical honour his enemy and pagan and other which perform to he oath of fidelity obtain of he free liberty but on condition to pay tribute and poll-mony he command also to believe the truth of the prophet and apostle and of the book send to they also that Christ the son of Mary be the spirit of God and his word and apostle and he approve the gospel and the law of Moses the coraisite will not consent touch these thing but resist he valiant and defy he but his uncle Abutalib assist he and forbid that any man shall approach to he with a Sword in the five year Omar the son of Alchittabi of happy memory believe and confirm the other Muslims with his faith they be then 39 and himself be the 40. in the eight year the coraisite write a decree that the child of hasiem shall not make league or be mix with the child of Almutalib and hang it in the temple of Mecca in the ten year Abutalib die addict to the religion of his people age somewhat above eighty and the coraisite be confirm and their power and hope increase the same year the prophet of glorious memory make a expedition to Taijfa and invite the inhabitant to Islamism but they yield not to he and when he have stay there a month he return to Mecca his two wife Aijsia and Sewda the conversion of Medina this year also he marry the daughter of abubeer the just and Sewda the daughter of Zamaa in the thirteen year certain of Awas and Chazraz viz. seventy three man and two woman come to he which be swear to he concern Islamism and of these he appoint twelve doctor after who return to Medina Islamisme be spread among the inhabitant thereof and they become his helper the same year he command he to remove to Medina and they all go thither except abubeer and Ali which remain with he the history of the departure to Medina in the 14. year Muhammed of glorious memory remove to Medina have with he Abubeer the just and Amar the son of Kamra the servant of abubeer and Abdalla the son of artacat guide they but Ali remain behind with his leave three day to dispose his business and then come to he he enter Medina on Monday noon other say on Thursday the twelve of the former rab. and abode with chalid Abiobi son of Zeid till he build the temple and house into which he then enter and from this year be reckon the computation * * the Hegira or flight of m. fall out on the 16. of july A.D. 622. fatima d. of Muh marry to Ali his uncle son au. h. 2. which begin july 5. 623. his slight skirmish which after grow to great battle A.H. 3. which begin june 24. A.D. 624. of the Hegira which be the 54. year of the age of Muhammed of glorious memory the first year of the Hegira Ali the son of Abutalib marry fatima the same year Muhammed of glorious memory give a white banner to his uncle Hamza this be the first banner which he give to any and send with he thirty Muslims but he perform little in the second year be fight the second battle of Badra and the great in which divers valiant leader of the coraisite be slay on Friday the seventeen of the month Ramadan for he have hear that abusofian the son of Harith be go into Syria with many pack in which be money of the coraisite for the spoil whereof he go but abusofian with his get to Mecca the Muslims be three hundred and nineteen in number the infidel betwixt nine hundred and a thousand and the Muslims overcome and slay seventy of the unbeliever and take as many but of the muslim only fourteen be slay there be other battle also this year in the three year of the Hegira he besiege the jew in their fort fifteen day and they yield he captive they and spoil their good the same year he send a band of man to slay Caab son of Abrasaf a jew. and that year be fight a battle on Saturday about the midst of the month Siewal and the hill near Medina be take the number of the infidel be three thousand footman and two hundred horseman three thousand camel and fifteen woman their captain be abusofian son of Harith the Muslims be a thousand these first have the better but after the infidel which slay 70. muslim among which be Hamza son of Abdulmutalib this be a unlucky day in which m. of glorious memory be also present in the battle and be wound by Ochas the son of abumugid and lose one of his right foretooth m. wound and be hurt on the low lip Abdalla also the son of Siehab wound his forehead his upper jaw also be wound and two of his foretooth fall out of the infidel be slay two and twenty in the four year happen the battle of the jew son of Nadir a. h 4. which begin june 13. 625. which leave their fortification go out of their limit and come to Chaibar and some of they go into Syria Mundir son of Omar the saadite pursue they to the well of Muavia with 70. medinan and slay they all but Caab son of Zeidi which escape A.H. 5. june 2. 626. the last battle of Badra be fight this year in the five year be the battle of fossa or the dike many nation be gather together the coraisite and the child of coraid of Nadir of Gatfan and of Selim their leader be Habih son of ahtab Salam son of Abulhakik and other jew and joseph son of Harith come to lead the coraisite and their follower with ten thousand man over the man of Gatfan be Atibas son of Hasan the Kararite and other Seliman the persian be author of dig the ditch the infidel besiege they above twenty day after which naim son of masud the Gatfanite embrace Islamisme procure the disjoin of those nation and the breach of league betwixt they and the jew they flee thence six Muslims and three infidel be slay in this year happen the battle of the child of coraid against who Muhammed go forth and besiege they five and twenty day they be force to yield to Saad son of Maad who counsel to slay all the man and to make captive the woman and child so that six or seven hundred be behead and bury in the market place of Medina the muslim share their wife child and good Saad die of a wound before get at the Dike-battle in the six year be ordain the prayer for obtain health in A.H. 6. which begin May 23. a d. 627. Mahomet three wife and many battle be fight among other that of the child of Mustalak who he meet in Safan with they be Giuweira daughter of Harith who m. of glorious memory marry in steed of dowry free diverse of her captive kindred this year also be fight the battle of a place near Mecca in the way to Giudda after that peace be make betwixt he and the coraisite that for ten year they may plough and it be free for every man to take part with they or with m. on condition that if any coraisite without leave of his captain flee to m. he shall be send back but if any of m. his follower flee without leave to the coraisite he shall not be send back to he if m. with his soldier shall pass that way he may stay three day he shall use no other arm but those which traveller use and that also in the scabbard this truce be make by Sablum son of Omar the amirite and write by Ali son of Abutalib of happy memory in that year he be inaugurate under a tree which after perish m. his coronation or installation a. h. may 11. 628. m. his pulpit carry away by overflow of water as be report in the seven year m. of glorious memory take to he a pulpit and it be report that his wife say to he I have a workman to my son shall I bid he make thou a pulpit he answer yea and he make he a pulpit of wild Tamariske or as other say of white Tamariske it consist of two step and a seat before this pulpit be make when he pray in the temple he lean on a prop of wood this pulpit remain to the reign of muavias son of abusofian which add six step to it and it be not alter after Otsman son of Affan first cover it with a carpet this year also be fight the battle of Chaibar and m. take many fort and possess their riches he straight besiege two castle Watitia and Selalima that they be force to sue to he to spare their line and to let they remain in their country which he grant on condition to pay yearly half their date and to be at his pleasure cast forth the inhabitant of Badra hear this conclude on like condition to which he yield the jew also remain under the same league until the reign of Omar son of Alchittabi who after that he understand that m. of glorious memory have say in his sickness that two religion may not concur in Arabia he cast they thence the same year Zeinaba daughter of Alharit a jewess bring he a poison sheep of which eat he say this joint tell i that it be poison in the eight year he take Mecca for the coraisite have break their league A.H. 8. April 30 629. and m. go against they with ten thousand Muslims till he come to Marwuttahran and his uncle abbas son of Abdulmutalib come to he with abusofian son of Harith and believe and he say he which shall enter the house of abusofian shall be secure and he which shall shut his door shall be safe and he enter Mecca without battle and all the people thereof believe except a few which he slay it be take the one and twenty of Ramadan Mecca take the battle of Honania a famous valley be fight this year for when the hawazine have understand that Mecca be take they assemble to melic son of Auf the tekifian adjoin themselves with their wife and good m. go out against they with twelve thousand man and the victory at first be with the infidel but after the muslim prevail which put they to flight and spoil their good which be six thousand kine four and twenty thousand goat forty thousand sheep and four thousand ounce of silver 90. of the tsekifian be slay and but four Muslims the captive and spoil be gather together at Giaran whither have besiege Taijfa and leave it he come and be seek to by the ambassador of the hawazine for the restitution of their wife say they be his ant whereupon he give they the choice of their wife and child and of their wealth they choose their wife and child which he deliver the same year melic son of Auf come to he to Giaran and believe whereupon he restore he his good he set over Mecca Gaiat son of ase A.H. 9 April 20 630. in the nine year be fight the battle of Tebuc and m. make peace with the prince of Dauma and the prince of Eila on condition to pay he tribute have stay ten day at Tebuc he depart to Medina in the month Regieb and that be his last war in which Otsman son of Affan bestow a thousand piece of gold on his army this year the taijfian embrace Islamism A.H. 10. which begin April 9 A.D. 631. over who he set Otsman son of Abulafi and he send abusofian to destroy their warlike provision in the ten year the arab come to he very frequent and man embrace Islamism and his word be confirm the same year Musuleima the false prophet rebel which say he be his fellow prophet and be follow by his friend the child of Hanifa of jamama his pilgrimage A.H. 11. mar. 28 a. christi 632. the same year m. of glorious memory go on pilgrimage to Mecca into which he enter the ten day of Dulhiggia and when he have teach man and instruct they in religion he return to Medina in the eleven year appear the false prophet aswad the absite in Arabia foelix and say he be a prophet false prophet and take Sanaa Nazran and the country of taijf and when he grow famous fir Dailam slay he in his house the same year Muhammed of glorious memory die for have return from his pilgrimage to Mecca and stay at Medina till the eight and twenty day of the month Safar Mahomet death he begin to be sick and he command Abubecr to pray with the people and they pray seventeen prayer he die on Monday the twelve of the former rab age sixty three year or after other sixty five he be of very good wit of a pleasant voice visit and entertain his which visit and entertain he liberal to the poor laud the great man converse with the mean and not repel any suitor without his request or a kind answer his scribe be Otsman son of Affan and Ali son of Abutalib sometime also Ubaharat son of Caab and Zeid son of Thebith write for he muavias also Chalid alan and Chantal Abdalla son of Abusierh write likewise for he his secretary and officer of State which apostate from Islamism to the infidel but Otsman in time of victory sue for his pardon which m. grant have before determine to shed his blood Zubeir son of Awan and Giehem son of safwan write down his alm hadikas son of semal his store of date mugiras son of Soicab and Husein son of jaman his judicial and imperial Abdalla son of Arkam answer to the letter of prince judge in his time be over the oath Ali son of Abutalib Maab son of habal of Medina and Abumousa the Asiarite over the pardon anis son of melic over his guard Cais son of say of Medina his banner be white his less standard black it be engrave with his scale for double testimony his porter be Bilal governor when he die Gaiat at Mecca alan at Bahrain Otsman at taijf Omar at Sanaa and gien chalid son of say over the village of Arabia foelix abusofian at Giuresia and Ali son of mina in a tract of Arabia foelix Muhammed die according to the arabian computation in the year of the sun from Adam 6123. nine month and fourteen day ten year of the Hegira reckon according to the course of the moon and seventy day be past that be nine year of the sun course eleven month one day less 3614. day in all the first of which be Thursday the last Monday the history of the christian write that he be gentle towards christian and when some of they have come to he and desire security this curiosity of chronology he observe in the rest by we omit m. his respect to christian he impose tribute on they bless they receive they into his tuition and command Omar to say to they we have their soul in the same account that we have our own soul and their riches as our riches and their chance as we the author of the book Almuhaddib write this and from he the famous man Abuhanifa cite it treat of a Muslim kill a Christian and when a certain great man a christian come to he he arise and do he reverence and answer to one question it when any principal man of any people come to you honour he he say also do good to the cophtis of Egypt for they be of kin to you he which oppress a Christian shall have he his adversary in the day of judgement and he which hurt a Christian hurt i in the first year * * these persian and Imperial occurrent I translate also that the reader may see how the saracenicall empire grow to so sudden a greatness out of the ruin of these two empire the Persian be say to have prevail in Syria and Egypt of the Hegira Siahir the persian take ancyra from the roman and the i will of Rhodes captive the inhabitant in the second Cosroes son of Hormisda persecute all which contradict his religion through his kingdom impose grievous tribute and destroy all the temple of Syria and Mesopotamia carry away all their gold silver and good even to the marble into his country in the three year Siahriar besiege Constantinople but depart frustrate the same year Cosroes oppress the ruhan and cause they to forsake the orthodox sect and to become jacobite for his physician name jonan a jacobite persuade he that so long as they be orthodox ^ they will incline to the roman he therefore decree that they shall either be slay or else become jacobite which they all do in the five year of the Hegira Cosroes be deprive by his subject for his tyranny after he have reign thirty eight year and his son k^bad set in his place call also syroe the son of Mary daughter of mauritius the roman emperor which carry himself well and be renown for justice but after eight month reign he and most of his people perish by pestilence his son ardsijr succeed and after five month be slay in the six year siahriar not of the royal race obtain the persian sovereignty whereupon a woman of royal blood lay wait and slay he when he have reign two and twenty day Cosroes nephew of Hormisda succeed who after three month be slay at Chorosan one great cause of this persian combustion after he Turana daughter of Cosroes reign a year and half in the four year of the Hegira siahriar have subject himself to heraclius because Cosroes on some complaint have write to Marzuban to entrap and kill both he and his son the commander of the army which letter and carrier be intercept by heraclius and by he present to siahriar he and the other captain subject themselves to heraclius who thereupon invade Persia and write to chacan king of Harari to help he with forty thousand horseman promise he his daughter in marriage thus heraclius prevail in Syria Egypt and Armenia against the city and force of the persian there Cosroes make Marzuban call also Zurabhar his general who march into the province of Mausil heraclius have at Ruha three hundred thousand horseman and from the tract of the Harari forty thousand be come to he which stay in the province of Aderbigiana by his command till he come thither have subdue Armenia he go to ninive Zurabhar and he fight a great battle and the persian have the worse above five hundred thousand of they be slay with Zurabhar himself hereupon Cosroes forsake Machura and Medaijn city present possess by heraclius and burn enjoy the king treasure after this Siroes son of Cosroes get out of prison and slay his father succeed he as before be relate heraclius come to the village Themanin which Noah of holy memory build after he pass out of the ark and that he may see the place of the ark he ascend the mountain Giudi which be high over all those land thence he pass into amida where syroe make peace with he condition to restore to the roman all which his father have take from they heraclius return to Ruha and command the christian to return from the jacobite sect to the orthodox which they do ardsijr have succeed Cosroes be slay by siahriar against who Marzuban gather force and the persian be divide in two part siahriar be slay and Cosroes succeed and when he be slay Turana to who giasiansed son of Cosroes his uncle succeed who be depose azurmis daughter of Cosroes obtain which after a year and four month be poison perchozad son of Cosroes succeed and be short slay in the seven of the Hegira abubcer 2. he first call himself Chalifa 1 vicar or give of God he may be call the Numa of the Saracen the sun be so eclipse that the star be see by day Abubecr the just or Abdalla son of Otsman Abucahaf son of Amir son of Omar son of Caab his mother name be Asma daughter of Sachar son of Amir son of Omar son of Caab he be create Chalifa the same day on which the prophet die the man of Medina assemble to inaugurate Saad son of Obad one of themselves and some of they say let we have a emperor of we and make you a emperor of you o fugitive * * fugitive be such as have d from Mecca first with m. and after from other place from which flight be their Heg. reckon other false prophet but when Abubecr of happy memory have praise God and celebrate he say to they o man of Medina take whether of these you will and lay hold on Omar and Abuobeid but with multiply cry and word Omar say to Abubecr stretch forth thy hand that we may swear fealty to thou which he do and both the Medina man and fugitive swear to he Ali only and the hasiemite except which will not by strike of the hand approve his empire which yet at last see themselves forsake they do the same year Heg. 11. the arabian rebel and some refuse to pay tribute and Museilema the false prophet prosper Taliha also the son of Chowailet say he be a prophet and be follow by the asedite news come also of the death of aswad Ibsua a false prophet which be Abubecr his first victory he chase also the Absite and Dibans and return to Medina he send to war against the rebel and deliver eleven banner for eleven tract chalid son of Walid be send against Taliba and his complice the gatfanite Taijtes and asedite and overcome they thegiagis also daughter of Harith profess herself this year a prophetess among the taalabite A.H. 12 ma. 18 A.C. 1633 and go to Museilema and be marry to he but when she have stay with he three day she return home Abubecr send ikirma son of abugiabl against Museilema with other they meet in jaman the Muslims be forty thousand which have the worse at first but after prevail and slay Museilema with ten thousand of his follower the rest return to Islamism he send Alau against the rebel of Bahrain who chase they force some to return and slay those which continue in their Apostasy Alau pass also the sea and slay all the inhabitant of Darina in the twelve year Abubecr write to chalid to go to Irac p p Irac be the name of the country where Bagdad and Balsora stand extend on both side of the bottom of the persian Gulf but to give his name of country just interpretation be very difficult the arab give one name Tartar another and other other to the same country which I therefore forbear Hierac in Persia have ^fsahon the chief city state be of divers value some be dram a piece some betwixt some half that and the former some the ten part of a dram Alcoran first gather together all be the article the coranto signify collection of this act of Abubecr Mushaph signify a book come from heaven or heavenly writing or the scripture coran signify read in publike or a collection of surat Azoaras some call they or chapter they hold it to excel all creature which christian or jew may not touch to sit on it be horrible or themselves to touch it unwashed etc. Omar the three emperor or Chalifa Damascus take A.H. 14. which begin feb. 25. A.C. 635. ah 15. feb. 14. 636. by roman he mean subject of the roman emperor which he call infidel as his own mahumetan Muslims or right believer who make a peace with they and the inhabitant of sawad on condition of tribute which be the first tribute bring to Medina he fight many battle and slay a great multitude of infidel and get innumerable spoil in the the thirteen year Abubecr send force into Syria and send Amir into palaestina jesid and other into Balcaa and the high Syria and chalid son of say to Teimaa Chalid fight a battle in Syria with mahan a roman commander and chase he to Damascus where the roman in the sapphire valley slay his son with many other Abubecr send Muavi with fresh supply and make chalid son of walid over the soldier in Syria and command he to go from Irac thither which he do with nine thousand this year Bosra be take the first of the city in Syria the same year die Abubecr of happy memory on Friday the three and twenty of the late giumad have enjoy the chalifate two year four month and nine day age sixty three and Omar the son of alchittab pray for he he be bury in the house of Aijsia he be abstinent devout and regard not the good of the World he be report to have take three stater out of the treasury for wage and to have say to Aijsia of happy memory see o prophetess what have accrue to the wealth of Abubecr since I have be over this empire and repay it to the Muslims and she sawit and when they have praise all his substance the value of all be but five stater which when it be tell Omar he say God have mercy on Abubecr for he have compel his successor to undergo labour this abubecr first gather the Alcoran out of table for when the Muslims in jaman be cross he fear leave some of the Alcoran may be lose be only in man memory and in sheet betwixt table and he call it Mushaf every Friday he distribute that which be collect in the treasury to his captain according to their place first to the soldier and after to the learned man and to such as have by their labour merit any thing the persian in the eleven year of the Heg. come to he about the slaughter of their king and sedition and desire jazdegijrd son of Cosroes which have flee from siroe and make he king over they be fifteen year old but their affection and assembly be differ and the province town and village war on their neighbour and be divide among themselves in the thirteen year happen a great earthquake thirty day and a great pestilence follow the muslim that year besiege Gaza and chase the roman which they signify by letter to Abubecr who be then dead God have mercy on he Omar son of alchittab son of Nckail son of Abdullaziz son of riah son of cart son of Rawah son of Adi son of Caab son of luae son of Galib be design Chalifa on the day of Abubecr his death and by his command in this thirteen year Omar of happy memory send abuobeid son of masud against the persian who he overcome in Hira slay many infidel but in a second battle he be slay with many Muslims after that be the battle of Buwaibic in which the infidel be overthrow in the fourteen year Damascus be take by chalid son of Walid forcible enter after seventy day siege at the thomas-gate and Abuobeid with condition of peace at the Custom-gate Omar send Saad against Irac which have many battle with the persian in cadis the persian be a hundred and twenty thousand the muslim thirty thousand they wall about by Omars command Bosra and Cufa in the fifteen year the roman assemble to the number of two hundred and forty thousand infidel and the Muslim be thirty six thousand which prevail as in many other battle this year emissa become tributary Kinnasrin be take in the sixteen year Omar go into Syria have make Ali governor of Medina he make agreement with Artenon prince of Ramla and send Amrus and sergijl to besiege jerusalem to who Omar grant security and impose tribute have subdue Palestina he send Amrus into Egypt this year Saad win Medaijna-Cosroe and with his Muslims possess the treasure n n this seem the late Cosroes or that before of Herac be not full true which he say he take out of christian story the last persian king overcome A.H. 17. jan. 23. A.C. 638. Egypt conquer Misra since enlarge and call cairo chief city of Egypt take of Cosroes and be say to have find 3000. million of gold and they find a house full of Camphora which the Muslims take for salt and use it in levin which make their bread bitter they find the crown of Cosroes and garment wrought with gold and gem and diverse arm and the hang of a gallery which say rend and make thereof a thousand thousand dam each dram be ten stater they find also a silken carpet sixty cubit long and as many broad wrought with figure and gem like flower on the border be the resemblance of the earth set with herb and flower as in the spring make of gold silver and gem Omar rend it and divide it to the Muslims Ali sell his share of it none of the great for twenty thousand this year be fight the battle of Gialul with the persian who last king jazdegijrd flee to Faryan this year Omar of happy memory return to Medina in the seventeen year of the Hegira the king of roman besiege emissa and Omar send abuobeid forty thousand man for succour which chase away the roman Omar the same year go into Syria and subject it in the eighteen year Amrus the son of alab besiege Misra and take it it be govern by Macuac which condition with Amrus that every egyptian shall pay a egyptian piece of gold and to entertain three day every Muslim which pass that way and the tribute impose on they yearly amount to twelve million of gold after that Omar go to Marbut where be many roman and expel they as also at cumsieric and then besiege Alexandria that year be a year of destruction through hail which spoil the ground and kill cattle there be a pestilence which kill five and twenty thousand Muslims there and diverse of the chief in the nineteenth year Heraclius die while Amrus besiege Alexandria A.H. 19 which begin jan. 1. 640. new Misra wall which be take in the twenty year after fourteen month siege the same year Amrus compass Misra with a wall call Fustata that be the tent because his tent be there pitch before he go to the siege of Alexandria and a dove have hatch her young therein he say it be unlawful for we to kill in the month Muharram and give his captain charge thereof in the one and twenty be the Nuhawendike battle betwixt the Muslims and persian wherein the general Nuaman be slay and Hodaifa succeed A.H. 21. dec. 10. 641. Persia Assyria and Syria which after turn the infidel to flight Mugiras possess aderbigian quiet and Amrus son of say get ainwerd and Harran and Ruha aias son of isa get Raca Nasibin and the part adjoin Abumasa also take Ahwaz and Seiwas A.H. 23. begin nou. 19 A.C. 643. the same year Chorasan be win by Nuaman before the battle abovesaid in the three and twenty year Omar of happy memory be slay by Abubulua servant to mugir ah persian by nation and by religion a Magus because he judge against he complain of too much tribute exact while Omar be at his morning prayer Omar kill on Wednesday the three and twenty of Dulhiggia he stab he in three place one of they under his navel whereof he die and Abdurrahman son of Auf pray * * this be note because it be do by the Chalifa when he can possible in his sickness by one of the chief Omar first call Emir elmumenim with the people Omar be carry to his house and he command Sahib to pray three day with the people and secret assign the empire to six person to Ali son of Abutalib Otsman say Abdurrahman Talha and Zubeir of happy memory he make his son Abdalla a counsellor only without any place of command he die the six and twenty of Dulhiggia and Sahib pray for he or in his steed he be bury in the house of Aijsia he be brown bald tall just pious abstinent he first reckon the computation of year after the Hegira and subscribe letter he first be call emperor of the faithful he first use the similitude of the ant and her burden he first assemble man together under one prince in the month Ramadan his scribe be Abdalla Zeid and almal and Ali his judge at Medina jezid at Cufa abumias his Portor jezid his seal that of the prophet he reign ten year of the moon and 178. day 6136. year of the sun be complete he distribute every Friday the treasure to his captain according to their necessity not as Abubacr according to their dignity say that the world good be give to repel the world evil the christian story tell that when Omar have take jerusalem he write they this letter of security in the name of the merciful mercy-shewing God of Omar son of alchittab privilege to jerusalem to the people of the city Aelia be grant security of their person wife child good and temple that they be not destroy nor unoccupied at the hour of prayer he will not pray in the temple but alone at the step before the door and write then a privilege that no Muslim shall pray at the step but alone and that no assembly shall there be make for public prayer he pray also at Bethleem at the arch where Christ be bear and write a privilege that no Muslim shall pray there but one after another without public assembly when Alexandria be take Amrus write to Omar I have take a city contain four thousand bath twelve thousand herb-seller four thousand tributary jew and four hundred * * Mimi jester Omar write to he to make a river from thence to Colzuma for carriage of corn thence to be transport by sea to Medina which he do and it be call the emperor river Amrus take barca and Tripoli he write to the patriarch of the jacobite Benjamin a letter of security note the cause why jacobitisme prevail with other heresy in the East partly because the politic infidel thus secure themselves by diversity of religion against the roman partly the circumcise Muslims favour the circumcise cophti by our a town on the river Euphrates Africa conquer and Cyprus A.H. 31. it begin Aug 24. 651. Nubia invade old persian A.H. 35. it begin july 11. 655. rebellion whereupon he return with great joy have be absent from his see thirteen year when heraclius be dead Constantine his son reign six month and be kill by his stepmother Heracleones succeed and be soon depose constans follow OTSMAN son of Affan son of abulas son of ommia son of Abdusiams son of abdumenaf son of Cuda be the four emperor of the Muslims his mother name be Arwis daughter of Kerir who mother be Bisa daughter of Abdulmutalib Abdurrahman renounce the right which he have with the rest which be design on condition that he may choose the emperor wherewith all be please but Ali which after yield he name Otsman in the four and twenty year Mugiras take by our and Hamadan and muavias take many city of the roman in the seven and twenty year Abdalla son of say governor of Egypt invade Africa slay the king and possess his State muavias also take Cyprus Otsman send Abdalla and say into Chorasan promise the government to he which first come thither they take many town and Abdalla return not till he have drink of the river balcha in the one and thirty year jazdegijrd the last of the persian king lose his life and their glory vanish and their kingdom be possess by the Muslims that year also Abdalla son of say invade Nubia and the king make peace promise many captive in the two and thirty year abbess son of Abdulmutalib die one of the chief of the coraisite and if he pass by Omar or Otsman they will alight off their horse to do he honour Abdurrahman son of Auf die that year who give to every man of Badra five hundred piece of gold which be a hundred and his good be divide into sixteen portion every of which contain eighty thousand piece of Gold in the three and thirty year Soliman the persian die age two hundred fifty six year other say three hundred and fifty 35. many accusation be lay against Otsman for bring back to Medina Hakem who the prophet of glorious memory have expel for depose say and substitute Ocha which be a drinker of wine and a adulterer for give to Merwan his kinsman five african talent that be 504000. piece of gold etc. he have borrow ten thousand stater which he repay upon suit of law and after will have borrow again but the treasurer refuse and declare it to the Muslims Otsman on Friday pray in the temple before the people Otsman kill and say o God I take thou to witness that I be true penitent yet the stir increase and many assemble to depose Otsman who send to they to Medina to appeal to the law of God so they call the Alcoran and the doctrine of his prophet at last Muhammed son of Abubecr kill he in his bosom be the Alcoran on which fall one drop of blood he reign twelve year lack eight day he be fair long-bearded much in fast prayer and meditation of the Alcoran he leave five hundred million of stater one hundred and fifty thousand piece of gold his promotion of his kindred cause his deprivation his seal be inscribe I believe in God the creator and administrator Ali 5. Ali the five emperor be son of Abutalib the son of Abdulmutalib son of hasiem son of abdumenaf son of Cuda his mother be fatima daughter of ased son of hasiem insurrection he be create Chalif the same day that Otsman be slay an. 36. Zubeir and Talha go to Mecca to frustrate the choice of Ali and say they require the blood of Otsman and Aijsia be at Mecca when Otsman be slay and hear of alis succession incite man against he swear prophetess say Otsman be slay wrongful by God I will require his blood Ali answer where be the mother of the dog allege that she give charge to slay he and call he infidel she reply they convert he and then kill he Aijsia Talha and Zubeir go from Mecca with a great army and take Basra Ali from Medina with twenty thousand fight with they be thirty thousand and slay Talha and Zubeir and put to flight Aijsias soldier seventy hand be relate to be cut off from the bridle of the camel on which Aijsia ride one after another and the camel stick with arrow like a hedgehog his leg cut off and Aijsia take Ali sent she to Medina with seventy woman in man habit have thus overcome the people of the camel he go to Cufa and there fix his tent thence he go and fight with Muavi which refuse the oath of allegiance an. 37. they have ninety battle in a hundred and ten day A.H. 37. june 19 657. 90. battle to every of which Ali premise a exhortation to take the oath which Muavi refuse till the murderer of Otsman be deliver to death and the chalifate be resign the last battle be call the strong night in which night be slay seventy thousand on both side and when day appear Amrus warn Muavi that they shall lift up their alcoran on their spear which they do and cry this book of God be between we and you whereupon the man of Irac threaten to kill Ali if he will not listen to the syrian according to the judgement of God book and so Muavi escape at last both side agree to choose a arbitrator which shall arbitrate according to that book which be choose Amrus and Abumusa and both party bind to stand to their agreement they agree to depose both Ali and Muavi and choose Abdalla son of Omar Ali be depose according but when Amrus shall have do the like to Muavi he refuse Abdalla son of Wahab have also forsake Ali who he slay in fight with all the chawarigians his follower the broil continue betwixt Ali and Muavi in Egypt and Irac till the forty year then basijr be send to Medina by Muavi and enter it the inhabitant acknowledge muavi thence he go to Mecca then to Aliaman and slay two of Ali his son with many other which follow the part of Ali after which he return to Mecca and slay at taijf jamam and Medina thirty thousand at last peace be conclude betwixt they that lay aside arm Ali shall enjoy Irac and muavi Syria that year three chawarisians agree to kill in diverse place on one day Ali Muavi and Amrus also hagiag wound Muavi with a poison sword but he be slay and Muavi escape Amrus another of they mistake and kill Charigia the lieutenant of Amrus son of alas in steed of he and be therefore take and execute Ali kill Abdurrahman the three wound Ali on the forehead as he go to morning prayer on a Friday the seventeen of Ramadan whereof he die three day after and be bury in Tahaf where now be the place of his burial some say he be bury at Cufa and some say the place be unknown Ali command to feed his smiter for he be take and use he well and if he recover to spare he if he die to join he with he that he may accuse he before God he reign five year three month less age sixty three he be brown short great-bellied long-bearded and bald neglect thing of the world fear god much much in alm just and lowly witty defender of the true religion learn in speculative and practic science bold liberal the inscription of his seal be only to the strong God dominion Hasen son of Ali be make Chalifa at Cufa on the day of his father death Hasen 6. but the man of Irac quarrel with he he send to Muavi condition and agree with he he abide at Medina and yield Cufa to muavi have enjoy the chalifate six month and five day his seal be inscribe there be no god but God the true and manifest king muavi son of abusofian son of Haleb son of ommia son of Abdusiams muavi 7. and first on who posterity in the Ommian family the chalifate settle son of abdumenaf son of Cuda be the seven emperor he be create Chalifa at Cufa when Hasen resign 46. muavi son of Amir and Basier son of Artah invade the west and take many city Carava Caphsa etc. till they come to Kairawan which Muavi son of chodbag have take before they come and there build a city and encompass with a wall the city now call Kairawan an. 49. Hasen die poison by his wife as be say by the command of Muavi hasen holiness he have go five and twenty pilgrimage on foot and twice have forsake all his wealth and thrice make partition with God even to his shoe and sock reserve one half to himself an. 50. muavi procure that the oath of fealty shall be make to his son jezid as to his partner of the covenant which be do by all but Husein son of Ali Abdurrahman son of Abubecr Abdalla son of Omar and Abdalla son of Zubeir an. 52. jezid invade the roman as far as Constantinople an. 58. Aijsia of happy memory die on the seven day of Ramadan an. 60. muavi die at Damascus and his son jezid pray for he he enjoy the place nineteen year and ninety four day old obey obey son of Sarib live in his time a man three hundred year old jezid be create Chalifa the same day he write to walid governor of Medina jezid 8. to apprehend Husein son of Ali and Abdalla which flee to Mecca and abode there refuse the oath to jezid the Cufan scent to Husein and promise to swear to he Husein go thither with fifty horse and a hundred foot be set on by the band of Obeidalla send thither by jezid he on the Friday set before he the Mushaf and admonish they Husein slay and the Mushaf neglect but they rush on he and slay he and all his company and carry away their wife and child jezid command his head to be set up at Damascus on the gate the same year Abdalla son of Zubeir usurp the empire at Mecca while jezid follow his wine and dog contemn religion jezid set over Chorasan Selim which take Naishbur and Chovarasma Bochara in Bactria and samarcand subject and Bochara then rule by Chatumis a woman who promise the king of Saida marriage if he will assist she against the Muslims who thereupon come with 120000. but be slay in battle and enrich the Muslims with spoil they go to samarcand the king whereof buy his peace with much money a. 63. the man of Medina depose jezid who send against they Muslim Medina spoil who spare they three day and then enter and spoil they three day shed their blood and carry away their good yet the prophet of glorious memory say he which spoil my city my wrath remain on he a. 64. Muslim go to Mecca against Abdalla and die in the way Hasin succeed in his place lay siege to it * * temple of Mecca burn beat the house with engine of battery and burn it this siege continue till news come of jezid death his son muavi pray for he or in his steed he reign three year nine month 6175. muavi 9 Abdalla 10. mirkond and zacuth leave his out of their catalogue Merwan 11. muavi son of jezid the three emperor of the house of ommia be create Chalifa the same day and reign forty five day and then die his seal be inscribe the world be deceit Abdalla son of Zubeir be inaugurate at Mecca when there have be no Chalif two month the iracans egyptian and some syrian swear to he Merwan of the house of ommia raise a party at Damascus and prevail in battle against Dahac which stand for Abdalla slay he and chase his follower he hold Syria enter Egypt and after many fight obtain it send a army against Abdalla which get the better Cufan rebel an. 65. the Cufan make a uproar to revenge the death of Husein sixteen thousand be assemble under Suleiman which be slay in battle by Obeidalla and his follower chase this year also muchtar son of Abuobeida come to Cufa and incite they to revenge Husein of happy memory for which the governor imprison he Merwan die of the plague in the month Ramadan some say i i so mirkond that his wife poison he other that she lay a pillow on his face and sate thereon abdulmelic son of Merwan pray k k to pray for he be mean to pray public before the people which in the caliph temple none may do but himself except in such fatal necassity etc. abdulmelic 12. for he he be Chalifa ten month or 298. day abdulmelic be inaugurate the same day hold the Mushaf in his bosom the same sixty five year he enlarge the temple at jerusalem and man begin to go thither in pilgrimage and he forbid pilgrimage to Mecca because of Abdalla son of Zubeir he will have persuade the christian of Damascus to yield he the house next the cathedral church but they show the charter of Walid whereupon he offer they much money and liberty to build another like it where they will but they refuse and he leave they a. 66. arise muchtar son of Abuobeid at Cufa require the blood of Husein to who the citizen swear and besiege Obeidalla who obtain security of muchtar pretend that he will call to the empire Muhammed son of Hanifa of happy memory intend indeed to draw it to himself have before do much spoil on the citizen the same year the horseman of muchtar and Obeidalla have a cruel battle and obeidalla man run away Cufa rebel a chief city in Arabia since ruin then muchtar send to ainwerd seven thousand horse under Ibrahim against Obeidalla after who departure the people of Cufa mutine against muchtar and have well near slay he insomuch that he send back for Ibrahim who set upon they with his army and slay two hundred and fifty of they which have war upon Husein and persecute the rest with death and exile the same year Abdalla son of Zubeir cast Muhammed son of Hanifa with seventeen of his house into prison and threaten to put they to death except they swear to he in such a space Muhammed mean while send to muchtar who send he 150. horseman which enter Mecca cry revenge of Husein and come to the well Zemzem they break the prison and bring forth Muhammed and receive new supply from muchtar and terrify the son of Zubeir who Mohamed company be four thousand will have assault but he permit they not an. 67. muchtar send Ibrahim with seventy thousand against Obeidalla which slay 10300. of obeidalla man and take Singiar Nasibin and dara Masab son of Zubeir in his brother name governor of Basra go that year with a great army to Cufa against muchtar Basra now call Balsora and after a great battle put he to flight and destroy he and he in the month Ramadan Masab have thus obayn Irac invite Ibrahim to obedience which he perform he set Mahleb son of Abusafia over Mausil Mesopotamia Aderbigiana and Armenia an. 68 the azrakaean come out of Persia into Irac a charisaean the charisaeans nation enter Medaijn take Ahwaz and the country subject to it but Masab send Mahleb which slay many of they and after that Omar which fight with they at Naisabur and overthrow they and they go back to Isfahan and to Carmania whence with increase force they return but be force back by Omar have before slay the woman and child Hispaan now chief city of the persian 69. abdulmelic son of Merwan go from Damascus to make war upon Abdalla son of Zubeir and substitute Omar son of Saad at Damascus in his place which present rebel and fortify himself whereupon abdulmelic return and besiege Damascus Omar send to he and obtain security but when he come to he he slay he security not secure and quiet his partaker with distribution of money 71. Masab be slay by abdulmelic in battle and he enter Cufa and his empire be establish in Irac Syria and Egypt only Higiaz remain in the hand of Abdalla son of Zubeir who Hagiagi son of joseph soon after besiege and slay at Mecca which he also take after seven month siege and batter Caab the fortification of Abdalla with engine Mecca besiege and take and throw into it ball of pitch and fire to destroy the house when Abdalla fear the house or temple lest it shall fall he enter his own house his mother encourage he to go forth if he die he shall die a martyr he answer o mother I fear not death but dismember a sheep say she when she be kill feel not the flay he be say to have drink a pound of musk and then go forth to be slay and his head fasten on the gate and his crucify body smell of musk many day the same year abdulmelic make his brother Muhammed son of Merwan governor of Aderbigiana Mesopotamia and Armenia musk drunke who send a hundred thousand against the Harari which be all slay Muhammed much move go with forty thousand and overthrow the Harari and burn they in their temple he send also Muslima to the gate of gate a a I suppose he mean derbent of old caspiae portoe where he besiege eighty thousand Harari of who he slay many and the rest believe the azrakean do and suffer much harm and change anno. 74. hagiagi be make governor of Medina who go to Mecca and destroy all the fortification of Caab and 75. be set over Irac he come to Cufa and send help to Mahleb against the azrakean and chase they 76. salih son of margi and Siabib charisaeans conspire salih be call emperor of the faithful by his follower they spoil Mesopotamia and increase in power A.H. 76. it begin April 21. 695. and often overthrow the army of Hagiagi have but small force with a thousand he go to Cufa and overthrow Hagiagi which come against he with fifty thousand and have the spoil of his tent but in a sea fight sahib ship sink and he say when God dispose any thing it come to pass and rise again out of the water he say this be the power of the strong and wise God he be draw out with net and his head send to Hagiagi his heart they cut in sunder and find it hard and compact like a stone note hard stony heart Mahleb go against the azrakaean which withstand Catris their governor and slay many of they Catris flee to Tabristan who king be ashid a Magus that be of the old persian religion and obtain leave to enter his country which have obtain and settle his affair he send to Ashid demand that either he will embrace Islamisme or pay tribute which he refuse whereupon he make war on he and chase ashid to Raija who get help of the Muslims and Catris be slay Arabic letter first in coin the same year coin of gold and stater be stamp with Arabic letter for before the letter be roman and the stater also persian the inscription be God be the lord 81. Muhammed son of Hanifa of happy memory die but many of the vulgar believe that he still live in the mount radwa perhaps the tale of Mohamed return arise from this m. and not their first seducer of that name and will one day appear and fill the earth with justice as it be now fill with iniquity of this sect be d. Hamiraeus which after meet with a true man who instruct he of the vanity thereof 82. hagiagi have send Abdurrahman son of Muhammed against zentil king of turk with a small power secret animate the Turk against he purpose to destroy he which he reveal to his follower who thereupon depose Hagiagi and swear to he he compound with the Turk and return to war on Hagiagi he obtain aid of ahdulmelic out of Syria Basra and Cufa swear to Abdurrahman and his army be a 100000. Hiagi and he make 81. fight in 100 day 81. civil fight Abdurrahman flee and be take at Sahan which Zentil hear besiege Sahan and free he he assemble sixty thousand man against who go jezid and overcome they abdulmelic 86. make walid partner of the league and die after he have reign one and twenty year and fifteen day walid his son pray for he he be very covetous and call sweat-stone he dream that he have piss four time in the chief temple consult with say son of Musabbib he tell he that four of his child shall reign which come to pass in Walid Suleiman jezid and Hisiam his seal be inscribe I believe in God our saviour indian Christianity in his time Simon syrus be the jacobite patriarch of Alexandria to who the indian send to ordain they a bishop and priest which he refuse till the governor of Egypt command he and then the legate go to another which do it whence arise great stir after he be Alexander which endure hard time Abdulaziz brother of abdulmelic the governor of Egypt exact tribute of the monk tribute of monk of each a piece of Gold this be the first tribute exact of they after his time asama be more cruel kill and spoil the people and brand the monk with a iron ring in their hand which round mark they which want have their hand cut off of who be a number innumerable and whosoever travel without a pass shall pay ten piece of gold or be slay tyranny which be exact of a woman who pass be in her son hand tyrant reward walid 13. these country lie east from the caspian bactriana sogdiana and other country east-warst from Persia and the caspian so that from thence north-east and from India southeast his empire extend to the western ocean without interruption quite through Africa with Spain and part of France in Europe include Constantinople be also tributary the great empire that ever have be temple at Damascus costly and magnificent Spain conquer who as he drink of the river a crocodile carry away and she nevertheless be force to sell her clothes and beg that payment but asama be take and die by torment of his iron collar and wooden fetters in the way at the command of Omar the Chalif but the persecution of christian continue till the reign of Hisiam he write for their liberty in their rite and privilege jezid his predecessor have raze their cross and temple and commend they to Abdalla who he send governor but he when he come into Egypt exceedeed his predecessor double the tribute and cause their person and beast to be number and brand the christian with the figure of a lion cut off every man hand which be find without it Hisiam therefore depose he and send he into Africa where he do likewise whereupon the people rebel and slay his son who heart and innards they throw at the father head Walid be the thirteen Chalifa six of the house of ommia son of abdulmelic son of Merwan he be surname Abulabbas he be create Chalifa on the day of his father death in his time be achieve great victory his brother Muslimas invade the roman and take many captive catibas son of Muslimas oppugn the land of Baikend and Mauranahar besiege Bochara win Sogda fargan and Bagras and when the turk be assemble the muslim assault and take their chief city and get great wealth Catibas son of Muslima make peace with the king of Chovarazma and he build therein a cathedral temple and set a pulpit therein thence preach on the Friday and pray with the Muslims he burn also his idol they be fasten with nail of gold weigh fifty thousand dam their tribute impose be two thousand piece of gold yearly after this he go to samarcand and take it Muhammed son of Casim conquer India and the land of sin or Indus and slay the king Daehar the same year Walid command the temple of Damascus to be build and the church of the christian consecrate to saint John to be pull down he offer for the same forty thousand piece of gold which they refuse and therefore he destroy it and give they nothing twelve thousand mason be employ in that building but Walid die before it be finish four hundred chist each contain fourteen thousand piece of gold be bestow thereon in it be six hundred golden chain of lamp the brightness whereof hinder man from pray which after be colour with smoke and remain to the time of Omar son of Abdulaziz who put they in the treasury and hang iron chain in their steed Corrah son of Sieric be make governor of Egypt in the nineti year a man manifest impious which enter the cathedral temple of Mithra with ruffian and gamester and with they sit in the chancel in time of prayer 93. taric conquer Spain and Toledo and bring to walid the table o o rich table rodericus Toletanus say that Muza which send Taric first come and get much riches among which a table of stone green very great contain 365. foot all of one stone together with the foot etc. of Solomon son of David make of gold and silver have three border or row of pearl 94. a great earthquake last forty day at Antiochia and ruin the city the same year die Zainulabidin son of Husein son of Ali son of Abutalib which be religious and devout and perform a task of a thousand kneel every day for which cause he be call the prayer he leave child Zeid and Muhammed Abugiafar of happy memory 95. die hagiagi p p mirkond call he oiasgegove of Korason zac. Hagog son of joseph be sick he send for a ginger which foreshow by the star the death of a king he cut off his head and say he shall die one hour before he which be say to have slay 120000. man beside those which he slay in war and fifty thousand die in his prison beside thirty thousand woman eighty thousand he slay when he be full but his dominion pass as if it have not be and happy be he which do good the same year Walid cast out of Damascus Ali son of Abdalla son of abbas q q this family soon after get the chalifate Suleiman 14. and command he to reside at Homaim where he get above twenty son 93. die Corrah son of Sieric governor of Egypt which build at Misra the old temple Walid also die have reign nine year and eight month he marry and put away many wife he be say to have have sixty three and spend much on woman and building he build the temple of the prophet and the mansion adjoin and Omar the governor of Medina be set over it he first build a hospital for sick and stranger his seal o Walid thou shall die and give a account A.M. 6206. and seventy nine day past Suleiman his brother be make Chalif the same day catibas governor of Chorasan invite the chorasan to depose he which refuse and slay he Suleiman place jezid son of Mahleb which obtain many victory take Taberistan and Giorgian slay and spoil innumerable infidel and impose tribute on the rest Suleiman send his brother Muslima against the roman which lie before Constantinople a seed time and harvest asamas writ that the measure of Nilus at Hulwan be fall whereupon he command that measure to be build in the island betwixt the river of Fustata and Gijza 97. which still remain 98. Muslima conquer the city Sacaliba and make himself governor of it Suleiman build Ramla and make job his son partner of the league and he die Omar son of Abdulaziz Suleiman die 99 and Omar pray for he he be tall lean slender halt many-wived and a glutton every day eat about a hundred pound he be poison by procurement of jezid great glutton and find himself like to die he tell Muhammed son of Ali son of Abdalla son of abbas that the empire will come to Abdalla that be Saffah his son and give he the write of vocation and teach he what course to take Omar son of Abdulaziz son of Merwan obtain the chalifate the same day he take away the malediction of Ali of happy memory for the king of the house of ommia from muavi hitherto be wont to curse he in their pulpit Omar 15. Chalif the 8. of the ommians Ali curse daily in the end of all their prayer muavi have foretell it shall be so swear by God it shall not be omit till a little one prove hoary and when it shall be abolish neglect of the law shall be admit Omar abolish that curse read the verse which begin God command justice and beneficence and man go out of the temple say the law be neglect he be Chalif two year five month and four day he be just devout religious prefer his religion before worldly thing he have a room lock wherein they hope to find money caliph devotion but find nothing but a garment which he use to put on and a line to bear he up in his prayer suit be make in his time for the temple in Damascus by the christian but because their city be partly take by the sword partly by composition the church of saint John be leave to the Muslims the rest to the christian whereof Omar give they a charter together with all the monastery and the temple without the city in Gouta on the hill and the rest to enjoy and use they without molestation of the Muslims jezid son of abdulmelic be create chalife on the day of Omars death jezid son of Mahleb rebel and go to Cufa with many follower but be slay in battle by the adverse army and his head send to the Chalif muavi his son succeed in quarrel jezid 16. rebellion go to Basora and by sea to Cundabil into sindia but Cundabil forbid he to land and Muslima send a armada armada by sea under Halal which overthrow they Omar son of Habir send and invade the turk take Multahar and pursue their king from town to town to Ardebil in the country of aderbigian where be fight a great battle and Gierrah the commander with many Muslims be slay jezid die 105. have reign four year and one month he spend much on wife play and spectacle he have two woman Habab and Selam who he much affect Habab die and he keep she till she stink and when she be bury take she up again and not long after die Love odious hisiam son of abdulmelic be make caliph the same day hisiam 17. the five and twenty of Siaban 113. Muslima take town of the turk many captive and rich spoil muavi and his brother Suleiman son of Hisiam go one on the right hand the other on the left and Constantine the roman emperor meet they with a army which be put to flight by the Muslims and Constantine take 117. Ali the grandfather of the abasian chalif die leave two and twenty child 121. Zeid son of Husein son of Ali son of Abutalib A.H. 121. begin dec. 18. 738. rebellion seek to make himself emperor and the citizen of Cufa swear to he but Omar son of joseph resist slay crucify and burn he Muslima invade the roman and take cataman Merwan take and waste serirdehe and force the prince to tribute 122. die Muslima son of abdulmelic a wise and valiant prince beyond any of the child of ommia 125. Hisiam die have reign nineteen year seven month and eleven day he will rule and observe the thing which pass his hand but be covetous envious and spoil his subject to needless expense he have curtain vest and wardrobe which none have before he his vest be say to be six hundred camel load first and great wardrobe he leave a thousand pair of breeches and ten thousand shirt he have seven hundred vestry but when he die walid son of jezid have not to wrap he in for all his wardrobe be seal up and none permit to enter so that a servant of his be fame to shroud he in example worthy wise man observation 6234. and 162. day 120. abnachaijl in the year of Dioclesian 460. be make patriarch of Alexandria and continue three and twenty year in his time Merwan the chalife set abdulmelic son of Moses a jew turn to Islamism over Egypt who demand money of the patriarch and after imprisonment permit he to beg with his bishop through the province they return into Egypt the one and twenty of the month on which night be so great a earthquake that many city bury their inhabitant in the ruin and many ship be drown in the sea it go through all the east terrible earthquake and in one night ruin six hundred city and kill innumerable man and beast when the king of Nubia name Ciriacus understand what have happen to the patriarch he go towards Egypt with a 100000. black horseman on black horse and before he be enter abdulmelic the governor send to the patriarch to write to the king of Nubia note the greatness of the king of Nubia in those day note of the different patriarch at Alexandria which he do signify that the christian be now in good case and so he return without battle cosmas be alexandrian patriarch of the orthodox Christian which pray in the church of saint Saba all other church be under the jacobite till upon complaint and gift to Hisiam they get the temple of the gospel thus say say son of Batric in his history and also that the orthodox have be without a patriarch ninety seven year from the time of Omar the conqueror till this Cosma which be a unlearned man not able to write or read a needle-man the jacobite mean while possess all the see in Egypt and Nubia Wa'id 18. walid son of jezid son of abdulmelic be create caliph the same day his uncle Hisiam die and be slay 126. for his manifest infidelity and impiety his two son be imprison and after slain he reign one year two month and two and twenty day he be a excellent poet but apply all his thought to wantonness he make he a iron tomb which in his pilgrimage he determine to set up in Caab he take with he to Mecca hound in cage and wine he deflower a woman of he in his drunkenness and promise that she shall pray in the presence of man which she do with her face cover he fill a pond with wine and water and send for Maabad the singer woman not permit to pray with man to sing while he bathe and drink therein after walid death the region be embroil the chawasirians multiply and the kingdom of the child of ommia weaken by reason thereof jezid 19 jezid son of Walid son of abdulmelic son of Merwan be the twelve Chalifa of that house Emessa rebel upon the death of Walid and put to flight jezid army Suleiman son of Hisiam spoil Naama and go to Damascus the people of palaestina slay their governor rebellion Merwan son of Muhammed rebel pretend the revenge of Walid and jezid give he the government of Mesopotamia Armenia Mausil and Aderbigiana on condition to swear to he which he do at Harran jezid die that year of the plague have reign five month his brother Ibrahim pray for he he diminish the soldier stipend be prone to the sect Cadritica be after dig out of his grave and crucify by Merwan Ibrahim 20. Ibrahim son of walid his brother be the same day make Chalifa 126. but 127. Merwan seek to get the empire pretend the revenge of walid death and overthrow Suleiman which come against he with a hundred and twenty thousand and cause man to swear to walid child then remain in prison whereupon Suleiman cause they at his return to Damascus to be kill their name be Hakem and Otsman upon pretence that Hakem have say that Merwan shall succeed if he and his brother be slay Merwan 21. and 14. of the house of ommia Merwan be make Chalif and Ibrahim after sixty nine day reign depose which live till 132. and then be slay he be call himar-ulgidzira the ass of Mesopotamia because he can not flee in the time of battle 127. the emissen rebel but be overthrow and their wall raze and 600. of their citizen crucify Damascus depose his governor also and those of Basra create Suleiman Chalifa but Merwan overthrow he in battle and slay 30000. of his man at Cufa Abdalla seek the chalifate but be chase thence to the mountain Merwan be slay as shall after appear he be a glutton and when a sheep come to his hand he can not forbear but will thrust his hand and sleeve into the sheep belly Merwan gluttony and take out the kidney to eat they and then to change his garment of such garment grease with the fat of the kidney he be say to have leave above 10000 he be politic valiant magnanimous and prudent but fortune be cross great spirit and wisdom prevail not as it be say fortune approach come fasten with ten setter but go back she go no chain can hold she lib. 2. the first prince of the child of abbas be Muhammed son of Ali son of Abdalla son of abbess in the 100 year he die a. 125. and leave twelve son the call happen to he in Chorasan and succeed son Ibrahim he send Abumuslim surname Abdurrahman into Corasan and write to those which follow his sect to obey he he deliver the letter to Suleiman and present publish the vocation of the Hasiemides and tie a banner on a staff or spear nine cubit long send from Ibrahim which they call Tallum and he and all of that sect put on black garment on the day of the great feast and Abumuslim pray the prayer of the feast before prayer time without convocation or raise up contrary to the course of the child of ommia thus Abumuslim increase and Nasr governor of Chorasan under Merwan decrease he see these beginning write to Walid son of jezid I see amongst embers spark of coal woe to thou if they burn wood make fire flame word do the same to war they after turn sleep or wake Ommias speak I no my maze verse do mourn but find no help Nasr flee and Abumuslim spoil his army and set Cahtabas over the army who fight many battle with Nasr and slay and take thirty thousand of his man Nasr die 131. Merwan take Ibrahim and slay he who have before command his brother Saffah Abulabbas to go to Cufa and write to his follower that he shall be Chalifa after he 132. Cahtabas overthrow jezid governor of Irac under Merwan and pass over Euphrates very early the river be increase he be drown and humid his son command the army the same year at Cufa Muhammed son of Ali the Carsican call the hasiemite to the empire the man of Cufa swear to done son of halab which be also call Muhammed the counsellor of Religion the same year Saffah and Abugiafar Almansor come to Cufa and have lodging assign they by Abumuslimas the counsellor which conceal the fame forty day mind to transfer the empire to the house of Abutalib Abdalla saffah Abulabbas son of Muhammed son of Ali son of Abdalla Abdalla 22. son of abbas son of Abdulmutalib son of hasiem be the three and twenty Chalifa and first of the child of abbas one salute he Chalifa and the people swear to he which Abumuslimas see salute he also which Hamid say be do against his will be inaugurate he ascend the pulpit in black garment and make a speech to the people he send his uncle Abdalla against Merwan which put he to flight innumerable number of his soldier be slay and drown Abdalla pursue he from place to place and pitch his tent in jordan he assemble many of the child of ommia pretend to take their oath of Fealty and when above eighty of they be together he set a soldier by each of they with a club in his hand and at a token give they be all kill o cruelty then do he cause they to be draw and lay in order and spread a carpet over they sit thereon with his follower and call for victual and do eat hear their groan till they be quite dead Abdalla say for the day of Husein and for nothing else Damascus be force walid the governor kill and the city put to the spoil three day Merwan flee into Egypt and be there take and kill by Salih which send to Saffah his head who thereupon fall down in adoration and give ten thousand piece of gold to the poor say praise to God which have deliver to we the ass of Mesopotamia this be do after one hundred and thirty one year and threescore and thirteen day of the Hegira 6241. of the year of the sun and sixty three day Abumuslim the author of the vocation with other lay wait for Abumuslimas son of Halal the counsellor and slay he by command of saffah because he seek to raise the the abulatabite saffah promise security also to jezid son of Omar but after send one to slay he for seek to prefer to the empire Abdalla son of Hasen son of Husein son of Ali son of Abutalib saffah now establish set Abugiafar Almansor over Aderbigiana Armenia and Mesopotamia jabiae his brother over Mausil his uncle David over Higiaza and Aliaman his uncle isa over Cufa sofian over Basra Muhammed over Persia Mansor over India and sinde abumuslim over Chorasan Abdalla his uncle over Syria and his uncle Salih over Egypt who rule it by his lieutenant Abaun Abdalla return from Ramla to Damascus dig up the child of ommia and burn they and to the corpse of Hasiam at Rusaf he give a hundred and twenty blow till his flesh be disperse which then be gather together and burn a. 136. saffah die after he have reign four year and nine month his brother son isa pray for he he give to Abdalla son of Hasen son of Husein two million of stater the first of the chalifa that have give so great a sum he be the first also which take a counsellor for the child of ommia have none but scribe when Merwan flee into Egypt in the year of Dioclesian * * the egyptian reckon from this year because of the multitude of martyr then slay and call it the year of the martyr Abugiafar 23. 467. the christian suffer much adversity he burn Misra with the corn and provision therein and go over with his into a nunnery where eye a beautiful damsel he take she to his tent to deflower she she to save her virginity tell he of a precious ointment which she have which will make the anoint part sword-free but how say he shall I know that she offer the trial on herself and so he cut off her head rather embrace death then pollution Abugiafar Almansor son of Muhammed brother of saffah succeed and be make Chalifa in the pilgrimage to Mecca over which his brother have set he in a place call Sifia that be famous and our empire say he by God grace shall be famous he take the oath and finish his pilgrimage 137. Abdalla seek the empire in Syria and Almansor send against he Abumuslim the author of the vocation and after many battle abumuslim prevail and Abdalla flee into Irac he to Basra his brother to Cufa after that under pretence of friendship he send for Abumuslim and cast he into Tigris the number of those which be slay in battle and out of battle in time of abumuslim prosperity be six hundred thousand huge slaughter he profess the sect of the succession descendent and determine the principality after Ali to descend to Hasen his son then to Husein then to Muhammed son of Hanisia from he to abuhasiem his son then to Muhammed son of Ali son of Abdalla son of abbas from he to Ibrahim Saffah and this Almansor an. 139. muavi son of Hisiam muavi of the merwanian or Ommian race emp in spaine^ son of abdulmelic son of Merwan enter Spain and be the first make emperor in those part the same year Almansor command the temple of Mecca to be enlarge an. 144. Almansor take Abdalla son of Hasen son of Husein son of Ali and other of hasen child and Muhammed son of Omar and imprison they because he have hear that Muhammed and Ibrahim son of Abdalla seek to get the empire these two hide themselves but the other Muhammed be whip and die in prison an. 145. Almansor command to build the city bagdad and lay the foundation at the time design by astrologer with unanimous consent it be report to have be a green meadow bagdad build mirkond say it have that name of baga a persian word which signify garden because of many garden in that place before the building scaliger conceit that it be seleucia be by both exclude in which be the cottage of a eremite who name be bagdad and thereof take the name but Almansor call it medinato-ssalami that be the city of peace when it be finish it be make the seat of the abbasian caliph the same year Muhammed son of Abdalla son of Hasen go to Medina and be there create Chalifa he take to name Mahad and have a laundr thousand follower but Almansor send against he his partner of the league isa which slay he and send his head to Almansor Ibrahim his Brother appear at Basra and enjoy that city and Persia and Ahwaz but run like course and be slay by isa an. 147. Abdalla who Abumuslim have put to flight come forth upon almansor oath not to trouble he and he command to build he a house and to lay much salt in the foundation and when he dwell in it let in water which ruin the house upon he an. 158. Almansor die at Birmaimon l l or pit which Maimon dig in that desert rapacity in his way to Mecca on pilgrimage and Ibrahim son of jahia pray for he or in his steed he be bury at Mecca he reign two and twenty year he change the hoary colour of his hair with two thousand dam of musk every month he be wise and of pleasant conversation suspicious and cruel and sordid covetous he leave in his treasury six hundred million of stater and twenty four million of Gold mu. Mahadi 24 Muhammed Mahadi son of Almansor be the three Chalifa of the abasians create at Mecca himself be then at bagdad joseph son of Ibrahim rise against he in Chorasan but be take by jezid and by Mahadi crucify at bagdad an. 163. he send his son Haron against the roman and make jahia his counsellor he send he again the next year he overthrow the roman and go to the sea near Constantinople where a woman m m Irene soz. then govern which make peace with Haron condition to pay seventy thousand piece of gold yearly beside present and preparation of the way the Muslims in this war get innumerable spoil when Haron return his father make he partner of the league have depose isa from that dignity an. 169. Mahadi die in Maseidan a village and when they have no other hearse they carry he on a door and bury he under a nut tree where he have sit he reign ten year two month Haron his son pray for he he be liberal and abstain from shed of blood restore much money which his father have take free prisoner build the cloister at Mecca and enlarge the temple bounty to poet Merwan a poet offer he a poem contain seventy distich for which he command to give he seventy thousand stater his seal be inscribe God be my sufficience m. Alhadi 25. musa Alhadi then in the war of Giorgian with the tabristan be inaugurate he die an. 170. be strangle by his mother sit on a pillow lay on his face he reign a year and fifty two day Haron 26. Abugiafar Haron rasijd be the five of the abasian caliph create on the day of his brother death on which also Almamon his son afterward Chalifa be bear he make jahia his counsellor call he his father and say to he I put my business from my neck on thou an. 172. Abdurrahman son of Muavi son of Hisiam king of Spain die have reign thirty two year and his son Hisiam succeed he in the chalifate of those part an. 176. jahia son of Abdalla son of Hasen son of Husein son of Ali arrogate the empire but the matter be compose by Haron and gift with security give yet he be after that cast in prison an. 178. haron send Haziman governor of Egypt into Africa and set abdulmelic over Egypt who appoint in his place over prayer l l the caliph where they reside pray in their own person and in other province their lieutenant their hypocrisy condemn other profaneness which think Ieroboam Priest the base of the people good enough for prayer and themselves too good to be present a thing perform five time a day by the great Muhammedans Victory against the christian and tribute Abdalla an. 179. haron go to Mecca and to Medina and return thence on his foot an. 180. hisiam king of Spain die and his son Hakem succeed an. 181. haron invade the roman and get much spoil an. 183. the Harari from the gate of gate issue and do much hurt to the Muslims musa die that year of the race of Ali as be report murder by one who Haron have suborn he leave eighteen son and three and twenty daughter an. 186. Haron and his son go on pilgrimage to Mecca and give much alm there and to Medina he distribute his empire to his three son Muhammed Alamin Abdalla Almamon and Casim mutamam he appoint Alamin his successor and give he Irac and Syria appoint Abdalla to succeed he and give he all from Hamadan to the utmost east to Casim Mesopotamia tsugour and Awasim an. 187. Giafor son of jahia be slay and his father cast into prison where he die have this scroll in his bosom the defendant go before be call into the law the plaintiff follow and the judge shall need no witness which when Haron punic he weep and swear it be true the same year he go as far as heraclea spoil and fire all thing and Nicephorus the emperor offer he yearly tribute which he accept but upon occasion of the cold and snow he perform not covenant whereupon he return notwithstanding and force performance an. 188. he again invade the roman and in a great battle with Nicephorus the muslim prevail and slay forty thousand and Nicephorus receive three wound an. 190. he invade the roman with a hundred thirty five thousand beside voluntary and take and burn heraclea Sacaliba Risia and Saffaf with colonia he carry away sixteen thousand captive of heraclea Nicephorus buy his p ace with tribute he send by sea also and waste Cyprus and carry away many captive he die an. 193. when he have reign three and twenty year one month and nineteen day he be exceed delight with good verse and be bountiful to poet he make eight or nine pilgrimage in his Chaliphate and pray a hundred kneel or prostration every day a hundred learned man accompany he in his pilgrimage his pilgrimage and when he go not himself he set forth three hundred man on pilgrimage with sufficient expense and clean garment nor be the court of any Chalifa so furnish with counsellor judge poet and learned man learned man his seal be inscribe greatness and power be god he give his physician a Christian a hundred thousand stater a year stipend for save his life by blood-letting the same pay which his keeper have say one keep my body the other my soul a. 193. abuna mark be make patriarch which receive those of the sect of Sienufa two of their bishop desire admission and upon their humility he entertain they in his house till two bishop die in who place he set they Abu-Abdalla Alamin call also Muhammed Abu-Musa son of Haron Rasijd be the next and six Abasian Chalif create on the day of his father death Abu Abdalla alaminus 27. but rasijd have renew the league to his son Almamon after Alamin who behave himself so well whiles Alamin give himself to play and drink that the chief man favour he yet Alamin burn the covenant of his father and assume his own son Musa partner of the league Almamon hereupon forbid his brother name to be stamp in money or cloth and all Chorasan yield to he and he name himself a prince and pray in the pulpit of Chorasan an. 195. a great battle be fight and the follower of Almamon prevail z. reckon excellent physician in his time Gabriel Surianus John son of masawia and Sela a indian Almamon 28. z. Mammon m. Mahamun he be studious of learned man and cause the book s of philosophy mathematics astrology and physic to be translate out of greek and Syriac into Arabic whereupon he be salute Chalifa an. 196. Alamin be depose and imprison with his mother zebeida but soon after by popular commotion restore but Taher the general of almamon force take Ahwaz wasijt Madaijn and cause man to swear to Almamon Egypt Syria Higiaza and Aliaman call he to the empire an. 197. bagdad be besiege and most of the house ruin a. 198. Alamin be forsake by most of his soldier and as he flee his boat be overturn and the man with he drown but he escape swim into a certain garden and be there slay by taher servant the ring of the chalifate the roll and the sceptre be send to Almamon which fall down and give God great thanks for the victory and give a million of stater to the messenger Alamin reign four year eight month and eighteen day he be liberal bloody inconsiderate cowardly he neither leave his angle nor chess-play upon the heavy tiding or occasion and be a drinker of wine Abulabbas Almamon call also Abugiafar Abdalla be the seven Abasian Chalif inaugurate an. 198. an. 199. the talibite make commotion in diverse place and at Cufa arise Muhammed son of Ibrahim son of Ishmael son of Ibrahim son of Hasen son of Husein son of Ali son of Abutalib invite the people to respect the stock of Muhammed and to observe the book and the law Abusaraia war in his name and the chawarisians come forth many battle follow but Abusaraia prevail which go to Basra and take it but in the year * * A.H. 200. it begin aug. 11. ad 815. 200. be slay and Muhammed be dead and another Muhammed of the pogeny of Ali inaugurate in his place which be take and send to Almamon at Mecca also Muhammed son of Giafar and in Aliaman Ibrahim make insurrection which succeed not an. 201. Almamon assume Ali son of Musa son of Giafar son of Muhammed son of Husein son of Ali into partnership of the league and to the succession of the chalifate and call he Arrad of Mohamed stock and command the soldier to wear green and cast away their black and write to Hasen to procure his inauguration at bagdad but they refuse to transfer the succession from the abasian stock to that of Ali and thereupon the Hasiemides and captain determine to depose Almamon and to make his uncle Ibrahim Chalifa this they do an. 202. and name he mubaric who ascend the pulpit make a speech to the people and promise they bounty he enjoy bagdad and Cafa with their village Almamon hear of these commotion in Irac go towards bagdad and consider that Fadlus his sway all thing occasion this distaste he cause he to be close slay in a bath and then kill the murderer surname first feign that he have no hand in it this Fadlus first add surname in letter for before the inscription of epistle be only from n. son of n. to n. son of n. an. 203. Almamon come to tus p p of this city tus be the translater of Euclides element late print in Arabic at Rome where Ali son of Musa after the eat of a grape sudden die poison as be suspect yet Almamon seem to take his death heavy this Ali be very abstinent and religious at bagdad the soldier rebel against Ibrahim who hide himself an. 204. Almamon come to bagdad clothe in green as also his soldier but after a week he wear black q q z say he forbid the posterity of Ali to wear black but only yellow poetry rich reward and command the people so to do an. 206. Hakem son of Hisiam son of Abdurrahman king of Spain die and his son Abdurrahman succeed he have reign six and twenty year an. 207. Taher die a wise valiant and liberal commander and a good poet. for three verse make to adorn he he give three hundred thousand piece of gold and more say he will I have give if thou have give more an. 210. Almamon get his uncle Ibrahim into his hand who come to he be say my sin be great but thou than it art great my deed be bad let thou be see far better Almamon answer other have counsel i to kill thou o emperor of the faithful say he counsellor counsel that which be usual in government but thou beg help of he who give all of mercy if thou punish thou shall have example but if thou spare thou shall be good beyond example alis correction of the Alcoran 1500000. give he give he ten thousand piece of gold and dismiss he in peace an. 212. Almamon publish the speech according to the form of the Alcoran and the correct of Ali son of Abutalib which have better the form after the messenger of God an. 213. he give to abbas Mutasim and Abdalla five hundred thousand piece of gold to each in one day an. 215. and 216. he invade the roman an. 217. one of the child of ommia write to he that Merwan have treasure hide in Hebron where some chist be find and among other thing ten thousand shirt with foul sleeve the reason whereof be ask Asmagaeus say that he be a glutton and when a roast sheep be set before he see before in Merwan it seem they roast then sheep whole and not cut out in joint he use to thrust in his hand sleeve and all for the kidney as before be say and then to have put on another garment Almamon give to Asmagaeus those shirt which he sell for so many piece of Gold an. 218. Almamon try the people in the form of the Alcoran grievous punish those which will not utter it he die have reign twenty year five month and thirteen day none of the abbasians be more learned he be skilful in astronomy and the wind and one wind bear name of he his seal be inscribe ask of God and he will give thou Mustasim 29. z. Mutetzma 2 great lover of physician m. matacon he build Samarra three mile from Tigris n. from bagdad Muhammed Mutasim Billa Abuishac his brother be create Chalifa on the day of his brother death an. 218. the horrimaeans a vile and heretical nation make insurrection lead by Babec but Mutasim send a army against they which kill sixty thousand of they and the rest flee to the roman dominion an. 219. Muhammed son of Casim son of Omar son of Ali son of Husein son of Ali have many follower make many battle but at last be take an. 220. the child of Babec lose above a hundred thousand in battle in Arsaw and Babec flee to Badwa which city Asfin besiege and take and give security to Babec but kill he notwithstanding an. 223. Ammoria be take and great spoil make in the roman region an. 224. Barabas son of Caran make insurrection and after many battle be take by Abdalla son of Taher who send he to Mutasim which beat he to death and then crucify he beside Babec an. 226. Asfin be add to they for in his house be find idol and wicked book idol hate neither have he alter his paganism an. 227. Mutasim die at Samarra mutasim strength he be strong able to carry certain pace a thousand pound weight bagdad be not able to contain his soldier and therefore he build Samarra and place his soldier there and Samarra remain the seat of the caliph till mutadid reign which remove to bagdad as the after caliph also do Mutisim be unlettered and can not write he be call Octavian for that the number of eight agree to he eleven way he be the eight Chalifa of the Abbasian create an. 218. reign eight year eight month and eight day age forty eight year bear also in the eight month of the year his father eight son leave eight son and eight daughter fight eight battle and leave eight million of gold in his treasury and eighty thousand stater he die in the year of the sun 6333. and a hundred and thirty day complete an. 223. and of Dioclesian 547. abuna joseph be make patriarch of Alexandria in his time jacob a bishop in Aethiopia when the king be abroad in war be displace by the queen and another substitute in his place but drought and pestilence follow and the king send to the patriarch to send back the bishop which he do b. of the ethiopian under the negro wacic 30. z. Elwathek m. a great famine in Persia by three year drought which almost people it they return after rain and war on the magi kill of those fire worshipper very many Mutewakkel 31. z. Metuchal m. Almotowakel ceremony of inauguration and he be receive with great joy he send also bishop into Africa to Pentapolis and Cairawan Haron wacic Billa Abugiafar be the nine of the abasians and 30. king of the Muslims create on the day of his father death at Samarra an. 227. and an. 228. he remove his judge and scribe and take of they much money a. 230. Abdalla son of Taher decease a honourable and valiant man which have be governor of Chorasan Egypt and Syria to who be great resort of learned man and poet to who he be very bountiful wacic seek to increase his ability for lust be advise to eat lion flesh boil in red vinegar and to take three dam thereof but he die soon after he have use it stretch his sick body on a carpet he say o thou who kingdom pass not have mercy on he who kingdom pass away he love and reward poesy he propound to man the form of the Alcoran as Almamon have do and alienate man mind from he he reign five year nine month and six day Giafar Abufadl Mutewakkel Aballa Wacics brother succeed an. 231. they first put on the chalifate robe on Muhammed son of wacic but then contemn his childhood the judge Ahmed send for Giafar son of Mutasim and clothe he with a long garment and kiss he betwixt both his eye salute he emperor of the faithful and surname he Mutewakkel he imprison Muhammed his counsellor and appoint one to keep he wake and after some day watch permit he to sleep which he do a day and a night and then put he into a hot iron oven have nail within and there torture he to death he be a grammarian and poet but proud shameless covetous and merciless be accustom to say that i i out of thy own mouth will I condemn thou A.H. 235. which begin july 26. 849. mercy be a certain imbecility in nature and that liberality be foolishness an. 235. Mutewakkel appoint his son Mustansir Billa his successor after he mutaz Billa after that muaijad Billa give to each two banner one black which be the banner of the league or covenant the otherwhite of their place of government assign to Mustansir Africa and all the west from Egypt also Kinnasrin Awasim Syria Mesopotamia Diarbecr Diarebia Mausil Habeb aiat Chabur Karkisia Tecrit the region of Tigris Mecca and Medina Aliaman hadramat jamam Bahrain sindia and adjoin thereto Ahwaz Sacalas Samarra Cufa Maseidan Hazran Siahruzar comma Casan and Giebel to mutaz he assign Chorasan Tabristan Raija Persia Armenia and aderbigian the mint also and his name to be stamp in all come to muaij^d he assign the province of Damascus Emessa jardan and palaestina a. 238. Abdurrahman king of Spain die and his son Muhammed succeed in the year 241. and 242. the roman invade and carry away Muslims captive great earthquake this year be terrible earthquake which oppress forty five thousand man most of they in damijs in Persia also Chorasan and Syria earthquake and unusual sound happen and in Aliaman with great destruction an. 245. also be terrible earthquake and the spring of Mecca fail so that a bottle of water be sell for a hundred stater many be oppress with a earthquake at Antiochia and fifteen hundred house and ninety tower of the wall fall thereby the people run into the field and Acraus the hill there fall into the sea a black and unsavoury smoke ascend thence the river also vanish for a farsang an. 246. Omar invade the roman and carry thence seventy thousand captive other also in other place Mutewakkell have pray and preach before the people the last Friday in Ramadan at his return reprove his son Mustansir and threan he and his mother who thereupon set his servant to kill he a principal cause hereof be Mutewakkels hatred to Ali son of Abutalib which Mustansir can not bear he reign fourteen year ten month and three day he take away the temptation k k the form of the Alcoran before enjoin by his predecessor from man and the world be order Mustansir 32. z. Mutuatzar m. Montacer Muhammed Abugiafar Mustansir Billa be private inaugurate the same day of his father death and public the day after he continue six month a persian carpet with the image of a king be haply bring before he he will needs force one to read the letter therein wrought which be I syroe son of Cosroes slay my father and reign but six month some say he be poison a fearful dream also of his father threaten he with short reign and fire after it terrify he he have make his two brethren resign their partnership of the covenant mustain 33. Ahmed Ahulabbas mustain Billa son of Muhammed son of Mutasim be enthronize in his place and imprison Mutaz and muaijad an. 249. the turk kill Utamaz which rule all under mustain an. 250. jahia son of Omar of the posterity of Ali arise at Cufa but be slay in battle they which have slay Mutewakkell slay also jaaz whereupon mustain flee to bagdad and the people create Mutaz Chalifa mutaz send his brother Ahmed to besiege mustain at bagdad who general Abdalla make his peace with Ahmed the same year Hasen of the posterity of Ali possess himself of Tabristan and another Hasen the talibite of Ali his posterity arise in the region of Dailam and besiege Mecca but both be put to flight and this last die an. 252. mustain resign the chalifate and be commit to custody where by Mutaz his procurement he be slay he reign two year and nine month Mutaz 34. Muhammed Abu-Abdalla Mutaz Billa be the thirteen Abasian Chalif he depose his brother muaijad from the partnership of the covenant and imprison he and perceive that the turk will have he set at liberty he cause he to be strangle in clothes that the judge can perceive no sign of violent death in he an. 253. the turk kill Wasif for their stipend the keeper of the port who son Salih procure the deposition of Mutaz and starve he to death have reign four year six month and three and twenty day he be a man give to his pleasure and negligent of government a. 254. Ahmed g g zacuth suppose that the chalifate be by he divide and another set up in Egypt which be not true as anon shall appear Muhtadi 35. son of Tulan be make governor of Egypt Muhammed Abu-Abdalla Muhtadi Billa son of watic son of Mutasim succeed an. 255. he forbid the use of wine and reject singer and jester exile soothsayer refuse the lion and hunt dog in the imperial tower and take away tribute he also take on he to be present at judgement and account and sit every Monday and Thursday to attend the people have a book before he Habib rebel at Basra say false that he be Ali son of Muhammed of the posterity of ali. he gather together the rihi the rihi mutamid 36. habib harm mirkond say that Yacub leis a tinker a prodigal and robber by highway to who renown for liberality unthrift resort first get sistom than invade Karason etc. still give the spoil to his follower take Persia go towards bagdad to see he say the Chalifa which will have confirm all he have to he if he will have stay he die in his way of the colic have rule Persia eleven year his brother Hamer succeed he confirm by the Chalif this Hamer seem Habib here mention if mirkond do at all mention he which live like lion he be a ginger of bad religion he continue to the year 270. musa kill Salih the killer of his master an. 256. Muhtadi Billa be slay that year by the mutinous turk have reign eleven month and some day Ahmed Abulabbas mutamid Alalla son of Mutewakkel be create the same day at Samarra an. 256. the rihi take four and twenty ship of the sea and slay all that be in they and Habib with eighty thousand man do much spoil he get the victory in diverse fight against mutamid army he take Basra and slay twenty thousand inhabitant at his entrance he prevail also a. 258. and slay muflish neither can muaffic Billa who mutamid have make governor of the east and partner of the league prevail against he he make the people believe that he know all secret and can do thing miraculous an. 259. jacob son of allit rebel at Nisabur and possess himself of Tabristan habib soldier slay fifty thousand at Ahwaz and throw down the wall he and jacob make great stir and overthrow mutamid captain jacob put to flight Muhammed son of Wasil and take his castle in which be forty million of stater he take wasit mutamid with his partner go against he and put he to flight but habid prevail in diverse battle he continue spoil and victorious till 267. at which time muaffic Billa send his son mutadid who chase he take his city Mabia which he have build ruin the wall and fill up the ditch and free out of his prison five thousand Muslim woman muaffic pursue they to the city which they have build with five wall and as many ditch and drive they out of it and get rich spoil Habib have fortify Mahbar and have three hundred thousand soldier with he there muaffic see it can not in short time be take build another city muaffikia over against it he build also a temple there stamp coin invite merchant and by degree prevail an. 268. Lulu rebel against Ahmed the governor of Egypt and get muaffic favour whereby Ahmed be curse in all pulpit for muaffic rule all and mutamid enjoy only the title his name on coin and to pray in pulpit an. 270. Habib be take and execute his head carry about for show muaffic be surname Nasir Lidinilla that be the helper of God religion p p as our defender of the faith in their superstitious conceit for kill Habib the same year Ahmed q q this Ahmed will not acknowledge mutamid and rule Egypt as sovereign therefore curse as seek to raise another Chalifa in bagdad not any at all in Egypt which long after be do but now begin to be hereditary as Persia also by mirkond testimony to the family of Leys die when death approach he lift up his hand say o lord have mercy on he which know not his own quantity and show thyself merciful to he when he die he leave three and thirty son he be a man of much justice and alm and give every month 300000. piece of gold in alm a thousand piece of gold daily be design to his kitchen and to ecclesiastic person every month he give as much and while he govern Egypt two million and two hundred thousand piece of gold be carry to bagdad to be give to the poor and to learned and good man he leave in his treasury ten million of Gold he have seven thousand slave and as many horse eight thousand mule and camel three hundred horse for war all his own proper good the rent of Egypt in his time be three hundred million of piece of Gold he be say to have execute with add those which die in prison eighteen thousand his son hamaruias succeed in all which he have in Egypt and Syria an. 273. Muhammed son of Abdurrahman king of Spain die his son Mundir succeed an. 278. muaffic Billa die and his son mutadid succeed in the government be vest by his uncle mutamid and make partner of the covenant depose his own son Giafar that year begin the caramite a kind of batin heretic one of the tract of sawad feign fast and austerity of life say that God have enjoin he fifty pray every day he say he will call a prince and take of every man a piece of gold say it be for the prince he take twelve man which he send to preach his religion and when the people by multitude of his enjoin prayer neglect their work haidam imprison he and keep the key under his head threaten to kill he a maid of he in pity steal away the key r r which be to be understand of all land take as in our doomsday book let he out and lay the key under his head again who open the door find he not hereupon he take occasion to say that no man can hurt he he go into Syria and none know what become of he his name be carmat his sect of caramite caramite increase about Cufa 279. mutamid die have reign three and twenty year and three day Ahmed Abulabbas mutadid Billa son of muaffic be on the day of mutamid death create Chalifa h. 279. begin April 3 A.D. 892. mutadid 37. z. mutetze m. mutaze egyptian broil z. say that Hamaria make a match betwixt his son Ali and the caliph daughter an. 282. Hamarvias be kill by some of his servant in his bed and the soldier place his son Gieis in his steed some say they will have his uncle to govern whereupon he cut off his uncle head and throw it to they an. 283. the soldier slay Gieis and his mother and spoil his house and Haron his brother be make governor of Egypt and Syria which promise to pay mutadid fifteen hundred thousand piece of gold yearly out of Egypt he pay he also for Kinnasrin and Awasim government four hundred and fifty thousand abusaid a caramite rebel and take Hagiara an. 287. mutadid send abbess against he who the caramite take and few of his man escape an. 289. mutadid die through immoderate use of lust have reign nine year nine month and four day he remit the poll money and the tribute of Mecca and Medina and have great need of money for his war he be tell of a Magus one of the persian ethnic religion dwell at bagdad which have store of money he send for he to borrow money of he who answer my money be before thou take as much as thou will but how say mutadid can thou expect restitution Equitie see God say the other trust thou with his servant and his land and thou show thyself faithful and execute justice shall I be afraid to trust thou with my money whereupon mutadid weep bid he go away and swear he will borrow nothing of he yea if he need our good say he shall be thou yet he be bloody and bury his servant quick which have anger he Ali Abumuhammed Muotafi Billa son of mutadid son of muaffic son of Mutewakkel be create Chalifa the same day that his father die Muctafi 38. an. 289. while he be at Raka his counsellor Casam procure his inauguration at bagdad which be reiterate when he come thither himself this casam have intend to turn away the chalifate from mutadid posterity and know that Badir the brother of Muctafi know it procure his death lest he shall reveal it caramite hurt to the Muslim at that time jahia a caramite have many follower and slay Siecr the Commander which Muctafi send against he and burn the temple at Rusaf after that he go into Syria overthrow the force of Taagi and besiege Damascus where he be slay the caramite substitute his brother Husein which give out himself to be Ahmed son of Muhammed he besiege emissa and take it and force Damascus to composition he slay innumerable people at Maara hamat Balabec Selmia where he enter on composition and slay notwithstanding both man child and beast and spoil all Syria with fire and sword an. 290. Muctafi send Alaz against he which get the worse and after he other army an. 291. the caramite be overthrow and many take which have their hand and foot and after their head cut off he send a army also into Egypt which take it from the posterity of Telun an. 293. Muhammed son of Ali possess Egypt and seduce many but by Muctafis army be take and imprison Zacrunas the caramite slay the inhabitant of Basra and Adriat and spoil the city and then repair to Damascus and slay the deputy but can not take it and be chase by another army which Muctafi send under joseph son of Ibrahim to Sawan where in another battle the caramite get the victory an. 294. Zacrunas assault the pilgrim slay the man captive the woman and spoil the god but be soon after take and kill an. 295. Muctafi die have reign six year six month and twenty day he be very rich and bare good affection to the posterity of Ali of happy memory seleucia be take an. 290. that year Nilus flow but thirteen cubit and two finger and man of all religion make supplication to God for more water but prevail not Giafar Abulfadl Muctadir Billa son of mutadid succeed the day of his brother death Muctadir 39 the same year die Mundir son of Muhammed king of Spain to who succeed in the chalifate his son Abdalla an. 296. Muctadir be depose and Abdalla son of Mutaz surname Abulabbas be inaugurate by occasion of the soldier assault and kill abbas the counsellor of Muctadir but he possess it only one day and night and be strangle he be a rare poet and author of similitude such as none before have give example of Africa divide as Spain before and follow a new Chalif an. 298. the posterity of fatima begin to flourish and Muhammed at Segilmessa in the jurisdiction of Cairawan be salute emperor of the faithful profess himself to be descend of Ali son of Abutalib he build Mahdia and reign over Africa Sicilia and the western province he fight often against the son of aglab and expel they a. 302. and then die and his son Caijm succeed and after he his son Almansor and after he his son Muaz Lidinilla who be the first egyptian Chalifa of the fatimides a. 300. Abdalla die and his brother Abdurrahman Nasir Ladinilla succeed in Spain after who I know nothing of that Ommian spanish race which cease about the year four hundred an. 301. abusaid the caramite be slay by his servant in the bath and the caramite exalt say his son in his place who with burn pincer execute the murderer an. 302. Habas with a multitude of magarib take Alexandria and overthrow Maunas which be send from bagdad against he heretic execute an. 309. Muctadir cause Husein to be put to death and crucify by the advice of the wise for certain verse in which he seem to acknowledge a union of man spirit with God spirit abugiafar death see of he in the preface ah 310. begin may 1. 922 as wine with water and with amber mask be mix thy spirit with i thou-i be be joint fix but God know whether he have not some other meaning an. 310. Muhammed Abugiafar son of Harir the Tabarite die the author of the history a learned and mighty prince God have mercy on he an. 311. Abutaher the caramite son of abusaid grow powerful and profess to know secret he assault Basra with 107000. man take it slay all the townsman burn the temple enjoy the spoil an. 312. he set on the pilgrim as they return in Nahar and overthrow they in a great battle caramite cruelty take their general Abulhigia governor of Mausil Diarreb Dainawar and Giebal with the good and most of the woman and child leave the rest without provision so that most of they die with thirst and wander he be then nineteen year old and get a million of gold and baggage worth as much more he set Abuhigia free and many captive and send to Muctadir to give he Basra and Ahwaz which he refuse but honour and vest his messenger an. 313. Abutaher take Cufa slay and captive the inhabitant he take there four thousand colour clothes and three thousand camel with innumerable spoil melita Dailam a people of Persia an. 314. the roman take Malatia an. 315. the dailamite begin to be of note who first king be Wahsihudan who seat be Staristan his son Hasan succeed he war with Husein the fatimite surname Nasirulhac but Ali brother of Hasan slay he and be slay himself by Muhammed father in law to Hasan and chase his son Mahadi which succeed he this Muhammed become king of the dailam Mahadi flee to Asfar who have take Razwin and georgian send Mardawig his general against Muhammed who counsel he to get into his hand the kingdom of asfar his master which he do possess the dominion of Raija Karwin Abhar Giorgian and Tabristan then go mardawig to Hamadan take it slay the man ravish the woman these thing be set together but in time happen after Muctadir send Haron with a army against he an. 319. which mardawig put to flight and then possess Isfahan after this mahcan and Mardawig war on each other and Ali abulhasen Amadudaulas son of Boia be one of mahcan soldier these war continue an. 321. and 322. and Mardawig get the better and take amida and Tabristan Amadudaulas leave Mahcan and serve mardawig who set he over Margia where be settle he arise against mardawig take Isfahan with a great army and after that Argian and all Persia Muctadir send joseph against Abutaher the caramite but joseph be take and his force break he send another army which return without do any thing they be afraid at bagdad lest he shall have come thither and for joy of his return Muctadir his mother and Ali his counsellor give God thanks and distribute fifty thousand piece of gold to the poor an. 316. the caramite take Rahab and force Karkisia to buy their peace he build a house at Hagiara and increase in strength an. 317. Muctadir be depose and Kahir Billa succeed by the mean of Maunas general of his force which take Muctadir and imprison he and cause he to resign the soldier take from his mother 600000. piece of Gold but the soldier soon after mutine and slay Baruc the captain of the guard make the son of Mucla the counsellor run away and Muctadir repossess his place his brother Cahir he kiss betwixt the eye say there be no fault in thou and Cahir answer God God be in my soul o emperor of the faithful Muctadir swear he will not hurt he Abutahar this year assault Mecca Mecca assault and slay the pilgrim in the temple on the eight of Dulhiggia pluck up the black stone and the cover of the well Zemzem and waste the temple he carry the black stone to his city which remain with they twelve year lack one day and be render an. 339. jahcam have offer for it five thousand piece of gold which thy refuse an. 320. Muctadir be slay by Maunas in battle blackstone take away have reign four and twenty year eleven month and fourteen day he be much give to fast and alm but much rule by woman one of who jamec will sit in judgement none have enjoy the place so long in his time cease the pilgrimage when the black stone be carry away he be say to have give away above seventy million of Gold he give also to the man the jewel of the chalifate and the treasure which his ancestor never think to give and most of the gem to woman ointment also and civet A.M. 6424. and sixty four day be past he forbid to take tribute of bishop monk and poor man who the author of the vocation have free an. 314. the emperor with a thousand ship intend to invade Egypt but by tempest three hundred be lose and the rest return an. 317. such a multitude of locust come into Egypt that the sunbeam can not come at the ground and they consume vine fruit and corn Muhammed Abulmansor Kahir Billa be the forty Chalifa Kahir 40. z. Elkahar and the nineteenth of the abbasides create after his brother death at bagdad he torture muctadir mother for her money hang she by the heel her urine run over her body and she deny knowledge of more money after which she die 322. he be depose have reign one year six month and seven day Chalifa beggar l. 3. of the distraction of the saracenicall empire Arradi 41. Boia z. and m. tell of he and call he Segiar m. Abusuia that he dream he piss fire which inflame the country in three part which be interpret of his three son greatness and Ahmed son of Muctadir be create which remain in the imperial tower till Mutaki cast he forth a. 333. after which on a Friday in the temple he beg alm say I be sometime your Chalifa now I be one of your poor Ahmed Abulabbas Arradi Billa be the twenty of the abbasides 322. die Abdalla Abu-Muhammed Mahadi which reign at Cairawan have rule four and twenty year three month and six day Caijm his son succeed Boia be a poor fisherman some say descend from ardsijr king of Persia from Adam to he be a hundred generation he have three son Ali Abulhasen Hasen abuali and Ahmed Abulhasen which serve the soldier we have before show how Ali abulhasen Amaduddaulas serve mardawig take Isfahan and Hamadan he take cazerun and increase in power after that letter come from Cahir wherein he offer to mardawig Raija Narcab zangion and Abhar on condition to leave Isfahan from which Wasmakin brother of mardawig have drive Amaduddaulas which he accept but hear of cahir deposition detain it still 323. Mardawig be slay by his servant in the bath and so God deliver the Muslims from mardawig a man unjust bold and addict they say to paganism Abutaher the same year spoil the pilgrim the same year Hasen Abu-Muhammed Nasiraddaulas son of Abdalla give to his brother Ali Abulhasen Saifuddaulas Maijafarikin Diarbecr Abubecr subdue Egypt Egypt conquer and possess it together with Syria an. 324. Aradi make Muhammed son of raijc his counsellor and emperor of emperor and commit to he the administration of the kingdom and command he to preach in his steed in the pulpit and give he a banner from that time the dignity of a counsellor grow out of use at bagdad and continue but a name the power remain with the emperor or commander an. 325. there be many prince for whosoever can possess himself of any city style himself king Basra Ahwaz and be in the hand of Abu-Abdalla the baridite and his brethren Persia in the hand of Amaduddaulas Muslim empire fall in piece son of Boia the Dailamite and of Wasmakin brother of mardawig Mausil Diarreb and Diarbecr in the hand of the child of Hamadan Egypt and Syria in the hand of Muhammed son of taag the west and Africa under Caijm Spain in the hand of the son of ommia Chorasan in the hand of Nasr son of Ahmed the samanaean jamam Bahrain and Hagiara in the hand of Taher the caramite tabristan and Giorgian in the hand of the Dailan only bagdad remain with the Chalifa and the son of raijc the tribute be abolish the kingdom decay and robbery increase the money be carry into the treasury of the emperor which dispose thereof at their pleasure Arradi go to war upon Abuabdalla the baridite who agree with he for 36000. piece of gold to pay thirty thousand every month Basra be take by the son of raijc and Abutaber the caramite make peace with he on condition to pay he out of bagdad 120000. piece of Gold Abubecr take also Ahwaz whereupon the baridite seek help of Amaduddaulas who send his brother Ahmed Mumuddaulas with he to take Ahwaz which he do an. 326. abuali son of Mucla the counsellor have his hand cut off and his tongue cut out for counsel Arradi to attach Abubecr and to employ jacham the Turk when his right hand be to be cut off this hand say he whereby I have minister to three caliph and wherewith I have write out the Alcoran the author of Arabic writing in the present form be out of like the hand off a thief this son of Mucla be author of this excellent writing and first bring the foreign write of Cufa to the use of the arab the son of Bawab add somewhat and bring it to perfection jahcam the Turk come to bagdad and take it chase away the son of raijc which have enjoy the imperial dignity one year ten month and sixteen day jahcam be vest by Arradi and style emperor of emperor 327. jahcam with the Chalifa go against Nasiruddaul and besiege Mausil but be force to accept five hundred thousand piece of gold to haste back to bagdad where Abubecr have renew some broil with who he compound and give he the way of Euphrates the province of Kinnasrin and Awasim pilgrimage renew that year they again go on pilgrimage by the way of Euphrates which from the year 319. the caramite have hinder Abutaher now for five and twenty thousand piece of gold promise not to molest they an. 328. Abubecr take emissa overthrow in battle Muhammed son of taag prince of Egypt and Syria but be again deprive of his victory by his soldier overha to the spoil at last he get all Syria except Ramla Last Friday preach Chalifa which remain with the son of taag on condition to pay Abubecr 140000. piece of gold yearly an. 329. die Arradi of the dropsy and immoderate lust he be the last of the caliph which preach on friday which do penance with the penitent dispose of money army gift have servant and kitchen they which succeed after he until Muctafi Moctafi 42. have nothing in Irac and other province but the title he reign six year ten month and ten day Ibrahim Abu-Ishac Moctafi Billa son of Muctadir be create Chalifa the day of his brother death but hold only the bare title jacham in hunt be kill and Moctafi commit the administration of the kingdom to Cutelin and eighty day after to Abubecr son of Raijc an. 330. the baradite seek to possess bagdad Moctafi flee to Mausil with Abubecr Saifuddaulus minister unto they as do also Hasen Abuhammed Nasiruddaulas which title Moctafi then give he he send his brother Ali Abulhasen against the baridite who expel they from bagdad and take the city Nasirruddaulas slay Abubecr and succeed in the government his brother Ali be victorious be style Saifuddaulas a. 332. Nasiruddaulas with his brother return from bagdad to Mausil and Buzun the Turk bagdad and administration with the title of emperor of emperor who depose Moctafi from the chalifate which now be grow to a title have also the honour to have their name stamp on coin and to pray in pulpit Mustacfi which be make his successor put out his eye have reign three year and eleven month Abdalla Mbulcasim Austacfi Billa son of Muctafi be the 22. Abasian Chalifa and in all the 43. he vest Buzun the same year 333. Saifuddaulas * * Daulas which m. call Daule and z. Eddula be a title of honour with several addition which the caliph when their own place be little better than title give to the sultan and prince which by force or inheritance obtain any signiory prince also give and assume that title at pleasure Muctafi 43. z. Saiph Eddula take Aleppo and Damascus Cafur be send out of Egypt against he and when their army be pitch over against each other Saifuddaulas man on a Friday say it be not lawful to fight to day and disperse themselves Cafur take the occasion and win the field with all the baggage Saifuddaulas recover his force in another battle overthrow he achsijd king of Egypt a fargan in a new succession the boijte greatness after that he prevail against Abubecr achsijd son of taag the king of Egypt and a peace be conclude betwixt they a ditch make to bound both kingdom 334. Muazzudaulas * * z. Meaz Eddula son of Boia possess bagdad and Mustacfi vest he take his oath of fealty and give he a banner chain and bracelet with the hinder part of his house his name to be stamp on money and command he to pray for he or in hu steed in pulpit he also give he that title of Muazzadaulas and his elder brother Ali Amaduddaulas and abuali the middlemost brother Rucnudaulas Muazzadaulas mind to depose Mustacfi go in and kiss the ground before he and a seat be bring on which he sit present come in two man which when he offer his hand to kiss pluck he off his bed his eye be put out and his palace spoil hypocritical depose of hypocrite he rule one year four month and two day fadlus Abulcasim Mutius Lilla son of Muctadir be the four and forty Chalif create an. 334. Abubecr achsijd king of Egypt and Syria die mutius 44. z. matia m. Metyah Bila fazde the fargan call their king achsijd as the roman Caesar and the persian Cosroes he have four hundred thousand soldier eight thousand mamluke which be his Guard none of his familiar know where he sleep when he be in camp by his close convey himself into other tent his son Muhammed Abuhur succeed Cafur rule all a negro who his father have buy for eighteen piece of Gold Abulcasim Caijm prince of Cairawan die and his son Ishmael Abutaher Almansor Billa succeed in the Chalifate who die an. 341. have rule seven year his son Maabad succeed which be the first Chalifa of Egypt first Chalifa of Egypt an. 347. Muazzadaulas win Mausil and all Diarreb Nasiruddanla flee and after compound with he an. 349 Abuhur die his brother Ali succeed Cafur a negro slave king of Egypt and Syria but Cafur rule all and Ali die an. 355. he become king of Egypt and Syria where he reign till an. 358. Saifuddaulas die an. 356. have reign in Aleppo one and twenty year he be learned and have great confluence of learned man to he to who he be very liberal his son Saududdaulas succeed Muazzuddaulas die at bagdad have rule in Irac one and twenty year his son bachtiar Azuddaulas succeed in his place but not his fullness of power an. 358. Cafur die die his court be frequent with learned man and poet Ali son of Muhammed son of achsijd reign after he the same year Gheubar servant of Muaz l l z. Meaz Ledin Lidinilla lord of Cairawan come with a army into Egypt and cause the people to swear allegiance to Muaz and thenceforward in Egypt the public prayer cease in the name of the abbasides till joseph Sallahuddine m m he which win jerusalem from the Frank call Saladine in our story Cayro build the jobide of happy memory restore it this gheubar build Alcahir for his soldier and a imperial palace and command all his commander and soldier to build each of they a house therein an. 362. muaz enter Egypt Alcahir be so call viz. Compeller because it be build in the horoscope of Mars which compel the World the same year Mutius Lilla be depose Sebertekin the Turk have get bagdad after he have enjoy the place nine and twenty year four month and one and twenty day he be religious frequent in prayer and alm honourable and sincere but have nothing in Irac and Persia but the title in other region other rule as there the son of Boia 334. so great a famine have be in bagdad that woman roast child which therefore be throw into Tigris an. 343. the king of Nubia invade as far as uswan but the egyptian army drive they back and slay and take many of they nubian invasion and the Muslims take a castle of they call Riwa abdulkerim Abubecr Taius Lilla son of Mutius be make Chalif on the day of his father deposition an. 363. he present vest Seberteken and set he over his palace Taius Lilla 45. z. Taia m. tayaha Abdelcarim he in the year 364. take father and son with he to war against Azzuddaulas son of Boia where he and Mutius die and the turk make Astekin the servant of Muazzedaulas emperor who go with Taius and besiege abutzalab Uddacuddaulas at the same time enter bagdad and carry himself as king whither Taius follow he Adaduddaulas help his cousin Azzuddaulas and come out of Persia to wasit and drive away the turk and pursue they to bagdad and humble himself before Taius and kiss his hand then take his cousin Azzuddaulas but upon Rucnuddaulas his father command restore he swear he to make he his lieutenant in Irac and not to contrary he nor his father Rucnuddaulas after which he return into Persia aftekin rule at Damascus limisee a commander of the roman take emissa and Balaber and force Damascus to buy their peace but be soon after poison by Basilius and Constantine an. 365. muaz die in who reign over Egypt the wife of achsijd complain to he of a jew unjust jew and just prince which deny the receipt of a precious garment full set with precious stone she have offer all the rest if he will give she but one sleeve he send for the jew which still deny and he search his house find it and restore it whole to the woman he be give to astrology have hide himself upon a astrologer counsel a year in a vault the people imagine mean while that he have be take up into heaven he soon after his come forth die and his son Barar Abulmansor Aziz Billa succeed but Gheuhar administer the empire Hasen abuali Rucnuddaulas distribute his kingdom to his three son to Adaduddaulas Persia Argian and Carmania to Muaijdduddaulas Raija and Istahan and to abulhasen Fachruddaulas Hamedan and Dainawar take oath of they for mutual confederacy he die 366 be ninety nine year old and have reign four and forty year one month and nine day Adaduddaulas go against Azzudaulas overthrow he and possess bagdad an. 367. the Chalifa vest and crown he give he a chain and declare he lord give he two banner and set he over his palace he crucify Ali the counsellor of Azzuddaulas of who a poet make a rare epitaph witty epitaph in Arabic verse of a crucify man exalt thou in life and death a miracle indeed environ as when Prayer-day thou whilom do aread thou stretchedst forth as it be with gift thy hand which die bleed earth belly all too narrow be thy greatness to contain air yield close grave the cloud thy shroud and wind sheet remain Azzuddaulas get help of abutzalab but be in a great battle slay by Adaduddaulas he be a strong man strong man and with his hand have prostrate a bull without other help he will also go to fight with lion and hunt they 368. Adaduddaulas Diarreb Maij^farikin and Diarbecr and abutzalab flee into Egypt Taius Lilla command that king Adaduddaulas shall pray in his steed every three Friday great and first Muslim king great dignify to be the caliph curate to say prayer in his place which none have obtain before he though partner of the covenant he command also drum to be sound at Adaduddaulus court at the five hour of prayer which none before have and he be the first which be style king in Islamisme and in pulpit he be name Siahensiah or king of king a. 371. he cause Taius to confirm to Muaijidduddaulas his brother Giorgian and Tabristan which drive thence Panus son of Wasmakin a. 372. Adaduddaulas die at bagdad have rule over Irac Carmania Persia amman Churistan Mausil Diarbecr Harran and Mambag his son Marzuban Abucalangiar Samsamuddaulas be vest by Taius Muaijidduddaulas die 373. and his brother Fachruddaulas succeed he confirm by Taius an. 375. Siarfuddaulas son of Adaduddaulas possess bagdad and imprison his brother and put out his eye have conquer Basra ahwas and in Irac Taius rest he an. 377. with his father dignity but he die an. 379. and be bury at Cufa his brother Abanasar Bahaiuddaulas succeed and be crown by Taius who free his brother from prison an. 381. Saaduddaulas king of Aleppo die and abulfadaijl his son succeed who be much molest by the egyptian and assist by the roman Aziz the egyptian die an. 386. Hakem his son succeed Taius Lilla be depose by Bahaiuddaulas and Cadir Billa inaugurate pretend the resignation of Taius whereas he have go in to he kiss the ground and sit down on a seat by Taius appointment after which his man come in Taius depose and lay hold on the pommel of his sword pull he off his bed roll he in the carpet and carry he away to prison he have be Chalifa seventeen year nine month and six day in his time Aziz have marry a melchite christian give our lady church from the jacobite to the melchite * * they be in the east call melchite or kingsman which follow the religion of the greek emperor the jacobite in circumcision be like saracen Russ convert egyptian tempest which they call the church of the patriarch and her brother jeremy be make patriarch of jerusalem and her brother Arseninus be make patriarch of the melchite at Alcahir and Mitsra phocas rebel against Basilius the emperor he crave help of the ruff king give he his sister in marriage conditional to receive the christian religion Basilius send they bishop which convert he and his people this be a. Heg. 377. bardas phocas be overcome and slay an. 379. that year by a earthquake the three part of the temple of saint Sophia at Constantinople fall down which Basilius repair a. 378. a great tempest happen in Egypt of wind and thunder and such darkness as have not be see next morning a pillar of fire come forth which make the sky and earth red and the air be so full of dust that man can scarce breathe an. 386. jacob son of joseph counsellor of Aziz die he have of a jew become a Muslim serve Cafur and after his death bring Muaz into Egypt Aziz pray and weep for he as he deserve an. 381. a earthquake earthquake throw down a thousand house at Damascus and a village near Balaber sink down and man run out of their house into the field it continue seven day Ahmed Abulabbas Cadir Billa Cadir 46. be the five and twenty abbaside Chalifa an. 385. abulcasin counsellor to king Fachruddaulas which of all counsellor be first call partner die he write elegant epistle and good verse Fachruddaulas die 387. * * began jan. 13. 997. his son rustem who Cadir nominate Maghduddaulas succeed he an. 389. Mahmud jamanuddaulas son of Sebertekin lord of India possess Chorasan take it from abdulmelic the last of the samanaean king an. 391. abulfadaijl lord of Aleppo be poison and Lulu his counsellor seize on the State Bahaiuddaulas after long war slay Abunasr son of Azzuddaulas and possess his and his brother inheritance an. 397. walid of the house of ommia and progeny of Hisiam invade Hakem lord of Egypt surname himself naijr Biamrilla but after many battle be slay a. 399. Lulu lord of Haleb die and his son Murtadiddaulas succeed an. 401. carwas governor of Maufil pray in the name of Hakem lord of Egypt and cause the same to be do at Cufa but upon Bahaiuddaulas write the call of Cadir Billa be restore who send Carwas gift and an. 402. publish a write against the caliph of Egypt say that their original be from Disania and that they be charigaean and have nothing to do with Ali son of Abutalib prove the same by great author radis and murtadis abuhamid etc. an. 403. Bahaiuddaulas lord of Irac die and his son Abusugiaus Sultannaddaulas be vest in his place he reside at Sijraz the deputy of the lord of Haleb rebel and hold the same under Hakem lord of Egypt which be soon after murder by procurement of his sister daughter of Aziz and Ali his son make Chalif this Hakem have be of ill disposition of no religion inconstant in all his business suborn spy to bring he tale he forbid that any woman shall go in or out of his house or shoe to be make for woman he set Mitsra on fire and command the citizen to be kill z. write that a. h. 408. 300000. Tartar out of China invade Asia which be overthrow by tagan Chan a tartar king and a 100000. take prisoner with China dish and much spoil proud ambition of deity reward their good be spoil wife ravish and the four part of the city be burn yet some fool cry to he o God which make to live and die he afflict christian and jew and raze their temple whereupon some become Muslims and then he give they leave to revolt to their former religion sixteen thousand acknowledge his deity solicit thereto by Muhammed son of Ishmael who a zealous Turk slay in hakem chariot once atheism and madness be in he combine his son Ali be surname Tahir lijzaz-dinilla an. 413. the lord of Haleb be slay by his servant and Badir possess it call himself Waliuddaulas but Tahir send a army against it and take it an. 415. salih son of mardas get possession of Haleb and Balabec Sultanuddaulas die and his son Abulcalanghar succeed and remain at Sijraz but his uncle Siarfuddaulas after many battle get bagdad an. 420. p p it begin jan. 19 A.C. 1029. dararaean Sect true begin of the dogzijn or drusian which be these Dararaeans see my Pilg l. 2. in fine salih be slay by the egyptian force with his son in battle but his son Nasr Abucamil Siabluddaulas hold Aleppo an. 422. Cadir Billa the Chalif die after one and forty year reign aged eighty six in his time Muhammed son of Ishmael the false prophet have preach hakem deity and after his death Hamza Alhadi in Egypt and Syria confirm the same opinion place doctor at Mitsra give all licence to marry their own sister daughter mother and take away fast prayer and pilgrimage Hakem abstain from prayer on friday Ramadan and feast day forbid pilgrimage to Mecca and thus begin the sect of the dararaeans especial famous at Tyre Sidon mount berit and the adjoin place of Syria abdala Abugiafar Caijm Biamrilla Caijm 47. son of Cadir be the six and twenty abasid Chalifa create that day on which his father die be before make partner of the covenant by his father and mention in public prayer by that title the same year 422. king Ghalaluddaulas son of Bahaiuddaulas come to bagdad and take it and prayer be make in his name Caijm style he Siahensiah great king of king 426. letter be bring from Mahmud son of Sebucktakin jamanuddaulas that he have take many city in India indian city take that he have slay fifty thousand infidel and take seventy thousand and spoil worth a million of Gold an. 427. Taher lord of Egypt die his son Maabad Abutamim Mustansir Billa succeed being about eight year old or as some say six he rule sixty year none before have begin so soon or hold out so long yet Abdurrahman king of Andalusia reign about so much time an. 430. m m it begin octob. 3 1038. begin of turkish greatness better and more true relate then in our common story m. write of this mahmud great victory against four king in India and huge spoil there get and Lahor be subject etc. begin the prince Salghucides Muhammed Abutalib Togrulbec be the first inaugurate of they his brethren be David Ghacarbec fir and Arselan the son of Michael son of salghuc son of Dacac a Turk who first of that race embrace Islamisme and be much employ by the turkish king in his war his son salghuc after his father death be make chief commander of the turkish army but the king suspect he seek to slay he whereupon he flee to Haron king of Ghabia and of he obtain a army to invade those infidel but be slay in battle be a hundred and seven year old his son Michael with his child abide in Mauranahar many turk acknowledge none other commander when Mahmud son of Sebuctakin king of India pass over the river Ghaihon to help Wararchan king of Mauranahar he cast Michael into bond for refuse to go with he promise to set he in Chorasan to keep it against the enemy but take with he Michael soldier which stay in his country masud succeed his father Mahmud expel they by a army the remainder of these turk after Michael death follow Togrulbec who overthrow the army of masud and pursue they to tus which town he take the first town which come into their hand wherein they fortify themselves thence they go to Naisabur and take it king masud flee into India and forsake Chorasan stay there a long time the Salghucides subdue Chorasan mean while and when masud return they overthrow he whereupon Caijm Biamrilla exhort they to keep the region of the Muslims they overthrow masud a second time and their empire be establish a. 431. masud overthrow Togrulbec who return an. 432. and chase away masud enjoy all Chorasan kill innumerable number of man an. 433. Muazzuddaulas the mardasite Haleb where Nasr son of Salih son of Maidas have rule eight year who be slay by Busekin the dariraan in battle who after come to Haleb and take it this Dariraan be a captive Turk which come with merchant into Syria be buy by Darir the Dailamite and give to the king of Egypt where by degree he be promote to be commander of the army masud king of Chorasan India and Mauranahar be slay and Muhammed his brother succeed but be slay by Maudud his brother son an. 435. four captain Gazian with a thousand six hundred and fifty horseman overcome Diarbecr Mesopotamia and Mausil destroy and spoil fir Abutaher die and his son Abumansor Melecaziz succeed at bagdad but an. 440. Abunasr son of Abucalanghar which reign in high Irac come and take bagdad and be crown by the Chalifa this be the last king of the boijte an. 447. the Salghucides begin to rule at bagdad by this mean a certain Turk Ruslan Abulharith Mutaffir call the basasaraean grow great in Irac and they pray in pulpit in his name neither remain any thing but title to the boijte last king of the boijte whereupon Caijm write to Togrulbec for aid exhort he to come thither which he do the basasaraean writ to Mustansir Billa lord of Egypt and pray in his name at Rahab he help he with money Togrulbec take the boijte Melecrahim and his prayer n n his prayer be the dignity to be mention in public prayer through their kingdom and to pray in the caliph steed cease with that empire which have continue one hundred and twenty seven year praise be to he who empire pass not away 448. Togrulbec go with a army to Mausil at Cufa wasit and Ainattamr prayer be make in the name of Mustansir lord of Egypt an. 449. Caijm crown Togrulbec so that in both irac and Chorasan none stand against he Haleb be deliver to the lord of Egypt by Muazzudaulas because he be not able to hold it an. 450. Caijm be depose upon this occasion Togrulbec go to Mausil and Nasibin and his brother Ibrahim with he to who the basasaraean send and procure he to rebel upon promise of the empire the basasaraean enter bagdad with egyptian banner inscribe prince Maabad abutanim Mustansir Billa emperor of the faithful prayer at bagdad in name of the egyptian Chalifa on Friday after the thirteen of Dulkiada prayer be make in the cathedral temple in name of Mustansir they make a bridge over to the east part of the city and do the like at Rusaf he take caijm counsellor and clothe he with a woollen cowl and long narrow red hood set he on a camel with skin hang about his neck and so carry he through bagdad one follow and beat he after which they put he in a new flay bull hide set the horn on his head and hang on hook there beat till he die Caijm flee and his palace be rifle on the four Friday in Dulhiggia be no prayer in the temple of the Chalifa in other temple they pray in the name of Mustansir Caijm be carry to haijth and there imprison an. 451. the basasaraean take oath of the supreme judge and chief man to Mustansir lord of Egypt that year Togrulbec overthrow and take his brother Ibrahim and strangle he with a bow string slay many turkemen his partaker go to bagdad against the basasaraean and carry back the Chalifa Togrulbec hold the bridle king hold the bridle of his mule when he enter bagdad from which he have be a year absent the basasaraean be go to wasit against who Togrulbec send force which slay he and send his head to bagdad an. 453. Togrulbec desire the caliph daughter in marriage which he refuse yet after consent an. 455. Togrulbec die Muhammed Olbarsalan Adaduddaulas son to his btother David succeed he an. 460. Hasen abuali rebel in Egypt besiege Mustansir in his tower and spoil his good an. 462. Mahmud lord of Haleb pray in the name of Caijm Biamrilla and prince Azzuddaulas which force he to it have before acknowledge Mustansir an. 463. prince Azzuddaulas go against the roman with forty thousand horse take Patricius their general and cut off his nose and after on a Friday slay innumerable and take the emperor himself who he free on condition to pay 1500000. piece of gold etc. an. 464. he be slay Roman discomfit have pass out of bagdad with 200000. soldier and command to execute a certain factious captain name joseph and to set his quarter on four post he revile he and run sudden within he and wound he with a knife whereof he die he be a prince fear God much in prayer and alm and a defender of religion when he be wound he say I never else contend but first beg aid of God yesterday also the earth tremble under i and I say azzud slay I be king of the world neythcr be any able to war with i and never think of God power whereof I ask he forgiveness his son Ghelaluddaulas succeed call Melicsiah 467. Caijm die have be Chalifa four and forty year seven month and twenty day Abdalla Abulcasim Muctadi Billa Muctadi 48. son of Muhammed son of Caijm Billa be the seven and twenty Abasian and eight and forty Chalifa create on the day of his grandfather death an. 467. he pray for his grandfather and bury he bagdad in his time flourish and they pray in his name in jaman Syria and jerusalem in his time also the muslim recover from the roman Raha and Antiochia Nasr succeed to Azzuddaulas in Haleb who be slay by his soldier Turk after he have reign a year he be a man liberal to poet who no less chant his praise his brother Sabac succeed and be the last of the mardasian king for Siarfuddaulas lord of Mausil subdue Haleb an. 472. have obtain leave of Gielaluddaulas Melicsiah on condition to pay he 300000. piece of gold rend out of it 469. isarus surname Afiijs have subdue emissa and Damascus with their territory go into Egypt and when Mustansir Billa be ready to flee by night in a battle the egyptian overthrow he he return full of indignation kill who he can three thousand at jerusalem and be force to compound with Gielaluddaulas who have think to have take Syria from he yet an. 472. Tagiuddaulas brother to Gielaluddaulas slay he and possess Damascus the inhabitant whereof return from the place of their dispersion cause by isarus his tyranny but he rebel an. 477. against Gielaluddaulas takin Murwa drink wine in the temple in Ramadan be besiege take and cast into prison who after 478 get Haleb and Syria in possession an. 483. Batijna * * perhaps the bedwine a rove sort and rogue sect of arab receive name of he see of they my pilgrim tom 2 li. 7. cap. 6. John di Castro etc. but it be manifest of the assassins see my pilgrimage l. 2. in fine which hence receive those inhuman order of obedience more than disobedient both of self-killing and of prince-killing upon command invade certain castle of the barbarian and arab and take they many adjoin themselves to his sect and he in the name of the people be inaugurate and grow potent king Gielaluddaulas exact obedience of he by his ambassador with threaten he call some of his follower in presence of the legate and bid one young man to kill himself which he do another he command to throw himself from a high tower whereby also he be break in piece then say he to the legate I have 70000. subject thus observant and let this be my answer this answer cause the king to leave he and fill he with care they therefore proceed and invade diverse castle take alamut and make that their chief Seat an. 485. Gielaluddaulas die have reign twenty year and some month he be witty sincere full of piety diminish tribute forbid injury cause bridge highway and river to be make and the temple of bagdad to be build call the king temple and the hanijfaean college which he enrich with many benefit he obtain many victory and from the further confine of the turk to jerusalem and the end of jamar his empire be extend the way be secure the wrong be right and the wrongdoer hold in awe the mean woman and poor have their complaint hear when he have go to the sepulchre of Ali son of Moses at tus to pray netamulmelic his counsellor be with he be ask if he pray not for victory against his brother then in rebellion he say no but his prayer be this o almighty God if my brother be more convenient for the good of the Muslims than I give he victory over i but if I be fit than he for their profit make i to have the upper hand his son Muhammed not six year old succeed in bagdad by his order and his mother care which be regent with the caliph confirmation it begin jan. 21. 109. and prayer be make in his name Tagiuddaulas inaugurate himself but be refuse by the Chalifa an. 487. Barcana mother of Mahmud die Barkiaruc another son of Gielaluddaulas go to bagdad and chase away his brother Mahmud Muctadi die have continue Chalifa nineteen year five month and five day he be skilful in religion and studious of learned man and make excellent verse in his time Michael be make patriarch of the jacobite at Alexandria note of Nilus divert in Ethiopia in who time Nilus fail Mustansir send he into Aethiopia with many gift the king come to meet he and receive he reverent inquire the cause of his come and learn the state of Egypt through want of Nilus wont overflow he cause the place to be open where the water have be turn aside and Nilus increase in one night three yard k k Brochia so that their field in Egypt be water and sow and the patriarch return with great honour from both king of ae hiopia and Egypt Ahmed Abulabas Mustasir Billa mustasir 49. son of Muctadi succeed in the chalifate Mustansir lord of Egypt die z Mustetaher z. he reign sixty year and his son Ahmed abulcasem mustali Billa succeed a. 488. Tagiuddaulas have after bloody battle betwixt they slay Icsancar and possess Haleb mind to invade Irac be encounter and slay by his nephew Barkiaruc who be now crown and hereby confirm in his empire Tagiuddaulas have send to bagdad to procure his inauguration joseph son of arfac a Turk which commit great spoil in those part but hear of his master death flee to Haleb where roduwan son of Tagiuddaulas succeed his father and be surname fecharulmelic that be the glory of the kingdom his brother Decac also style himself Siemsulmuluc that be the sun of king he possess Damascus an. 489. Riduwan with a purpose to get Damascus acknowledge the egyptian Chalifa but he revolt when he receive of he no assistance in the siege thereof the Frank of western army win jerusalem hence all western european in all the east be still call frank because first and most out of that nation and by the council of Claremont this voyage be begin A.H. 4. ^c Nou. 27. a d 1099 a h 19 no. 6 1100. an. 492. the Frank invade the muslim country take jerusalem conquer Antiochia slay the king of Maatrannaman which remain in their hand till the year 526. when Abahak Elsiahyd on who God have mercy take it from they they go to Ramla and take it they set forth to jerusalem an. 491. and burn the jew which be there in their temple and kill 70000. muslim and take out of the Sachra forty silver lamp each of which weigh three thousand six hundred dam beside a silver furnace of forty pound and twenty lamp of Gold jerusalem remain subject to they ninety one year till king joseph Nazir Saladine son of job on who God have mercy recover it an. 583. Muhammed son of Gielaluddaulas possess himself of bagdad and overthrow his brother barkiaruk an. 493. and an. 494. the Frank take Hijfa by force and Arsuf by composition and the most part of the sea coast be subject to they an. 495. mustali Billa prince of Egypt die berar his brother possess himself of Alexandria and be there inaugurate by Aftekine but Afdal war on he and take he prisoner and inaugurate Ali Abulmansor son of Mustali then but five year old Afdal be his protector this year the Frank besiege Tripoli and the Muslims which come to their aid from Damascus be put to flight 496. king barkiaruk move against his brother king Muhammed which be at Isfahan and there besiege he but be force to depart for want of provision they after meet in battle and Muhammed be overthrow Batijna author of the assassin and barkiaruk again reign at bagdad Decac that year get possession of Emessa Husein the lord thereof leave rodnaeans friendship and take part with Decac whereupon three man be send from Batyna which kill he on a Friday in the temple whereof Decac hear go to Emessa and get it an. 497. Decac die of eat a grape prick with a poison needle by a treacherous woman Ababacuc Tagtakin surname Tahiruddin enjoy Damascus the Frank win acca by help of the ship of the Frank of Genua Zahruddaulas be there then commander under the egyptian an. 498. king barkiaruk die who have rule over Irac and the land of the barbarian leave his kingdom to his son Gelaluddaulas under the regency of Eyad Muhammed hear of his brother death go to bagdad and after composition on both part slay eyad and then rule without corrival crown by the emperor of the faithful an. 501. he slay Sadeca Seifuddin prince of Hella Frank victory an. 502. the Frank win Tripoli after seven year siege a city full of Muslims and learned man before the siege an. 503. the Frank take acad and Minattar and Beryt an. 504. they take Sidon and Rardija and their kingdom prosper in Syria enjoy all the sea coast Muhammed send Mudud against they who approach to Damascus be overthrow by Batijna in the year 505. an. 507. Rodawan die and Tagiuddaulas Azras his son succeed who be slay an. 508. and Lulu possess the city an. 509. Ababac lord of Damascus go to bagdad to offer his service to Mustadir the Chalifa and to king Muhammed Lulu be kill and the scribe of abumael army hold the tower of haleb. but an. 511. Haleb come into the possession of bulgar son of Aryc which hold it five year at that time die king Muhammed at Isfahan leave eleven million of gold and as much in good to his son Mahmud Abulcasem and prayer be make in his name at bagdad an. 512. Mustadir the Chalif die have enjoy that place four and twenty year three month he love learned man forbid wrong be eloquent and much in alm a note of the author parentage in the time of Biamrilla one tijb a syrian merchant a christian come into Egypt and abode at Alcahir his son Carwijn be a notary and follow the court get a son which he call abultijb which also prove a notary of note at Elcahir and serve the Arabic senate he have five son of which four be make bishop but Abulmecarim the young delight in husbandry and breed of cattle and have above a thousand hive of bee he marry the sister of Simeon a notary which serve joseph Saladine 569. and after betake he to a monastery in the mid whereof he enclose himself in a place which he have build and therein live above thirty year Macarim have three son the second of which abuliaser elamid be the father of the chronicle writer Macarem succeed Simeon when he become a eremite in his notary place in the court under king Abubecr Elaadil Seiffuddin son of job and die 636 God rest all their soul a continuation of the former story out of mirkond the persian and Abraham zacuth a jew to the end of the chalifa in Mustafir time bagdad be ruin by the overflow of Tigris whereupon it be remove and new build on the east side of the river murky where it stand more commodious than before it be remarkable of five and twenty caliph since the foundation that none die therein the astrologer have threaten say zacuth zac. a flood next to that of Noah then say one of they there be seven planet in conjunction with piscis now but six whereupon they fear the low situation of bagdad and stop the water-passage also the ismaelite which go on pilgrimage on devotion to their sanctuary be most of they drown the Chalifa honour that ginger with royal vest Toledo Sicilia and some city of Africa be recover from the saracen by the christian Mustcali king of Egypt die Elamir Bahachan five year old succeed Aphtzala the visir govern musterasched son of Mustetaher succeed his father in the chalifate Hegira 512. he make war with masud salivaui king of Korasan m. A'mostarch Billa fazele 50. and be by he take and slay an. 529. raschid or rach rach 51. succeed in the chalifate quarrel and success masud come to bagdad and make almoctafy Billa Chalifa Muktafi or Almoktasi 52. who after masud death war on the persian province where he recover much with little labour Noradin get Halep and the part adjoin on Antioch elaphit succeed Elamir his father in Egypt after he Ettaphar who be slay Elphais a child of five year who the wisir enthronize Noradin take Damascus an. 552. great earthquake in Syria an. 554. great inundation at bagdad and other city 555. muktaphi the Chalifa die mustenege musteneged 53. or Almostanget Billa Issuf his son succeed elphaiz king of Egypt die and his son Etzar ledin illuhi last of the phetinaeans succeed Asareddin Schirachocz succeed one of the curdi Noradin send his wisir and subdue Egypt yet jusuph Asar Eddius brother son be constitute king of Egypt by the Chalifa baharon succeed masud in Korasan a learned man which write book in philosophy he be martial also and make some erterprise in India and Persia Kozrao his son follow but by reason of some broil go to Lahor in India and there die 555. his son Kozrao melic succeed in Lahor almostanzy 54. in he the sabutiquis end 563. the Chalipha die suffocate in a bath 566. his son Mustetzi succeed in who time the Chaliphas of bagdad be restore in Egypt which the phetimaeans have before abolish he die natbar 55. 575. Natzar his son succeed Saladine recover jerusalem a. Hegira 586. and conquer all the city of Mesopotamia to Nisibis he die 589. his kingdom be divide among his three son Elaphatzal have Damascus and palaestina Elachiz Egypt Taher Giazi Halep the tartar make prey of Turon and agem Natzar die 622. and Taher Taher 56. his son enjoy the place nine month in this time flourish in Egypt rabbenu mose son of Maimon of Corduba Mustenatzer Mustenatzer 57 succeed a just prince and almesgiver which build many school the tartar Tartar overrun Asia Russia Polonia and vex Germany another army invade Syria Baba profess himself a prophet send of God and gather rude multitude to he fill Asia with slaughter and emptiness till he be slay by Gyatheddin king of Gunia the chaliph die 640. and his son Musteatzem succeed the last of the Chaliphas of bagdad almostacem 58. slay by Halocho the tartar 655. elmutam king of Egypt by the turk conspiracy be drive into a tower end of the chalifite both in bagdad and Egypt they which succeed be as subject to the several monarch as patriarch among christian etc. which they set on fire to avoid which he leap into the water underneath and be both scorch and drown thence forward the slave mameluke tule in Egypt at the conquest of bagdad the tartar be say to have slay in those part 1600000. person a brief continuation of the saracen in Spain out of rodericus Toletanus and other to the fail of the Ommian race and empire the saracen do not so extirpate christianity in their conquest but that such as will be subject to their tribute and exaction may enjoy their conscience whereupon not only Asia remain in great part Christian till the tartarian deluge and some also till this day in nestorian armenian jacobite and other sect but even in Africa where black darkness most prevail on man body and soul some christian continue and do to this day through so many saracenicall generation in Morocco in the time of Ferdinand the holy see my pilgrim tom. 2. and of John the first diverse christian family be find and in Tunis also when Charles the five in the former age conquer it above eight hundred year after the first conquest by Muhammedans their course as be in Turkey now be by degree with discountenance disgrace and oppression of their person and exaltation of their own which rather unrip than rent asunder and unti then with sword of extreme persecuion chop in sunder that knot of christian religion herein the western Antichrist be the more dangerous enemy to christian verity as more in show pretend but more eager and irreconciliable with open war tumultuous massacre and direct-indirect work and undermine seek to extirpate the contrary profession brethren fall out be the most implacable enemy in Spain also so few arabian can not people so large a country but a deluge of african grasshopper leap over that sea with they and although 700000. be say to have be slay in that first spanish invasion yet the rest enjoy their church and devotion still with tribute Turquet l. 6. in Toledo they have seven christian church leave they with judge of their own nation and religion these christian be call musarabe musarabe of Musa the first conqueror See bibliotheca and arab-african commander which send Taric thither who liturgy be extant rod. Tolet. yea still observe for antiquity sake in the great church of Toledo this musa or Muza Muza 1 be reckon the first arabian governor in Spain who be revoke by walid abdulazis abdulazis 2. son of Musa be by his father leave to govern Spain who marry the wife of rodericus the spanish king and by her persuasion crown himself king whereupon the arab kill he at his prayer and ayub ayub 3. succeed in the government who remove the court from Seville to Corduba but the Chalipha eject he and place alabor alabor 4. who severe exact on the first conqueror of Spain Musa have by tarric complaint incur disgrace and die of grief that what spoil those sponge have suck he squeise out of they and make they to vomit again their sweet morsel Zama Zama 5. succeed three year in the spanish government who make a book of the revenue of Spain and of Gallia Narbonensis also for he pass into France place a garrison at Narbona besiege Tolouse but by eudo be slay and his arab chase which choose abderramen for their leader while they have feast themselves with hope of Gotic Gaul and conquer it in manner from the pirenaean hill to the Alpes Pelagius Pelagius king of Ouiedo Ximeres king of Arragon ximenes and other lay hold of such place as fit their purpose in Spain and begin petty kingdom therein since unite into one sovereignty after many age Asam Azam 6. son of melic succeed in Spain who impose the fifth on all conquer place for the caliph treasury and the ten of such as yield he be slay Ambiza Ambiza 7. succeed Hegira 103. and make many inroad into France impose to that purpose double tribute on the christian jahya jahya 8. rule two year and half and after he Odoyfa odoyfa 9 who do little worthy memory next be send Yemen Yemen 10. Heg. 111. which rule but five month and autuman autuman 11. succeed four month and then follow Alhaytam alhaycam 12. ten month who after many torture and derision die in prison and Mahomet Abenabdalla Abenabdalla 13 rule two month to who succeed Abderramen abderramen 14. he enter France as far as Rhodanus at Arles slay many commit great spoil in Poitiers and Xantonge eudo duke of Aquitaine which some say have bring in the saracen and on the day of battle forsake they join with Charles Martell against they assist with the german overthrow they some say above three hundred thousand of they be slay with that their general an. h. 116. abdelmelic abdelmelic 15. 17. succeed four year and then Ocha Ocha 16. or Ancupa an. 119. and after he abdelmelic again be replenish Spain out of Africa after much depopulation but he be slay in civil combustion Abulcatar abulcatar 18. be send governor an. 125. who be slay by Zimael and Toban Toban 19 be place in his room eudo be dead his son dispossess by the french of their inheritance call the saracen again into Gaul who spoil the whole country betwixt the pyrenees and the river Loire Languedoc and Provence seize also on Auignon but be again chase by Charles Martell an. h. 128. Thoaba thoaba 20. rule Spain one year juseph succeed at this time the Ommian race be dispossess of the chalifate and that of abbas succeed abderramen of the Ommian family possess himself of Spain after which it be separate from the asian chalifate and become a kingdom and these ommians call themselves emirelmumenim this be an. h. 142. in the year 149. he begin the mezquit at Corduba the chief of all other in his dominion an. 171. he die and be bury at Corduba he leave eleven son and nine daughter isen the elder succeed and war on his brother Zulema who he put to flight he take Toledo Zulema sell all his challenge in Spain and pass the sea to Barbary as do Abdalla also another brother isen an. 177. send abdelmelic with a great army into France which spoil and subdue Narbone with so great a part of the country that isen perfect with the fifth of those spoil the temple of Corduba which his father have begin the christian also of Narbone carry earth thither from their own country he build the bridge at Corduba he be munificent and just he prosper in France war with alfonsus king of Gallicia and have reign seven year seven month and seven day die leave his kingdom to his son Alhacam a. 179. he be wise and fortunate have seven thousand slave for his guard three thousand renegado and two thousand eunuch he personal judge poor man cause and be liberal in alm he overcome in battle Zulema and Abdalla his uncle ship of dane as our story call they or norman or other infest Spain slay one and subject the other he die an. 206. leave nineteen son and one and twenty daughter abderramen his son succeed he recover the town which in late schism the christian have get an. 229. fifty ship and fifty four galley arrive at Lisbon the next year a great number of ship come and besiege Seville and often fight with the Arab and spoil their dominion with fire and sword carry away every thing of value and kill very many abderraman have a great battle with they but neither part prevail an. 236. Corduba be pave and water bring thither in pipe of lead abderraman die an. 238. leave five and forty son and two and forty daughter Mahomet his son succeed who much prevail against the christian slay many and an. 245. take Toledo by composition sixty norman ship that year burn gelzirat Alhadia and the mezquit and thence proceed into Africa and there commit many spoil after which they return and winter in Spain and in the spring wen home an. 273. Mahomet die and leave thirty four son and twenty daughter of which Almundir succeed and die two year after Abdalla his brother reign five and twenty year after his death Abderramen son of Mahomet son of Abdalla succeed an. 300. and reign fifty year he call himself Almunacer Ledinella that be defender of the law of God and Amiramomeni or king of the believer he be mighty take septa in Africa adorn the mezquit of Corduba and many other his son Alhacam succeed an. 350. who they surname Almuztacarbille that be defend himself with God an. 366. isen his son succeed he entitle himself Almuhayatbille labour with God he be under eleven year of age Mahomet Ibne Abenhamir be make protector or regent in their stile Alhagib or viceroy which rule all and of his fortunate victory be call Almanzor two and fifty time he lead army against the christian his son abdelmelic succeed in his office an. 393. and hold it six year and nine month the king be little more than titular after he abderraman his brother who force isen to nominate he his successor and be soon after slay then follow division in the State Isen be shut up and report dead by Mahomet Almahadi which domineer the earl Sancius help the adverse faction of zuleman and slay of Almahadis part 36000. neither can isen be accept who Almahadi now bring forth but zuleman enter Corduba and possess the throne which Almahadi in a great battle recover 404. but lose it soon after with his life and Isen be restore Alhameri be make Alhagiber viceroy the country be spoil and near Corduba almost dispeople by barbarian zuleman also and Almahadis son in diverse part do much harm against who isen hire earl Sarcius restore six castle to he which Almanzor have take zuleman wan Corduba and isen flee into Africa now be all in combustion Ali Alcazin Hyahye Cazim Mahomet Abderramen Mahomet Hyahya Iris Isen successive start in and out of the throne so that the kingdom of Corduba fail and every man make himself master of his charge and usurp what he can the Ommian race fail the almoravide of Africa an. 484. possess the kingdom joseph son of Tessephin be call to help one against the other and take all into his own dominion he make Morocco his seat royal Ali his son succeed and Tessephim his son be depose an. 539. the almoade extinguish the almoravide after many change and chance the realm of Granado be erect which continue above two hundred and fifty year under these king successive Mahomet allen Alhamar mir almus Aben Azar Aben levin Ishmael Mahumet joseph Lagus Mahumet mah. guadix joseph Balua joseph Aben Azar mah. the little joseph m. Aben ozman Ishmael Muley Alboracen mah. Boabdelin Muley Boabdelin expel by Ferdinand and Isabel a. 1492. a relation of the king of Barbary after the end of the egyptian caliph to the present Xeriffian family take out of a spanish book of that argument ABtilhac Abtilhac 1 be the first king Merin in Fez he have son a Bucar and jacob Bucar the which jacob be lord of Ramatto and Abtilhac leave his kingdom in his life time to his son Bucar Bucar Bucar 2. have for son Yahia this Bucar overcome king Abtolcader and die in the battle and he say Yahia be king under protection of his uncle jacob which be lord of Ramatto Yahia Yahia 3 die a child without issue and the say jacob Bucar his uncle remain king which afterward cause himself to be call Muley Xeh jacob Aben juseph 4. which signify old king this king build new Fez which be call the white city he overcome budebuz king of marwecco and sometime be lord of Tremesen Tumbe and Sojumenza and in the year of our lord 1264. he enter Spain be call by the king of Granado he have three son abucait Aben jacob and Aben jucef abucait abucayt abuzayt 5. after that his father have gain Tremezen be leave for king there he have one son a child who name be not know and Abuhamo beget upon a christian woman abucait reign in tremezen his father jacob Aben jucef die and his young son Aben jacob Aben jacob 6. reign in his steed in marwecco Sojumenza and algarue and besiege tremezen against his brother abucait and the say Aben jacob leave two son abucale and Aliborregira which afterward be drown by Aborabec Abucalec the elder son of Aben jacob have a son call abuhumer who die and be never king himself but leave two son botheyd and Aborabec both which be king the child 7. abucait die at the end of four year leave as I say before two son the elder for understanding we call the old who reign a year and a half after the death of his father and die without issue and Abuhamo which afterward be king in his steed the foresay child be dead his brother Abuhamo abuhamo 8. reign in his steed who afterward be call abuhertab and his uncle Aben jacob besiege he in tremezen seven year after who death the siege be raise and the say Abuhamo afterward with the aid of d. jayme of Arragon gain Cevet in the year of our lord 1310. after that Aben jacob be dead his son Abucalee Abucalee 9 take possession of the new city but his uncle for hatred that he bear he cause they to receive for king botheyd who be son unto Abuhamer that die and never have be king himself and the say botheyd pursue Abucalee and slay he and reign after he botheyd after that his uncle have salute he for king die without issue after that Botheyd botheyd 10. be dead the christian raise his brother aborabe Aborabee 11. for king then the moor will have have Ali Berregira king young son to Aben jacob which be the six king and so after much war between they at length Aborabee overcome he and command he to be drown and after Aborabee have reign two year he die without issue after Aborabee die his great uncle Aben jucef Abucayt Aben juseph Abuzayt 12. which conquer Spain be make king in Fez he have two son Abohali and Abuhacen this Aben jucef abucait gain many city in Spain in the year of our lord 1318. and 1322. Albohali wound his father in the war and make himself to be call king of Fez and his father be sick besiege he and they come to agreement that his father shall give he sojumensa and the half of the treasure of Fez and his father shall remain with marwecco algarue and Fez the say Albohali have two son Buzayn and Bahamon albuhazen albuhazen 13 be receive for king in the life of his father for his brother Albohali be disinherit for wound his father this albuhacen have three son abtulmalic Abtolrahmin and Abuhenan he be king of Fez maruecco algarue Sojumenza Tremezen and tunes abtulmalic be king of Algezira he pass into Spain in the year of our lord 1340. and be overcome by the christian which they call and in the war of xere he die Abtolramin his other brother rise with the city mequine and his father cut off his head Abuhenan Abuhenan 14. rise with the kingdom of Fez and fight against his father albuhacen and overcome he he make in Fez the college which be call the college of Abuhenan he have three son Muley bucayt and Muley Zaet and jacob abucayt abuzayt 15. send his brother Zaet to succour Gibraltar who be take prisoner by the king of Granada and Abucayt be kill by his own subject leave one son call Abtilhac zaet zaet 16. understand the death of his brother get liberty and aid of the king of Grada and recover Fez after the death of Zaet Abtilhac Abtilhac 17. son of abucayt be king who be slay by treason by one of his own subject who think to usurp the kingdom but Zaet Benimerine next heir unto Abtilhac recover it again by force of arm within few month and put to death the usurper Zaet zaet 18. leave for heir two son Muley Mahamet and Muley Nacer Muley Mahamet Mahamet 19 succeed his father in the kingdom and have two son to wit Muley Ahmat and Muley nacant Muley Ahmat Ahmat 20. succeed his father and have one daughter call Lalalu which be force to marry with the xarife and die without issue for grief of the death of her father and three son Muley Bucar which die in the war when king Buhason recover Fez and Muley Muhamet and Muley alcasery which be king upon condition in the absence of his father and brethren when they be prisoner five year in the hand of the xarife Muley Buhason Buhason 21. be king of Velos de la Gomera and after that Fez be lose by Ahmat he by the aid of salharaes governor of Algiers recover it again he be slay by treason by one of his guard in a battle against the xarife he leave three son Muley nacar a bastard and Muley Mahamet which be his elder son legitimate and Muley Yahia which yet live Muley Mahamet Mahamet 22. succeed his father but be present force to fly leave the xarife in possession of all his estate and die within few year leave one son a child call Muley Halal which be this present * * when this spanish book be write pretender Muley Halal Halal 23. be a child be carry to the mountain of Tarudante be name for king but be not able to recover his estate nor able to resist the power of the xarife he flee into Christendom where he yet remain together with his uncle Muley Yahia who be son unto a christian woman flee present into Christendom with his mother when his father king Bahason be slay as aforesaid finis