The history of Great Britaine under the conquests of ye Romans, Saxons, Danes and Normans Their originals, manners, warres, coines & seales: with ye successions, lives, acts & issues of the English monarchs from Iulius Cæsar, to our most gracious soueraigne King Iames. by Iohn Speed. Speed, John, 1552?-1629. The history of Great Britaine under the conquests of ye Romans, Saxons, Danes and Normans Their originals, manners, warres, coines & seales: with ye successions, lives, acts & issues of the English monarchs from Iulius Cæsar, to our most gracious soueraigne King Iames. by Iohn Speed. Speed, John, 1552?-1629. Schweitzer, Christoph, wood-engraver. THE SITE AND CIRCVIT OF GREAT BRITAINES MONARCHIE. CHAPTER I. B ESIDES those fruitfull Ilands that dispersedly are scattered about the Mayne, like to beautifull pearls that incompasse a Diademe, the Ile of GREAT BRI∣TAINE doth raise it selfe first to our sight, as the Bo∣die of that most famous & mighty Empire, whereof many other Kingdomes and Countries are parcels and members. Being by the Almighty so set in the maine Ocean, as that shee is thereby the High Admirall of the BRITAINE Admirall of the Seas. Seas, and in the terrestriall Globe so seated, as that she is worthily reputed both The Garden of Pleasure, and The Storehouse of Profit, opening her Hauens euery way, fit to receiue all forraine trafficke, and to vtter her owne into all other parts: and therefore (as the Soueraigne Lady and Empresse of the rest) deserues our description in the first place. (2) This Iland is so spacious and ample, that Ce∣sar (the first Romane discouerer thereof) supposed that he had found out another World: for to his see∣ming it appeared, that the Ocean was rather contained In Panegy. Orat. to Constan s. within that Mayne, then that Mayne to be compassed with the Occan about. And Iulius Solinus, for her cir∣cuit and largenesse, saith that it deserueth the name of Another World. But Aristides a Greeke Author speakes Aristides. much more properly, who by way of excellencie ter∣meth BRITAINE, The Great Iland: As likewise Tacitus, that vndertooke to describe BRITAINE Tacit. in vit. Agr. by his owne knowledge, who saith, that of all Ilands BRITAINE the greatest Iland knowen to the Romanes. Dionysius. Strabo. Rutil. Numat. knowen to the Romanes it was the greatest: And so doth Dionysius in his description of the World. (3) But as Strabo compares the then knowen World, to a Cloake, Rutilius Numatianus Italy, to an Oken leafe, and Dionysius Spaine, vnto an Oxe-hide: so the said Tacitus in the life of Agricola, from Liuie his anci∣ent, and Fabius Rusticus his moderne, doth liken the Fabius Rustic. fashion thereof to a long Dish, or two-headed Axe: whose forme notwithstanding may better be exposed to the eie, in the draught before seene, then can be ex∣plained in words to conceit, or vnto any other thing bee compared besides it selfe: especially seeing that so many good Writers haue had but very bad suc∣cesse in their resemblances of Countries. And this of them is rather vnlike to either, if wee speake of the whole, which then was vnknowen, as it seemeth by BRITAINE discouered to be an Iland 136. yeeres after Iu∣lius Cesars en∣trance to it. Tacitus in vita Agric. Tacitus. And the huge enorme tract of ground be∣yond Caledonia, which runneth vnto the furthermost point, growing narrow and sharpe like a wedge, was first redoubled with the Romane fleet by Iulius Agri∣cola, and BRITAINE discouered to bee an Iland, one hundred thirty and six yeeres after Iulius Cesars first entrance therein. (4) Some haue beene induced by the narrow∣nesse of the Sea, and likenesse of the Soile, to thinke BRITAINE thought one continent vvith FRANCE. Seruius Hono∣rat. that BRITAINE was sometimes ioined to the con∣tinent of France: whereunto Seruius Honoratius sub∣scribeth in his Commentarie vpon the first Eclog of Virgil, who there mentioneth —Penitùs toto diuisos orbe Britannos, Clandian. The Britaine people quite from all the world disioin'd. As likewise by Claudian another ancient Poet it is stiled, —nostro deducta Britannia mundo, The Britaine soile remooued from our worlds continent. And Vinianus with them affirmes, that in the be∣ginning Vinianus. Britaine and Gallia were both one Land. The like doth Virgil verifie of the Ile of Sicilie, which in Sicilie thought once one conti∣nent with Italie. D Niger. Thought of some that all Ilands had their first se∣paration from the Mayne by the rage of the gene∣rall Deluge. times past hee reports to haue beene one with Italie. Others hold, that all Ilands had their first separation from the Mayne by the rage of the generall Deluge, and that the mountaines thereby shewed their tops a∣boue the plaine grounds; and the plaines setling low∣er, became deepe vallies. When or howsoeuer, by Gods diuine ordinance and wisdome, wee see that these Ilands situated in the Seas, doe no lesse serue and adorne the Ocean it selfe, then the Lakes and Pooles of water doe the drie land, and all of them (as members of one masse) to minister sustenance for the life of all things liuing, and pleasures to the vse and seruice of man. (5) The Iland of BRITAINE, of all others the most famous (by Catullus reputed the furthest to∣wards Catullus. the West) is bounded on the South with Nor∣mandie and France, vpon the East with Germany and Denmarke, vpon the West with Ireland and the Atlan∣ticke Ocean, and vpon the North with the vast De ca∣lidon Seas. The length thereof, measured by the gra∣duations to both extremes, that is, from the Lysard Point Southward in Cornwall, which lieth in the Lati∣tude of 50. degrees and 6. minutes, to the Straithy head in Scotland (being the furthest point of this Iland towards the North) set in the degree 60. and 30. mi∣nutes containeth (according to the scale of the terre∣striall Globe) six hundred twenty foure miles: not Britaines length. to trouble the Reader with other accounts, seeing the same so exactly to agree with the spaces of the hea∣uens. And the extent of the Land in the brodest part is from the Lands end in Cornwall in the West (situa∣ted in 14. degrees and 37. minutes of Longitude, ac∣cording to Mercator his Atlas) vnto the Iland Tenet in the East of Kent (lying in 22. degrees 30. minutes) and containeth miles 340. as they haue deliuered, that Britaines bredth. with curious search haue laid the dimension thereof. (6) The site of this Iland is set by the Mathema∣ticks BRITAINE in the 8. Climate for Latitude, and for Longitude placed betweene the parallels fourteene and twenty six. in the eighth Climate for Latitude, and the Lon∣gitude likewise placed betwixt the Parallels four∣teene and twenty six: a seat as well for Aire as Soile, both fruitfull and milde; and for length of daies, pleasant and delightfull: for in the height of Summer the day is said to bee eighteene equinoctiall houres long, wherof sixteen and a halfe are spent from Sunne to Sunne. Yea and Tacitus saith, that in the furthest In the furthest North part of BRITAINE y e nights so short, as the space be∣twixt the daies going and com∣ming can hardly be perceiued. In vita Agricolae. North part of the Iland the nights are so short, that be∣twixt the going out and comming in of the day the space is hardly perceiued, and the Sunne seene neither to set nor arise: Because (saith he) the extreme and plaine parts of the earth proiect a low shadow, and raise not the dark∣nesse on high, so the night falleth vnder the skie and starre. Better might hee haue said, by reason of the inclina∣tion of his Circle to the Horizon descending not di∣rectly, but passing obliquely, razing as it were vnder their Horizon. (7) The aire, saith Strabo and Tacitus, is rather in∣clinable to showers then to snow. And Cesar com∣mends it to bee more temperate, and the cold lesser, Caesar. Com. lib. 5. then that in France, as not subiect to either extremes, The cold in Bri∣taine less then in France. as the more Northerne and Southerne Countries are: to which temperature Cescenius Getulicus a very anci∣ent Poet seemeth to haue respect, when of this Iland thus he versifieth: Non illîc Aries verno ferit aëra cornis, Probus in Virgil. Georgic. Gnosia nec Gemini praecedunt cornua Tauri. The horned Ram there butteth not the aire of tender spring: The Twins, nor Bull do to this soile vntimely seasons bring. (8) And although the Seas thereof are accoun∣ted and called by Nubiensis the Arabian, The darke and The Arabicke Geographie. dangerous Seas, in regard of the misty vapors that ther∣from arise, yet in the winter season those clouds are di∣spersed into still showers of raine, that doe dissolue the rigour and great extremitie of the cold: yea and those Seas themselues stirred and working to and fro with the windes, doe thereby wax warme (as Cice∣ro▪ British Seas warme. De natura Deo∣rum Lib. 2. Minutius Foelix, adioined to Ar∣nobius, as his eighth booke. saith) so that a man may easily perceiue within that world of waters a certaine heat inclosed. And Minu∣tius Foelix proouing that GOD hath a speciall regard to the seuerall parts of the world, as well as to the whole, saith, that BRITAINE, though otherwhiles wanting the aspect of the Sunne, yet is it releeued with the warmth of her enuironing Seas; and as much refresh∣ed, Britaines sea∣windes in sum∣mer asswage the heat. we may well say, by those sweet and gentle windes that in the height of Summer are sent from those seas, and doe abate the rigor of the Sunnes great scorching heat; and yeeldeth not only entercourse for traffique into all parts of the World, but plentifully aboundeth with all sorts of fish, to the great benefit of the Inha∣bitants; and bringeth foorth Pearles, as Tacitus shew∣eth, which were vsually cast out with the flood, and ga∣thered In vita Agricolae. at the ebbe. These Pearles, though not altoge∣ther so orient as they in India, by Amianus in his 23. booke and 12. chapter, are called Rich Gemmes. And Pliny in his ninth booke and thirty fifth chapter, v∣seth the like terme: The desire whereof (as Sueto∣nius saith) drew Cesars affection for the Conquest of In vit. Caesar. cap. 47. BRITAINE. (9) The soile (saith Tacitus) setting aside the Oliue, the Vine, and such other plants as are onely pro∣per to hotter Countries, taketh all kinde of Graine, Britaine abound∣eth with all sorts of Graine. and beareth it in abundance: it shooteth vp quickly, and ripeneth slowly: the cause of both is the same, the ouer-much moisture of the soile, and th aire. And Cesar writeth, that for timber it was stored of all kindes, as in Gallia, the Beech and Firre tree onely ex∣cepted. Caesar. Com. lib 5. For abundance of Graine, Britaine is said to bee The seat of Queene Ceres, by Orpheus the old Poet; Britaine called the eat of Q. Ceres. and the Granary and Storehouse for the Westerne World, as Charles the great tearmed it: and by our owne An∣cestors in the blacke Booke of the Exchequer it is called a Paradise of pleasure. From whence the Ro∣manes Romanes laded 800. vessels with corne in Britaine for their armies elsewhere. Zoso us. were wont yeerely to transport (with a fleet of eight hundred vessels bigger then Barges) great store of corne for the maintenance of their Armies. But vnto the particular relation of each seuerall blessing belonging to this most happie Iland, wee will not a∣gaine enter, seeing that in euery County wee haue suf∣ficiently, and no more then truly, spoken thereof. Only, if you please, heare what hath beene said of this Land by the Romane Orators, and first in the Pane∣gyricke to Constantius the Emperour. (10) O happie BRITAINE, and more fortunate Panegyric. to Constantius. then all other Lands beside, which first didst see Constan∣tine Emperour! For good cause hath nature endowed thee with all blessings both of aire and soile: wherin there is nei∣ther In Britaine nei∣ther excessiue cold of winter, nor extreme heat of summer. Britaine abound∣ing with all plen∣tie of foode for mans sustenance and delight. excessiue cold of Winter, nor extreme heat of Summer: wherein there is so great abundance of graine, that it suffi∣ceth both for bread and drinke. There the forrests are free from sauage beasts, and the ground void of noisome ser∣pents: in whose stead an infinite multitude of tame cattle there are, with their vdders strutting ful of milke, and loden with fleeces to the ground. And verily (that which for the vse of our liues wee most esteeme) the daies are therein very long, and the nights neuer without some light, for that those Britaines nights neuer without some light. vtmost plaines by the sea side cast and raise no shadowes on high; and the aspect both of skie and starres passeth beyond the bound of the night: yea the very Sunne it selfe, which vnto vs seemeth for to set, appeareth there only to passe by a little, and goe aside. And in another, spoken to Constantius, the father Panegyr. spoken to Constantine. of Constantine the Great, thus is said: Though BRITAINE be but a single name, yet surely the States losses haue beene manifold, in forgoing a Land so plentifull in fruit and graine, so rich in pasturage, so full of mines and veines of metall, so gainfull in tributes BRITAINE full of mines of metals. and reuenewes, so accommodated with many hauens, and for circuit so large and spacious. And a Poet of good antiquity, of natures motherly Remaynes. affection towards this our Iland, hath thus written: Tu nimio nec stricta gelu, nec sydere feruens, Clementi coelo temperiéque places. Cùm pareret Natura parens, varióque fauore Diuideret dotes omnibus vna locis, Seposuit potiora tibi, matrémque professa, Insula sis foelix, plenáque pacis, ait. Quicquid amat luxus, quicquid desiderat vsus, Ex te proueniet, vel aliunde tibi. Nor freezing cold, nor scorching hot thou art; Thy aire a heauenly temper, sweetly breath'd: So pleas'd Dame Nature when she first bequeath'd To euery soile of her rich gifts a part; Then Mother-like best choice for thee she sought: Be thou (quoth she) the blessed Ile of peace. What euer pleasure yeelds, or wealths increase, From thee shall grow, or shall to thee be brought. (11) And that BRITAINE hath beene taken for those fortunate Ilands whereof the Poets haue imagined a perpetuall spring time, is certaine by Isa∣cius Tzetzes a Greeke Author of good account. And Isaci Tzet∣zes. in Robert of Auesburie wee read, what time Pope Cle∣ment the sixth had elected Lewis of Spaine to be Prince Robert of A∣uesburie. Britaine taken for the fortunate Ilands. of the Fortunate Ilands, raising him powers both in Italie and France, the English Ligier Embassadours, that lay then in Rome for King Edward the third, were so deepely set in the opinion, that this preparation was made against BRITAINE, that they wrote their suspicions conceiued, and presently with-drew themselues into England, to certifie the King of these designes. And it seemeth Pope Innocent the fourth was of the same minde, when (as Matth. Paris. wri∣teth) Ad . 1246. hee said, Verè hortus deliciarum est Anglia: verè puteus inexhaustus est: Et vbi multa abundant, de multis multa possunt extorqueri, &c. Certes the Kingdome of En∣gland is the very Paradise of pleasures, a Well which can neuer bee drawen drie: where many things doe abound, and whence many things may bee extorted, &c. With Pope Innocent maketh suit to the King of En∣gland to see Britaine. which his conceit he was afterward so farre transpor∣ted with a longing desire, as hee made great meanes and earnest suit to the King of England (as the said Author writeth, ad ann. 1250.) that hee might come into England to see that Country which was euery where so much renowned. In a word, BRITAINE is so rich in commodities, so beautifull in situation, and so resplendent in all glory, that if the Omnipotent (as one hath said) had vouchsafed to fashion the world Ioseph. bell. Iudas. lib. 7. cap. 13. round like a ring, as he did like a globe, it might haue beene most worthily the onely Gemme therein. Whose Vallies are like Eden: whose Hilles are as Lebanon: whose Springs are as Pisgah: whose Riuers are as Iordan: whose Walles is the Ocean: and whose defense is the Lord IEHOVAH. (12) The body then of this Imperiall Monar∣chie sheweth not onely the greatnesse of it selfe in it selfe, but also extendeth her beautifull branches into many other Countries and Kingdomes farre iacent and remote. This greatnesse is made the more sensi∣ble, BRITAINE sustained at once no lesse then 11. Kings command∣ing great powers. for that the Iland in times past sustained at once no lesse then eleuen Kings in their royall estates, all of them wearing Crownes, and commanding great powers. Such was the Heptarchie of the Saxons seuen Kingdomes, seated on the South of Seuerius his Wall. Two Kingdomes thence had their sites in that Nor∣therne part, and their seuerall Kings of Scots and Picts ruling on both sides the Clude, euen vnto the Deucale∣donian Seas. And two Kingdomes (if not more) diui∣ded into North and South, and their Kings of the ancient Britaines ruling the West part of this Iland D in of in the Great. beyond the Clawdh Offa, or Offa his Ditch, commonly called WALES. (13) The Ilands likewise belonging to this Em∣pire The Ile of Ma belonging to Bri∣taine, a kingdome within it selfe. had Kings of their owne, as that of Man, the Or∣cades, and in Ireland at one time fiue Kings raigning together. France also is annexed, and so was Cyprus Cyprus and some prouinces subdu∣ed to Britaine. sometimes with some Prouinces of Syria, subdued by King Richard the first, surnamed Caeur-de-lion. And at this present in the new World of America a Colonie of A Colonell of Britaines in VIRGINEA. BRITAINES is seated in that part now called VIR∣GINEA; whereby the borders of our Soueraignes command and most rightfull title may bee inlarged, & the Gospell of Iesus Christ further preached, which no doubt will in time be imbraced, to the saluation of many, and great honour to the BRITAINES. And that the borders of this most roiall Tent haue beene wide spread in former times, White of Basingstocke is of Vitus Basing∣stocke. The limits of the British Empire in times past from the Orcades vnto the Pyere Moun∣taines. opinion, who affirmeth that the limits of the British Em∣pire in old time was from the Orcades vnto the Pyrenean Mountaines. And that King Athelstan after his con∣quest of those Northerne parts with that of Denmarke wrote so his title: which further is confirmed by the Charter of King Edgar for the foundation of the Ca∣thedrall Church at Worcester, wherein likewise he so stiled himselfe. The inlargement whereof we pray to be accomplished, especially in those parts where God is not knowen, according to the saying of the Pro∣phet, that the curtaines of our habitations may bee fur∣ther Isa. 54. spread, with increase on the right hand and on the left: and that our seed may possesse those GENTILES, and dwell in their Cities: whereby the ninth Nati∣on Eight Nations conuerted to Christ by Englishmen. may bee conuerted vnto CHRIST, as eight others before this time by English-men haue beene. THE NAMES THAT HAVE BEENE ATTRIBVTED VNTO THIS ILAND OF GREAT BRITAINE. CHAPTER II. A S touching the first Inha∣bitants and originall Names of this Iland, things so farre cast into the mistie dark∣nesse of obscuritie and ob∣liuion, that there is no hope left vs, so lately born, to discouer them; especi∣ally The first Inhabi∣ters of this Iland being meerely barbarous, neuer troubled them∣selues to transmit their Originals to posteritie. Caesar. Com. lib. 6. Druides the onely wise men among the first Inhabi∣tants of this Iland. If the first Inha∣bitants of this I∣land had written any thing of their originall, yet it must needs haue perished. Gildas de excidi Brita iae. No vnderstāding of the first af aires of this Iland, but from sorraine Writers. knowing that the first Inhabitants being meerely barbarous, neuer troubled themselues with care to transmit their Originals to posteritie: neither if they would, could haue done, being without Letters, which only doe preserue and transferre knowledge vnto o∣thers. And say they had letters, yet was it not lawfull for them to commit their affaires to writing, as Cesar doth testifie of the Druides, the only wise and learned men among them, that had the managing both of Iustice and religious Rites. And had they commit∣ted these things to writing, yet doubtlesse had they perished in the reuolutions of so many ages as are pas∣sed, and so many conuersions or euersions of the State. Gildas and Nintus, the Britaines first Historians, confesse plainly, that they had no vnderstanding of the ancient affaires of this Iland, but from forraine Writers; and neither that aboue two hundred and odde yeeres before the birth of our Sauiour Christ. At which time Polybius a most graue Writer, and an at∣tendant Polybius. vpon Scipio, saith, that the Regions Northward from Narbona (as this is) were vtterly vnknowen; and whatsoeuer was written or reported of them, was but a dreame. And therefore vntill such time as the Ro∣mane Romane Writers the best directers for the antiquitie of Britaine. Writers reach foorth their hands to direct vs, wee shall wander, as without a guide, and shall seeme to heape more rubbish vpon former ruines. (2) Yet let this bee granted, that the Originall names of Countries and Prouinces were first assumed from their possessors, whereof Iosephus in the seuenth The originall names of Coun∣tries and Prouin∣ces assumed first from their pos∣sessors. Iudg. 18. 29. Iudg. 10. 4. Chapter of his first Booke of Antiquities is a sufficient Witnesse, who in the dispersion of Noahs sonnes and his nephewes, nameth the Countries according to their families. So did the children of Dan name Laish after their father: Iair his Cities that he conquered in the Land of Gilead: and Iudea from Iudah whose King was of him: And that this also was the practise of the Gentiles, Perionius doth shew, who saith, that himselfe de origi∣nal. Gallic . Spaine named from Hispalus, Italy fr Ital . the sixt sonne of Iap eth the first inhabiter of this Iland, who named it 252. yeeres after the flood. knew no Nation in the earth, which would not haue their names either from their Prince, Captaine, or King: the example whereof hee inserteth, that Spaine was so na∣med from Hispalus, Italy from Italus, and the like. (3) And accordingly from Samothes the sixth sonne of Iapheth (whom Moses calleth Mesech) the brother of Gomer, and of Ia an, whose seed is said in the tenth of Genesis to haue replenished the Iles of the Gentiles, is brought by some Authors into this Iland, the yeere after the generall Flood two hundred fiftie and two, where he seated, and gaue Lawes to his peo∣ple, and left to his posteritie the name thereof to bee called Samothea, after his owne. But sith the credit of this Samothes and his Samothea ariseth onely from a The credit of this Samothes and his Samothea ariseth only from a smal and new pamph∣let, bearing the name of Berosus the Chaldean. small and new pamphlet, bearing the name of Berosus the Chaldean, bolstred out vnder a shew of aged An∣tiquitie, and thrust into the world vnder the counte∣nance of the ancient Historian himselfe: I meane not to enforce, seeing my purpose is to expose this most beautifull Iland in her owne beseeming attire, and not deformed by these rotten and patched ragges. And of this forged Berosus we haue better cause to vpbraid Iohannes Annius his Countenancer and Commenter, then the Egyptian Priests had to twit Solon, in accusing Plato in Ti . Solo quippeth the Grecians, as not hauing attai∣ned to the yeeres of a gray head for historie. Lodouic. Viues. Gasperus Var∣rerius. Berosus reiecte d. the Grecians, that for historie had not attained to the yeeres of a gray head. For it exceeds not much one hundred and twenty yeeres since the same booke first appea∣red in the world; and then vehemently suspected as fabulous by Lodouicus Viues, and afterwards conui∣cted by the learned Gasperus Varrerius in a seuerall treatise, and now vniuersally reiected of all skilfull Antiquaries. (4) But the name ALBION is better receiued, ALBION y e name of this Iland so termed by the Grecians. being found so tearmed of the Grecians in ancient time, as in the booke De Mundo, written to Alexander, and supposed to be Aristotles, Pliny in his Naturall Hi∣storie, Ptolomie, Strabo, and others: yet vpon what ground it should bee so called there arise many conie∣ctures. Pomponius Mela, Nicolas Perottus, Rigmanus Philesius, Aristotle, and Humfrey Lhuyd, deriue it from Pomponius Mela cap. de Gallia. Albion Mareoticus a Giant, and sonne of Neptune, that The name Albion from Albion the Giant. conquered (as they say) these Samotheans, and seated himselfe in this Iland the yeere after the Flood three hundred thirty fiue. And if that be true which Perot∣tus and Lilius Giraldus haue written, then may this Albion giue name to this Iland. Notwithstanding, Strabo, Munster, and Frier Bartholomew, will haue it so Strabo lib. 4. Munst Cosmogr. Bar hol. de propri∣etatibus rerum. named ab albis rupibus, of the rockes and white clifts appearing towards the coasts of France: which carri∣eth the more likelihood through the credit of Orphe∣us a most ancient Poet, who in his Argonauticks (if so be they were his) calleth the Iland next vnto Hibernia or Hernin, which questionlesse is this of ours, , that is, the white Land. And accordingly haue Albion called the White Land. the Welsh Poets called it Inis Wen. And this is further confirmed from Cicero, who termeth these whitish Welsh Poets cal∣led this Iland I is Wen. clifts mirificas moles; as also by the anticke Coines of Antonius Pius and Seuerus the Romane Emperours, wheron BRITAINE is stamped in a womans attire Britaine stamped in a womans at∣tire sitting vpon rockes. Fracast. de morbis contagio is, Lib. 1. sitting vpon rocks. And the same being chalkie, or of a plaster-like substance, Fracastorius supposeth was the cause of the sweating sicknesse, and whereof Albion had the name. Vnlesse some will deriue it from Al∣phon, which as Festus saith, doth signifie white in Greeke; or Olbion, rich or happie, in regard of the fertilitie of the soile, wholesome temperature of the aire, and the rich commodities in the same: either from Albion for the high situation. But from the Latine albis rupibus Humfrey L uyd in Bre ar. Brit. it could not bee deriued, when that language was vn∣knowen to the world. Marianus the Monke, Iohn Rous, Dauid Pencair, and William Caxton, from others Marianus Scotus. Ioh. Rous. Albion, from Al∣bina the beauti∣full daughter of D oclesian. more ancient, doe fetch the name thereof from Albina the beautifull daughter of Dioclesian King of Syria, who with her sisters, thirty in number, for the slaugh∣ter of their husbands, were banished their Countrey, and without man, oares, or tackles, were committed to the mercy of the Seas, who after many aduentures, lastly arriued vpon this shoare, where they inhabited, and gaue name to this Iland, calling it Albion after the A ridiculous opi∣nion for a proge∣nie of Giants in Albion. name of their eldest sister: and accompanying with Diuels, brought foorth a progenie of Giants, if we will beleeue the Legend of this most impudent lier, which is worthily reiected by Badius, Volateranus, Harding, Bale, Iohn Rous, and others. But that the name Albion was both of great acceptance and long continuance, is apparent by the worthy Epitheton of King Edgar the Saxon, who in his Charter for the foundation of the Abbie of Ely, hath these words: Ego Edgarus Basileus The name Albion re eined in the Char rs of some of our latter Kings. dilectae Insulae Albionis, subditis nobis sceptris Scotorum, Cumbrorum, & omnium circumcirca Regionum, quieta pace fruens, &c. By which hee knitteth the whole Iland together, as a Land worthily to be beloued, and calleth it ALBION. (5) The next name ascribed vnto this Iland is BRITAINE. The Grecians first named this Iland by y e name BRITAINE. BRITAINE, and that first found and giuen by the Grecians, who were the first discouerers of these We∣sterne parts of the world: either from their painted bodies; as their neighbours (if not ancestours) the Gaules were named of their long shaggie haire, or of their rich metals therein gotten, and thence carried in abundance into other Countries; or from Brute, that with his dispersed Troians conquered it, as he of Monmouth hath translated; or what occasion soeuer, Ieffrey ap Arthur. I dispute not: only it feares me I shall giue but small satisfaction to the desirous Reader, of the cause and originall of this name, being consorted with so many vncertainties, wherein the further we follow this in∣tangled How this Iland came to haue the name Britanni is very vncertaine. threed, the further are we lead into the Laby∣rinth of ambiguitie. But as Plutarch, Liuy, and other Latine Writers haue complained of the many fictions The fainings of Poets haue bred mistrust in many true histories. and fables of Poets intermingled with the histories of truth, whereby truth it selfe was often made inctedible; so we in rehearsing the diuers names of Britannie, and the reasons thereof by sundry Writers alleged, rest free in our relations, either from impeaching the power of Antiquitie, or approouing those things that are as yet wrapped vp in Times Obliuions, leauing the credit to them that haue left the same vnto vs, and the censure of their opinions to the iudgement of the learned, and those of better experience. (6) The vulgar receiued opinion, held on with foure hundred yeeres continuance, (some few mens Britaine the name of this Iland thought to take his name from Brute. exceptions had against the same) is, that this Iland tooke the name of Britannia from Brute the sonne of Syluius, of whom more shall bee spoken in the next Chapter for the peopling of this Iland, and from whom some (following a suspected Gildas) doe write the name Brutaine: for so doth Hierome, who transla∣ting Aethicus that excellent Scythian Philosopher, cal∣leth both this and the Ilands adiacent, Insulas Bruta∣nicas. But besides the many obiections made both by forraine and home- red Writers, that seeme to make the storie of Brute doubtfull, Humfrey Lhuyd a Cambre-Britaine, a learned and diligent searcher of In his Breuiarie of Britaine. Antiquities, doth confidently deny the name Britaine to be taken from Brute; and among many other ob∣seruations, makes this an infallible argument, that the letter B. is not the first radicall of that name; and affir∣meth The letter B. no radicall in the British tongue. boldly, that there is not any British word whose first radicall letter is B. And therefore hee will haue it to be anciently written PRYDCAIN, compoun∣ded of two British words, PRYD and CAIN, which PRYD-CAIN signifie (as he saith) Beauty and White; the C. being lost in the latter word, for the more easie pronuntiation in the British tongue; and the P. in the former changed into B. by the Latines, for the more gentle and pleasant sounds sake: so that himselfe thinketh, that those learned and ex∣pert men in the British tongue, which wrote the Ilands name with B. doe therein rather follow the Latines, then iudging that to bee the true name indeed: for proofe whereof hee citeth both ancient Copies and Traditions of their owne old Poets the Bardi, by whom Britaine vsually called Prydain. (saith he) it was vsually called Prydain, as the fittest denomination for so beautifull a Land. But if either colour or commodities were her Godfathers at the font-stone, why was she not rather named The Palace of Queene Ceres, as old Orpheus termes her; either In∣sula flor , as it hath beene found written in a very Brita ia the Insula . ancient manu-script? And yet to second this his con∣c ited name, I finde recorded by Bishop Cooper, a lear∣ned Bishop Cooper in his Dictionarie. Writer, that which makes for that purpose. At E ychurth (saith he) two miles from Salisburie, in the dig∣ging written Pryd a. downe of a wall, a booke containing twenty le es of very thicke velo e was found, which from the hands of Master Richard Pace, chiefe Secretarie to the King, I re∣ceiued; King Edward V . but being sore defaced, could read no one sentence thorow, yet did I well perceiue the word PRYTANIA, (not called so, from the adiuncts white and Beauteous) but rather from the Greeke word Prytania, which Prytania so cal∣led from the Greek word . as he saith, doth signifie mettals. For the Grecians flou∣rishing in wisedome, and experience, entred the Ocean, and finding this Iland full of Brasse, Tynne, Lead, Iron, Gold, and Siluer gaue name thereunto accordingly and called it Prytania. Thus farre he. And some in re∣gard of these rich commodities thence brought, will haue it named Britannia, as vpon like occasion Vibius Sequester affirmeth Calabria sometimes to haue beene so called. Others, and those many, do hold a more strange Vibius Sequest. opinion, namely, that this Iland was called Britannia of Bretta a Spanish word which signifieth Earth, for Britannia of Bretta a Spanish word. that it was separated from the maine land, and, say they, it was once ioined with the continent of France. Of this opinion are Antonius Volscus, Dominicus Marius Niger, Seruius Honoratus, Vinianus, Bodine, Twyne, and Antonius Volscus Dominicus Mari∣us Niger, &c. Verstegan. But how that name from that separation may be gathered I vnderstand not: for if it be gran∣ted, that this Iland also was cut from the continent (as it is thought all others in the world were,) by the vio∣lent rage of the vniuersall floud, yet it followeth not, that this only should claime that name, and from that occasion, more then any other, or then all of them so diuided and set apart in the maine Ocean. Others there are that would haue the name Britaine to bee brought from Britona a Nymph in Greece, daughter to Britannia named of Britona a Nymphe. Textor Chr . Mars, who (as they say) to auoid the lasciuious intents of Minos, forsooke the country, and passing the seas a∣riued in this Iland and by her the name arose, this hath Textor. But I might as well cite Calepine for his Anglia, and Marianus for his Albina, being all fables Textor. consorting alike together, and fictions of the same au∣thority that Virgils Dido is. Hesychius deriueth the Hesychius. name Britaine from Britannus the father of Celtice on whom Hercules begat Celtus the originall of the Celtae as Parthenius Nicaeus a very ancient author writeth. Parthenius Ni∣caeus. Sir Thomas Eliot. Britaine of the Greek word . And Sir Thomas Eliot a learned Knight draweth the name of this Iland from the Greek fountaine also, but of other signification, viz. Prutania, by which terme the Athenians signified their publike reue∣nues, and yet that is iustly excepted against, seeing that it is a peculiar terme only to the Athenians, and that Grecians called this Iland and not . Goropius Becanus in Orig. de Ant. lib. 6. Bridania or Free-Denmark. the Grecians called this Iland not . Goro∣pius Becanus in his Originall of Antwerp saith, that the Danes sought here to plant themselues, and so named this Iland Bridania, that is, free Denmarke. And others de∣riue it from Prutenia a country in Germany. But that both these are fictions it manifestly appeareth, for that this Iland was famous by the name of Britaine many hundred yeeres before that either Dania or Britaine so na∣med before ei∣ther Dania or Prutenia were heard of in the world. Pomponius Latus. Prutania were heard of in the world. Pomponius Latus would haue it Briton, and that name giuen it from the Britons in France. Indeed it is probable, that from the Celtes, the old Gaules, our ori∣ginals descended: but that the name should come of them hath no colour of truth, seeing that those Britons came from vs, and not we from them: and in Caesars Britons in France came of vs. Cambden Brit. pag 8. Forcatulus. Britaine called of Brithin a drinke. White. Britaine called of an Hebrew word. Isidore. time that coast was called Armorica, but this of ours Britaine. Forcatulus deriueth the name thereof from Brithin a drinke, which as Athenaeus saith was vsed a∣mong the Greeks. And others will haue it from the Brutij a roauing and stragling people in Italy: both which are accounted but idle conceits and for no lesse we will leaue them. White of Basingstocke will haue the name thereof deriued from an Hebrew word, and I∣sidore from a word of her own language. Thus then is Britanny burthened with many titles vnder one truth; and these are the ascriptions, causes and exceptions, as far as we are able to gather: all which must giue place to that which is to follow out of the painfull collecti∣ons and iudicious obseruances of our illustruous An∣tiquarie Master Cambden. Whose words I will a∣bridge, and by his good fauour bring to furnish this chapter, and further to satisfie the vnsatisfied Reader. Cambdeni Britan∣nia. (7) This then he holdeth for granted, that ancient Ancient nations had names of their owne: af∣terwards wre∣sted by Greeks and Latines. nations in the beginning had names of their own: and that after from these the Greeks and Latines by wresting them to the analogie or proportion of their speech, imposed names vpon Regions and countries, which tooke their denominati∣ons from their people and in-dwellers. So Iewry was na∣med from the Iewes, Media from the Medes, Persia of the Iewry so called of the Iewes. Media of the Medes. Scythia of the Scythians. Britta, Brito, Britones and Brittus. From Brit or Brith. Persians, Scythia of the Scythians, &c. And why not then by the authority of Martial, Iuuenal, Ausonius, Proco∣pius, and in old inscriptions set vp by the Britaines them∣selues, BRITTA, BRITO, BRITONES, BRIT∣TVS, from BRIT, or BRITH, from whom any one being of that nation might be termed NATIONE BRITTO, as is seene so inscribed in Saint Mary the Round at Rome? The Saxons likewise themselues called the Britains , and Witichindas the Saxon euerie where nameth the Britaines Britae: so that the word BRIT. Witichindas. BRIT is doubtlesse the Primitiue, from whence BRIT∣TO is deriued, and from whence the first glimpse of light Brit the primi∣tiue from whence Britto is deriued. leading to the word BRITAINE, seemeth to appeare. And that all nations deuised their names of that, wherein they either excelled others, or were knowen by from others, whether in regard of their first founders honor, as the Iones of Iauan, the Israelites of Israel, the Cananites of Canaan; or whether in respect of their nature, conditions, and incli∣nations; Israelites so cal∣led in honour of their first foun∣der Israel. Iberi why so called. Nomades named of their bree∣ding of Cattell. Dio. Aethiopians so called of their black hue. Iulius Solinus. as the Iberi after the Hebrew Etymologie because they were Miners; the Heneti because they were straglers; the Nomades for that they were breeders of Cattell; the Almanes for their esteemed valour and manhood; the Frankners for being free; the Pannonians, as Dio concei∣teth, of their coats with cloth-sleeues; the Aethiopians of their blacke hue: and the Albanes because they were borne with white haire, for so saith Solinus, that the colour of their heads gaue name vnto the people. Seeing then that these our Ilanders were known and called by a name com∣mon to both them and their neighbors, Cimbri or Cumeri, Britaines and their neighbors called both by one name Cim∣bri or Cumeri. Caesar, Mela, Pliny, Martial. and had no better marke to be distinguished and knowen from the borderers, then by their custome of painting their bodies, whereof the most approued authors doe witnesse, as Caesar, Mela, Pliny, Martial an others, who affirme that the Britanes vsed to colour themselues with woad, called in the Latine glastum (and Glase at this day with them doth The Britaine co∣loured them∣selues to be di∣stinguished from their neighbors. signifie blew) what if I then should coniecture (saith he) that they were called Britains from this their painted bo∣dies? for what is thus stained or coloured, in their ancient country speech is called BRITH. Neither let this Etymolo∣gie of Britains seeme to be either harsh or absurd, seeing the very words sound alike, and the name also as an expresse image representeth the thing which in Etymologies are chiefly required; for Brith, and Brit, doe passing well accord: And the word Brith among the Britaines, implieth that Brith and Brit do accord. which the Britans were indeed, to wit, painted, stained, di∣ed, and coloured, as the Latine poets describe them: hauing their backes pide or medly coloured, as Oppianus termeth Oppianus. Cyn . li. 1. Britaines so na∣med for painting themselues. them. From which colours and vse of painting, the an∣cient Britaines (as he thinketh) had their names, and as yet in vse among the Welsh. But this is certaine that a Britain is called in the British tongue BRITHON, and as BRITO came of BRITH, so did BRITANNIA, who as Isidore saith tooke the name from a word of their owne nation: for what time the ancient Greeks (that first Isidore. gaue name to this Iland) either as rouers or merchants tra∣uelled into other remote and farre disioined countries (as Eratosthenes reporteth) learned from the Inhabitants themselues, or els of the Gaules which spake the same lan∣guage, Eratosthenes. that this our nation was called Brith and Brithon: They then vnto the word BRITH, added TANIA, The Grecians vnto the word Brith added tania. which in the Greek Glossaries betokeneth a REGION, and whereof they made a compound name , that is, the BRITONS-LAND. And that this is so, the countries also lying in the West part of the world, as Mauritania, Lu∣sitania, and Aquitania, doe sufficiently confirme: for the Grecians being the first Surueiors of those regions, of Mau∣ri, whom Strabo saith was called Numidia, made Mauri∣tania; Strabo. Tania added to diuers countries, by the Grecians. Iuo Carnotensis. of Lusus the sonne of Bacchus, Lusitania, and of Aquis (waters, as Iuo Carnotensis is of opinion) called the country Aquitania: as also Turditania, and Bastinania, Prouinces in Spain, might arise from the Turdi, and Basti their possessors. And that this manner of composition is most vsuall in the names of countries we see: For came not Ire∣land by composition of the Irish word Erim? Did not An∣gle terre gr w together of an English and French word and became England, Doth not Franc-lond proceed from England com∣ming of Angle∣terre. a French and Saxon word? Came not Poleland from a Po∣lonian word, which with them betokeneth a plaine? and was not Danmarch compounded of Dan and the Dutch word Danmarch com∣pounded of Dan and March. March, which signifieth a bound or limit? Neither haue we cause to wonder at this Greek addition TANIA, seeing that S. Hierome in his questions vpon Genesis, proued out S. Hierom. in Gene. of most ancient Authors, that the Greekes inhabited along the sea coasts and Isles of Europe thorowout as far as to this our Iland. Let vs read, saith he, Varroes bookes of Anti∣quities, and those of Sisinius Capito, as also the Greeke writer Phlegon, with the rest of the great learned men, and Phlegon. we shall see, all the Ilands well neere, and all the sea coasts of the whole world, to haue been taken vp with Greek inhabi∣tants, Grecians inhabi∣ted well neere all the sea coasts of the whole world. who, as I said before, from the mountaines Amanus and Taurus euen to the British Ocean, possessed all the parts along the sea side. And verely, that the Greeks ariued in this our region, viewed and considered well the site and nature thereof, there will be no doubt nor question made: if we ob∣serue what Athenaeus hath written concerning Phileas Athenaeus. Taurominites who was in Britaine in the yeere one hun∣dred and sixty before Caesars comming: if we call to re∣membrance The certainty of the Greeks inha∣biting in Britain. Brodaeus Miscel∣lan. lib. 3. Vlysses Altar in Caledonia. Thule thought to be one of the Iles of the Or∣cades in Scot∣land. Low countries. the Altar with an inscription vnto Vlysses in Greek letters, erected in Caledonia as Solinus saith, and lastly if we marke what Pytheas before the time of the Ro∣mans here, hath deliuered and written as touching the di∣stance of Thule from Britaine. For who had euer discoue∣red vnto the Greeks, Britain, Thule, the Belgick countries, and their sea coasts especially, if the Greek ships had not entred the British and German Ocean, yea and related the description therof vnto their Geographers? Had Pytheas, thinke you, come to the knowledge of six daies sailing beyond Britaine, vnlesse some of the Greeks had shewed the same? Who euer told them of Scandia, Bergos and Nerigon, out of which men may saile into Thule? And these names seem Thule much mentioned in Greek writers. to haue been better knowen vnto the most ancient Greeks, then either to Pliny or to any Roman. Wherupon Mela te∣stifieth, that Thule was much mentioned and renowned in Greek writers: Pliny likewise writeth thus; Britain an Iland famous in the monuments and records both of the Greeks and of vs. By this meanes therefore, so many Greeke words haue crept into the British, French, and withall, into the Belgick or Low-Dutch language. And if Lazarus Laza. Baysius. As other nations glory that they deriue many words from the Greeks, so may we. Baysius, and Budaeus doe make their vant and glory in this, that their French-men haue been of old that is, louers and studious of the Greeks, grounding their reason vpon few French words of that Idiome, which receiue some marks and tokens of the Greek tongue: if Hadrianus Iu∣nius ioyeth no lesse, because in the Belgick words there lie couertly Greek Etymologies: then may the Britains make their boast in whose language many words there be deriued from the Greeks. Thus farre M. Cambdens iudgement for Britannia. Which name we find first mentioned by Polybius the Greeks historian, who liued and traueled with Scipio thorow most parts of Europe, about 265. yeers before the birth of Christ. And after him Athenaeus a Greek authour of good account, and before the yeere Athenaeus. For so by the Scriptures ac∣count I place the time. In Britaine great store of large trees. of grace 179. mentioneth the name of Britaine, and that vpon this occasion: King Hiero, saith he, fra∣ming a ship of such hugenesse and burden, as was admira∣ble to the world, was much troubled for a tree, whereof he might make the maine mast: which at last with much adoe was found in Britaine, by the direction of a Swineheard: and by Phileas Taurominites the Mechanick conueied Phileas Tau∣rominites. into Sicilie, whereby that want was sufficiently suppli∣ed. To this let not the Criticks from Caesar say, that Caesar. Britaine brought foorth neither Beech nor Firre, as he in his fist book of commentaries affirmeth (if by fagus he meane the Beech) seeing that the same kind doth most In Scotland Firre trees for masts. plentifully grow in all parts of this Iland, and the Firre-trees for masts in the North west of Scotland vp∣on the bankes of the Lough argicke of such great height and thicknesse, that at the root they beare 28. handfuls about, and the bodies mounted to 90. foot of height they beare at that length 20. inches Diame∣tre, as hath been measured by some in commission, & so certified to his Maiesty: and at this present growing vpon the lands of the right worthy Knight Sir Alex∣ander Hayes, his Maiesties principal Secretay for Scotland. But among the Latine Writers Lucretius was the first that before Cesar mentioneth Britaine in these verses: Nam quid Britannum coelum deferre putamus, Lucretius. Et quod in Aegypto est, quà mundi claudicat Axis: We see the difference in the spheeres where Britaines Sunne doth goe From Egypts Clime, wherein Charles waine is forc'd to draw so low. (8) Other names hath this Iland beene termed by, and that either by way of note for her situation, as Insula Caeruli, the Iland in the Sea, so written in the Britaine called Insula Caeruli. sonet or parodia made against Ventidius Bassus, and by Claudian confirmed, whose sides (saith hee) the azure Sea doth wash. And in a very ancient manuscript it is found written, Insula florum, an Iland of flowers, for the abundance of Graine therein growing: as also for her subiection to the Romanes, hath beene called by Aegisippus, the Romane World, and by her owne Hi∣storian Britaine the Ro∣mane world. Prosperus Aquitaine. A prophecy of the Romane sooth sayers concerning Bri∣taine. This Iland Bri∣taine named the Roman Iland. Gildas, Romania: for being first subdued by them, the very name of seruitude (saith he) stucke fast to the soile. And Prosperus Aquitanis in expresse words calleth it, the Romane Iland, and so did the South-sai∣ers when the statues of Tacitus and Florianus the Em∣perours were by lightning ouerthrowen, who prophe∣cied, that an Emperour should arise out of their familie, that should send a Pro-consull to the Romane Iland. Vp∣on the like cause of conquest and subiection we read in Amianus, that what time the Iland had assaied a dan∣gerous Amianus Marcel. lib. 28. cap. 7. reuolt in the raigne of Valentinianus the Empe∣ror, Theodosius as then Gouernor of Britaine, reducing them vnder their wonted obedience, in honor of Va∣lentinianus, caused the Iland to bee called VALEN∣TIA, which name notwithstanding died either with, This Iland na∣med Valentia. or immediately after the death of the said Emperour. (9) But about the same time, when as by Gods de∣cree the Romanes fulnesse was come to the wane, and Many countries arise by the Ro∣mans downfall. the greatnesse of their glory did abate; by the downe∣fall of that one Empire many Kingdomes beganne to arise, and to haue their Rulers, Lawes, and Limits of themselues. Among the rest, this Iland Britaine short∣lie came to be diuided into three scuerall Kingdomes, This Iland Bri∣taine diuided in to three king∣domes. The first, Scotland, whose partition south∣ward is from Carlile to New∣castle. and each of them to retaine an absolute power in their owne dominions, and knowen by their seuerall and proper names. The first was Scotland from Sco∣tia, and that from Scythia, as the best suppose, whose Southerne bounds was the famous Wall from Carlile to Newcastle, and from thence the enorme tract of all that Northerne promontorie was called Scotia, or Scotland. The second was Cambria, of vs called Wales, sited in the West of this Iland, inclosing those waste The second. Cambria or Wales, whose partition is from Basingwark to Wye. mountaines with a ditch drawen from Basingwarke in Flint-shire in the North, to the mouth of Wye neere Bristoll in the South, so separated by great Offa the Mercian King. And the third was Angle-lond, the East, the most fruitfull, and best of the Iland, lying coasted The third. Angle-lond coa∣sted with the French and German Seas. with the French and Germane Seas; so named when the vnited Heptarchie of the Saxons was ruled by King Eg∣bert, who by his edict dated at Winchester, Anno 819. commanded the same to bee called Angle-lond, accor∣ding to the name of the place from whence his ance∣stors This Iland na∣med Angle-lond of a place in Denmarke cal∣led Engloen. the Angle-Saxons came, which was out of the continent part of Denmarke, lying betwixt Iuitland and Holsatia, where to this day the place retaineth the name Engloen. And therefore Calepine is to be reiected, that would haue the name from Queene Angela, and Goropius, of good Anglers; either from Pope Gregorie his attribute of Angell-like faces; or from others that Gregorie 1. would faine it from Angula the Giant-like brother to Danus; or force it from Angulus Orbis. (10) Neither indeed was it called England before This Iland not called England before the daies of Canutus the Dane. the daies of Canutus the Dane; but with Angle-land, retained still the names both of Albion and Britaine, as in a Saxon Charter made by King Edgar the tenth in succession from Egbert, and no lesse then one hun∣dred forty and nine yeeres after this Edict is seene, This Iland vsu∣ally called both Angle-lond, Al∣bion, and Britain, before Canutus daies. where in the beginning he stileth himselfe thus: Ego Edgar totius Albionis Basileus, &c. And in the end of the same charter thus: Edgar Rex totius Britannia D co∣nem cum sigillo S. Crucis confirmaui. And yet vpon his Coines wrote himselfe Rex Anglis, whereby wee see the rellish of the former names not vtterly extinct, though a new was imposed by the Saxons. (11) This last name this Iland still retained, The name En∣gland not chan∣ged either by the Dane or Nor∣mane Conque∣rours. though two seuerall Conquests of two seuerall Nati∣ons were made of the same. Neither did William the Conquerour attempt to alter it, it sounding belike so Angel-like in his eares, accounting himselfe most hap∣pie to be King of so worthy a Kingdome: the glorie whereof is further inlarged by the ranking of Christi∣an Hath the fifth place in all Ge∣nerall Councels. nations, assembled in their generall Councels, wherein England is accounted the fifth, and hath place of presidencie before kingdomes of larger territories. This name of England continued for the space of se∣uen hundred eighty and three yeeres, vnto the com∣ming Hath continued and kept the name England the space of se∣uen hundred eighty and three yeeres. in of our Soueraigne Lord King IAMES, in anno 1602. who by the hand of GOD hath vnited all these Diademes into one Imperiall Crowne, and redu∣ced the many Kingdomes in one Iland, vnder the go∣uernment of one Monarch: and after the manifold conquests, irruptions, and dissensions, hath settled an eternall amitie; and extinguishing all differences of names, hath giuen the whole Iland the ancient name of Now reduced to the name of Great Britaine. GREAT BRITAINE, by his Edict dated at Westminster, quartring the royal Armes of his seuerall Kingdomes in one royall Scutchion, and for his mott, as is most meet, BEATI PACIFICI. THE ANCIENT NATIONS IN∣HABITING THIS ILAND OF GREAT BRI∣TAINE BEFORE THE CONQVEST THERE∣OF BY THE ROMANES. CHAPTER III. I T is not to bee doubted, but that this Iland with the Vniuersall was reple∣nished Britaine repleni∣shed with people before Noahs flood. with people, imme∣diately after that men be∣gan to be multiplied vpon the earth, euen in the daies of the former Patriarkes, and long before the Flood of Noah, as sundrie ancient Writers haue related. And surely if wee consider in those first ages of the world the long life of man (the only meanes to multiplication) and the worlds conti∣nuance for one thousand six hundred fiftie and six yeeres before it was destroied, wee shall easily yeeld, that euery Country and corner of the earth was plen∣tifully peopled and inhabited. And so much doe the Sacred Scriptures intimate vnto vs, where, by the Pro∣phet Esay it is said, Thus saith the Lord, that created hea∣uen; God himselfe, that framed the earth, and made it: he Isa. 45. 18. hath prepared it; he created it not in vaine; he formed it to be inhabited. (2) But when the wrath of GOD was executed vpon the world for sinne, and all ouer-whelmed with a Flood of waters, the whole earth thereby became al∣together vnpeopled, eight persons only with the breed∣reserued Noahs flood. creatures saued in the floting Arke: Whose Port or Hauen was the mountaine of Araret in Arme∣nia; The hauen of Noahs Arke, Mount Araret. whence, with the blessing of procreation, man∣kinde againe began to be multiplied vpon the earth; and from the confusion of Babels building, to be scat∣tered Babels Tower the cause of sundrie Languages, and dispersion of people. by Tribes and Colonies, according to the diuer si∣tie of Languages, into diuers parts and Countries of the world, giuing names to the places where they sea∣ted, according to the names of their Princes, or chiefe Commanders. Amongst whom the sonnes of Iapheth the eldest sonne of Noah (whom Moses declareth to Iapheths progeny peopled Europe. Genesis 10. haue peopled the Isles of the Gentiles) betooke them∣selues into Europe, these westerne parts of the world: as Sem did into Asia, and Cham into Africa: whose Sems planted in Asia. Chams off-spring seated in Africa. Ioseph. lib. 1. posterities accordingly dispersed Iosephus in his first Booke of Antiquities hath both branched into their se∣uerall diuisions, and reduced them to their first roots and originals. (3) Now that the Iles of the Gentiles mentioned Europe the Iles of Gentiles. by Moses, were these of Europe, all learned men con∣fesse: and therefore those especially of Britannie and Sicilie, as Wolfangus Musculus is of opinion. And that Wolfang. Mus∣cul. Origen. lib. 9. cap. 2. Wolfang. Europe fell to Iaphets portion, Iosephus and Isidore doe agree: who affirme his off-spring to haue inhabited from the Mount Taurus all Europe Northward, so farre Lazius. Theophilus Episc. Antioch. ad An∣ ol. lib. 2. as the British Seas, leauing names both to places and people. And Gildas, as Nubrigensis witnesseth, and Polydore Virgil granteth, will haue this Iland inhabi∣ted euen from the Flood. But of these ancient things, Sebastian Mun∣ster. saith Sebastian Munster, no man can write certainly, it depending only vpon coniecturals, and the same by Stories of the first times meere∣lie coniecturall. heare-say, and flying reports of priuate men, as Ori∣gen speaketh. (4) Gomer then, the eldest sonne of Iapheth, gaue Gomer the eldest sonne of Iapheth. name to the Gomerians, who filled almost this part of the world, leading (as Villichius saith) in the tenth Villichius. A Colonie of Go∣merians called Combri or Cimbri, of Gomer, came into . Englishmen were of Cimbrica Cher∣sonesus, which came from Italy. Ioh. Lewis in Re∣form. hist. li. 1. ca. 9. yeere of Nimrod, a Colonie out of Armenia into Italie, which of Gomer were called Combri, and afterwards Cimbri: whence such as departed Italy went into the North parts and gaue name to Cimbrica Chersonesus: from whence it is certaine we the English proceede, and of whom also it is likely the Britaines came. For so iudgeth a learned Britain himselfe, who saith his countrimen the Welsh which are vnlearned, as yet know no other name for their land and people, but only C mbri. (5) And that of these Gomerians were also the Gaules of the Go∣merians. Gaules, learned Clarenceaux that brightest lampe to all Antiquities, out of Iosephus and Zonaras sufficiently hath obserued; who that they were also called Cim∣bri, he proueth out of Cicero, & Appian Alexandrinus; Appian. Alexand. Lib. . that those Barbarians whom Marius defeated, Cice∣ro plainly termeth Gaules, where he saith C. Marius re∣pressed the armies of the Gaules, entring in great num∣bers Gaules by all Hi∣storie were the Cimbrians. into Italy: which, as all Historians witnesse, were the Cimbrians. And the Habergeon of their king Beleus digged vp at Aquae Sextia, where Marius put them to flight, doth shew the same: whereon was en∣grauen in strange characters BELEOS CIM∣BROS; as also the testimony of Lucan doth no Marius Haber∣geon. Marius killed by a Cimbrian. lesse, who calleth the Ruffine hired to kill Marius, a Cimbrian, whom Liuy and Plutarch in the life of Mari∣us affirme to be a Gaule. They also who vnder the conduct of Brennus spoiled Delphi in Greece, were Delphi spoiled by Brennus. Gaules, as all writers with one voice agree; and yet that these were named Cimbri, Appian in his Illyricks doth testifie. And for Brennus their Grand-Captaine, Brennus a Britaine or a Cimbrian. our Historians report him to be a Britaine: as likewise Virgil (though in taunting wise) termeth that Gram∣marian Virgil. Catalect. lib 8. cap. 3. Quintilian. the Britaine Thucydides, whom Quintilian af∣firmes to be a Cimbrian. (6) And if of the rest of Noahs nephewes, seated The Turkes, the Iones, Medes, and Thracians come of Noahs ne∣phewes. in seuerall countries, the Nations proceeding from them, are knowen by their originall names, as the Turkes of Togorma, whom the Iewes to this day so terme, the Iones from Iauan, the Modes from Madai, the Thracians from Tiras, and so of the rest, whose names as yet sound not much vnlike to their first planters; why then shall not we thinke, that our Bri∣tanes or Cumerians, are the very of-spring of Gomer, Britaines or Cu∣merians the off∣spring of Gomer. and of Gomer tooke their denomination, the name so neere according? Sith granted it is, that they planted themselues in the vtmost borders of Europe, as Isodore Isodore. hath said. For the Ark resting in Armenia, and the peo∣ple Armenia the fountaine region of all Nations. Places neerest Armenia first peopled. thence flowing like waters from the spring, reple∣nished those parts first that lay next their site: as Asia the lesse, and Greece before Italy: Italy before Gaule, and Gaule before Britaine. And if we consider the oc∣casions, that might be offered, either for disburde∣ning the multitudes of people, for conquest, desire of The occasions why people dis∣perie. nouelties, smalnesse of distance, or commodities of the aire and soile, we may easily conceiue this Iland to haue been peopled from thence. For it standeth with sense that euery country receiued their first inhabi∣tants Each Nation peopled from places neere. from places neere bordering, rather then from them that lay more remote: for so was Cyprus peopled out of Asia, Sicile and Candie out of Greece; Corsica and Sardinia, out of Italy, Zeland out of Germany, Island out of Norway, and so of the rest. Now that Britaine had her first inhabitants from Gaule, sufficiently is Britaine had her first inhabitants from the Gaules. proued by the name, site, religion, manners, and lan∣guages, by all which the most ancient Gaules and Bri∣taines haue beene as it were linked together in some mutuall society; as is at large proued by our Arch-Antiquary in his famous worke, to which I refer the Britannia Camb∣deni. studious reader. (7) And although the inner parts of the Iland were inhabited, as Caesar saith, of such whom they themselues out of their owne records, report to haue Caesar. Comment. Lib. 5. been borne in the Iland: yet the sea coasts were peo∣pled The sea-coasts of Britaine peo∣pled out of Belgia. by those, who vpon purpose to make war, had passed thither out of Belgia, and Gaule, who still caried the names of those cities and states, out of which they came: as the Belgae, the Attrebatij, Parisi, and the like names of people both in Gaule, and in Britaine, that after the warres there remained. Which is the more confirmed in that both the Prouinces were gouerned by one and the same Prince, as Caesar in his owne re∣membrance Caesar. Com. lib. 2 A part of Gaule and Britaine go∣uerned by one Prince. knew, and nameth one Diuitiacus to hold a good part of Gaule, and also of Britaine vnder his go∣uernment. Yea and Tacitus the most curious searcher into Britaines affaires, in the life of Agricola thus disci∣phereth them. Now (saith hee) what manner of men Tacitus in vita Agricola. the first inhabitants of Britannie were, forraine brought in, or borne in the land, as among a barbarous people, it is not certainly knowen. Their complexions are different, and thence may some coniectures bee taken: for the red haire of the dwellers in Caledonia, and mighty limmes, import a German descent. The coloured countenances The Caledoniant import a German disscent. The Silures from Spaine. of the Silures, and haire most commonly curled, and site against Spaine, seeme to induce, that the old Spaniards passed the Sea, and possessed those places. The neerest to France likewise resemble the French, either because they retaine of the race from which they descended, or that in Countries butting together, the same aspect of the heauens doth yeeld the same complexions of bodies. But generally it is most likely, the French being neerest, did people the Land. In their ceremonies and superstitious Britaine most likely to be peo∣pled by the French. perswasions, there is to be seene an apparant conformitie. The Language differeth not much: like boldnesse to chal∣lenge and set into dangers: when dangers come, like feare in refusing: sauing that the Britaines make shew of great courage, as being not mollified yet by long peace. (8) Whereby wee see, that these Cimbrians (of whom, as Appian Alexandrinus saith, came the Celts, Appian. Alexand. in . Celt. and of them the Gaules, as Plutarch in the life of Ca∣millus Plutarch. Plato. Aristotle. affirmeth, with whom both Plato and Aristotle agree) were the ancient progenitors of these our Bri∣taines: and them, with the Gaules, to be both one and the same people, is allowed by Pliny, that placeth Britaines and Gaules both pla∣ced in the Con∣tinent of France them both in the continent of France; for so Eustathi∣us in his Commentarie vnderstandeth Dionysius Afar, that these Britaines in Gaule gaue name to the Iland now called GREAT BRITAINE, as Pomponius Pomponius Laetus. . hist. Angl. lib. 1, cap. . Laetus and Beda before him had done. These things considered, with the neerenesse of their sites for ready entercourse, made both Cesar and Tacitus to conceiue as they did. Neither were these things following small motiues vnto them: for their religion was alike, saith Lucan. Britaines and Gaules alike in many respects. Strabo, Tacitus, Dion, &c. Caesar, Strabo. Lucan and Tacitus: their boldnesse in warres, and ma∣ner of armes alike, saith Strabo, Tacitus, Dion, Pliny, Herodian, and Mela: Their building alike, saith Cesar and Strabo: their ornaments and manners alike, saith Pliny and Cesar: their wits alike, saith Strabo and Taci∣tus: their language alike, saith learned Bodine: and in Bodin. all things the vnconquered Britaines to the ancient Gaules alike, saith Tacitus. And all these doe warrant Tacitus. vs (me thinkes) to come from the Cimbrians, whose sonnes, and our fathers, were the Celts and Gaules: The Celts and Gaules our fa∣thers. Bale Cent. 1. Britaines assisted the Gaules a∣gainst Cesar. the bands of whose amities were so linked together, that the Britaines gaue aid, and assisted the Gaules a∣gainst Cesar, which was no small cause of his quarrell against them. (9) Not to deriue the truth of our historie from the fained inuentions of a forged Berosus, that bring∣eth Berosus thought a forged author. Samothes to people this Iland, about one hundred fiftie two yeeres after the Flood, to giue lawes to the Land, and to leaue it to his posteritie, for three hun∣dred thirty fiue yeeres continuance: although hee be Holinsh. hist. lib. 1 cap. 2. Vitus hist. Brit. lib. 1. annot. 25. Genes. 10. 2. countenanced by Amandus Zirixaeus in the annotati∣ons of White of Basingstocke: and magnified vnto vs by the names of Dis and Meshech the sixt sonne of Ia∣pheth, from whom this Iland with a Sect of Philoso∣phers tooke their names, saith Textor, Bale, Holinshead, Textor, &c. Iob. Caius in An∣tiq. Canterb. lib. 1. and Caius: yet seeing this building hath no better a foundation but Berosus, and he not only iustly suspe∣cted, but long since fully conuicted for a counterfeit, we leaue it, as better fitting the pens of vulgar Chroni∣clers, then the relish or liking of iudicious Readers: whilest with Laertius wee iudge rather, that those So∣phes Laertius in vit. Philosophorum, cap. 1. Villichus. were termed Semnothoes, and they not from Sa∣mothea, as Villichus would haue vs beleeue. (10) Neither soundeth the musicke of Albions le∣gion tunable in our eares, whom Berosus with full note, and Annius alloweth to be the fourth sonne of Hollinshead. An vnlikely sto∣rie of Britaines first peopling. Neptune, and him the same that Moses calleth Napth∣tahim, the fourth sonne of Mizraim, the second sonne of Cham, the third sonne of Noah, (because his fictions should be countenanced with the first) who being put into this Iland by Neptune his father (accounted for∣sooth the god of the Seas) about the yeere after the Samothea this Iland Britaine conquered by Chams posterities flood three hundred thirty and fiue, ouercame the Sa∣motheans, as easily he might, being a man of so great strength in bodie, and largenesse of limmes, that hee is accounted among the Giants of the earth. Him Her∣cules Pompon. Mela. surnamed Lybicus in battle assailed for the death of Osiris his father, and after forty foure yeeres tyran∣nie (saith Bale) slew him with his brother Bergion in Bale. the continent of Gallia neere to the mouth of the ri∣uer Rhodanus: whence Hercules trauelled into this Iland, as Giraldus (from Gildas the ancient Briton Po∣et) coniectureth, whose fifth dialogue of Poetrie hee Giraldus. had seene; and the rather beleeued, because Ptolemy calleth that head of Land in Cornwall, Promontorium Hercules in Bri∣taine left the pos∣sesion thereof to Chams posteritie. Herculis, and left the possession of the Iland vnto them of Cham, contrarie to the meaning of the Scriptures, that made him a Captiue, but neuer a Conquerour ouer his brethren, whiles their first Policies were standing. (11) The last, but much applauded opinion, for An opinion much applau∣ded. the possessing and peopling of this Iland, is that of Brute, generally held for the space of these last foure hundred yeeres (some few mens exceptions reserued) who with his dispersed Troians came into, and made Brute and his Troians conque∣red this Iland. conquest of this Iland the yeere of the worlds creation 2887. and after the vniuersall flood 1231. in the eigh∣teenth yeere of Heli his Priesthood in the land of Isra∣el, and before the incarnation of Christ our Sauiour one thousand fifty nine. This Brute is brought from the ancient Troians by descent, yea and from the per∣sons of the heathen deified Gods: as that he was the Brute descended from Iupiter. sonne of Syluius, who was the sonne of Ascanius, the sonne of AEneas, the sonne of Anchises by Venus the Goddesse, and daughter to Iupiter their greatest in ac∣count. And if Pliny and Varro hold it praise worthy to challenge descents (though falsly) from famous Pliny. Varr . personages, wherby, as they say, appeareth an inclina∣tion to vertue, and a valorous conceit to perswade vnto honor, as sprung from a race diuine and power∣full: A false descent may not be challenged. Geffrey of Monmouth died in Anno 11 2. Acts 17. 28. then by all meanes let vs listen to him of Mon∣mouth, who hath brought his Nation to ranke in de∣gree with the rest of the Gentiles, which claime them∣selues to be the Generation of the Gods. (12) But why do I attribute the worke to him, as the Author, sith he professeth himselfe to be but the translator of that history out of the British tongue, Monmouth his excuse. which Walter the Archdeacon of Oxford brought out of Normandie, and deliuered vnto him? For the fur∣ther confirmation thereof, and more credit to his sto∣ry, Henry of Huntington, who liued in the time of king Stephen, and wrote likewise the history of this land, Henry of Hun∣tingdon died in Anno 1148. bringeth the line of Brute from AEneas the Troiane, and his arriuage and conquest to happen in the time of Heli his Priesthood in the land of Israel, as Geffrey ap Henry Hunting∣ton also recor∣deth Brutes line and arriuall in Britaine. Geffrey ap. Arthur. A booke hereof found. Arthur hath also done: not taking (as some thinke) a∣ny thing thereof from him, but rather out of an an∣cient booke intituled De Origine Regum Britanno∣rum, found by himselfe in the library of the Abbey of Bec, as he trauelled towards Rome: which history be∣gan at the arriuall of Brute, and ended with the acts of Cadwalader, as by a treatise of his owne inditing, bea∣ring the same title, hath been compared, and found in all things agreeing with our vulgar history, as indu∣strious Lamberd affirmeth himselfe to haue seen. And Ninius is said by the writer of the reformed history, to Wil. Lamb. Per∣amb. Ninius and Ta∣liesin bring the Britaines from Brute. bring these Britaines from the race of the Troians, foure hundred yeeres before that Geffrey wrote: yea and long before Ninius also, Taliesin a Briton Poet in an Ode called Hanes, of Taiess his course of life, in these words, Mia deythymyma at Wedillion Troia, that is, I came hither to the Remnants of Troy. (13) That William of Malmesbury (who wrote in the daies of King Henry the first) was before him of Died in Anno 1142. Monmouth, is most certaine; yet doth he make menti∣on of Arthur a Prince (saith he) deseruing rather to be aduanced by the truth of records, then abused by false im∣putation Malmesb. de Gest is rerum An∣glorum. lib. 1. of fables; being the only prop and vpholder of his country. And Beda, his ancient also, nameth Ambrosius Aurelianus to be King of the Britaines, long before Beda hislor. Angli. lib. 1. cap. 16. that Geffrey was borne: So was Brennus mentioned by Liuy; Bellinus, (if he be Belgius) by Iustine; Casibe∣lan by Caesar; Cunobilin by Suetonius; Aruiragus by Liuy. Iustine. Caesar. Suetonius. Martial. Rusebius. Eutropius. Nicephorus. Ambrose. Socrates. Harding Chr . chap. 11. Iohan. Hanuil. Nichola. Vpton. Martial; Lucius by Eusebius; Coel, Constantius, Carau∣sius, and others by Eutropius, and Paulus Diaconus; and Helena by Nicephorus, Ambrose, and Socrates. These are the affirmatiues that giue countenance to the Arch∣deacon of Monmouths translation, and credit to Brutes conquests and successours; yea and Iohn Harding his Herauld, in his home-spun poetry, can easily emblaze his armes to be Gules, charged with two lions rampant endorsed Ore; and the same to be borne by the Kings of Troy. And his banner displaied at his entrance is said to be Vert a Diana of gold fitchel, crowned, and in∣thronized, . the same that AEneas bare, when he entred the land of the Latines. But the censures of these rela∣tions I leaue to the best liking of iudicious Readers, only wishing them to be vnlike the inhabitants vnder the rockes of the Cataracts of Nilus, whereof Cicero and Ammianus make mention, who were made deafe Cicero de Som. Scipionis. Ammianus Mar∣cel. lib. 22. cap. 14. Histories must be weighed with iudgement. by the continuall noise of the fall of Nilus: left by the sound and loud voices of these writers, the excep∣tions of others can not be heard, which from the ful∣nesse of their pennes I will likewise declare, without offence, I hope, vnto any. (14) First (with a reuerend reseruation had to the sacred histories) Varro the most learned Latine writer, Va o. diuiding times motions into three seuerall parts, that is, from the creation to the flood, which he termeth al∣together vncertaine: from the flood to the first Olympi∣ad (by Beroaldus computation set in the yeere of the Times motions diuided into three parts. Beroaldus. world 3154. and thirty one of the raigne of Ioas, king of Iudah: seuen hundred seuenty and foure yeers before the birth of our Sauiour) he calleth fabu∣lous: and the last age from the first Olympiad to him∣selfe The third only historicall. he nameth historicall. Now the story of Brute be∣ginning two hundred sixty seuen yeeres before the The story of Brute fabulous. first Olympiad, falleth in the time wherein nothing els is related, either of the Greeks or Latines, the only lear∣ned writers, but fables and tales, as both himselfe and others haue told vs, much more then, among the bar∣barous, vnlettred, and vnciuill nations, as all these parts of the world then were. (15) Whereupon Gildas our ancientest home∣borne writer, (cited and in whole sentences followed Gildas. by venerable Beda, who termeth him the Britaines hi∣storiographer) in this of Brute is silent, and in his lamen∣table Beda hist. Angli. lib. 1. cap 22. Gildas maketh no mention of Brute. passions neuer dreames of him, but as one ouer∣whelmed with griefe bewaileth the wickednesse of the time wherein he liued, who was born, as himselfe saith, in the forty fourth yeere after the Saxons first en∣trance, about the yeere of Christs incarnation 493. and died, as Bale citeth out of Polydore, the yeere of our re∣demption 580. Ninius also another ancient writer, Bale out of Polydore. Ninius also saith nothing of him. who liued aboue eight hundred yeeres since, taking in hand the Chronicles of the Britaines, complaineth that their great Masters and doctors could giue him no assistance, being ignorant of skill, and had left no memoriall of things passed, nor committed their acts vnto writing, whereby hee was inforced to gather what he had gotten from the annals and Chronicles of the holy fathers. Beda likewise, whose history ended in anno 733, beginneth no sooner then with Iulius Cae∣sars Beda hist. Angli. lib. 5 cap. 24. Beda beginneth but at Iulius Caesar. Beda had the help of the Ab∣bat Albinus. entrance; notwithstanding he had the assistance of the Abbat Albinus, who was brought vp vnder The∣odorus Archbishop of Canterbury, and had begun the history of this land with most diligent search from the records of the kingdome of Kent, and the prouin∣ces adioining; as also being further assisted by Daniel Bishop of the West-Saxons, who sent him all the re∣cords that were to be found of the same Bishoprick, Of Daniel Bi∣shop of West-Saxons. South-Saxons, and the ile of Wight. The like helpes had he from Abbat Essius, for the country of East-Angles; Of Abbat Essius. from Cymbertus and the brethren of Laestinge for the prouince of Mercia, and East-Saxons. And from the Of Cymbertus and brethren of Laestinge. Of the brethren of Lindisfarnum. brethren of Lindisfarnum, for the country of Nor∣thumberland; besides his owne paines in collections, knowledge and experience: all which he did disgest and historically compile, and before the publication thereof sent it to king Ceolulphe at that time raigning in Northumberland, to be approued or corrected by his most learned skill: yet in none of these found he that history of Brute nor his successors, which as some The history of Brute not to be found in Beda his time. Elward. would haue it, was then vnbegotten in the world. (16) After him Elward, as William of Malmsburie calleth him, or rather (as he writeth himselfe) Patrici∣us Consul fabius Questor Ethelwerdus, a diligent sear∣cher of antiquities, a reuerend person, and of the blood roiall, wrote foure bookes, briefly comprising the whole history of England, from the beginning of the world vnto the time of king Edgar wherein he li∣ued; Elward speaketh nothing of Brute. Ingulphus. Florentius of Worcester. of Brute nor his Britaines speaketh a word; but passeth with silence to the Romans and Saxons. What need I to cite Ingulphus, who died anno 1109. Flo∣rentius of Worcester, that florished in the daies of King Henry the first, or William of Malmsbury, that wrote vn∣to William of Malmsbury. All these writers before Geffrey and yet none mention Brute but he. the end of his raigne; all of them writers before Geffrey of Monmouth, but none of them mentioning this story of Brute. This moued William of Newbourgh, borne (as himselfe saith) in the beginning of King Stephens raign, & liuing at one and the same time with this Archdeacon of Monmouth, too too bitterly to in∣ueigh against him and his history, euen so soone as the same came foorth: as in the proeme of his booke is to be seen. And that the words are his and not our own, take them from him as they lie. In these our daies (saith he) there is a certaine writer risen vp, deuising fictions and tales of the Britaines out of the vaine humors of his owne William of New∣boroughs Chro∣nicle inueighing against Ieffrey ap Arthur. braine, extolling them far aboue the valorous Macedoni∣ans, or worthy Romans; his name is Geffrey, and may well assume the sirname Arthur, whose tales he hath taken out of the old fables of the Britaines, and by his owne in∣uention augmented with many vntruths, foiling them ouer with a new colour of the Latine tongue, and hath inuested them into the body of an history. Aduenturing further to diuulge vnder the name of autentick prophesies, deceit∣full coniectures and foredeemings of one Merline (a Wi∣zard), Merline a wizard. whereunto also he addeth a great deale of his owne. And againe: In his booke which he hath intituled the Bri∣taines History, how shamelesly, and with a bold counte∣nance he doth lie, there is no man that readeth therein can doubt, vnlesse he hath no knowledge at all in ancient true hi∣stories; for hauing not learned the truth of things indeed, he admitteth without discretion and iudgement, the vanitie and vntruths of fables. I forbeare to speake (saith he) what great matters this fellow hath forged of the Britaines acts before the Empire and comming in of Caesar. Thus farre Paruus. But I know the answer to this so great an accusation: A deuice to put by this William of Newburghs accusation. namely, that this William making suit vnto Dauid ap Owen Gwyneth, Prince of North-wales, for the Bisho∣prick of Saint Assaphs, after the death of Geffrey, and thereof failing, falsly scandalized and impudently be∣lied that most reuerend man. Which surely had been a great fault, and might of vs be beleeued, had not o∣thers of the same ranke and time, verified asmuch. (17) For Syluester Giraldus, commonly called Cam∣brensis, that flourished in the same time with the said Descript. Camb. cap 7. He florished in Anno 1210. Giraldus Cam∣brensis calleth Bruts history the fabulous story of Ieffrey. Iohn Weatham∣stead. author, made no doubt to terme it The fabulous story of Geffrey. The like is verified by Iohn Weathamstead Ab∣bat of Saint Albanes, a most iudicious man that wrote in anno 1440. who in his Granarie giueth sentence of this history as followeth. The whole discourse of Bru∣tus (saith he) is rather poeticall, then historicall, and for diuers reasons is built more vpon opinion then truth, first because there is no mention thereof made in the Romane story, either of his killing his father, or of the said birth, or The discourse of Brutus dispro∣ued by Iohn Weathastead. yet of banishing the sonne. Secondly, for that Ascanius begat no such sonne who had for his proper name Syluius by any approued Author: for according to them, he begat Ascanius had no sonne whose proper name was Syluius. only one sonne, and his name was Iulius, from whom the family of the Iulii tooke their beginning. And thirdly, Syl∣uius Posthumus, whom perhaps Geffrey meaneth; was the sonne of Aeneas by his wife Lauinia, and he begetting his sonne Aeneas in the thirty eighth yeer of his raigne, en∣ded his life by course of naturall death. The kingdome ther∣fore now called England, was not heretofore, as many will haue, named Britaine of Brutus the sonne of Syluius. A ridiculous thing to vsurpe gentility. Wherefore it is a vaine opinion and ridiculous to challenge noble blood, and yet to want a probable ground of the chal∣lenge: for it is manhood only, that enobleth a nation; and it is the mind also with perfect vnderstanding, and nothing Wisedome the true nobility. els, that gaineth gentility to a man. And therefore Seneca writeth in his Epistles to Plato; that there is no King but he came from vassals, and no vassall but he came from Seneca Epist. 44. Kings. Wherefore to conclude, let this suffice (saith he) that the Britaines from the beginning of their nobility haue been couragious and valiant in fight, that they haue subdu∣ed their enemies on euery side, and that they vtterly refuse the yoke of seruitude. (18) Now that William of Newborough, had suffi∣cient cause (say some) to exclaime against the fantacies of Merline, and the fictions of Arthur, is made mani∣fest in the sequel, not only by the decree of that ob∣truded Councell of Trent, wherein was inhibited the publication of Merlines books; but also (in effect) by the statute enacted the fifth yeere of our last decea∣sed Merlines books inhibited. Queene Elizabeth of blessed and immortall memorie, wherein is forbidden such fantasticall predictions, An Act inhibi∣ting fantasticall predictions. vpon occasions of Armes, Fields, Beasts, Badges, Cogni∣zances, or Signets, such as Merline stood most vpon; and likewise William of Malmsbury saith that Arthur Malmesburies testimony of Arthur. being the only proppe that vpheld his country, de∣serued rather to be aduanced by truth, then abused with fables wherewith that story is most plentifully stored. And also, that Weathamstead had reason to ac∣count Brutes acts and conquests, to be rather poeticall then any waies warranted by the records of truth, ap∣peareth by the silence of the Romane writers therein, who name neither Brute nor his father in the genea∣logie of the Latine Kings: and if any such were, (saith Brute not menti∣oned in the ge∣nealogie of the Latine Kings. the contradictors) how could they be ignorant of the vntimely death of their king, slaine by the hand of his naturall (though in this act vnnaturall) sonne? or what should moue them, being so lauish in their own commendations, to be thus silent in their Brutes worthinesse, that with seuen thousand dispersed Tro∣ians warred so victoriously in Gallia, conquered a king∣dome of Giants; subdued a most famous Iland, raigned gloriously, and left the same to his posterity; none of them, either in prose or poetry once handled, but left to destiny to be preserued by a long ensuing meanes, or to perish in obliuion for euer? And surely this mo∣ued the whole senate of great Clerks to giue sentence, that neuer any such Brute raigned in the world; such Neuer any such king in the world as Brute. Boccace, Viues, Hadrianus Iu∣nius, &c. The Criticks argument. as were Boccace, Viues, Hadrian Iunius, Polydore, Bucha∣nan, Vignier, Genebrard, Molinaeus, Bodine, and others. (19) Yea, and there are some Criticks that faine would take aduantage from the defenders of Brutes history themselues, as from Sir Iohn Prys, that produ∣ceth many vncertaine ensamples of the originall of o∣ther nations; which granted, (say they) doth no waies confirme the truth or certainty of our owne; neither is it any honour to deriue these Britaines from the No honor to the Britans to be de∣riued from the Troians. scumme of such conquered people as the Troians were. Humfrey Lhuyd likewise denying absolutely the deriuation of the Britaines name from Brute, and bringing it from two compounded words, (as we haue said) doth thereby weaken the credit of his con∣quest of this Iland to their vnderstanding, as also the The Britaines histories weak∣ned by them∣selues. catalogue of his successors, which are said to raigne successiuely for many hundred of yeeres after him. And another industrious British writer, hauing the helpe of two most ancient British copies, the collecti∣ons of Caradock of Carnaruan, their owne Bardies eue∣ry D. Powell begin∣neth his history of Wales but at Cadwaller. third-yeeres visitation, and twenty seuen authors of good account, (all of them cited in the preface of his Chronicle) besides his helps had in the offices of re∣cords for this realme; yet ascending no higher then to the person of Cadwallader, Prince of Wales, whose raign was in the yeere of Christs incarnation 682. and no lesse then one thousand seuen hundred twenty and sixe yeeres, after that Brute is said to come into this Iland, doth not warrant (say they) the story that is in∣cluded betwixt, but rather euen the same is enterlaced Cadwallers story also doubtfull. with many doubtfull vncertainties, and so left dis∣putable by the said compiler himselfe; as namely whether that this Cadwallader whom the Britaines Ran. Chest. claime to be their king, be not the same Chedwald whom the Saxons would haue theirs; both liuing at Rob. Fabian. one time, both in acts alike, and names neere, both a∣bandoning their kingdomes, both taking the habit of religion, both dying in Rome, both buried in one Church, nay, say they, in one Sepulchre. The like he bringeth of the Britaines Iuor, and the Saxons Iue, in the like coherences of names, acts, deuotions, and deaths: so that this history of Brute carieth not so smooth a current for passage as is wished, nor is that Gordeons knot so easily vnloosed. Againe, the Reformer of the British history himselfe, al∣though Iohn he hath written one whole chapter in defence of Geffrey Monmouth, and straineth to make his booke authenticall, complaining often and accusing learned and vnpartiall Cambden seuerall times, for blowing a∣way Master Cambden accused by the defender of Ieffrey of Mon∣mouth. sixty of the Britaine Kings with one blast: yet when he compareth the generations with the time, is forced thus to write: From Porrex to Mynogen are twenti one Kings in a lineall descent, and but yeers ninety two: now diuide 92. by 21. and you shall find, that chil∣dren A further dis∣proofe of Brutes history. beget children, and these (saith he) by George Owen Harry in his book of pedegrees dedicated to his Ma∣iesty appeareth to be in a lineall descent, besides three or foure collaterals. And yet goeth further: Though the Scripture (saith hee) allege Iudah, Hezron, Salomon, and Ezekiah, to be but yoong when they begat their sonnes, Ach z he should haue said. Rabbi Isack. Aug. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 16. cap. 43. Hierome. which (as Rabbi Isack saith) might be at thirteene yeeres of age: And although Saint Augustine say, that the strength of youth may beget children yoong; and Hierome bringeth instance of a boy that at ten yeeres of age begot a childe: yet this doth not helpe to excuse the mistaking of yeeres for the British Kings aboue mentioned. Thus far Iohn Lewis: and for the exceptions made a∣gainst Brute: wherin I haue altogether vsed the words of others; and will now (without offense, I hope) adde a supposall of mine owne, seeing I am fallen into the computation of times, which is the onely touch-stone to the truth of histories, especially such as are limited by the bounds of the sacred Scriptures, as this for Brutes entrance is. And that the same cannot bee so The Authour owne opinion of Brutes historie. ancient (supposing it were neuer so certaine) as the vulgar opinion hitherto hath held, the circumstance of time, to my seeming, sufficiently doth prooue. (20) For Brutes conquest and entrance are brought Brutes conquest in the eighteenth of Heli his priest∣hood. by his Authour to fall in the eighteenth yeere of Heli his Priesthood in the Land of Israel, and so is fastned into a computation that cannot erre. Now the eigh∣teenth yeere of Helies gouernment, by the holy Scrip∣tures 1. Sam. 4. 18. most sure account, is set in the yeere of the worlds creation 2887. after the vniuersall flood 1231. and be∣fore Heli his priest∣hood in anno 28 7. the birth of our blessed Sauiour 1059. yeeres. Brute then liuing in this foresaid time, was foure descents from the conquered Troians, (as he of Monmouth hath laid downe) which were Aeneas, Ascanius, Syluius, and himselfe: so that by these generations successiue in order, the very yeere almost of Troys destruction may certainly be pointed out and knowen: which in searching hath beene found so doubtful, that by some it hath beene thought to be a meere fable. Yet with more reuerence to antiquitie obserued, let vs cast and compare the continuance of these foure generations vnto Brutes Conquest, not shortning them with Ba∣ruch, to be but ten yeeres to an age; neither length∣ning them with Iosephus, who accounteth one hun∣dred Baruch 6. 2. Ioseph. contra Appion. lib. 1. and seuenty yeeres for a generation: but with more indifferencie let vs with Herodotus, who wrote Herodotus i Euterpe. neerer these times, allow thirty yeeres for a succes∣sion, as hee accounteth in his second booke. Now foure times thirty make one hundred and twenty, the number of yeeres that these foure Princes successiuely did liue: by which computation likewise measured by Scripture, the ruination of Troy fell in the thirtie eighth yeere of Gideons gouernment in Israel, and was the yeere after the worlds creation 2768. But the Iudg. 8. 28. Clemens Alexand. Stromat. 1. authoritie of Clemens Alexandrinus, alleged out of Menander, Pergamenus, and Letus, destroieth that time of Troies destruction, and placeth it fully two hun∣dred and thirtie yeeres after, euen in the raigne of King Salomon: for in his first booke Stromat n thus he writeth: Menelaus from the ouer throw of Troy came Menelaus retur∣ned from Troy when Hiram gaue his daugh∣ter in mariage to Salomon. into Phoenicia, at that time when Hiram King of Tyrus gaue his daughter in mariage vnto Salomon King of Isra∣el. Where, by him we see, that Troies ruines and Sa∣lomons raigne fell both vpon one time. And so Brute hath lost of his antiquity, by this account, 230. yeeres; and entred not in Helies Priesthood, but rather in the vsurpation of Iudahs Kingdome by Athalia, and in 2. King. 11. 3. Brute his con∣quest rather in Athalia her time. Ioseph. cont. Ap∣pion. lib. 1. & 2. the yeere of the world 3118. (21) To whom let vs ioine Iosephus, an Authour of great credit, and without suspicion in this case, who in his Nations defense against Appion, in both his bookes, confidently affirmeth himselfe able to proue by the Phoenician Records of warrantable credit, that Phoenician re∣cords. Carthage built after King Hi∣rams raigne 155. yeeres. the City Carthage was built by Dido, sister to Pigmalion, one hundred fiftie and fiue yeeres after the raigne of King Hiram, which was Salomons friend, and one hundred forty three yeeres and eight moneths after the building of his most beautifull Temple. Now wee know by Virgil, Virg. lib. 1. from whom all these glorious tales of Troy are told, that Carthage was in building by the same Dido at such Tacitus . lib. 16. cap. 1. time as Aeneas came from Troies ouerthrow, through the Seas of his manifold aduentures. If this testimo∣nie of Iosephus be true, then fals Troies destruction a∣bout the twentieth yeere of Ioas raigne ouer Iudah, which was the yeere of the worlds creation 3143. wherunto if we adde one hundred and twenty yeeres for the foure descents before specified, then wil Brutes conquest of this Iland fall with the twelfth of Iothams Brutes conquest rather in Iotham his time. 2. King. 15. 32. raigne in the Kingdome of Iudah, which meets with the yeere of the worlds continuance 3263. And so hath he againe lost of his antiquitie no lesse then 375. yeeres. (22) And yet to make a deeper breach into Brutes storie, and to set the time, in a point so vncer∣taine, as from which neither circle nor line can be tru∣lie drawen; Manethon the Historian Priest of Egypt, in Manethon cited by Iosepo. cont. Appion. lib. 2. Israelites depart from Egypt 1000. yeeres before the warres of Troy, by Iosephus account. Iosep. cont. Appion. lib. 1. Brutes conquest rather after Ale∣xander the great. his second booke cited by Iosephus, affirmeth that the Israelites departure from Egypt was almost a thousand yeeres before the warres of Troy. If this be so (as it see∣meth Iosephus alloweth it so) and one hundred and twenty yeeres more added, for the foure descents a∣boue mentioned, the number will fall about the yeere of the worlds creation 3630. long after the death of Alexander the Great, and Greeke Monarch. By which account the great supposed antiquity of Brute, is now lessened by seuen hundred fiftie and two yeeres; and the time so scantelized betwixt his and Cesars en∣trance, that two hundred forty six yeeres onely re∣maine: Two hundred forty six yeeres a time too short for the raigne of se∣uenty two Kings. a time by much too short for seuenty two Princes, which successiuely are said to raigne each af∣ter others, and from Brute to Cesar recorded to haue swaied the regall Scepter of this Iland. (23) But vnto these obiections I know the an∣swer will be ready; namely, the diuersities of Scrip∣tures A supposed an∣swer. account, being so sundrie and different, that the storie of Brute cannot thereby bee touched, but still standeth firme vpon it selfe. Indeed I must confesse, that from the first Creation, to the yeere of mans Re∣demption, the learned Hebrewes, Greekes, and Latines, differ much, and that not only each from others, but euen among themselues so farre, that there can be no indifferent reconciliation made, as by these seuerall computations may be seene, as followeth: Hebrewes: Baal Seder-Holem—3518. Talmundistes—3784. New Rabbins—3760. Rabbi Nahsson—3740. Rabbi Leui—3786. Rabbi Moses Germidisi—4058. Iosephus—4192. Greekes: Metheodorus—5000. The great diffe∣rences in com∣putation of yeers among Writers. Eusebius—5190. Theophilus Antioch—5476. Latines: Saint Hierome—3941. Saint Augustine—5351. Isidore—5210. Orosius—5190. Beda—3952. Alphonsus—5984. And yet doe these disagreements helpe little the Obiectors if this be considered, that the maine foun∣dation of these diuersities consisteth chiefly in the first world before the Flood, wherein it is manifest, that These differen∣ces were chiefly before the Flood. Septuagint. the reputed Septuagint addeth to the Hebrew Origi∣nall fiue hundred eighty and six yeeres. And from the Flood to Abrahams birth, is accounted two hun∣dred and fiue yeeres more then Moses hath. As like∣wise Ioseph. Antiquis. lib. 1. cap. 7. the like is done in the latter times: for from the Captiuitie of Babylon to the death of Christ, one hun∣dred thirty and seuen yeeres are added, more then the Sunnes course hath measured: so that it seemeth the differences were not great for the times of Heli, Salo∣mon, nor Iudahs Kings, in whose raignes Brute is brought to people and possesse this Iland. But leauing these diuersities, and to come to a certaintie, let vs calculate the yeeres of the holy historie according as Functius, Beroaldus, and sundry other Theologicke Chro∣nologers . Beroaldus. haue done; who from the Scriptures most sure The accounting of yeeres by the Scripture is a m st sure maner of computation. account, so tie the stories of times together, that like to a golden chaine, the linkes are fastned each to o∣ther, and the whole so compleat, that a yeere is not missing from the fall of man, vnto the full time of his redemption. (24) First then from the Creation to the Flood are From the creati∣on to the flood 1656. reckoned yeeres 1656. gathered by a triple account, from the ages, begettings, and deaths of the fathers. The like is thence obserued for foure hundred twen∣tie From the flood to the seuentie fif h of Abrahams life 427. and seuen yeeres, that is, to the seuentie fifth of A∣brahams life, wherein God began to tie the times ac∣counts in holier summes: for Terah, the first recorded Idolater, was the last in honour that had the Sunnes Ioshua 24. 2. course measured by mans life. And now the bounds of time tie the Promise to Abraham, to bee before the From the pro∣mise to Abraham, till the Law, 430 Galath. 3. 17. From the Law, to Salomons Temple, 480. 1. King. 6. 1. From the foun∣dation of the Temple, to Salo∣mons death, 36. yeeres. 1. King. 11 42. From Salomons death, to the bur∣ning of the Tem∣ple, 390. yeeres. 2. King. 25. 8. Eze. 4. v. 2. & 5. From the bur∣ning of the Tem∣ple, to the end of Iudah captiuity, 51. yeeres. Ier. 25. 11. Isa. 45. 1. 2. Chron. 36. 21. 22. 23. Ezra 1. 1. 2. From the first yeere of Cy us, vnto the death of Christ, 490. yeeres. Law foure hundred and thirty yeeres, as the Apostle to the Galathians affirmeth. From the Law to the buil∣ding of Salomons Temple, and that in the fourth yeere of his raigne, were yeeres foure hundred and eightie: and from that foundation, to his death, were thirtie six yeeres: for his whole raigne was fortie. From his death and Kingdomes diuision, vnto the burning of that Temple, which was executed in the nineteenth of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel, were yeeres three hundred and ninetie, as by the daies of Ezekiels siege and sleepe appeareth in the second and fifth verses of his fourth Chapter. From the burning of the Temple, to the end of Iudahs captiuitie, were yeeres fiftie and one, for the whole time of Babels bondage contained seuenty yeeres, as Ieremy 25. 11. whereof nineteene were expired; and fifty one remaining vnto the first yeere of Cyrus their deliuerer, whom the Lord in that regard calleth his annointed Isay. 45. 1. In the first yeere of whose Monarchie he published an Edict for the re∣turne of the Iewes and new building of their Temple, as in the books of Chronicles and of Ezra is seene. And from this first yeere and proclamation of King Cyrus, vnto the last yeere and death of Christ our Sauiour the great yeere of Iubilie, the acceptable time, wherein he troad the winepresse alone; to the finishing of the cere∣monies, the taking away of sinne, the reconciling of ini∣quity, the bringing in of euerlasting righteousnesse, to the sealing vp of vision and prophecie, and to the anoin∣ting of the most holy; were yeeres foure hundred and ninety, as the Prophet Daniel from the Angell Gabriel receiued, and vnto vs hath deliuered Dan. 9. 24. all which added together make the number to be three Dan. 9. 24. thousand nine hundred and threescore yeeres. And by this said computation, I haue accounted Brutes story, as all others wherein I shall bee occasioned to speake. (25) Lastly, if from among these misty cloudes of ignorance no light can be gotten, and that we will needs haue our descents from the Troians; may wee not then more truly deriue our blood from them through the Romanes, who for the space of foure hun∣dred Britaines may more truly de∣riue their descent from Troy by the Romanes. Britain s tooke wiues of the Ro∣manes, and they of the Britaines. B da hist. Anglic. lib. 1. cap. 16. Gen. 6. 1. threescore and six yeeres were planted amongst vs? in which continuance it is most certaine, they tooke of our women to be their wiues, and gaue their women to be wiues vnto vs, seeing that some of their Emperors did the like themselues, and from whose blood, saith Beda, the Britaines Ambrosius lineally des∣cended. And if beauty and parts be the instigaters vn∣to loue, as in the first world we see it was, no doubt then the features of the Britains were mouing Angels vnto the Romanes, whose faces euen in those times were accounted to be angelicall, and whose persona∣ges as yet, are respected as the best (if not better) then any other in the world. But that the Romans them∣selues descended from the Troians, or AEneas should be the roote of the Iulian family, howsoeuer the ficti∣ons of Poets as a spring tide haue flowed from the Romanes to be discended of the Troians is a fable. fulnesse of their pennes, yet Tacitus their best writer accounteth those things not far vnlike to old fables, Tacit. 1 . 1 . wherein he iudgeth that Nero to win credit before the Consuls, and to get reputation in the glory of elo∣quence vndertooke the pleading of the Ilienses cause, declaring the Romanes descent from Troy: and the Iulij from the loines of AEneas, which notwithstan∣ding he censureth as is said. And Iosephus in the dis∣persion of Noahs sonnes and families, affirmeth that Ioseph. 1. 7. Romus the origi∣nall of the old Romanes. Romus was the Originall of the old Romanes and he of Chus, and Cham, if he meane as he speaketh. To con∣clude; (by what destiny I know not) nations desire their originals from the Troians; yet certaine it is, that no honor from them can be brought, whose city and fame stood but for six descents, as vnder the To haue a descēt from Tr y, cannot be an honour to any Nation. Troians thrice vanquished. raignes of Dardanus, Erithonius, Troos, Ilion, Laomedon, and Priamus, during which time they were thrice van∣quished; twice by Hercules in the daies of Laomedon, and the third time rased by the rage of the Grecians in the raigne of King Priamus, and the Troians them∣selues made as it were the scum of a conquered peo∣ple. And therefore as France hath cast off their Fran∣cio King Priamus his sonne, Scotland their Scotia King Pharaoes daughter, Denmarke their Danus, Ireland their Hiberus, and other Countries their Demi-gods; so let BRITAINES likewise with them disclaime their BRVTE, that bringeth no honour to so renow∣ned Brute embaseth the descent of the Britaines. a Nation, but rather cloudeth their glorie in the murders of his parents, and imbaseth their descents, as sprung from Venus that lasciuious Adulteresse. THE MANNERS AND CVS∣TOMES OF THE ANCIENT BRITAINES. CHAPTER IV. H Auing thus farre spoken of the ancient Names of this famous Iland, and of the Nations acknowledg∣ed to bee the first Planters and Possessors thereof; it remaineth that somewhat be mentioned of the Man∣ners and Customes of those people and times, though not so pleasing or acceptable as were to be wished, for that the clouds of ignorance and barbarous inciuilitie did then shadow and ouer-spread almost all the Nati∣ons of the earth: wherein I desire to lay imputation no further then is sufficiently warranted by most au∣tenticke Writers: and first from Cesar, who formost of all the Romanes discouered and described our anci∣ent Britaines. (2) Touching their persons: All the Britaines (saith Of their Per∣sons. Cas. . . 5. where hee vseth the word Cesar) vsed to die themselues with woad, which setteth a blew colour vpon them, and that maketh them more terri∣ble to behold in battle. But Mela therein mo∣ueth a doubt. They died their bodies (saith he) with woad; but whether to make a gallant shew, or for what other cause else is vncertaine. And yet Herodian here∣in absolutely determineth, where hee saith, that the Herodian. Britaines knew no vse of garments at all, but about their wastes and neckes wore chaines of iron, suppo∣sing Pliny also addeth another orna∣ment, and saith that the Britains wore rings on their middle finger. The Britaines would not be clad, because they would shew the gay pain∣tings of their bodies. Plinie. Oribasius calleth that herb, Vi∣trum; and the Britains call that colour, glasse: whence our En∣glish word glasle, (called also Vi∣trum in Latin) may seem to be taken, by reason of the colour thereof. Dio Nicaeus. Caesar. Some Britains clad in leather. Solinus. them a goodly ornament, and a proofe of their wealth: and their bare bodies they marked with sun∣dry pictures representing all manner of liuing crea∣tures; and therefore they would not be clad, for hi∣ding the gay paintings of their bodies. To which painting Pliny also agreeth, and describeth that hearbe woad, to bee like to the Plantine in Gallia, naming it Glastum, with the iuice whereof (saith he) the women of Britaine, as well wiues as yoong women, anoint and die their bodies all ouer, resembling by that tincture the colour of the Aethiopians, in which manner they vse at solemne feasts and sacrifices to goe all naked. And Dio Nicaeus out of the epitome of Xiphilinus, saith, that the custome of that Nation was, to abide in tents all naked and vnshod. Notwithstanding, Ce∣sar doth elsewhere report, that they clad themselues in leather, which perchance is meant of the ciuiller sort of them, and in time of battle. Solinus likewise speaking of the Britaines, saith, their Country is peo∣pled partly with Barbarians, who by meanes of artifi∣ciall incisions of sundry formes, haue from their child∣hood diuers shapes of beasts incorporate vpon them; and hauing their markes deepely imprinted within their bodies, looke how their growth for stature, so doe these pictured characters likewise increase. Nei∣ther do these sauage Nations repute any thing a grea∣ter testimonie of their patience, then by such durable skarres to cause their limmes drinke in much painting and colour. These skarres by Tertullian are tearmed Britannorum stigmata, The Britaines markes. And vn∣to Tertullian. Britannorum stigmata. this skie-colour, or blewish dyings, it seemeth Mar∣tial had relation in his praises of Lady Claudia: Martial. Claudia caeruleis tùm sit Rufina Britannis, Edita cur Latiae pectora plebis habet? Sith Claudia comes of Azurde Britaines race, Whence comes her minde so deckt with Roman grace? And of this vse of painting, as our great Antiquarie iudgeth, both the Britaines had their primitiue deri∣uation, Master Cambden. and the Picts (a branch of British race) a long Picts of the British race. time after, for that their accustomed manner, were called Picti by the Romanes, that is, the painted people. Called Picti of their painted bodies. Caesar. com. (3) The haire of their heads, saith Cesar, they let grow, and wore long, which naturally was curled, and of colour yellow, (as in the Panegyricke Oration a∣scribed to Mamertinus, and spoken in praise of Maxi∣mianus, is to be seene) all other parts of their bodies Mamertinus. being shauen, sauing only the head and vpper lippe. Yet their complexions were much different, as by Tacitus wee see, who auoucheth that some of those Tacitus in vit. Agricola. Ilanders were red of haire, as the Caledonians in the Northerne Promontories; the haire of the Silures co∣loured and curled, like to the old Spaniards; and those Caledonians the Northern people. Silures the Westerne. neerest vnto Gallia resembled their complexions, though not altogether so yellow, saith Strabo. But their wit by Tacitus is preferred before them, and their statures more tall, as Strabo affirmeth, whose li∣neaments Tacitus. shewed a good making of body, and mea∣surable Strabo. proportion in all parts answerable. Their women faire, and of exceeding good features, as is described by the Romane Writers. Such was Boudicea, saith Xiphilinus; Claudia and Helena, saith Martial and Xiphilinus. Martial. Eutropius. Eutropius. (4) That the strength of nature wrought long in the Britaines, we read out of Plutarch, who reporteth that the people liued one hundred and twenty yeeres, Plutarch. They liued to a great age. for that, saith he, their cold and frozen Country kept in their naturall heat: whose conditions by Diodorus Siculus are commended to be plaine and vpright, farre from the wilinesse and craft of the Romanes. And by Diodorus Siculus. Strabo their dispositions are partly resembled to the Gaules, but yet somewhat more rude and plaine; and Strabo. those most ciuill, who were the inhabitants of Kent, by reason of their oftner conuersing with other Nati∣ons, as Cesar sheweth. But the farther from the con∣tinent, Caesar. These Britaines in Kent the ciuil∣lest. Pomponius Mela. the more rude, and lesse acquainted with other kind of riches besides cattell, as Pomponius Mela affir∣meth. (5) Now touching their domestick matters. Their buildings were many, and like to them of the Gaules Of their do∣mestick mat∣ters. Caesar. The Britaines townes are their woods being fortified. Strabo. saith Iulius Caesar; notwithstanding they giue the name of Townes to certaine combersome woods, which they haue fortified with rampires and ditches, whither they retreat, and resort to eschue the inuasions of their enemies. Which stand them in good stead, saith Strabo: for when they haue by felling of trees, mounted, and fenced there∣with a spacious round plot of ground; there they build for themselues houses and cottages, and for their cattell set vp stalls and folds, but those for the present vse onely, and not for long continuance. Which, as Diodorus Siculus saith were vsually thacked with reed; but the cities without walls, and the coun∣try Diodorus Siculus. without townes; as Dion describeth the Calidoni∣ans and Meats. Dion. (6) Their wiues were ten or twelue a peece, as Caesar hath alledged, which they held common a∣mong The Britains multiplicity of wiues. Caesar. brothers and parents; yet the issue reputed his, who first maried the mother when she was a maide: and Dio indeed affirmeth no lesse, adding withall, that Dio. the children thus begotten, were fostred and brought vp in common among them. And Eusebius likewise Eusebius . praepar . 6. testifieth, that many Britaines together kept one wife in common to them all. This community in mariage moued Iulia the Empresse of Seuerus, to twite the Iulia her re∣proofe to a Bri∣tish woman. wife of Argetecaxus, that the fashion of the women of Britaine in accompanying with men, was very impu∣dent; to whom she replied and said, we British women The answer. do indeed herein differ from you Roman Ladies; for wee satisfie our appetite, by accompanying with the worthiest men, and that openly, but you with euery base fellow, in a Dion. Cas. lib. 76. corner. (7) For their diet; it was a heinous matter with them to eat either Hen, Hare, or Goose, saith Caesar, The Britains diet. Prohibited. meats. Caesar. which notwithstanding they bred for their plea∣sures; neither fed daintily at full and rich tables, as Diodorus Siculus affirmeth, but rather in necessity could liue vpon barkes and roots of trees, and with a Diodo. Siculus. The Britaines of a very spare diet. kind of meat no bigger then a beane, after which for a good time they did neither hunger nor thirst, saith Dio Nicaeus: who likewise testifieth that the Britains, did till no ground, neither eat fish, though their ri∣uers Dio Nicaeus. thereof be pleneously stored, but liue vpon prey, They eat no fish. venison, and fruits: to which also Caesar addeth milke, whereof (saith Strabo), they had not then skill to Caesar. Vnskilfull to make cheese. Strabo. Their drinke of barley. Solinus. Plinie. make cheese. And according to Solinus, their vsuall drinke was made of barley. But for tillage Pliny see∣meth to contradict Dio, affirming that the Britaines manured their grounds with Marle in stead of dung; which argueth no such simplicity in gardening, plan∣ting, and in other like points of husbandry as Strabo Strabo. doth taxe them with. And this foresaid temperance of diet differeth much from that, which Saint Hie∣rome chargeth their neighbors the Anthropophagi of Ireland, who vsed to feed on the buttocks of boies, and Hiero. lib. 2. womens paps, as their most dainty and delicate dish. (8) For their religion, or rather diabolicall super∣stition, was as the rest of the world, (some few excep∣ted) Of their reli∣gion and lear∣ning. when Satan had clouded the truth of Gods do∣ctrine, by the foggy mists of confused darknesse. For Tacitus makes their superstitions, and ceremonies to be the same in conformity with the Gaules. And what that was, Dio Cassius in his Nero, and Solinus in his hi∣story, Dio Cassius. Solinus. doe declare; who doe ascribe to them the most inhumane offering of mans flesh in their sacrifices. The Britaines inhumane sa∣crifices. The names of their Idols. And besides their ancient Idols, such as Dis, Iupiter, Apollo, Diana, and the like, they worshipped Andates for their Goddesse of Victory, vnto all which they performed no small adorations and honors, imputing their prosperities vnto them: vnto whom also they erected temples with such magnificence as they then had; whose walles, as it seemeth, long after remained, whereon some of those prophane portraitures with deformed lineaments were seene by mournfull Gil∣das, carrying a sterne and grim countenance, after the Gildas. wonted heathenish manner: here see we (saith he) vpon these desert walles, the vgly features of the Britains Idols, The Britains I∣dols exceed Ae∣gipt for number. meerly diabolicall, and in number almost exceeding those of Egypt. So by Tacitus they are noted with the com∣mon custome of the Gentiles, which was that they sought for the direction of their Gods by the looking into the entralls of Beasts, yea and of men too; and that they honored the Altars of their Gods with the sacrifice and blood of such as they tooke captiue in wars. And Plinie writing of Magick, saith, that in his Plinie. Magick highly honored of the Britaines. daies the art thereof in Britaine was highly honored, and all the people thereunto so much deuoted, yea and with all such complements of ceremonies in the same to be performed, that a man would thinke the Persians had learned all their Magick skill from them. Priests and instructers had they, whereof the chiefe were called Druides, whose office was imploied about holy things, saith Caesar; for they had the managing of publike and priuate sacrifices, and to interpret and Caesar. com. 6. discusse matters of religion. Vnto them doe resort great numbers of yong men to learne at their hands, and they be had in great reuerence. For they deter∣mine almost all controuersies, and matters in vari∣ance, The Druides de∣termine almost all controuer∣fies. as well publike as priuate. And if there happen any thing to be done amisse, if there be any murther committed, if there rise any controuersie concerning inheritance or bounds of lands, they take the matter into their power, and award either recompence or penalties in the case. And if there be any, be he priuate person, or be it corporation, that will not stand to their iudgement, they interdict him, which punish∣ment among them is held most grieuous. They that are so excommunicated are accounted in the number of the wicked and vngratious: all men shun them, all Excommunica∣tion of great sorce in the time of the ancient Britaines. men eschue their company and communication, lest by conuersing with them, they should defile them∣selues and receiue harme. If they demand law, they may not haue it: neither may they enioy any place of honor. Ouer all these Druides there is one Primate, Among the Dru∣ides one Primat and chiefe ouer the rest. which hath chiefe authority ouer them. When he is dead if there be any of the rest that excelleth in wor∣thinesse, he succeedeth: or if there be any equall, he is chosen by voices of the rest, and diuers times they striue for the soueraignty by force of armes. These men at a certaine season of the yeere, in the borders of the Caruntes (whose country is counted the middle of all Gallia) do sit together in a place hal∣lowed, They assemble once a yeere at a place in France to heare contro∣uersies. whereunto resort from all sides all such as haue any controuersies: and looke what is decreed and iudged by them, that they stand vnto. This order of discipline is thought to haue had beginning in Bri∣taine, Here appea∣reth, that Aca∣demies were then amongst the Britans, and from their ex∣ample deriued into other coun tries. They are exemp∣ted from war. and from thence to haue been brought into Gal∣lia. And at this day, they that are desirous to attaine this skill more exactly, do commonly repaire thither to learne it. These Druides customably are exempted from the wars, neither do they pay taxes and tallages with other folke: for they are priuiledged as from the warres, so from all other burthens. Allured with so great rewards, many euen of their owne accord, do register themselues in that order, and diuers are sent thither by their parents and kinsfolke. Where they are reported to learne a great number of verses by heart. Their schollers must learne a great many ver∣ses by heart. Whereof it commeth to passe, that diuers continue twenty yeeres in learning. Neither do they thinke it lawfull to put them in writing, whereas in all other things, for their accounts, as well publike as priuate, they vse the Greek letters. This order they seeme (in mine opinion) saith he, to haue taken for two considerations: partly because They vse the Greek letters lest their skill should be too common. they will not haue their discipline published among the common people; and partly because they will not that they which shall learne, trusting too much to their bookes, should haue the lesse regard of remem∣brance: in that it hapneth well neere to most men, that vpon trust of the helpe of their booke, they are slacker in learning things by heart, and lesse care to beare them in mind. This is one of the chiefest things Their Theology is, that the soule dieth not, but passeth from one to another. that they labour most to beat into mens minds, that the Soules die not, but do after death passe from one to another: and hereby they thinke men should be most stirred vnto virtue, when the feare of death is nothing regarded. Also they dispute many other things: as of the starres, and of their mouings: of the Their naturall Philosophie. bignesse of the world, and the earth: of the nature of things: of the strength and power of the goddes im∣mortall: and do therein instruct the youth. Vnto these Druides and their doctrine had Lucan the Poet relation in his first booke towards the end, where he Lucan. writeth thus of them. Et vos barbaricos ritus, morem{que} sinistrum Sacrorum, Druidae, positis repetistis ab armis. Solis nosce Deos & Caeli sydera vobis Aut solis nescire datum. Nemora alta remotis Incolitis Lucis. Vobis autoribus, vmbrae Non tacitas Erebi sedes Ditis{que} profundi Pallida regna petunt, regit idem spiritus artus Orbe alio: longae, canitis si cognita, vitae Mors media est. Certè, populi quos despicit Arctos, Foelices errore suo, quos, ille timorum Maximus, haud vrgent laethi metus: inde ruendi Inferrum mens prona viris, anima{que} capaces Mortis: & ignauum est rediturae parccre vitae. In English thus. You (Druides) free from wars, with barbarous deuices Sinistrous rites performe, and vncouth sacrifices. High Mysteries, of God, and Heauens, you only know; Or only erre therein. Where shady woods doe grow; There you repose; and teach, that Soules immortall be; Nor silent Erebus, nor Plutoes Hall shall see. And, (if your Sawes be sooth) Death is no finall dome, But only Mid-way, twixt life past, and life to come. Braue Britain bloods perdilwarmd with this happy error, Death (greatest feare of feares) amates the with no terror. Hence t'is, they manly rush on pikes, and griesly death, And scorne base minds, that stick to sped reuiuing breath. (9) These Britaines being meerly barbarous, as most of the Western parts of the world then were, li∣ued Of their com∣merce and traffick. priuately to themselues with scarce any com∣merce, or entercourse with any other nation: neither indeed were much known to forraine people, for a long time. For the first notice of them extant, was by Polybius the Greek writer, that accompanied Scipio in Polybius the first that tooke notice of this land. his warres, about the yeere of the worlds creation 3720. and two hundred and nine, before the birth of our Sauiour Christ. Which Author nameth their Iland to be plenteously stored with Tynne: but of other Polyb. lib. 3. things therin is silent, saying that al those parts which lay betwixt Tanais and Narbor bending Northward in his daies were vnknown and vncertaine, and there∣fore the reporters of them he held as dreamers. So doth Master Cambden another Polybius, & no way his Cambd. Britannia de moribus Bri∣tan. inferior, account it a prodigall humor of credulity, to be perswaded that Himilco, from the state of Carthage sent to discouer the coasts of Europe, in the said expe∣dition Matters scarse to be beleeued. That Himilco entred this Iland. Polyb. Eclog. lib. 10. That Hannibal should war here. That Alexander came hither. entred this Iland: or that Hannibal should war in this Iland, because Polybius in the Eclogues of his tenth booke saith that he was inclosed within the streits of Britaine, which place is mistaken for the Brutij in Italy: or that Alexander came from the East Indians, to Gades, and from thence into Britaine, though Cedrenus say so, seeing all other writers are a∣gainst it; or that Vlysses, (ancient enough if he be that Elishah the sonne of Iauan, the fourth sonne of Ia∣pheth) That Vlysses should visit Bri∣taine. should visit Britaine in his trauels, whereof Bro∣daeus maketh doubt; though Solinus report that an Altar in Caledonia was erected, and Vlysses in Greeke letters thereon inscribed. Which might very well be: for who doubteth but that the Greekes, in their vaine deuotions, did both build and sacrifice vnto their Gods, which they made of their worthiest men? and sith Vlysses, (in regard of his farre sea-trauels) was had in speciall account among all nauigators, why might The like exam∣ples we haue now of Cap. Henry. &c. The Romans not mentioned either by Thu∣cydides or Herodotus. not such monuments be reared, and his name inscri∣bed, as farre as the Grecians trauelled, though his per∣son neuer came there? And if the Romanes, at whose greatnesse the whole world trembled, were so lately known in those anci∣ent times, as that neither Thucydides nor Herodotus made mention of them: yea and with much adoe at last were heard of by the Grecians themselues: as Iose∣phus affirmeth; And if the Gaules and Spaniards, (in∣habitants Ioseph. contra Ap∣pion. lib. 1. Gaules and Spaniards for many yeeres vn∣known to Histo∣riographers. in the continent) for many yeeres together were vtterly vnknowen to the worlds historiogra∣phers; shall we then thinke, that this remote Iland, and people then far from ciuility, were noted foorth with markes of more certainty? surely to my see∣ming, nothing lesse: seing that their next neighbours the Gaules knew not so much as what manner of men they were: none resorting thither, except some few The Britains vn∣known to their next neighbors. Caesar com. lib. 4. merchants, and they no further, then vpon the sea coasts, neither able to describe the bignesle of the I∣land, the puissance of the inhabitants, their order for war, the lawes that they vsed, the customes of the people, nor their hauens for the receit of ships; all which Caesar by diligent inquiry sought after, but could find no satisfaction till he had sent some pur∣posely to search it out. (10) Neither is this their want of knowledge to bee wondred at, seeing the entercourse of their traf∣ficke was vpheld by so meane commodities: for Stra∣bo saith, that their merchandizing chiefly consisted in Their merchan∣dize of small vse. Strabo. Iuory Boxes, Sheeres, Onches, Bits, and Bridles, Wreaths & Chains, with other conceits made of Am∣ber and Glasse; for which notwithstanding they were compelled to pay customes and imposts vnto Oct aui∣an Augustus, as elsewhere shall be shewed. (11) And as their commodities were very mean, so were their meanes either for exportation or im∣portation very slender in those times; I meane their shipping. It is true, that some are of opinion, that Their shipping very meane. Sh s first inuen∣ted in Britaine, is a matter to be doubted. Ships were first inuented in these our Seas: but that this should be true, I haue cause to doubt, that Art being long before inspired by God himselfe into the heart of Noah for making the Arke, and no doubt practised by that paterne of many others. But that the ancient Britaines had ships of reasonable vse, though of simple Art, Cesar testifieth, saying, that the The ships of this Iland according to Caesar. keeles and ribs of their ships were of light wood, and couered ouer with leather: which kinde the now- Britaines call Corraghs: and with them (saith Polyhistor) they did saile betwixt Britannie and Ireland, (which sea for rough∣nesse and danger may bee compared with any other whatsoeuer) though the bulke of their vessels were but of some flexible wood, couered with the hides of Bufflles: and as long as they were sailing, so long did they abstaine from meat: whereby it seemeth they neuer sailed any great iourneys. And of this their shipping Pliny also speak∣eth, and Lucan singeth, thus: Plinie and Lu∣can of the ships of this Iland. Primùm cana salix, madefacto vimine, paruam Texitur in puppim, caeso{que} induta iuuenco, Vector is patiens tumidum super emicat amnem: Sic Venetus stagnante Pado, fuso{que} Britannus, Nauigat Oceano.— At first, of hoary sallowes wreathed boughs, the ships Small bulke is trimly twist, and clad in bullocks hide: Then, patient to be rul'd, on swelling wanes she skips. Thus on the spacious Poe the Venice Merchants glide, And Britaine Pilots saile on surge of Ocean wide. But after-times brought the Britaines to more exqui∣site skill in nauall affaires, insomuch as the royall Na∣uie of this Kingdome hath beene reputed (and so is at this day) not only the inuincible walles of our owne, but the incredible terror of al other Kingdoms, which haue or shall enuy our happie peace: and the aduen∣tures likewise of Merchants, and the skill of our Sea∣men, hath left no corner of the world vnsearcht. (12) And their trafficke amongst themselues was not of much worth, in that, as Cesar saith, the Coines Casar. which they had were either of brasse, or else iron rings sized The Britaines coines. at a certaine waight, which they vsed for their monies. Of which kind some haue auerred they haue seene found and lately taken vp in little cruses or pitchers of earth. But as times grew more ciuill, and trafficke more fre∣quent, they shortly after stamped both siluer and gold; and thereon the faces of their Kings, euen in the daies of Iulius Caesar, who was the first that had his owne The first Romane coynes with were in Caesars time. stampt on the Romane Coynes. Many of these are a∣mongst vs remaining, whereof I haue inserted some few, as in their due places shall follow, which I recei∣ued from the liberall hand of that most learned Knight, and worthy storer of Antiquities Sir Robert Cotten of Cunington. These Coynes are commonly im∣bossed Sir Robert Cotten. outward and shield-like, whereon the inscripti∣on, The m ks to know . or face, is seen; the reuerse hollow, and therein their deuise set: and by these formes are they known to be the Britaines, no other nation stamping the like, except some few among the Grecians. (13 We come lastly, to speake of the manner of Of their warres. Caesar com. 4. their warfare, which Caesar thus describeth. First (saith he) they ride round about all parts of the battell, ca∣sting off their darts: and often times with the terrible noise of their horses, and the ratling of their chariot They amaze the enemy the of their chariot . wheeles, they amaze the enemy and breake their ar∣ray. And when they haue wound themselues in a∣mong the troopes of horsemen, they leape foorth of their waggons, and fight on foot. In the meane while the waggoners withdraw themselues somewhat out of the battell, and set their waggons in such order, that if they be ouercharged by the enemy, they may haue speedy and easie recourse vnto them. By meanes whereof they are both as ready to remoue as the horsemen, and as stedfast to stand in the battell as the footmen, and supply both duties in one. And they are come to such perfectnesse by daily practice and exer∣cise, that euen in steepe and falling places they will stop their horses running a full gallop, and guide and turne them in a short roome, & run vpon the vergies, and stand stedfastly vpon the beames, and quickly re∣couer themselues back againe into the waggons. These would often giue ground to egge their ene∣mies from their maine battell, and then would leape Casar. com. 5. out of their chariots and fight on foot. And they kept also such an order in fighting on horseback, that whe∣ther the enemies chased, or were chased, they were alwaies in danger. For they neuer fought in great companies together, but scatteringly a great way di∣stant They fight not in great companies together. the one from the other, and had stals lying in diuers places one to supply another, hauing euer fresh and lusty men in the roomes of them that were wea∣ry. They haue euer fresh men in the roomes of them that are weary. Strabo. Diodorus Siculus. The Britaines fight in chariots as the vse was in the worlds first age. Pomponius Mela. Of this their manner of fight in chariots, Strabo al∣so declareth; and Diodorus Siculus saith that the Bri∣taines liued after the manner of the first age of the world, vsing chariots in their fight, as the report goes of the ancient Greeks at the Troian warres. Pomponius Mela also describing these Britaines, affirmeth that their fight was not only with horsemen and footmen, but also with waggons and chariots, harnessed, and armed at the ends of the axle-trees with hookes and sithes, after the manner of the Gaules; but with appa∣rance of greater courage, as Tacitus saith; as being not yet mollified by long peace. Their strength in Tacitus. field consisteth most of footmen, yet some countries Their chiefe strength consists in sootmen. there are (saith he) that war in waggons, the greatest persons guiding the same; and so much doth Iuuenal intimate, who in shew of prophecie but indeed in Iuuenal. flattery of the Emperor Domitian, salutes him after this manner. It boads thee Triumph great; to captinate some King; Or fierce Aruiragus from Chariots beame to ding. Dio Nicaeus from Xiphilinus more particularly decla∣reth their strength; Their horses (faith he) are but little, Dio. yet therewithall swift of pace: their footmen also run very speedily, but in their standing are the strongest: their armor Their footmen run swiftly. Their armor. are shields, and short speares, in the nether end whereof is fastned a round bell of brasse like vnto a ball, which at the first onset of incounter they shake with great courage, sup∣posing that such a ratling noise doth much amate the enemy. And Herodian saith that their shields were nar∣row and speares short, wearing swords hanging down their Herodian. naked loines, hauing neither knowledge nor vse either of corslet or helmet. (14) Some haue thought that their women also were not exempted from the wars; but certaine it is Many British women renow∣ned for valour. Tacitus. that many of that sex were renowned for their valour amongst them. Which made Tacitus to say, it was vsu∣all for the Britains to fight vnder the conduct of women, (which the Romans found to their smart) nor to make any difference of sexes for gouernment. A more noble patterne whereof, neuer had any age, then in our late glorious Virgin Queen, (the wonder of her sexe, and of al future ages,) who, as she was inferior to no Prince Queen Elizabeth a glorious virgin Queen. euer liuing, for her admirable gouernment in vphol∣ding of her kingdomes peace, so was she a match (to say no more) to the proudest monarchs, in her mana∣ging of her wars; as (when occasion was offered) she was ready to make good, in her owne roiall person in A most valorous Princesse in war. the field. But besides the vse of armes, the ancient Bri∣tish women had another imploiment in the field, which I will only set downe in Tacitus his words, speaking of Paulinus Suetonius his assailing of Angle∣scy: Tacitus. The British Army (saith he) stood on the shore, thicke of men and munition, and women running vp and downc amongst them, like furies, carrying burning firebrands in rufull attire, and with their haire hanging about their shoulders. The Druides meane while went with their hands The British wo∣mens rufull at∣tire and the Dru∣ides behauiour in praier amaze the Roman souldiers. lift vp to heauen, pouring out praiers and imprecations. The strangenesse of which sight so amazed the Ro∣man souldiers, that they stood still like stocks, whiles the other wounded them at their pleasure; till Pauli∣nus encouraged them, and they excited one another, not to be so danted by an army of women and wi∣zards. &c. (15) In the relations of these things, let no man thinke, that the glory of these ancient and warlike nation of Britains, is any waies disparaged, or made in∣ferior to them that would be more famous, whose beginning haue been as meane, and state as rude, if not more. For let vs consider the Romans so lauish in their The Romans deriue their name from an infamous person. owne worths and greatnesse; who notwithstanding, bring their name and originall from Romulus, a ba∣stard by birth, nourished by a beast, educated among a sort of rustick shepheards: and grown to the ripe∣nesse of his owne affections, he became ring-leader of a damned crue, that liued by robberies and without lawes: besides the shedding of his naturall brothers blood, as Titus Liuie their owne historian witnes∣seth: and both himselfe and followers, had in such Titus Liuius, &c. contempt and derision by their neighbour nations, that they both disdained and refused to giue them their daughters in mariage, lest in time they also should become lawlesse, vntill that by subtilty and force, they had rauished their virgins, and thereby made them vnworthy of other matches. Yet when their after fortunes and successe had mounted them vpon the wings of glory, and seated them on the necks of their subdued neighbors, their Caesars would needs be more then mortall, and their pedigrees must lineally be brought from the Gods. (14) And, to let passe many others, the like may be said of the beginners of the Scythian and Turkish The poore be∣ginnings of Scythian and Turkish Em∣pires. Empires, two golden pillers raised vpon leaden bases, howsoeuer now, the power of their command, circles three parts of the earth. Nay what more is, that preti∣ous, roiall, and Gods only people, from whom the e∣ternall King of Kings descended, in their offrings made And of Iewish. in time of their highest glory, were by the Lord thus commanded to acknowledge and say: A Syrian was my father, who being ready to perish for hunger, went down Deut. 26. 5. into Egypt, and soiourned with a small company. And the richest stone of that most beauteous building in his highest pride is counselled by the Prophet, to looke back to the rocke whence it was hewen, and to the hole of the pit Isai. 51. 1. whence it had been digged. THE GOVERNMENT OF GREAT BRITAINE. CHAPTER V. W EE come, at length, to speake of the gouernment and politicall estate of the The British go∣uernment. Britaines, which doubtlesse (the times then conside∣red) was as honorable in their rulers, and as ma∣nageable in the subiects, as any other nations in these West parts of the world: their temperance, religion, learning, and no∣ble resolution shewing no lesse. But in this point I must craue pardon of our British Heraulds, and some learned Antiquaries, if I bring not a lineall succession from Brute, and a monarchicall gouernment in those Their succession doubtfull. times of obscurity, through whose mists no Egles eies could pierce, before the daies of Geffrey ap Arthur, as before was touched. And therefore following his counsell, who is best able in these things to giue dire∣ction; I will begin the succession of Great Britains Mo∣narchs, at the entrance and person of Iulius Caesar; at Not meerly monarchicall. which time, it seemeth, by him and other Latine wri∣ters (the best Recorders of kingdoms affaires,) this I∣land was gouerned rather after the manner of an Ari∣stocratie, that is, by certaine great Nobles and Potent men, then vnder the command of any One as an absolute Monarch: though herein is a difference, in that in the Aristocraticall regiment, the rulers are all Peeres of one Common wealth; whereas here, as many Princes, so many seuerall Publike weales. For so Caesar himselfe found the state of Britaine to be How in Caesars time and after. diuided into Provinces vnder the names of her in∣habitants; and to be ruled by diuers Peeres or petty Kings. (2) And such a Gouernor was Cassibelan, ouer the Trinobantes: Cingetorix, Caruilius, Taximagulus, and Segonax, all foure Rulers together in Kent: Comes sup∣posed to be King of the Atrebatij, and to be the same Comius of Arras, whom Caesar imploied to tease and worke the Britaines to his subiection. Caractacus the warlike King of the Silures, Galgacus the worthy King of the Caledonians; yea and women also, without ex∣ception of sex, held gouernment among them, such as Tacit. an. 14. 11. was faithlesse Cartismandua Queen of the Brigantes, and famous Boudicea Queene of the Icenians. Where∣by Tacit. histor. lib. 3. cap. 9. it seemeth that euery seuerall Prouince owed ser∣uice and alleageance only to their owne Prince. And as their gouernments were confined vnto certaine bounds and limits, so were the Inhabitants diuided and distinguished by diuers Names: of whom because we shall haue occasion hereafter often to speak, it shal not therfore be amisse in this place once for all, table∣wise to lay downe the same; whereby our narrations may passe vntroubled without more explanations, and the readers mind carried with lesse incombran∣ces. Those ancient names of people, and places for abode, throughout the whole Iland, from Ptolemie were as follow. A TABLE OF THE ANCIENT INHABITANTS, AND THE SITES OF THEIR POSSESSIONS AS THEY WERE CALLED BY PTOLEMY, AND OFTEN SINCE MEN∣TIONED IN THE ROMAN WRITERS. People. Countries. CANTII. — Kent. REGNI. — Sussex. Surrey. DVROTRIGES. — Dorsetshire. DAMNONII. — Deuonshire. Cornwal. BELGAe. — Somersetshire. Wiltshire. Hampshire. ATREBATII. — Barkshire. DOBVNI. — Oxfordshire. Glocester. CATIEVCHLANI. Warwickshire. Buckingham. Bedfordshire. TRINOBANTES. Hertford. Essex. Middlesex. ICENI. — Suffolke. Norfolke. Cambridge. Ely Iland. Huntington. CORITANI. — Rutlandshire. Lincolnshire. Northhampton. Leicestershire. Darbishire. Nottingham. CORNABII. — Staffordshire. Worcestershire. Cheshire. Shropshire. BRIGANTES. Lancaster. Yorkshire. Richmondshire. PARISI. Duram. Westmerland. Cumberland. ORDOVICES. — Flintshire. Denbighshire. Caernaruon. Montgomery. Merionethshire. SILVRES. — Herefordshire. Radnorshire. Brecknock. Monmouth. Glamorgan. DIMETAe. — Caermarden. Penbrookshire. Cardiganshire. OTTADINI. — Northumberland. Teifidale. Twedale. Merch. Louthien. SELGOVAe. — Lidesdale. Ensdale. Eskdale. Annandale. Niddisdale. NOVANTES. — Gallowey. Carick. Kyle. Cunningham. DAMNII. — Cluydsdale. Renfraw. Lennox. Striueling. Menteth. Fifa. CALEDONII. Perth. Strathern. Albin. GADINI. Argile. Lorne. EPIDII. — Cantyre. VICEMAGI. — Murray. VENNICONES. — Mernia. Auguis. Mar. TAEZALI. — Buquh e. CANTAe. CREONES. Rosse. CERONTES. Sutherland. CARNONACAe. Strath ern. CARINI. CORNABII. SIMERTAe. Caithues. LOGI. (3) These States ambitiously banding ech against others, to raise their owne Prince to a more soue∣raigne Their emulati∣ons & ambition. supremacy, and to enlarge their Prouinces vp∣on the borders of the next, were euer ready, the least occasion ministred, saith Pomponius Mela, to enter quarels, and seldome held amity, or were quiet. This Pomponius Mela. was the cause, as Tacitus tells vs, which brought that pu∣issant nation into bondage: and was the only helpe to the Tacitus in vita Agrico. Romans victories: for seldome it chanced (saith he) that two or three states met in counsell, and concurred in o∣pinion to repulse the common danger: so that whilst they resisted and fought one by one, all at length were sub∣dued. But this was not at once performed by Iulius Caesar the first Roman enterer, who (as he saith) rather shewed the place to posterities, then gaue them the possession Caesar first en∣terer, not con∣querer. thereof, supposing it his glory sufficient, to haue done what he did. For vnto the daies of Domitian, they held play with the Romans, and that with such valour, that the subduing of some small part of this Iland was ac∣counted by themselues to match the conquests of o∣ther mightier countries, and more notes of honour shewed in their publike triumphs for one Britaines misfortune, then vsually was solemnized for whole kingdomes subdued. Caractacus. (4) That such people possessed, and that many Kings together raigned here in Britaine, Pomponius Mela doth shew: Britaine (saith he) bringeth foorth Nations, and Kings of nations, though they be all without ciuility and barbarous. And Caesars intendments being known vnto them, it is said that many of their Cities sent him by their Embassadors profers of submission: whereby appeareth their diuersities of States, where∣of only two held promise, and the rest failing was the occasion of his second expedition for Britaine. And Ta∣citus, speaking of the shipwrack suffered by the Ro∣mans Tacitus Annal. lib. 2. cap. 5. in the raigne of Tiberius, saith, that many of their souldiers then distressed and torne, being cast vpon the coasts of Britaine, were by the people curteously releeued, and by their petty Kings sent backe vnto Germanicus their Generall into Germanie; which Princes or petty Kings, were drawn (as else where he saith) by emulati∣on into many partialities and factions; which was in∣deed their owne destruction. And by Gildas these were termed cruell Tyrants, taking his authority out Gildas. S. Hierome. of Saint Hierome. (5) Let thus farre suffice, in generall, of these an∣cient Britains; whose particulars we will further pro∣secute in the places of their resistances, lest otherwise they should seeme to fight only against themselues. And therefore so many of these Gouernors, as either yeelded their subiections to the Romans, or stood their opposits till their owne strengths were spent, I will briefly touch, vntill such time as the land was made a Prouince, by the valour and industry of Iu∣lius Agricola the first Roman that found it an Iland, and left it more ciuill, and in subiection to the Roman Empire; and by the way I will insert some of such ancient Coynes, as among them were then vsed, expressing their names, and places of coy∣nage. THE KINGS AND GOVERNORS OF GREAT BRITAIN VVITH THE ANCI∣ENT COINES VSED IN THEIR TIMES. CHAPTER VI. T He first British Coyne (as is supposed) both by the fa∣shion thereof being shield∣like, and Name thereupon inscribed REXCOM: denoteth Comius, (if he be a Britaine) King of the A∣trebatij in this Iland: whom some iudge to haue fled thence vnto Caesar, as a traytor to his Natiue country; and in Gallia vanqui∣shed those parts, that lay coasted against the Whight, Ptolem i Geo∣graph. wherein (by Ptolemy) the people called likewise the Atrebatij inhabited: ouer whom he receiued the go∣uernment by the gift of Caesar, and was by him im∣ploied to worke the Britaines to his obedience. And that he was King of the Atrebatij in Britaine, may be strengthned by that which Caesar in his second book of Commentaries affirmeth, where, by his owne knowledge he saith, that one Diuitiacus raigned ouer a great part of Gallia, and some portion of Britaine also: and so likewise this Comius is reported to be of great respect among our Britaines, and able in that country to doe much. Neither is it altogether Caesar. . lib. 4. vnlikely, seeing the Britaines distasted his loyalty to Caesar, and his Ambassage for their subiection, with such dislikes, that they laid violent hands on∣ly vpon him, and cast him in prison; vsing no such rigor against the rest of their owne Ambassadors. Notwithstanding when successe altered, they set him at liberty, and made him their meanes to pacifie Caesar. Other Coynes I haue inserted to such British princes as by their inscriptions are known to be theirs. And whereas some are not yet noted by that honor to the world; I haue vnto such added only blankes, if happily more be reueiled hereafter, and the bowels of the earth deliuer to others, her trea∣sures hid, as formerly (and in these our searching daies) she hath already done. (2) Cassibelan, as the most worthy among the Britains Kings, to withstand the common danger now ready to light vpon them all, by the inuasions and wars of the Romans; was by a generall consent cho∣sen their chieftaine, though in times past, he had mo∣lested his neighbouring prouinces to the inlargement of his owne. Whose signiories, as Caesar saith, were seuered from the Cities towards the sea coast by the riuer Thames, about fourescore miles from the same. Caesar. commen. lib. 5. He had obtained the gouernment of the Trinoban∣tes, by the slaughter of Imanuence, and the expulsion of Mandubrace his sonne. And, with great valour, held opposit to the Romans, vntill the reuolt of his chiefe Citie, the Cenimagues, Segontians, Ancalits, Bibroces, Cas∣sians, and other states, which drew backe, and yeelded to the enemie; his confederates, the foure Kings of Kent, ouerthrown, his owne towne won, and himselfe forced to yeeld vnto Caesar, and the land to pay a tri∣bute of 3000. pound yeerly to Rome. A British Coyne of gold with the inscription CAS in scattered letters we haue inserted; as also another wheron is instamped the word VER, supposed to be his, because it is thought to haue bin coined in antient Verolam, the City of Cas∣sibelan, Verolam a fa∣mous City neere to the place where now S. Albons is. and that in his daies, before the Romans won it. (3) Cingetorix: whom Caesar calleth Kings that raigned in Kent, were in∣stigated by Cassibelan suddain∣ly to set vpon, and to assault the Roman forces, that lay incamped vpon the sea shore whilst he kept Caesar occupied further in the mayne: which thing they attempted, but failed of their hoped expectation, their men being slaine, three of them chased, and Cingetorix the chiefest taken cap∣tiue. This heauy newes and vnfortunate successe, cau∣sed Cassibelan to sue vnto Caesar, and by the meanes of Comius obtained his peace. Caruill: Taximagull: Segonax: (4) Mandubrace a prince of the Trinobantes, but a traytor to his country; whose father Imanuence being slaine by Cassibelan, and his owne life likewise sought after, and in danger, fled vnto Caesar into Gal∣lia, and followed his fortunes in the wars; wherein, he was a great spurre vnto Caesars forwardnesse for Britain, both to be reuenged vpon the murtherer of his father, and to recouer the gouernment of the Tri∣nobantes vsurped by Cassibelan: preferring his owne ambitious desire, and the reuenge of one mans death, before the freedome of his natiue Country, or the deaths of many his coūtrimen, that daily stopped the Romans passage with streames of their blood. He recouering his chiefest City with the protection of the Romans, yeelded subiection, & forty hostages to Caesar: whose example drew others to sell their owne liberty, & to buy many miseries at too deere a rate, and with too late repentance, him doth Beda call Androgorius. Beda hist. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 2. (5) Cenimagues Inhabi∣tants of Norfolk. Suff. Cam. &c. Segontians Hantshire. Ancalits Camb. Britan. Hendly hund. in Oxford. Bibroces Bray hund. in Barkshire. Cassians Caishow hund. in Hartf. These people or states, seeing the proceedings and happy successe of Caesar, after the example of the Tri∣nobantes, whose chiefest Citie had yeelded him obedi∣ence, and were thereby secured, and protected from the harmes of his souldiers, sent him like∣wise their submissions, and were accepted into subiection: so ready were they to saue their owne stakes, that they left the whole to the hazard of losse, which soone after followed as an ouerflowing flood, wherein was lastly drenched the whole I∣lands liberty. (6) Cunobeline (for so vpon his Coynes his name is instamped) was the son of Theomantius and he the sonne of Lud (as say our British historians, by whom his name is corruptly writ∣ten Kymbeline) he liued at Rome, and in great fauour with Augustus Caesar the Emperor, by whom he was made Knight, and by his meanes the peace of Britain was continued without the paiment of their Tribute, as Fabian out of Guido de Columna hath gathered. In the foure∣teenth yeere of his raigne the Day-star of Iacob ap∣peared, and the rod out of I shal did flourish from Numb. 24. 17. the wombe of a Virgin, when the wonderfull Isay. 11. 1. Counsellor, the mighty God and Prince of Peace, the Emmanuel with vs was borne at Beth-lehem of Isay. 9. 6. his maiden-mother the blessed Virgin Mary, and was made man like vnto vs in all things, sinne only excepted. These were the times that great Kings and Prophets desired to see, but sàw them not, when Matt. 2. the Wolfe and the Lambe, the Leopard and the Kid, the Calfe and the Dyon fed together; for war was Esay 11. 6. not heard of then in the world, but rather their swords were made into mattocks, and their speares Mica. 4. 3. turned into sithes, as the Prophets, Sibyls, and Poets from them haue affirmed. In Rome the temple of Ianus was shut, and in Britaine Cunobeline enioied peace with the rest of the world, and his fame made more famous by the many Coynes instamped of him, and whose face thereon among all the British Kings was first inscribed, as by these here inserted doth eui∣dently appeare, one with two faces, like vnto Ianus, and foure more with his owne, besides three others wherein is read his name, one of them with a womans head, another with a horse, and the third with a wreath: all these (if not more) are knowne to be his, which shew∣eth his wealth, his fame, and his ciuill respect. The chiefest Citie for his princely resi∣dence was Camalodunum, now Malden in Essex, wonne by Claudius from the sonnes of Cu∣nobeline, as by the inscription of the Coyne next ensuing appeareth, and wherein many of the British monies also receiued their im∣presse. This City with the free towne Vero∣lam afterwards felt the heauy hand of merci∣lesse BODVO in her reuenge against the Ro∣mans, who laid the beauty and gorgeous buil∣dings thereof so leuell with the earth that those walles and mounted turrets neuer since aspi∣red to halfe their wonted heights. (7) Adminius the first sonne of Cunobeline, King of the Britaines, by Suetonius his report, vpon some offence was banished the Iland by his father; and with a small traine fled ouer the seas into Belgia; where Caius Caligula was in making his ridiculous expedition against the Ocean. And yeelding him∣selfe to his protection, added matter to his vaine glorious humors, as of a great victory and conquest; sending the newes therof to Rome, with an especiali S ton. i vitae Catig , s . 44. command that his letters should be deliuered in the Temple of Mars, and that in the assembly of a full Senate. It is iudged by learned Cambden that the Roman Coyne aboue prefixed, vpon whose reuerse is inscribed Metropolis Etiminij Regis, to be meant of this Adiminius the sonne of Cunobeline, whose Citie Camalodunum, Claudius Caesar the Emperour after∣wards wonne, and wherein a temple was built and consecrated vnto him, attended by the Priests Au∣gustals: which heauily burdened the poore estates of the Britaines. (8) Catacratus another son of Cunobeline, immedi∣atly after the death of his father, found himself agr e∣ued Dio calls him Catacratus. at the Romans, for the retaining of certaine fugi∣tiues the betraiers of their natiue country; wher one Bericus was a chiefe, and a great firebrand of Clau∣dius his attempts against the Britains. This Catacratus maintained resistance against Aulus Plautius the Em∣perors Deputy, with such noble resolution and warlike encounters, that often he endangered both his per∣son and army. But Fortune and victory attending the Romans, brought at length Catacratus their captiue into bands, with great slaughters of his Bri∣taines, himselfe led shortly after in great triumph through Rome, in honor of Plautius his so fortu∣nate successe. The miseries of others thus made the Romans to mount the chaire of their triumphs; and the chaines of their captiues, the records of their pre∣sent aspired pride. But the bordering D buni seeing his fall, made their owne standings surer by yeelding themselues subiects to Rome. (9) Togodamnus the third sonne of Cunobeline, and successor to Catacratus, prosecuted his countries quarrell with the like boldnesse and resolution as his brother before him had done: & was the only touch∣stone that gaue Vespasian his lustre, whose interpositi∣ons Tacitus in vitae Agric . (as Tacitus saith) was the beginning of that great∣nesse whereunto afterwards he aspired. And with such manhood followed the chase of the Romans, that in a bloody battell he ended his life, and brought Plautius their Lieutenant vnto a stand, where straitned in dangers both of place and people, he was forced to send to Claudius the Emperor; whose con∣ceit was then grounded, that in Britaine was grea∣test glory to be gotten, and therefore came to his as∣sistance in person himselfe, the first since Iulius Caesar that attempted their conquest. His recorded com∣positions made with Aruiragus, the mariage of his daughter and building of Glocester, I leaue to be read out of Geffrey of Monmouth, and to be allowed at the choice of his hearer; only noting that the possession of so faire a land drew the affection and aged per∣son of this Emperor to vndergoe so farre distant and dangerous a iournie, as this of Britaine lay from Rome. (10) Cogidunus a Britain borne, receiued in pure gift at the hands of the Romans, certain Cities, ouer which he peaceably raigned their King. For when they had conquered the neerest part of this Iland, and reduced it into the forme of a Promi ; according to their an∣cient policie, it was their custome, (saith Tacitus) to vse Kings themselues for instruments of bondage, both in admittance of their authority, and in pro∣tecting Tacitus in vita Agricola. them against their opposits. Other memoriall of him none remaineth, but that he is reported to haue rested euer most faithfull to the Romans, and was of them accordingly esteemed, albeit his owne people bare him no such good will, but rather ac∣counted him and others his like, to be Romes only instruments, and Britaines vipers, that brought in strangers to eat out the home-bred inhabitants, and fettered the freedome of their land, with the heauy chaines of a forrein subiection. (11) Caractacus the most renowned prince of the Silures, in nine yeeres resistance waded through many aduentures against the common enemy. For when as the Icenians, Cangi, and Brigantes began to faint and giue ouer, he only with the Ordouices held out with such seruice and fame, that thereby he grew both famous and fearefull to the Romans. But Desti∣nies determining the downfall of Britain, the props that were set to stay it still vp, proued too slender and brake vnder the waight. For this bold Caractacus o∣uerthrown in battell, his wife, daughter, and brethren taken prisoners, and his forces defeated, committed himselfe to the protection of Cartismandua the Bri∣gantes faithlesse Queene: who by her was deliuered to the Romans; and by P. Ostorius brought to Rome; where beholding the riches and glory of that City, he openly and boldly checked the auarice and ambi∣tious humors of the Romans, who being owners of so great and glorious things, were (notwithstanding) couetous and greedy for the poore possessions of the Britains. And there being led in triumph, with admi∣ration he was beheld of all the spectators, and for his Zonaras. vndanted spirit and magnanimous resolution relea∣sed of bands, and taken into fauour by Claudius the Emperor. And the Lords of the Senate assembled to∣gether made glorious discourses touching Caractacus captiuity, affirming it to be no lesse honorable then when P. Scipio shewed Syphax vnto the people, and L. Paulus, Perses, or if any other had exhibited to the Tacit. Annal. 12. cap. 8. view of the people kings vanquished and ouercome. The British Coyne here aboue shewed, by the scatte∣red letters therein inscribed, is by the iudicious obseruers of such ancient monies supposed to be his. (12) Venutius, a famous King of the Brigantes, and husband to Cartismandua, (a woman of an high and noble linage, but of a base and vnsatisfied lust:) finding his bed abused by Vellocatus his seruant and harnesse-bearer, raised his power against her, and her paramour. With him sided his Brigantes, and the neighbour countries adioining, whose good will went generally with the lawfull husband, fearing the ambitious authority of a lustfull woman. With her went the Romans, at the command of Didius their De∣putie: and these striking battell won the day: yet so, as the war continued to the Romans, the kingdome to Venutius, and the infamy with Cartismandua, both for betraying the pledge of her trust reposed by Caracta∣cus in his distresse, and her truth to Venutius her noble Lord and husband: preferring the licentious plea∣sures of a vassall, before the bed of chast mariage, or the nuptiall imbracements of a worthy King, and hath to ages following left her name noted with the scarres of infamy, that time nor continuance shall euer weare away. His ancient coyne is thought to be as thou seest here aboue described. (13) Prasutagus Boduo King and Queene of the Iceni∣ans, a people vnshaken by war, and themselues rich, (as Tacitus reporteth;) the only cause of their ruines, for which the Romans then war∣red; were brought to destruction vpon this insuing occasion. King Prasutagus dying, by will left Nero his heire (supposing by this meanes to leaue his state the safer,) together with the protection of his two daughters. These, contrary to trust, were abused, and defloured, the mother Boduo turned out of all, and against all manly ciuility, or womanly (much lesse, princely) respect, contumeliously and despitefully whipped. In the reuenge of which vnsufferable wrongs she so opposed and oppressed the Romans, that at one battell seuenty thousand (or as Dion Cassi∣us saith 80000. of their slaughtered bodies she sacri∣ficed to her dead husbands ghost; and hath left the fame of her proceedings registred, euen by her ene∣mies themselues, to her immortall and neuer dying memory. The strong Cities, Camalodunum, and Vero∣lanium, she sacked with the rage of mercilesse war; Pe∣tilius, Lieutenant of the ninth Legion, she discomfited, Catus the Procurator droue ouer the seas, Posthumus the Campe-master durst not resist her, and all indeed feared the valour of this heroick Lady: whose lawes were not martiall to saue vpon ransome: whose re∣uenge was not pacified with yeeldings or submission, nor did she thinke there was blood enough in the Ro∣mans to imbrue the altars of her assisting gods, or to wash off the staine of their vnnoble and vnmanly iniuries. But when successe altered, after losse, and valorous resistance, she made an end of her life by poison, lest liuing she should see either her owne mise∣ries in their triumphs, or leaue her remembrance in the records of their lauish and selfe-pleasing histo∣rians. Her Coyne of gold we haue here expressed, the forme shield-like, and vpon the embossement thus inscribed: BODVO. (14) Aruiragus, the valiant British King, whom Humfrey Lhuyd confidently affirmeth to be the same man that is called Meurigus, and is said to withstand Claudius in his enterprises for Britaine, vntill a com∣position of mariage was concluded betwixt the Em∣perors daughter and himselfe. Notwithstanding by Iuuenal it is plaine, that this Aruiragus was in his fame in the daies of Domitian, vnto whom the Poet, as a Prophet, would foredoome his happy successe in the dispossession of his gouernment ouer the Britaines, as in these his verses are seene; It bodes great honor to thy selfe, some King th shalt depriue, Or els Aruiragus from the rule of Britains waine shalt driue. An ancient British Coyne of siluer is here inserted, and a mans head thereon instamped, which is supposed to be his, the letters alluding so neere to his name. (15) Galgacus, a worthy and most valiant prince of the Caledonians, for vertue, and birth, preferred before any other in the Northern parts of this Iland, and made their Generall against the inuasions of Iuli∣us Agricola, was the last Britaine, that against the Ro∣mans stood out: accounting those only happy, which were free from the contagion of that Roman tyranny, and themselues the flower of all the British nobility, that yet had not subiected their necks to their yoke. The resistance which he made was great and warlike, but against the decree of God no man can stand; for the Romans, risen to their greatnesse, bare downe all that withstood them; and in a bloody battaile sub∣dued him, and his forces, making all silent before them where they came, and leauing desolation in the places where they had been. Thus then was the whole Iland subiected to the Roman Emperors, about one hundred thirty and six yeeres after Caesars first entrance, and the land that had been ruled by many petty kings, was brought now (as most parts of the world besides were) vnder the gouernment of one absolute Monarch. Grieuous, no doubt, was the losse of their liberties, but a greater gaine was gotten not many yeeres after; for from the rude and sauage manners of the barbarous, they were reclaimed, and became most ciuill. And he that had giuen their Iland to his Christ, prepared their hearts to receiue him their King; vnto whose subiection also they were Psal. 2. motiues to the Romans themselues. Two ancient British Coynes stamped in siluer we haue here set downe, attributing them both to this Galgacus of Ca∣ledonia. Notwithstanding in these (as in the rest) I must submit my selfe to the more experienced, and the cen∣sures of these ancient things to the learned and more iudicious. (16) These then were the resisters of the Ro∣mans proceedings, that rather yeelded their brests to the sword, then their necks to the yoke of a forrein subiection, and made their assaulters more famous in their conquests, and themselues more renowned to following posterities: neither in these relations haue we followed the records of our owne, but the appro∣ued testimony of their best writers, who haue deli∣uered what we haue said, and no doubt felt the like repugnancy of many others, both in the South and North of this Iland, though their names died with their valiant resistance. And as these Britains held the Romans at euen hand the space of one hun∣dred thirty and six yeeres, neither yet then were sub∣dued without themselues, that euer sided with the enemy against themselues, and whose factions made way for the feet of their conquerors, as from Tacitus we haue declared: So their successors the Saxons found as warlike withstanders, till God for Britains sinnes had cast downe their strength, whereof more shall follow (Christ assisting) in the due place of their stories, that from the raigne of Vortigerne the scourge of his country to Cadwallader the last prince of the Britains, spent their liues in the quarrell of liberty, and hath left their memorials famous for their countries defence. (17) But the state of kingdomes (how largely so euer extended, or by what humane wisedome strengthned with defence) do find their periods not to exceed much the number of six hundred yeeres, as by common experience among most nations is seene. In these times therefore when the world was shaken with wars, first by the Romans that stroue to mount hie the spires of their intended glory, and were by Gods decree appointed to ouerrun and afflict the earth, when Kings of people (I say) were en∣forced to lay the Crownes from their heads at their conquering feet; and free nations loaded with the yokes of their bondage: then was fulfilled the reso∣lution of this question demanded, Alas who shall liue Numb. 24 23. when God doth this? And then among the rest, Bri∣taine gaue place to necessity with as manlike resi∣stance as did states more stronger, or kingdomes confined with far more larger compasse. And Caesar himselfe bought his entrance with such losse to the Romans that no Emperor after assaied the like, be∣fore aged Claudius, whose opinion was, that thence the remembrance of his succeeding glory should wholly arise. But when the props of that Empire began for to faile, as nothing can bee firme in this still-wea∣ring world, the Saxons, for their valour a second triumphant nation, began as it were where the Ro∣mans left: for besides the continuall possession of their owne country, as in that case vnpartiall Tacitus doth tell vs; their legions were transported into all parts of the world, and without whom almost no victory was wonne: of whose power and prowesse in the expeditions of warre both Dionysius, Arrianus and Seneca, doe speake. To these then likewise if the Britains gaue place, their lots came foorth with the like price of the rest, and in this Iland they bought their conquests as deere as they had done in any other part of the world. Neither was Britaine sub∣dued by either of these nations, or their inuersion and exchange of policie altered, but with as vnwil∣ling subiection and streames of blood as had been slu∣sed out of the sides of their mightier nations, or by them had bin tamed to follow their triumphal chari∣ots. And more honour attributed to passe these British seas, with more admiration only to see the I∣land it selfe, then was vsually conceiued of king∣domes more larger, or that lay iacent as farre from Rome. And the conquest of some small parts of Bri∣taine in no small selfe-glory to be inscribed as tro∣phies of their victories vpon their Coynes, and to giue sirnames to the Emperors and their sonnes: as shall be shewed, when the age of this history shall be increased with the times of the Romans assaires in this Iland. Free from subjection before the attempts of Caius Iulius Caesar by the testimony of Diodorus Sicu∣lus, and neuer had yeelded to any forrein power, as not prouoked by Dionysius or Hercules, nor inforced by any to maintaine their liberties by the feats of warre. But Caesar in Gallia thirsting after nouelties, or his conceited humor to purchase renowne, made the sea seeme safe from dangers in passage, and himselfe resolute to venture his person amongst those bold and barbarous Britains: wherein he left no meanes vnassaied for their conquest and subiection, nor his successors omitted any prouident care to retaine and keepe the land in their possessions, which whilst it stood a prouince in their obedience was held and ac∣counted the fairest plume in their triumphant Dia∣dem, and the losse thereof (if no more but only in name) as was publikely affirmed, wold proue a great detriment to the Empire. This made the Romans to desire it as they did, who besides the great glory they conceiued in the conquest, made it the granary for the westerne garisons, besides the delicate prouisions for their Emperors owne tables. And the German Saxons straitned in their owne countries through increase of their people, or haply to supply their owne wants, infested with piracies these West parts of the world, and among all others set the eie of their affections vpon this most beautifull Iland, and neuer left their at∣tempts vnassaulted till they set the glorious diadem thereof vpon their owne heads. Changing the name Britannia into Anglia, a terme most fit to expresse that subiect, and pleasing in sound as Angelicall like, nei∣ther haue themselues proued vnworthy of so rich a possession, that in wars haue maintained, and by voi∣ages made known her fame as far as the sunne hath his beames, or the endlesse Ocean her ebbes and tides. But of these things wee shall haue occasion here∣after. And now addresse our selues to describe our anci∣ent Britaines, and to shew their true pictures as they are reported. At first rude and vnciuil (I taske them no further then all others then were in the world, some few excepted that were only taught by God) and with the first were reclaimed to a more ciuill re∣spect, both in their apparell and apprehension of lite∣rature; whose pictures in the Chapter succeeding we will demonstrate as they are described by Caesar, Pliny, Dio, Herodian and others; at first altogether naked, cut, and painted as thou seest, afterwards partly clad in imitation of others which frequented their coun∣try either for traffick or conquest; in both which manner take them as they are reported to bee by these authours, and impute no liberty in the draught to the workmans best liking, nor thy selfe any whit disparaged to be brought from such parents, which here are set as the pillars spoken of by Iosephus, that Ioseph. Antiqui. lib. 1. cap. 3. after the flood did preserue the inuented science of the celestiall bodies, lest time or elements should con∣sume that knowledge or deuoure those rules before demonstrated: So the true portrature of our ancient progenitors may by these be preserued from the ru∣ines of time & made our motiues to be thankful vnto him that hath brought vs forth in these most ciuill times, and not only clad vs with the garments of hu∣manity, but by his spirit hath guided vs vnto a cele∣stiall knowledge. THE PORTRAITVRES OF THE AN∣CIENT BRITAINES, OF THEIR NAKED∣NESSE, PAINTING AND FIGVRING THEIR BODIES, OF THEIR PERSONAGES HABITES, AND HABILI∣MENTS, BOTH IN PEACE AND WARRE: AS ALSO OF THE PICTS, THEIR ORIGI∣NALL AND HABITES, &c. CHAPTER VII. T He vnderstanding and apprehensions of men clouded in ignorance, are Aristotle. by a Great Philosopher compared to the eye∣sight of such men, as stand and behold things afarre-off; because both of these, though they ap∣prehend some generall shapes and notices, yet can they not discerne of the true proportions and proprieties of their Obiects. The like happeneth in the search and suruey, as of all other Nations, so of our owne, of our first begin∣nings, our antique Customes, behauiours, habits: the true Circumstances whereof are the more difficill to find, in that those things are not onely remote many de∣grees beyond the kenning of our Eye, (yea so ma∣nie Ages from the times wherein we liue,) but are also shadowed and enwrapped in manifold vncer∣tainties and contrarieties, wherewith euen those Wri∣ters The reason why Nations Origi∣nals are so hardly found out. haue perplexed our way, who vndertooke to be both our Guides and our Lights. Notwithstanding, our purpose being to propose vnto the eye of our now glorious and gorgious Britaines, some generall draughts of our poore and rude Progenitours, (that as King Agath cles in his chiefe feasts vsed onely earthen dishes to put himselfe in minde that his Father was but a Potter, so wee may remember that true British Nobilitie is more in Vertue then in Auncestors;) let vs first see what the principall notes and markes are whereby the persons of those first Britaines were made so remarkeable among all other Nations. (2) These Notes were chiefly three; first, their going naked; secondly, their staining and colouring of The three chiefe notes of the Bri∣taines. their whole Bodies; thirdly, their cutting, pi king and pouncing of their flesh, with garnishments (for so they thought them) of sundry shapes and fashions, as the two first ensuing Icones or Portraitures doe repre∣sent. Touching all which, the reports of Authors are very discrepant: and therefore, sith light is gotten out by collision of flintes, wee will essay, whether out of those Writers contradictions (brought to the stroke, and confronted together) we may strike some glime∣ring light to direct vs how to paint them forth, who so delighted in painting themselues. (3) First touching their going naked, the autho∣rity of Caesar must ouersway (as being auncientest) 1. The first note of the Britaines, their Nakednes. the too-generall reports of such others, as seeme to re∣late that the Britaines generally vsed no Gouer e, as neglectiue either of weathers iniurie, or of ciuill modesty; for he saith, interiores pleri{que} pellibus sunt ve∣stiti: the In-land men for the most part were clad with Caesar. skinnes. And yet these Inlanders were the rudest of all the rest, the Kentish and Sea-borders being full of humanity and little differing from the French ciuilitie. So that when Herodian saith, Vestis vsum non cognos∣cunt, nec induuntur quidem, They neither know the vse of Herodian. Garments: nor put any on: either he speaks on hearesay, or his large report must bee restrained to some cer∣taine Persons, Times, and Places. And for certaine Persons and Times indeed Plynie somewhat limits it, Pliny, saying, that their married weomen, both elder and yon∣ger, (coniuges, nurus{que}) in certaine festiuals vsed to goe starke naked: so doth Dio also for certaine Places: in their Tents (saith he) they liued naked and vnshod, where Dio. he seemeth to allow them some couerture abroade. The like may be supposed in time of Winter or War, where Herodian himselfe saith onely, plera{que} corporis Herodian. nudi, A great part of their body was bare. (4) Itmay seeme hereby, that those Originals of Particular Nations were not much vnlike that first beginning of the vniuersall prosemination of Man∣kind, when our first Parents innocencie walked in naked simplicitie: the foundations of all things be∣ing, as farthest from our sight, so more simple and farre from those artificiall fraudes, which some call Wit and cunning. And though an Saint Cypri in∣terprets. A , East. D. , West. A. arctos, North. . . South. ancient Father be mistaken, in conceauing that by the foure letters of the name of Adam, were signified the foure quarters of the World, (that being an Hebrue name of three letters, and not a. Greeke of foure) yet all those Quar∣ters of the World participate somewhat of Adams dis∣positions; and as all Naturall things retourne by course to that whereof first they were framed, so if Lawes, discipline, and Customes, did not restraine men, they would in time, of themselues reuolue to that first neglectiue condition, and carelessenes of those outward respects whence men are now named Ciuill. (5) But in our Britaines, three reasons there seeme of this their going v loathed. First, their hardines, Causes of the Bri∣tish nakednes. 1. Hardinesse. which was partly naturall, and partly acquired by practise of their bodies to durance: of whom Dio re∣cords that all of them had an excellent habit in tolerating Dio Nic. hunger, cold, and labours in somuch as they could endure to abide many daies together in the water vp to the chinne without any food at all; that they would liue in the woods on roots and barkes of trees; though one kind of foode he there mencioneth vnknowne in our times, where∣of vsing to make as much as a beane onely, they were not subiect either to hunger or thirst. No maruaile, if those, who would endure this, could endure the want of garments: especially in a soile whereof wee find this See Chap. 1. 5. 10 Euloge. Tu nec strict a gelu, &c. Nor freezing cold, nor scorching hot thou art; Twixt both thou hold'st the meane and pleasing'st part. The like patience we find euen now not onely in the wilder Irish, and Virgineans, but in rogues and Wan∣derers of our owne Countrey, who often pittilesse of themselues voluntarily depriue their Bodies of this Protection against the Aires offence, to procure pit∣tie of others. And what speake we of these? seeing euen children for Custome, and Women for pride, wil suffer their Breasts, and most tender parts of their Body, to be exposed not only to offence of weather, but of modesty also? yea generally, the handes, and fa∣ces, being of most subtilest sence, yet by custome are enabled now to endure that, which by the like cu∣stome the olde Britaines endured in their whole Bo∣dies; whereby Plutarch thinkes they vsually liued so long Plutarch. euen to the age of sixescore, the externe cold keeping in and augmenting their internall heate. (6) As abilitie to endure colde, so ignorance (in many) of meanes to preuent it, may seeme another 2. Ignorance. occasion of these Britaines nakednes. The Romans (it seemes) in their old Consuls times, and after, had not the skill nor vse of Hats, Breeches, &c. That Britaine abounded with wooll and other materials for cloa∣thing, is past all doubt, for which cause, by one Pane∣gyrick, it is named Riche in Pasturage, which by ano∣ther Paneg. ad Constan. Paneg ad Constan. is thus explicated, that therein was an infinite multitude of tame cattell both with Vdders full of milke, and loaden with Fleeces to the ground. So then Woll was not wanting, but Will, or Skill; the latter in most like∣lihood: for, as Strabo saith, that though those strut∣ting Vdders yeelded great store of milk, yet some of them had not skill to make cheese, and hauing so rich grounds, Strabo. yet had not the art of tillage, so their sheepe might haue such heauy sleeces, yet some of their Owners no cun∣ning to keepe themselues warme therewith. Some of them, I say; for otherwise, as Pliny, touching Tillage, giues light to Strabo, witnessing, that others of them were so good Husbands as to manure their grounds Pliny. with Marle, as likewise doth Dioscorides, saying they had skill to make drinke of Barley: so probable is it, that Dioscorides: those other who were by Caesar and Tacitus said to be so like the French in conditions, had also some Caesar. Tacitus. part of their Art in fitting the Burthen of their Sheepes backes to couer their owne. (7) The last reason of such their going naked 3. Pride. sometimes, was out of an opinion that no cloathing so adorned them, as their painting and damasking of their Bodies, for which cause (saith Herodian) they Herodian. would not couer themselues, lest then their gay painting should not be seene: but Pomponius Mela makes doubt, Mela. whether their thus painting themselues were for or∣nament or for some other vse; which doubt Caesar seems to resolue, as if the men did it; because it made them Caesar. looke more terrible in warre. (8) And thus we are now orderly fallen on the second of those three notes appropriated by Au∣thors 2. The second note of the Bri∣taines, their pain∣ting. Caesar. to our Britaines, which is their painting and stai∣ning of their Bodies, which appeares by Caesar to haue beene more vniuersally vsed, then going naked, for all the Britaines (saith he) die their bodies with staining. As Authours differ in the reason of this their painting, (as we shewed) so in the name, perchance also in the substance. of that wherewith they stained themselues, and somewhat also in the colour it selfe. The substance Caesar calles luteum, which yet in vulgar acception is thought to be some yellow substance, as Pliny cals lute∣um Caesar. Pliny. oui, the yolke of the Egge; Pliny himselfe saith the Frenchmen call it glastum, describing it to be an herbe like Plantayne, which Oribasius (as learned Cambden Cambd. in Bri . p. 14. Mela. sheweth) doth terme Vitrum, in which sense Mela is vnderstood, to say, that they were stained Vitro (and not Vltrò,) it being generally taken to be Woad, from those ancient times hitherto vsed for the surest staine. But for the colour which is made, Caesar and the rest agree, it was Caeruleus, blewish or azure, which colour the Cambro-Britannes doe yet call glace, whence our glasse for windowes (called also vitrum) seemeth by reason of the colour, to haue taken name. Onely Pliny Pliny. leaueth some scruple, in saying, that the naked painted women imitated the Aethiopian colour; which must be vnderstood either comparatiuely, in respect of People white and vnpainted, or because blew a farre-of hath the appearance of blacke. (9) That the Britaines tooke their Name from See Chap. 25. 7 this painting, hath beene already shewed out of Isi∣dore, who writes, that they had that name from a word of their owne language, wherein Breeth signifieth as Isidore. What the Picts were. much as painted or stained; but whether those other Inhabitants of the more Northerne parts of this I∣land, called also Picti or painted, had their name vpon the same ground, & whether they were some branch of the British stocke, or of some transmarine Colonie, it is a question not yet decided. Pomponius Laetus, and some other, deriue them from Germany, some from the Pictones in France; but Beda, from Scythia, whence saith hee, they are reported to haue come into Ireland in a few long bottomes, and finding no seating there to haue entered into Britaine. Though Beda his autho∣ritie Cambden p. 2. be venerable, yet the learned find reasons to in∣duce them rather to beleeue, that they were the re∣maines of those ancient Britaines which either inha∣bited the North-part of this Iland, before the Romanes entrance, or which (vpon their Conquest) fled the∣ther to auoid the Romish yoake, where the difficulties of the aire & soile protected them from the Romanes ambition and inuasion. Whereto Tacitus well accor∣deth, Tacitus. saying, that Agricola droue the Romanes Ene∣mies (he meanes the more vntractable Britaines) into those parts, as it were into another Iland. And it is thought incredible, that those Enemies of the Ro∣manes, who sent forth against Agricola an Army of thirty thousand strong, and who so vexed Seuerus, that in one Expedition he loste seuenty thousand of his Ro∣manes, & their Aiders were so vtterly extinct, as that none of them remained; but that rather they won∣derfully multiplied, being those who afterward much perplexed and ouerran the Romane Prouince, and to whom (not vnlikely) some other, such as Beda mentioneth, did afterward ioine themselues. (10) If we would adde reasons vnto Authorities, to proue that these Picts were no other then that multiplied ofspring of those Britaines, we could pro∣duce their Beda makes thē diuers tongues, but they were onely different Dialects. See Cambden. language, their manners, their kind of Go∣uernment (all bearing British Resemblance) to con∣firme the same. But what neede? since the selfe-man∣ner of painting is an vndoubted marke in the Chil∣dren representing of what Parents they were borne. That they were painted, Claudian shewes, calling them, The Pictes, so truly named; which Isidore well ex∣pounds, Claudian. Why the Pi were so called. Isidore. The Pictish Nation had their name from their Bodie, depainted with the iuice of an herbe growing a∣mongst them. When therefore the Romanes exclu∣ded them from their other Prouinciall Britaines, this name (Pictes) for distinctions sake was in vse amongst them; before which times, yea and long after, they were knowne to Writers by no other name then Bri∣taines, and the Romaine Emperor, Commodus, Seuerus, Bassianus, Geta, vpon the Conquests of them, instiled themselues Britannici, British (not Pictish) Conquerors. But after the Romane tongue had preuailed with the Romane sword, the Britaines themselues vsed to name any thing painted by the name of Picte; as may bee gathered out of Vegetius, who saith, that the Britanes called certaine Shallops, Picts, because their sailes, tac∣kle, and Marriners apparell, were coloured blew, the very colour, wherewith these British Pictes (as V . Annal. An∣glor . some∣where they are truely called) vsed to staine them∣selues. When afterward the Irish-Scots had confede∣rated themselues with these against the Romanes, they all beganne by degrees to be more ciuilized: the more Southerly of them being by Ninian the Britaine con∣uerted vnto Christ, about the yeere of Grace 430. those other more Northward, by Columbanus Anno 565. by which time, it is likely, that Ciuilitie increa∣sing, their painting and other like ruder Customes were well nigh forgotten, both amongst them, and also amongst those other Britaines vnder the Romanes Gouernment. In which regard we haue besides those praefixed Icones, and Patternes of their first and most sauaged times, here added also their Habits, when they beganne to put on, with conditions, a little bet∣ter cloathing also. (11) Neither may we thinke that formerly they 3. The thi d note of the Britaines, their picturing of their bodies. refused such Apparell, onely to shew this staining and colouring of their Bodies: for besides it, some other bellishments they had, which they esteemed much more gracefull, then either their painting was, or any Cloathes could be. Which of the Britaines, Solinus thus deliuereth: The Country is in part (note that he Solinu makes it not generall) inhabited by People barbarous, who by artificial formes of incision haue from their Child∣hood sundry shapes of Beasts depourtraied in their bodies, and as their limmes increase in growth, so doth the pictu∣red worke together therewith, neither doth these wild Peo∣ple boast of any greater kind of patience, then in bearing long-lasting scarres, where the paint had deeply suncke in∣to their sliced flesh. The very paralell whereof is al∣so by I sidore set downe touching our Picts whose bo∣dies I sidore. sliced and pinked be an artificiall punchion, did suck in the tuice of the stayning herb, carying these rasures on their pictured limmes, as badges of their Noblenes, thus endamasked. Neither only the shapes of Beasts, but Maculosa Nobi∣litas. of all other things, were so printed in their flesh; which Herodian takes to bee the prime reason, why Herodian. they delighted to goe naked, least they should hide these their pleasing garnishments. Where also by the way may be obserued, since Solinus saith that the bar∣barous onely vsed so to doe, and Herodian, that those who did so, vsed therefore to goe naked; that therefore not the Britaines in generall, but the most barbarous of them vsed to goe naked. And very answerable to Solinus, (who elegantly calleth such their figuring of themselues, inscriptis visceribus, a writing on their Bo∣dies,) Solinus. is that of Claudian, Perlegit exanimes Picto mori∣ente Claudian. figuras, On dying Picts he reades the breathles shapes, as if the beasts so liuely portraited on them, seemed to lie dead together with the murdered bodies of the Picts. (12) By these varieties of picturing, (if The Appendix to Hariots Virgi∣nea. Their married weomen. some haue not misinformed vs out of their alleaged anci∣ent Authors,) those people so distinguished them∣selues, The vse of their different pictu∣ring. that the maried weomen were knowne by ha∣uing pictured on their shoulders, elbowes and knees, the heads of some fierce beasts, as Lions, Gryphens, &c. On their Belly, the Sunne spreading his beames: on their Pappes, Moones and Starres &c. On their armes, thighes, and legges, some other fancies of their owne Choice. But for their Virgins, their whole Body was garnished ouer with the shapes of all the fairest kinds Their Virgins. of flowers & herbes; which (to speake indifferently) could not but yeeld, though a strange, yet no vnplea∣sing aspect. Whereas the Men were (as Caesar speakes) very horrible to bee looked on, hauing all their The Men. breast & bodie disfigured with vgly Beasts, Serpents, rauenous Birdes, scales and finnes of fishes &c. In which relation yet, this scruple will not easily be re∣moued (if it bee true, that from their childhood their prints encreased with their bodies) how those, who be∣ing Virgins had no prints but of herbes and flowers, becomming Wiues were so easily transformed either into Beasts or heauenly Creatures. (13) The later Women, (as you see by the later portraicture,) became farre more modest, that is in∣deed The later British weomen. more womenly; hauing learned that then they openly shew most beauty, when openly they shew not their beautie; much lesse should they expose to the view, that which nature most endeuoured to hide, as knowing it least worth the viewing: yea * some obserue that weomen being drowned, natural∣ly swimme with their face and foreparts downward, Agryppa de la de saeminarum. whereas Men doe contrary, as if the impression of modesty were not to leaue a Woman euen after death. Agryppa who mentioneth it, reporteth also of some Matrones, so too-modest, that they chose ra∣ther to die, then to expose some hidden diseases to their Chirurgians view: A point vnfortunately inser∣ted into his witty booke, in praise of women, which he dedicated to Margaret wife to Maximilian (after∣ward Emperour) shee, of womanly bashfulnes choo∣sing rather to die, then to haue her thigh cured, which was broken with a fall from a horse. The picture of this British woman here last deportraied, is framed to that description of the most valient British Lady. Bou∣dicea, of whose braue attempts on the Romanes you shall read, more heareafter in the 7. Chapter of the Sixt Booke. (14) Of which Sex, though naturally the wea∣ker, yet in most Writers their are remembrances of Of their women Gouernors. some, whose Actions both politicke and Warlike haue beene no way inferiour to the worthiest Men; as our owne Age hath giuen testimony to the World in a∣nother Great Lady of British race, (the ofspring of the valiant and louely Meredicke of Wales,) the glorie of Queen Elizabeth descended from Owen Tender, whome L iland calleth M ridyck. whose Raigne and Regall vertues shall bee as lasting as the World. Whose iust, wise, and resolute kind of Gouernement hath iustified that Custome of our old Britains and Picts, of the former of which Tacitus reports, as Beda doth of the later, that they made no dif∣ference Tacitus. Beda. of Sexe for the Soueraigne Command, yea and vsed to warre vnder the conduct of women. In which respect though their Ordinary sort of weomen were not im∣ploied in martiall seruices, otherwise then before we shewed in the fourth Chapter, yet because some of the choisest of them haue been so imploied, we haue so deciphered them in their Martiall habit. (15) For their other habiliments of warre, and the manner thereof, we haue described it in the same Of the Britains habits in warre. 4. Chapter; their fight being (as Diodorus saith) after the fashion of the Heroes in the first age of the World, who Diodorus. fought in Chariots; yet on foote also they were most strong (saith Die) and also most swift; which makes me mar∣uaile why Strabo should say, they were pedibus malè suf∣fulti, Die Strabo not strongly vnderpropped; Who also ads that they were (as himselfe obserued at Rome) much tauller then the Gaulles, but yet of no very elegant shape and tim∣ber; Vsing as (Caesar saith) to weare their haire very long and curling, otherwise shauen all their bodie ouer, except onely the vpper lippe. Their weapons (saith Herodian) were narrow shields, and short speares, at the end where∣of Herodian. (saith Dio) was a little bell like a ball, which they shooke at their first encounter in Warre for terror of Die the Enemy. Swords also had they, but short, hanging at their naked sides; but helmet and corslet they vsed Herodien. none, as esteeming them burdens rather then helps in warre. But about their necks they wore a round circle of Iron (as an ornament no lesse esteemed then gold with other Nations) as also about their waste, whereat they hung their skeines: being doubtlesse, a most warlike Nation, (as their posterity haue euer since proued,) and most desirous to spill blood, wherein yet their Ofspring by di∣uine blessing are now most different from their An∣cestors. THE SVCCESSION OF THE MO∣NARCHS OF GREAT BRITAINE IN THE TIME OF THE ROMANS, WITH AN HISTORICALL RELATION OF THE LIVES, ACTS, AND GOVERN∣MENTS OF THEIR EMPEROVRS AND LIEVTENANTS: So farre as toucheth the affaires of this Iland, and so long as it stood a Prouince to that Empire. BOOKE VI. CHAPTER I. T He next Nation that to the Britains obtained pos∣session, The Romans the second possessors of this Iland. Iulius Caesar the first Roman at∣tempter. and soueraignty of this Iland, were the Ro∣mans, and of them Caius Iulius Caesar the first; what time their State had vn∣dergone all kinds of go∣uernments, and now aspi∣red almost to their highest pitch of glory. This Caesar bearing the office of Questorship in Spaine, and naturally disposed for great assaies, was thereto the more incited at the sight of Alexanders portraiture, standing in the temple of Hercules at Calez. Suet. in vita Cae∣sar. Sect. 7. Gades, where beholding it with great ad∣miration fell into a sudden dislike of himselfe, and (as Alexander in seeing Achilles tombe) with an ambitious, yet honorable emulation, sighed and said: Hast thou at my yeres atchieued the conquest of the whole world, my selfe Caesars speech beholding Alex∣anders picture. hitherto hauing done no memorable act? Euer after which he disdained that his petty charge, and made suite to the Senate to be dismissed, holding that the cloude which ouershadowed his following and (soone after) flowing fortunes. And forthwith returning to Rome Caesars complot∣tings for the Empire. obserued euery occasion that might make him grati∣ous in the peoples eies, hauing the aduantage of the time which then was swaied with most dislikes: and entring into many factions, yea and some of them not without suspition of conspiracy, did notwith∣standing so manage his proceedings, that their con∣structions were euer made honorable, and himselfe the man by all assents that did support the glory of their State; vnto whom offices of high dignities were assigned, which daily increased his credit and power. And in the time of his Consulship, tooke vpon him Caesar ten yeeres in Gallia. the gouernment of Gallia, where he remained ten yeeres together, and forbare no occasion for warre, were it neuer so vniust or dangerous: Insomuch that framing a Bridge of wood ouer the broad and swift riuer Rhene, he entred the country of the Sweui∣ans, Caesar the first Roman that as∣sailed the Ger∣mans. being the first Romane that assailed the Germans: And thence with victory returning, found his charge the Gaules in quiet: both which fortunes were as spurres to his aspiring minde, and set his thoughts to worke vpon other attempts. (2) For now intending a voiage into Britaine, he prepared thitherward, as well to inlarge the extent of his ambition and glory, as to satisfy himselfe with the sight and seate of the Iland, as for a further know∣ledge Causes of Cae∣sars inuasion. of those people the inhabitants, after whom he had most diligently inquired, yet by no relation could find content. But his pretence was reuenge against the Britains, for that thence (as himselfe speaketh) the Gaules had receiued most of their supplies against him in all his warres, or as some haue written, for the de∣sire Sueton. in vita Caesar. Strabo. of Pearles that therein plentifully grew, whose beauty and weight he had oft obserued. But because the summer was almost spent, and that the voiage seemed dangerous through want of knowledge, either for place of entrance, or safety in harbour (for our learned countriman Roger Bacon Bacon de arte & natura. was doubtlesse in an error, who thinketh that Caesar set vp perspectiue glasses on the coast of France, and thence saw all the ports and creeks in England) he thought good to send one Caius Volusenus a military Tribune in a Volusenus Cae∣sars spic. galley before him, giuing sufficient instructions for so great an enterprise in hand, himselfe drawing towards those parts of Gallia, that lay neerest coasted vnto Bri∣taine, thence expecting his successe. (3) These things were not so secretly done but that the Britaines receiued notice thereof, and therupon some of their priuate States sent Ambassadors with proffers of submission vnder the assurances of their hostages. Which Caesar accepted and sent back again with liberall promises, ioining in commis∣sion with them Comius a king of the Atre∣batij (for so he is stiled vpon his Coyne) a man well reputed, and respected among the Britains, that he might perswade the rest of the States to imbrace Caesars amitie. In effecting of which businesse, some fiue daies being spent, Volusenus returned, ha∣uing waffed vpon the coasts of Britaine so far, as with safety he might, which was no further then to view it with the eie, his foot not daring to tread the shoare repleni∣shed with those barbarous people, as it pleased the Romans to terme the Britaines: His discouerie and relation gaue small en∣couragements to Caesars hoped successe, and had not The Morines were of the hi∣ther parts of France, as Tur∣wine. Calis, &c. the Morines yeelded him their obedience, it may be thought his voiage at that season had been staied. (4) But now composing his affaires in Gallia, and hauing ready an hundred ships (wanting but two) Athenaeus reports he had 1000. ships. besides many Gallies also for transporting his army, he loosed from the shoare; hauing a good wind, about the third watch of the night, taking order for his The Romans di∣uided th night into foure equall parts, each part being called a watch. Caesar commeth in person against Britaine. horsemen to imbarke with all speed and follow after him; himselfe early in the morning attained the sight of Britaine, whose cliffes he found couered with ar∣med men, and place for entrance so naturally beset and strengthned with steepe hills and rocks, that hee there cast anchor, and called to counsell the Legats and Tribunes, declaring vnto them the danger of the hauen that gaue such aduantage to their enemy, whose darts from the higher ground might much impeach their arriuage, and therefore determined their landing elsewhere. (5) Their Counsell was no sooner dismissed, but Caesar both tide and wind fitting him, not foreslowing the occasion, gaue signe of remoue, and some eight miles distant came to Thought to bee Deale. a plaine and open shoare, and made preparation to land his men. Thither also the Britaines had remooued part of their forces, and so valiantly withstood the enemies, that Caesar himselfe, though wholly addicted to honor himselfe and his Romans, yet confesseth that his army was sore ouer∣laid and terrified with that incounter: and had they not been assisted from the Gallies with an vnusuall kind of Engines, which did beat backe the Britaines (vnexpert of that strange manner of assault) from the shoare, the Romans had not set foot on British soile, nei∣ther durst they then aduenture it, vntill the standard-bearer for the tenth legion desperately leapt foorth This ensigne was an Eagle of siluer standing in a lit∣tle shrine vpon the top of a speare. Valer. M . lib. 3. cap. 2. of the ship with his Eagle, calling on the danted soul∣diers and asking whether they would dastardly for∣sake their ensigne and betray it through cowardize to the enemy? which opprobry prouoked them to fol∣low his example, and so they got the shoare after an encounter fierce and terrible on both parts, as Caesar acknowledgeth. But the first of all (euen before the Stander-bearer) who put courage into the Romans and taught them how to deale, was (as testifieth Eu∣tropius) one Scaeua a Britaine (who formerly had fled to Caesar) and guiding foure other souldiers in a boat to a rock nere the shore, where the tide leauing them, his fellowes slunke backe in the boat, but hee most boldly defended himselfe from the rocke against the Britains, like a Beare at a stake among a multitude of mastiues, till hauing all his armour broken in peeces and himselfe all wounded with darts, he swamme to the fleet; and begging pardon for his foole-heady for∣wardnesse, Caesar both forgaue him, and rewarded his valour with the honour of a Centurion: and hee did Caesar afterwards noble seruice at Dyrrachium in the ciuill warres. Caesar confessing, that hee alone saued the fortification against Pompey, at which time his tar∣get Caesar. bell. il. was shewed to Caesar, hauing 230. holes pierced in it by the enemie, whereof Iosephus Iscanus that an∣cient Ioseph. Iscanus in Antiocheid . Poet of Excester writeth thus: Hinc & Scaeua satus pars non obscura tumultûs Ciuilis, Magnum solus qui mole soluta Obsedit, melior{que} stetit pro Caesare murus. The Britaine Scaeua in ciuill warres well knowne, Besig'd the Viz. Pompey. Great, and rampiers ouerthrowen, Was Caesars wall more strong then wall of stone. The first attempt assaied, that is warranted by any true Record for the conquest of this Iland: which The first assay for the conquest of this Land. An. nds 3873. happened in the yeere of the worlds creation 3873. and before the birth of our Sauiour Christ, 54. (6) This enterprise for landing thus atchieued, Caesar charged so fiercely vpon the enemie, that hee put them to flight; but wanting his horsemen to fol∣low Caesar putteth the Britains to flight. the chase, (which as yet were not arriued) he pro∣ceeded no further, but encamped his host vpon a great plaine, not farre from the Sea, and not without At Barham Down Caesar seeth the dispersion of his ships. likelihood thought to be Barham Downe: for so neere lay it vpon the shoare, that thence he beheld the dis∣persion and losse of his 18. ships (comming vnder saile with his horsemen to his assistance) through the violence of a storme, and rage of Sea. (7) In the meane time the Britaines; that after flight had againe recouered head, and in their assem∣blies aduisedly considered their imminent dangers; concluded their submission for the safest remedie, and to that end sent their second Embassadours vnto Cae∣sar, with whom Comius before remembred was im∣ploied, The Britaines second ambas∣sage to Caesar. whom they had retained in strait prison for Caesars cause, but now made him a meane to worke their peace; which was granted after some soft and gentle reproofes, with hostages receiued for perfor∣mance of Couenants, and resort of their Nobles to Caesars campe, to yeeld themselues and Cities to his will. (8) These Britaines, although rude in regard of the Romanes, and vnmatchable to them in educated ciuilitie, yet were so skilfull in the affaires of warre, and so ready to discerne the least aduantage, that they easily perceiued the weaknesse of Caesars power, both in want of horsemen to equall their wagons, wherein chiefly stood the strength and order of their fight, as also of ships for seruice and safety, as occasions should be offred: whereby their mindes touching their pro∣mised submission began to wauer, and the matter with better aduice to be pleaded in their assemblies; for that not only these foresaid ships for Caesars sup∣ply were dispersed and hindred, but euen his owne Caesars ships distressed. flect, which lay then in harbour by the rage of winde and sea, (beeing then spring tide, and the moone in the full) was not onely filled with waues, but also their tacklings, sailes, and anchours spoiled or lost, the violent storme so dashing the bulkes one against another, that their bruised bottomes were thereby made vnfit for burden. (9) This losse was so great, that it is accounted Suetonius in vit. Caesar. the first of the three aduerse fortunes which euer happe∣ned to Caesar in all his proceedings: and it was so well obserued by the Britaines, that immediately they in∣tended a reuolt, and in Counsell vrged this, as the materiall point that breathed hope and life to their Britaines reuolt. former liberties, condemning themselues as impious if they should refuse to ioine consent with the hea∣uens, whose elements had thus farre fought for their freedome and full deliuerance, assuring themselues (if on this aduantage they might cut off these new guests) that neuer any afterward would aduenture to enter Britanny in hostile manner. And thereupon they began both to slacke the per∣formance of couenants, and daily to withdraw them∣selues from Caesars Campe, which gaue him iust occa∣sion to suspect whereat they aimed. And to preuent their proceedings he as wisely wrought: for first re∣pairing his Nauie with the huls, timber, and tackling of the most bruised ships, with the losse of twelue ships only, the rest were made able to brooke the seas. And prouiding against the aduantage of the enemie, he sent foorth the seuenth Legion for forrage to sup∣plie any occasion. (10) This Legion taking the coast cleere, and lit∣tle surmising so sudden a reuolt, fell to the sickle and sithe like haruest labourers, and laid their weapons apart, mistrusting no Enemie. Now the Britaines as forward to put in practise what they had determi∣ned, closely had laid themselues in ambush, for thither they knew the enemie would come, a peece of corne there standing, whereas in all other parts haruest was past: and so hauing these workmen in their danger, suddenly fell vpon them, slaying some, and forcing The Britaines suddenly assaile the Romanes. the rest out of their array, who not knowing the or∣der of their fight, cast themselues in a ring (the best defensiue forme of embattelling) and stood on their guard as they might: but had they not happily beene rescued, Caesar had lost one whole Legion at that time. (11) For though this skirmish thus in acting was altogether vnknowne and vnexpected to the rest of the Romans, yet by the rising of the dust, appearing to the Coherts that warded before their Campe, the same was mistrusted, which caused Caesar in all haste to make thitherward with part of his host. (12) The Britaines thus preuented, seeing more supply to maintaine the battle, stood still, without further stroke: and the Romanes as much amazed at this sudden attempt, and order of their fight, made a stand, not venturing any further. Which order in fight so often mentioned, and so much admired, in Caesars words we will declare, the rather because some Clem. Edmunds his obseruations on Caes. Comment. li. 4. ca. 12. obscr. 2. haue thence collected, that the Britaines were the of∣spring of the Troians, who with other Easterne Na∣tions only vsed this kinde of fight in Chariots. (13) They vsed (saith he) to ride in wagons against Cas. Commen . li. 4. the approch of the enemie, and to circulate them about with a whirling compasse, and ratling noise, each waies casting their darts as they did driue, and euer as they saw aduan∣tage The manner of the Britaines fight. would winde themselues in amongst the horse and foot, to breake the array; which done, they would for sake their wagons, and onfoot most dangerously assaile the ene∣mie. In the meane while the Wagoners would with-draw themselues somewhat out of the battle, and place their wa∣gons in such order, that if their masters were ouer-charged, they might haue speedy accesse, and opportunity of retrait, by which meanes they were euer as quicke to mooue as were horsemen, and as stedfast to stand the battle as were the foot, whereby they did supply the duties of both at once, and by daily exercise grew so expert in managing their horses, that running them forcibly downe a steepe hill, they would stop, and turne them in the mid-way: and they would run along the beame, and stand firme vpon the yoke; whence with like facility they would againe returne into their Cha∣riots. This order Caesar so well obserued, as that notwith∣standing his desire of reuenge, yet wanting his horse∣men (as he pretended) wherein consisted the chiefest resistance, hee durst attempt no further on them, but was content to keepe the field without profer of battle. (14) The Britaines likewise hopelesse of further successe at that present, departed without any im∣peachment, intending to prosecute their cause with a greater and more generall supplie: and thereupon The Britains ga∣ther a greater power. sent messengers to their seuerail States, with notice of their hopes against so small a power; whose Campe by them if any way might bee vanquished, the pur∣chase of spoile, besides their frced liberties, would re∣quite the paines. (15) These States, though maintaining ciuill fa∣ctions amongst themselues, yet seeing the intended danger of this generall enemie, presently assembled Cor. . . a great power, purposing yet once againe to trie the hazard and fortune of warre. Caesar, whose vigilancy did euer equall his valour, prepared his armie, where∣in now only 0. horsemen were present, and those Comius supplieth Caesar with 0. . brought to him by Comius the King. The battle ioining continued not long, but that the Britaines gaue backe and fled, whom the Romanes pursued as farre as strength indured, and returned with the slaughter of many, burning the Country where they came. (16) Thus the Britaines once againe vanquished, The Britaines ubmit the third time. foorthwith sent their third Embassage vnto Caesar, de∣siring peace, with promise of quiet subiection; whom he with hard termes now reprooued, and imposed a double number of hostages to be brought him into Gallia, whither he made all possible preparation, for that the Aequinoctium drew neere, doubting his cra∣zed Aequinoctium is the are both of a length. ships would hardly brooke the winter stormes, that vsually rage vpon these Seas. And hauing gotten a faire wind, imbarked all his forces about midnight, and so brought most of his fleet safe to the continent. This enterprise so fortunately accomplished, Caesar by his letters made knowen to the Senate, who de∣creed and proclaimed to his honour a generall suppli∣cation Caesar was now the first that had 20. daies g ted: the grea∣test but 5. daies, or 10. at the most. or thanksgiuing to their Gods, for the space of twentie daies together, wherein all the Romans, clo∣thed in white garments, and crowned with garlands, went to all the Temples of their Gods, and offred sa∣crifices for so glorious a victorie. CESARS SECOND EXPEDI∣TION INTO BRITAINE. CHAPTER II. C AESAR expecting the per∣formance of Couenants a∣greed vpon in the treaty of peace with the Britaines, receiued hostages from two of their Cities onely, and no more: the rest Most of the Bri∣taines breake co∣uenant with Caesar. drawing backe, refused his subiection: whereupon in∣tending not to lose so rich a prey, nor to suffer that Sunne to bee eclipsed, whose glory thus farre in his Horizon had as nded, hee ap∣peased some troubles in Gallia, and in the winter sea∣son began his preparation to that enterprise. And hauing had experience of his former wants, he furni∣shed himselfe accordingly, and the next spring fol∣lowing drew his forces towards Calis, the shortest cut some thinke to be Calis. some S O . into Britaine. There committing the charge of Gallia to T. Labienus his Lieutenant, himselfe with fiue Le∣gions of souldiers, 2000. horsemen, and 800. ships, about going downe of the Sunne loosed from the shoare, and with a soft Southerne gale were carried into the streame. But about midnight the winde fai∣ling, and their sailes becalmed, the tide diuerted their course: so that in the dawning he well perceiued his intended place for landing to be passed. (2) Therefore falling againe with the change of Caesar againe lan∣deth at the place of his first arriual tide, and indeuours of their Oares, about noone the same day hee recouered the shoare, euen in the same place (and that without any shew of resistance) where he had found best landing the Summer before. There in conuenient manner he encamped his host, and by certaine Fugitiues got notice of the power and place of the enemie. (3) And lest delay should afford them aduantage, he committed the gouernment of his ships at anchor to Qu. Atrius, and his campe on land to the guard of ten Cohorts, besides the strength of three hundred horsemen; and himselfe with the rest about the third watch of the night tooke their march towards the e∣nemie, proceeding with such celeritie, that by the day dawning they were entred twelue miles higher into the Continent: where seeking to passe a riuer, which is supposed to be the water Stower, the Britaines with Caesar resisted at the riuer Stower. their darts and chariots began in most terrible man∣ner to assault the Romanes. But being at length by them repulsed, tooke into a wood strongly fortified both by nature and mans industrie. For in the time of their owne dissensions they had formerly made this place one of their strongest fortresses, and had cut down many trees, which ouerthwart the waies of en∣trance they had bestowed. (4) In this they secretly kept, and where they saw aduantage, would by companies sallie out vpon the enemie to their no little annoiance. Whereupon Caesar commanded the seuenth Legion to raise a banke, and to build a Testudo of boards, couered with The Britains dri∣uen from their fortresse. raw hides, by which meanes the place without much adoe was won, and the Britaines forced to forsake the woods. Whose chase Caesar forbade both in regard the day was neere spent, as also that the countrey was altogether vnknowen to the Romanes. But the next day the pursuit being begun, sudden newes was brought from Q. Atrius, that most of his ships the night before by a violent tempest were cast on Land, Caesars Nauie greatly impai∣red by tempest. their bulks shaken, their cables broken, and anchours lost. Caesars experience in like mishaps the Summer before, made him so much more ready to preuent the worst. And therefore recalling his forces, in all haste returned to his Campe, finding the relation too true in their wracke, wherein forty of his ships were quite lost. Wherefore he wrote to Labienus his Lieutenant in Gallia for supply of ships, thence to bee sent in all haste. Then gathering his shipwrights out of the le∣gions, with the ruines of the bruised bulkes, he repai∣red the whole; and now hauing twice felt the dangers of these seas, caused his whole fleet (a strange attempt) to be drawn on land, euen into the midst of the forti∣fications Hee draweth his fleet on shoare. of his campe, so to secure them from the like mishap, and that one strength might defend both. (5) In which admirable toile ten daies and nights were altogether spent, before hee could returne to the place from whence he came; where now the Britaines through great confluence of people had increased their power, and entred againe their fortresse and wood. The chiefe command of these affaires was commit∣ted to Cassibelan, whose coine wee haue heere likewise set, a Prince of good repute for feats in warre, whose Seigniory was se∣uered from the Cities towards the Sea, by the great and famous riuer Thamisis, and extended into the land full foure∣score miles. This Cassibelan present Gouernour of the Trinobants, had attained to the posses∣sion of their chiefest Citie by the slaugh∣ter of Imanuence their former Ruler (a man well respected, and much lamented after death) whose sonne Mandubrace, a gentleman of great hope, Caesar. Com. lib. 5. fearing the like danger, by the new established autho∣ritie of Cassibelan, had made ouer into Gallia, crauing Caesars assistance to set him in his right. (6) Cassibelan (if among these authenticke Au∣thors Flor. Histor. Fabian. the British Writers may bee heard) was the bro∣ther of King * Lud, and in the nonage of his nephewes Cassibelan brother of King Lud. gouerned the Trinobants, whose bounds hee sought to enlarge vpon the bordering Countries of his neigh∣bours, and in his fortunes had so borne himselfe, that he was much maligned, and more feared. But now all their dangers yoked alike in a common perill, they laid aside priuate grudges, and held him the only man to support the strength of their troubled and decli∣ning estate, and by a common consent made him Ge∣nerall of their warres. The expectation of whose pro∣ceedings he long delaied not, but with a fierce and hot encounter did assaile the Romans, and so manfully dis∣charged the parts of his place, that in the sight of the whole Campe Quintus Laberius a militarie Tribune was slain, (in memorie wherof the place as yet, though somewhat corruptly, is called Iul-laber) and Caesar Lamber. Peramb. himselfe professeth he learned many points of marti∣all policie by their braue and running kinde of en∣countring. (7) But his next daies seruice prooued not so for∣tunate; for the Romans hauing learned their owne de∣fects by the former daies experience, laid aside their weightie armour, that with the more facilitie they might both assaile the enemies, and with like nimble∣nesse auoid their furie, they hauing now bestowed their powers dispersedly, and scattered their troupes into companies, wherby the Romans were still match∣ed with fresh supplies. A policie no doubt of no small consequence, had not destiny determined the fatall subiection of the Britaines, and Fortune now raised the Romans almost to the height of their Monarchie. (8) For this failing, the Britaines neuer after shew∣ed Britaines retire to their seuerall Prouinces. themselues with any vnited resistance, but hauing lost the day departed, thinking it better to secure eue∣rie priuate by his owne meanes, then by a generall power to hazard all, as hopelesse any more to vphold that which the heauens (they saw) would haue down. And Cassibelan himselfe despairing of happy successe, drew into his owne territories, keeping with him not aboue 4. thousand wagons. And fearing the Romans further approch, fortified the riuer Thamisis (then pas∣sable Thought to be Oatland. onely in one place) with sharpned stakes bound about with lead, and driuen so deepe into the bot∣tome, that Beda and Asser report them so to remaine Beda lib. 1. cap. 2. in their times. All which notwithstanding, the Ro∣mans passed with the repulse of their enemies, and Caesar, who grew now to the height of his honour, marched further into the Continent, and comming forward, was met by Ambassadours from the chiefest Citie of the Trinobants, which first of all the States profered submission, and promised subiection, with this The Trinobants submit to Caesar. Beda calleth him Androgorius, lib. 1. cap. 2. intreatie also, that Mandubrace (who being Caesars fol∣lower, and doubtlesse the contriuer of this submis∣sion) might be Gouernour of their Citie. (9) Caesar ready to worke vpon such aduantage, seized them at forty hostages, with sufficiencie of graine for his whole armie, which with all expedition those Suppliants performed, preferring the satisfaction of their owne discontentments before the common cause Ceminagues, Segontianus, Ancalits, Bibrokes, Cassians. of their Natiue Country, thus laid open, and betraied into the enemies hands; from whose example many other States without stroke yeelded to Caesars com∣mand: yea further treacherously shewing vnto him both the power and place of Cassibelans abode, who had now retired himselfe into his owne Citie called Verolam, well fortified both with woods and marish S. Albans besie∣ged by Caesar. grounds. Thither Caesar came, and with little losse or la∣bour won the place, and many of the miserable Bri∣taines both taken and slaine. Cassibelan now despairing of his owne power, farre vnable to match, and much lesse to ouermatch his Enemies, instigated the Gouer∣nours The Gouernours of Kent ioine with Cassibelan against Caesar. of Kent, being foure in number, Cingetorix, Car∣uilius, Taximangulus, and Segonax, (whom Caesar ter∣meth Kings) to raise all their strengths, and suddenly to set vpon the Romanes Campe that guarded their ships; which enterprise was accordingly attempted, but with such successe, that the Britaines were on each side slaine, and Cingetorix taken prisoner, the rest sa∣uing themselues by flight. (10) Cassibelan beholding these vnfortunate pro∣ceedings, feared the end of vnhappie successe, for hee saw his Country wasted, his owne designes defeated, and himselfe forsaken by the traiterous reuolt of ma∣ny Cities and States on euery side. Therefore as bootlesse to bandy against fortune, he sought to hold Cassibelan sollici∣teth for peace. his owne with others, and sent Comius King of the Attrebatij to be his meane to Caesar for peace, which was the willinglier heard and granted, for that he de∣termined to winter in Gallia, his affaires so requi∣ring it. (11) The conditions were hard, but necessitie must be obeied: for Caesar imposed a grieuous Tri∣bute A great Tribute. to be taxed of the Britaines, of no lesse then three thousand pounds yeerely to be paid, and moreouer in∣cluded So saith an old written Chroni∣cle, the Author not named. the safety of Mandubrace, with his Trinobantes taken into friendship, and protection of the Romans; & lastly, that these Couenants should be faithfully ob∣serued, he cōmanded hostages for assurance forthwith to be deliuered. These things thus compounded, he tooke the Seas, about the second watch of the night, which then began to equalize the day in length, and safely arriued in the Continent of Gallia; Hauing ra∣ther shewed the place to posterities, then deliuered to Tacitus in vita Agric. the Romans the possession thereof, as Tacitus saith, supposing it his glory sufficient to vndergoe a matter so rare and difficult, and at his comming to Rome, to haue presented his British Captiues; whose strangenesse for attire and behauiour filled the peoples eies both with wonder and delight. He offred also in the Temple Eutrop. Plin. of Venus genitrix, a Surcoat made all of British pearles, as a Trophey and Spoile of the Ocean. And now his for∣tunes comming to the highest, the title of perpetuall Dictator (then which the State of Rome could affoord nothing greater) sufficed him not, but a King hee will Caesars ambition. be, and sole gouernour ouer all, though contrarie to the Law and liking of the Romanes; whereof in short time grew such heart-burning and hatred, that seuenty prin∣cipall men conspired his death, and after his many dan∣gers Caesars death. of enemies in battles abroad, was in the Senate-house amongst his supposed friends, and in peace (if treacherie may be called peace) cruelly murdered, re∣ceiuing in his body three and twenty wounds, whereof he died, after he had sate Emperour only fiue moneths. (12) I am not ignorant that the British Writers doe varie from Caesar in relating these his procee∣dings, British Writers vary from Caesar. and speake more honourably of their owne re∣sistance then himselfe hath set downe, namely, that by the valour of Cassibelan their King, in his first at∣tempts hee was twice driuen backe without his pur∣pose, That Cassibelan repulsed Caesar twice. and forced to take the Seas, to the great hazard of his ships and men, yea and with the losse of his owne sword, which with great prowesse was wonne from him in a single encounter by Nenion Cassibelans brother. And surely howsoeuer Polydore accounteth Nenion won Cae∣sars sword. their Story new, and Caesar carrieth himselfe glorious∣lie in his owne affaires; yet by sundry other renow∣ned writers it seemeth, that the currant of his Conquest went nothing so smooth and vntroubled, or with so Beda hist. li. 1. c. 2. little losse of the Romans, nor the Britaines liberties forgone by so easie resistance: which may be collected euen out of some couert passages of Caesars own words, where it appeareth, that hee durst not at sundry times giue the Britaines battle, though they were only harnes∣sed in leather, and his Souldiers were all old Legionaries of long seruice, called for their huge armour, Milites grauis armaturae, as hauing a helmet, corslet and boots, all of massy brasse or iron, with a large target, a strong two-edged sword, and a great staffe or clubbe hea∣ded with an iron pike; which oddes notwithstanding had not Cassibelan been vndermined by Mandubrace, and traiterously forsaken (which Caesar himselfe con∣fesseth) by the Princes which promised him assi∣stance, but euer mangned him, and had now a faire time of reuenge, perhaps Caesar might haue missed this parcell of his glory. Yet for all these helpes, Lucan saith expresly of him, Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Britannis: He Britaines found, but left them soone by fright. Lucan. Eutropius saith, He was wearied out and quelled both with the fierce battles of the enemie, and cro es of tempests. Eutropius, Tacitus saith, Hee found out Britannie for the Romans, Tacitus. but could not winne it for them: which was the very cause why (as Dion witnesseth) for twenty yeeres after Caesars entrance, Britannie kept their owne Kings and their owne lawes, and had no forraine Prefects to com∣mand them. And Beda sheweth, that Caesar in this Land was both receiued with sharpe and sore fight, and weakened by the losse of his ships, and with the most part of his men at armes. Tacitus also, vsing the speech of Caractacus to his Souldiers, hath these words: He called (saith he) vpon the names of his Ance∣stors, Tacit. lib. 12. ca. . which chased Caesar the Dictator out of the Ile, by whom and by whose valour they were deliuered from Hat∣chets and Tributes, and enioied freely their wiues and chil∣drens bodies vndefiled. Againe, in the consultations of the Britaines intending a reuolt, hee allegeth their ar∣guments, whereof one was the sudden departure of Cae∣sar out of this Iland, little better then a slight. With In vita Agric. whom Dion Cassius also agreeth, affirming that Caesar Diodi. 39. Caesar got no∣thing in Britaine, saue the sight of the Countrie. got nothing in Britaine besides the honour and renowne of that voiage, and sight of that Country, vntill then vnknown to the Romans. And againe (saith hee) Caesar departed thence hauing done no memorable act, which caused the Britaines to be secure and carelesse to prouide themselues a∣gainst his second arriuage. Whereby is apparant (euen by Romane Writers) both the bold resistance that the Britaines made, and the deare subiection that the Ro∣mans bought. But in matters so farre past, it is hard for mee to auouch any thing resoluedly, vnlesse I could meet with that aged Britaine whom M. Aper conferred with heere in Britanny (as Quintilian wri∣teth) who auowed that hee was in the British Campe Quintilian. when they did beat Caesar from the shoare. (13) Neither will I vrge that for truth, which Authours haue left vs in their reports, concerning the many prodigies before going, and forewarning his death: things rather to be accounted the superfluities of their owne pens, and vaine imageries, euer working vpon accidentall euents, and ascribing issued successe to a supernaturall cause. Such conceit had Caesar of himselfe, that for his fortunes hee would bee stiled a∣mongst Caesar would bee stiled amongst the Gods. the Gods: and his deitie to that credulous gene∣ration was further strengthned by the appearance of a blazing starre, which mooued (no doubt) an ouer∣large opinion of his humane power, and caused his glorie much to surmount it selfe. And therefore lest ignorance should any way blemish his immortalitie, they haue fained the manner of his dying best plea∣sing Sueton. Plutarch. to himselfe, and many ominous signes to fore∣shew the same: all which he either lightly despised, or carelesly neglected, as they would haue their Readers beleeue. (14) Such was that of Spurina his diuiner, that Caesar forewarned to take heed of the Ides of March. forewarned him of great danger, which should not passe the Ides of March. And Suetonius out of Corne∣lius Balbus reporteth, that in the ancient Monuments of Capuae, discouered but few moneths before, was found a Table of brasse, wherein was written the manner of his murder, and the reuenge that should follow: his owne dreames the night before, wherein he seemed to flie in the His dreames. clouds, and to shake hands with Iupiter: as also his wiues, that thought him stabbed in her armes, and to lie all bloody His wiues dream. in her bosome. Besides many other obseruances both of beasts and birds, and that in such plentie, that it yeelded sufficient matter for Ouid the Poet to furnish Ould. Meta. li. 15. and fill vp the latter part of his last booke of Meta∣morphosis. His feature, qualities, and fortunes, are by them thus described: Of personage to be tall, strong, His personage. and well limmed, faire, and full faced, with blacke eies, and bald headed, to couer which he vsually wore the Triumphant Lawrell Garland. He was well learned, and therewithall very eloquent: and although so great a warriour, thirsting after fame, yet would he be easily reconciled to his enemies, yea and often times Easie to be re∣conciled. seeke the meanes first himselfe. And hee held it no lesse valour to subdue his wrath, then his enemie; as likewise in his disasters hee was of great temper and Seneca. moderation, insomuch that Seneca writeth of him, that whiles he was in Britaine, hearing newes of his daughters death (which was lamented as a great losse to the whole State) hee conquered that sorrow as easily and as quickly as hee subdued all things where euer he came. And of his other moderatenesse, Cotas (who then held the se∣cond Cotas apud Athe∣naeum. place of honour and command in the Armie) writeth, that though Caesar was then so great and glo∣rious a Commander, yet he was so farre from outward pompe, as that when he came into Britannie hee had onely three seruants to attend him. (15) In his enterprises hee was both valiant and fortunate, and is therefore singled out for an Idea or Paterne of an absolute Generall, especially for foure mili∣taric properties very resplendent in him: first, laborious∣nesse His successe in warre, and num∣ber of battles. in his affaires: secondly, courage in his dangers: thirdly, industrious contriuing of what he vndertooke: fourthly, quicke dispatch in accomplishing what hee had once begun: In all which he proceeded with such successe, that in fiftie seuerall battles by him fought, he al∣waies preuailed, one only excepted, as both Pliny, Solinus, and others haue recorded. Foure times hee was crea∣ted Consul, and fiue times entred Rome in triumph, bea∣ring His Offices. still the stile of Perpetuall Dictator. And therfore with lesse dishonour did nations subiect themselues vnto him; and this of Britaine with them, whose lot being cast among the hazards of the world, was drawen with an equall chance, as the rest, and yeelded their freedomes with as hard conditions, as did Coun∣tries of more extent, and Kingdomes of greater ac∣count. But most especially the decree of God could not bee gaine-stood, who had foreshewed by his Prophets the ri∣sing Num. 24. 24. Dan. 11. 30. Dan. 2. 35. of these Chittims, and them a meanes to make the metalline image dust. OCTAVIVS AVGVSTVS: CHAPTER III. A Fter the death of Caesar, thus slaine in the Senate, Octauian (the grand-childe of Iulia, Cesars sister) whom hee had adopted, and de∣clared his heire, returned vnto Rome from From Macedo∣nia, say some. Apollo∣nia, where he studied Phi∣losophie, intending to pro∣secute the reuenge of Cae∣sars death; where falling at oddes with Marcus Anto∣nius a man of great spirit and power, and setting him∣selfe Caesar against Antony. Sueton. in vita August. against Brutus and Cassius, with their Complices, for the murder of his vncle, secretly wrought the friendship of the Citizens, before whose eies also Cae∣sars wounds seemed yet to bleed. (2) These factions thus begun, grew to such height, that in the Senate-house their causes were plea∣ded, and by the instigation and eloquence of Marcus Tullius Cicero, Antonius was proclaimed enemie to Cicero against Antonius. the State: against whom Octauian was sent, with En∣signes of Consul, and title Propraetor, being yet not twen∣tie yeeres of age; which duty and office he so well dis∣charged in the parts of a valiant Captaine, that Antony was forced out of the field, albeit in this battle the one Consul was slaine, and the other deadly wounded. For Antonius discom∣fited. which seruice so effected, he entred Rome in Triumph; though the glory thereof was much blemished, being obtained but in an intestine and ciuill warre. Marcus Antonius, to recouer himselfe, and make good his cause, ioined friendship with Marcus Aemilius Lepi∣dus, Captaine of the horse, who together interposed themselues against Octauians proceedings; but by me∣diation of friends all three were reconciled, and iointly Octauian and An∣tony reconciled. erected that forme of gouernment which thence was named the Triumuirat: for the establishment where∣of they had seuerall iurisdictions assigned them: to Lepidus, Africa, whereof he was present Gouernour: to Antony, the Countries as well of Greece as Asia, that lay betwixt the Ionian Sea, entring at the gulfe of Ve∣nice, vnto the riuer Euphrates: and vnto Octanian all these West parts of Europe, amongst which this our Bri∣taine was one. (3) In these ciuill broiles, and bandings of great men (as Tacitus termeth it) the State of Britaine lay long forgotten, and stood in peaceable termes, Au∣gustus thinking it wisdome (saith he) to restraine the infinite desire of inlarging the Romane Empire, whose ex∣tent was growen to that vast greatnesse, as it seemed euen burdensome vnto it selfe, whereby this remote The Empire too great. Iland lay ouershadowed from their sight: whereunto may be added that the presence of Kymbeline the Bri∣tish Fabian out of Guido. Columna. King (as their historie recordeth) in great fauour with Octauian, was a great furtherance to the peace, euen without paiment of the formerly imposed Tri∣bute. But yet the truth is (as Dion Cassius hath it) that Dio Cass. lib. 49. Octauian desirous in all things to be like vnto Caesar, see∣ing their tribute neglected, had intended a voiage to∣wards Octauians prepa∣ration for Bri∣taine. Britaine; but hauing set forwards into Gallia, he had there tidings of the sudden reuolt of the Pan∣nonians, against whom he diuerted his prepared pow∣er, and left his first designement for that time. Not∣withstanding, he still retained the desire of their sub∣iection, and foure yeeres after made a second very great preparation thitherward, proceeding with his power againe into Gallia. (4) The Britaines that had felt the force of the Ro∣mans, and in regard of their own distractions at home were hopelesse of strength to withstand them, sought the fauor of Augustus by their submission, and to that Dio. Cass. lib. 53. end sent ouer their Ambassadours, who presenting themselues before him in Gallia Celtica, appeased his The Britains ap∣pease Octauian. wrath, with promise of obedience and full satisfaction for their Tributes deteined: whereby Caesar was again staied, and the Britaines taken into sauour and prote∣ction. Notwithstanding, the mindes of their Magi∣strates were so vnconstant, or else the money so hardly drawen from the people, who naturally hated all such Strabo lib. 4. obliged seruitudes, hauing euer liued a free Nation (as Aegisippus speaketh of them) that they againe fai∣led their paiment; whereat Augustus was sore offended, and the third time prepared his voiage that way, which Augustus third preparation a∣gainst Britanny. yet a while was hindred by the reuolt of the Byscay∣ans, and some other Prouinces. (5) The Britaines seeing themselues thus still sought after, sent vnto Caesar their excuses, with pre∣sents to be offred in the Capitoll to the Romane Gods, The Britaines excuses. hauing now learned with the rest of the world to ap∣pease Princes by gifts and rewards, yeelding part of the Iland, and swearing him fealtie in the Temple of Mars, and so were registred subiects to the Romane Empire. At which time also they agreed to pay toll s Customes first paid in Britaine. and customes for all wares which they transported into other parts, their merchandize chiefly consisting of Iuorie boxes, Iron Chaines, and other small trifles of Amber and Glasse. All which agreements and compo∣sitions were afterward so loyally obserued, and the The Britaines loyaltie. Land so composed to quietnesse, that one band of soul∣diers, with a small troope of horse (as Strabo saith) or foure Legions (as Iosephus writeth) were sufficient to containe so great a multitude in a setled forme of obedience. (6) Ouer the Trinobantes, the greatest and most potent State of the Britaines, then raigned the happie Prince Cunobeline (for so in his Coines yet remaining Cunobeline prince of the Trinoban∣tes. we finde it) corruptly written Kimbeline, the sonne of Theomantius nephew to Cassibelan before spoken of, whose abode and principall seat was Camalodu∣num, Malden. as by the reuerse of the said Coines may ap∣peare. This Prince to make his estate more respe∣ctiue, The first stam∣ped Coines in Britaine. caused his owne Image to be stamped thereon, after the manner of the Romans, (who now had new∣lie taken vp that fashion) his paiments before consist∣ing for the most part in rings of iron, and plates of brasse, seized at a certaine waight, which vsually passed for currant amongst the Britaines, as Caesar reporteth, and as those rings are yet witnesses, whereof we haue Caesar. Com. lib. 5. seene some. This man trained his people to a more ciuill life then formerly had beene accustomed, and enioied peace with the rest of the world, which then stood vniuersal∣lie A generall peace thorow all the world. M cah 5. 2. Isay 9. 6. Gen. 3. 5. Isav 7. 14. Gal. 4. 4. in quiet, as waiting the comming of that Prince of peace, whose going foorth had beene from euerlasting, and of whose kingdome there shall bee no end: euen Christ the a∣nointed Emmanuel and sonne of the liuing God: so long be∣fore expected, and now in the fulnesse of time manifested: at whose birth warre went downe, as Virgil speaketh, or rather to vse the words of the Prophet, when were made into mattocks, and speares broken into : . And as in the building of Salomons Temple neither of axe, nor the sound of hammer was heard so his I building of Temple. Ioh. 3. 19. Luk. 2. 14. the true Temple, hee came and was arnate at such time, when the sound of warre did not awake the world, but a calme and quiet peace incompass d it, as by the Angels was proclaimed amongst the Iewes, and now was more pub∣likely made knowen amongst the Gentiles by the shut∣ting Paulus O . Temple is shut. of Ianus Temple in Rome. This vniuersall peace was so famous and so admirable, that it found matter for the finest wits amongst the Heathens to enlarge them∣selues: whereupon Virgil framing the perswasions of Iupiter to his daughter, foresheweth the happy suc∣cesse of her seed, and in what tranquillity they should sit, when the hands of Mars were thus restrained from fight, as he thus expresseth: Aspera tum positis mitescent secula bellis: rg. Aeneid. li. . Cana fides, & Vesta, Remo cum fratre Quirinus Iura dabunt: dirae ferro, & compagibus arctis Claudentur belli portae: furor imptus intus Saeua sedens super arma, & c ntum vinctus enis Post tergum nodis, fremet horridus ore cruento. Then men shall milder prooue: cease shall fierce warres: The fruits of a true peace. Faith, Gods, and Princes all shall iustly guide: Warres gastly gates with bolts and iron barres Fast shut shall stand: and Mars cashierd shall hide Mongst heapes of rusty armour, where his hands Bound fast shall be with hundred brasen bands. And yet further in his Ecloge (from the Sibyls, who Lactan. li. 4 ca. . in all likelihood had it from the diuine Oracles) hee D ples. . c. 32. vseth the very words of the Prophets in speaking of a Maid, and a Child of a new progenic borne and sent downe from heauen, by whom the brassy and iron-like world should cease, and a pure golden age succeed. Thus he sweetly singeth: Vltima Cumaei venit iam carminis aetas: Eclog. 4. Magnus ab integro seclorum nascitur ordo: Iam redit & Virgo: redeunt Saturnia regna: Iam noua progenies coelo demittitur alto. Tu modò nascenti puero, quo ferrea primùm Desinet, ac toto surget gens aurea mundo, &c. Now is the time of which Sibylla said, The old world doth his prime againe renew: Now hath the world a pure vnspotted Maid: Sa urne (whom Virgil nameth) was esteemed the father of the Gods. Now raignes the * God of Gods, whose off-spring new Descends from heauen. Bless'd be the babe whose raies Hath turn'd our iron age to golden daies. In which Ecloge are sweetly couched many other most diuine allusions to our Sauiours Magnum Io is incrementum, &c. Deity, M tri long de∣cem, &c birth and humanity, Nec Deus b c ensa, &c. pouerty, Assyriu vulg scetur, &c. graces, Cui non risere pa∣rentes. &c. crosses, Paca reget patri , &c. kingdome, and Soluet , &c. re∣demption of the world from Si qua , &c. sinne, Fall herba veneni, &c. death, and Occidet & ser∣pen , &c. Sueton. in vit. Au∣gust. Sect. 94. D ples. veritat. Christi. 32. sol. 518. Niceph li. 1. ca. 17. Iuuenal. Sa yr. 3. Zephan. 2. 11. Our Sauiour Christ borne in the fourteenth yeere of Cuno∣beline. hell. So likewise Marcus Tullius Cicero saw in his dreame (as himselfe reporteth) a childe of an ingenuous and beautifull countenance, let downe from heauen by a golden chaine. And Suetonius in the life of Augustus from Iu∣lius Marathus hath obserued, that certaine predicti∣ons in Rome happening, were so respected and gene∣rally expounded, That Nature was about to bring forth a King that should raigne ouer the whole world. And al∣beit these and other Heathen Writers ascribe these things either to Augustus himselfe, or to some of his fauorites, yet wee see them accomplished in none o∣ther but Iesus Christ the Messiah our blessed Sauiour, in whom only the Kingdome of God began, with the vt∣ter subuersion of all their heathenish Oracles, which at his birth, or at furthest at his death, ceased all, and gaue place to HIS eternitie. Which time of his birth by the Scriptures most certaine account, was from the worlds creation, 3927. and is set by the Britaines in the fourteenth of their Cunobelines raigne, and by other authenticke Writers in the two and fortieth of Augustus Caesar, euen in the top of that Empires great∣nesse, when Rome was with an vniuersall subiection acknowledged the absolute Lady of the knowne earth. For so in S. Luke wee read, that this Augustus then first Luk. 2. taxed the world. A text most strong for the full disso∣lution of the foure foregone kingdomes represented in Daniels Image, by the fall of this stone Christ, the rocke and stay of our eternall happinesse. Dan. 2. (7) This Emperour raigned in great honour the Augustus de∣scribed. His raigne. space of fifty six yeeres, and was obeyed both by the Easterne Indians, and the Northerne Scythians, with the subiection of the Parthians, a fierce and vntamed people, and generally with the loue of all. Hee was a Prince indued with great wisdome, magnanimitie, and Iustice; yet faulty in this, that he tooke from Tiberius Tacit. Annal. li. 5. cap. . Nero his wife Liuia, both great with child, and hauing also formerly borne him a sonne. Deuout hee was in the worship of the Romane Gods; amongst whom in the Capitoll he built an Altar vnto the Hebrew childe, with this inscription: The Altar of the first begotten His deuotion to Christ. Niceph. li. 1. ca. 17. Suid . Sonne of God: being thereunto mooued by the Oracle of Apollo that had answered his owne destruction by the birth of this childe. Of Stature he was but low, and His endowments of bodie. of a good complexion; gray-eied, his haire some∣what yellow, and his body freckled with spots, which as his flatterers would haue the world beleeue, were in forme like starres. Predictions foreshewing his gouernment and death are alleged, the which I wil∣lingly ouerpasse, holding most of them rather fanta∣sies then truth. At his death hee demanded of the standers by, whether he had well acted the enterlude of Sueton, in vitae August . his life vpon the stage of this world: and died fourteene yeeres after Christ his incarnation; leauing after him so honourable an estimation of his glory, that as the succeeding Emperours in remembrance of Iulius Caesar gloried to be called Caesars, so they euer held the name of Augusti to be sacred, and only befitting persons de∣stinated to imperiall Maiestie. And both their names were inserted into the number of the moneths, that The moneths of Iuly and Augst. the honour of them both might neuer perish while Times euiternitie should endure. TIBERIVS. CHAPTER IV. A Vgustus Caesar thus glori∣ously raigning, and peace∣ably dying, had ordained for his successour Tiberius Nero, the sonne of Tibe∣rius Tiberois Nero his parents. the Patritian, and of Liuia his wife, whom (as we said before) he had ta∣ken for his Empresse, and by whose incitements and continuall instigations that matter was procured: though Suetonius thinketh, it was by Augustus his Sueton. in vit. Tiber. owne ambitious conceit, to make himselfe the soo∣ner missed, and the more lamented, in leauing his sonne so vnlike him to succeed, whose conditions as they stood vpon their owne basis, hee knew to bee both reprooueable, and also contemptible. (2) But before the death of Caesar could be diuul∣ged, to write his imperiall stile as it were in blood, he His actions and conditions. began with the murder of young Agrippa the sonne of Iulia, daughter to Octanian, and once his owne wife, and continued his raigne with such tyrannie, that ma∣ny Tacit. Annal. li. 1. cap. . he slaughtred, without respect of person or cause; and in his loosest lasciuiousnesse, thought of nothing but how to subuert the Nobilitie; for rare it was in his Tacit. . . . cap. 3. His plotting a∣gainst his No∣bles. Tacit. . . . cap. 7. daies that any such died a naturall death: and main∣taining a race of men (Promoters, as Tacitus tearmes them, found out for a common ouerthrow and destru∣ction of others) allured them by rewards to accuse the rich, though guiltlesse; only this fauour granted to the condemned, that if they slew themselues before the day of execution, their bodies should haue buriall, Tacit. Annal. li. . cap. 7. their goods not confiscate, and their testament stand good in law. (3) A great dissembler he was, seeming euer to hate his hy∣pocrisie. those vices which in truth he loued, and to loue those vertues which he did most deadly hate: and for life His libidinous, esse. and libidinous filthinesse so extreme, that a Christi∣ans pen may not expresse, when the Heathen them∣selues doe blush to name such things as hee shamed not o∣penly Tacit. Annal. li. 6. cap. 1. to commit: his publike drunkennesse, and continuall banquettings, whereat hee spent whole daies His . and nights together without intermission, caused ex∣change of names from Tiberius Nero to A wine- . Biberius Mero. Dissolute and carelesse he was in gouernment, Carelesse in go∣uernment. though some haue accounted him a wise and poli∣ticke Prince: for the Prouinces he left to defend them∣selues, The prouinces v defended. and yet daily charged them with larger Tributes, to their great impouerishment, and almost vtter ruine. (4) In this state, amongst others neglected, Britaine Britaine without forraine garrison or gouernment. stood, wherein Tiberius neither maintained garrison, nor attempted alteration, and whereby (as it may be thought) their owne Lawes and Princes bare sway among themselues, howsoeuer the cause for Tribute was ballized betwixt them. And most certaine it is, the Britaines, if not in subiection, yet were well affe∣cted to the Romanes, as appeareth by Tacitus in the kinde entertainments, and in releeuing their ship∣wracked Tacit. Annal. li. 2. cap. 5. souldiers, that in crossing the Seas were by tempest driuen vpon their Coasts, and courteouslie sent thence by their petty Kings vnto Germanicus their Generall. Notwithstanding, Ieffrey Monmouth see∣meth to affirme the contrary, that bringeth the raign Ieffrey Monm. of one Guiderius, and the valour of Aruiragus, the sonnes of Cunobeline (of whom more heereafter) to withstand the Romish Command, and vtterly to refuse the paiment of Tribute, banding both against Tibe∣rius, as also against Caligula and Claudius the Empe∣rours succeeding. (5) Other remembrances of these times concer∣ning Our Sauiour Christs death. vs finde we none, besides that which is common to all, namely the death of our Saviour Christ, which vnder this Tyrant, and in his eighteenth yeere was accomplished by the proceeding of his (as wicked) Tert l. in Apolog. ad s. ge es, c. 5. Deputy Pontius Pilate, who both adiudged him to die, and to bee guiltlesse of deseruing death: whereby was wrought the mysterie of our Redemption, with such signes and euidences of his Deitie, that the wicked Iudge himselfe wrote thereof to Tiberius, and hee to the Senate, to haue him consecrated among the Ro∣man Gods. Which they refused to doe, that the wis∣dome Eus b. ccles. hist. li. 2. ca. 2. and diuine power of God in the doctrine of Sal∣uation should not need the allowance and commenda∣tion of men, as Eusebius hath well obserued. (6) Finally, when hee had raigned hated of all Tiberius hi raigne, age, and death. Tacit. Annal. li. . cap. 7. 2. Chr. 21. 20. Tacit. lib. . ca. 12. men the space of three and twenty yeeres, with no better liking then is read of Ioram King of Iudah, that liued without being desired, hee was smoothered to death (as is thought) by Caligula, the seuenteenth of the Kalends of April, the yeere from Christs Natiuitie thirty nine, and the seuenty and eighth of his owne age. He was of personage tall, and of body strong, broad chested, and vsed both his hands alike, faire of com∣plexion, but great and goggle-eied, whereby he saw so cleerely as is incredible to report. CAIVS CALIGVLA. CHAPTER V. himselfe feared by Tyrannie at home, then any waies famous by Acts abroad. (2) How the other Prouinces stood affected, I leaue to themselues; but by Tacitus it should seeme the Britaines and Germans were not his best subiects: Tacit. in vitae Agric. for these are his words, that Caius had a meaning to inuade Britaine, it is certainly knowen: but his rash run∣ning Casigula inten∣deth to inuade Britaine. head, and hasty repentance in his attempts against Germany, turned all to nothing. And Suetonius ascribes the foolish erection of that admirable bridge ouer a creeke of the Sea in Campania (whereof Dion writeth at large) to his vaine-glorious conceit, that by a brute Dion Cass. lib. 59. blazed abroad of so huge and monstrous a worke, he might terrifie Germanie and Britaine, vpon which Countries he meant to make warre. The issue where∣of was as fruitlesse as his great cost was ridiculous. Sueton. in vita Caligula. For hauing set forward for the conquest of Bri∣taine with no small preparation, he proceeded no fur∣ther then to those parts of Holland that confront a∣gainst Northfolke, where hee suddenly pitched his tents, and staied. (3) At which time, Adminius the sonne of Cu∣nobelin King of Britaine being banished by his father, Adminius banish∣ed flieth to Caesar. fled ouer Sea with a small power, and submitted himselfe vnto Caesars protection: wherupon Cali∣gula wrote vaunting letters to the Senate, as if the whole Iland had beene yeelded into his hands: com∣manding the messenger that his letters should be car∣ried in a Chariot into the Curia, and not deliuered but in the Temple of Mars, and that in a frequent Caligula his vaine ambition. and full assemblie of the Senate. And hauing no fur∣ther matter to worke vpon, hee caused certaine Ger∣mane prisoners secretly to bee conueied into a wood, and word to bee brought him in great feare and a∣mazement of the sudden approch of the enemie; a∣gainst whom with shew of great manhood and noble resolution in all haste and warlike manner he march∣ed, and in chaines openly shewed them as his captiues taken in warre, sorbidding the Senators the wonted celebration of their Feasts, or to enter their Theaters His deluding of the Senate. to take solace, seeing their Caesar exposed himselfe to so many perils, and fought so great battles with ha∣zard of his life. Last of all, as if he had meant to make a finall dispatch for euer of the warre, hee drew his forces downe to the Sea-coast of Belgia, and embat∣tailed His warring with the Sea. his army vpon the Ocean shoare; planting his ba∣lists and other Engines of artillerie in their seuerall pla∣ces, no man witting what hee meant: which done, himselfe in a Galley launched into the Sea, and imme∣diately returning, caused the Trumpets to sound the Caligula his great victorie. battle, and commanded his Souldiers forthwith to fall a gathering of cockles and muscles into their hel∣mets, terming them the Spoiles of the conquered Ocean: Against which hee also built a Tower, as a Trophey of his victorie, the ruines whereof as yet remaine in Holland to this day, and is called The Britons house, Ort lius Geograp. in memorie of that fantasticall seruice: vpon which exploit he made a glorious Oration to his souldiers, commending and requiting their valours with re∣wards, and auowing their shell-spoiles worthy offrings to be presented in the Capitoll, writing letters to Rome His ambition. of this his great Conquest, and demanding Triumph, and diuine honours to be assigned him: which when the Senatours made some question of, hee threatned them with death. But this Sea-seruice (as it seemeth) so ranne euer after in his minde, that one night hee dreampt that the Sea in dreadfull shape came and ex∣postulated with him, which cast him into an incredi∣ble horrour and affright. Affrighted in his sleepe. (4) In his last yeere of life and raigne, Pontius Pi∣late, vnder whom Christ Iesus suffered, was ap∣prehended and accused at Rome, deposed and banish∣ed to the Towne of Lions in France, where, in despaire Pontius Pilate banished killeth himselfe. he slew himselfe in the yeere from Christ his incarna∣tion, forty one, and from his death, the seuenth, as Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 7. Eusebius hath noted. (5) And now both the Ambition and crueltie of Caius was growen so intolerably sauage, as that he of∣ten lamented that some rare and vnusuall disaster (as either some horrible slaughter of huge Armies, or some vniuersall plague, or famine, or fire, or opening of the earth, or ouer-flowing of the Sea) happened not in his time, whereby his raigne might be made memorable to posteritie. And hee wished that all the people of Rome had but one necke, that he might haue the glorie of giuing the brauest blow that euer was giuen, where∣by so infinite multitudes of men might be killed by him at one stroke. But this his wish was preuented by a blow on himselfe, his death and downefall being Ioseph. Antiq. lib. 19. cap. 1. complotted and executed by certain Tribunes, where∣of Chaerea was chiefe; who following him from the Theater with resolution for the fact, tooke the time when Caligula turning suddenly aside into a narrow Cloister to see certaine boies sent him out of Asia, lost the defense of his fore-warders, and the straitnesse of the place permitted not his guard to follow, on which aduantage Chaerea demanded his watch-word, which he (according to his vsuall manner) gaue in great dis∣daine and scorne, whereunto Chaerea replied, and with his sword wounded him in the necke, and iaw; Caligula slaine. and then the rest of the Conspirators comming in, with thirty wounds made an end of his life, after hee had most impiously raigned three yeeres and tenne moneths. (6) He was of stature tall, of complexion pale and His personage. wan, of body somewhat grosse and vnfashionable, his necke and legges exceedingly slender, his eies sunke in∣to the hollow temples of his forehead, and that also frowning and full of wrinkles: his haire was thin and shaggie, but bald on the crowne, though otherwise so hairie of bodie, that all the time of his raigne if a man did but name a Goat, it was held a touch and offense of Lasae Maiestatis against his imperiall person. His Coun∣tenance Sabe . . 7. lib. 2. naturally sterne and grimme, which by com∣posing and gesture he purposely made more vgly and terrible. His apparell alwaies costly, but not alwaies Court-like, neither ciuill: his beard hee wore of gold like Iupiter or Aesculapius. In his hand for a Scepter, a Mace three-tined, as Neptune or God of the Sea, and vpon his body the Curace of Alexander the Great, taken from his Sepulchre and Monument. Hee died aged twenty nine yeeres, whose memory was so hatefull vn∣to Dion lib. 60. all, that all the Copper Coines or Modals stamped with his picture were melted downe by decree of the Senate, whereby (if it were possible) his name and His hatred after death. feature might be forgotten vnto future ages. CLAVDIVS DRVSVS. CHAPTER VI. Claudius Drusus E p. Aulus Plantius Lieut. B Vt Claudius Drusus a man of better spirit and tempe∣rature, Claudius Drusus chosen by the Pretorian Souldi∣ers. immediately vpon the death of Caligula, and euen in the height of those disturbances, by the Preto∣rian Ioseph Antiquit. l. 19. cap. 3. Souldiers (who were encamped nere the walles of Rome) was nominated, and chosen Emperor; wher∣as the Senate had decreed and determined to reduee the Citie into her ancient libertie, without admission of any Caesar, or subiection to such absolute and sole au∣thoritie; notwithstanding, the power of this Army, and the vote of the Citie so preuailed, that the election was confirmed, and the Imperiall dignity by him assu∣med, as the next, and onely man to whom it must of right belong: whose father Drusus was the sonne of Claudius his Pa∣rentage. Liuia, wife to Octauian, to whom the Emperours suc∣ceeding held it a glorie to be any waies allied. (2) In his first proceedings with the Prouinces af∣faires, hee determined warre against the Britaines, The Britaines de∣taine their Tri∣bute. whose Tribute had beene a long time neglected, and whose subiection was now to bee feared: all of them being raised in a tumultuous vprore. The cause pre∣tended was certaine fugitiues, (the betraiers of their State, and liberties) lately departed, and by the Romans receiued with protection of the Emperour: a matter that moued them to great discontents, and serued as a shew for their iust reuolt. (3) Claudius, as ready to preuent the worst, being thereto further incited by Bericus one of those British Dion Cass lib. 60. Anno Domi. 45. fugitiues as Dion reporteth, in the second yeare of his Empire, and from Christs Natiuitie forty fiue, sent Au∣lus Plautius a Romane Senator, well experienced in the Aulus Plautius sent against the Britaines. affaires of warre, to take charge of the Army remai∣ning in Gallia, and with those old trained Souldiers to make ouer into Britaine to retaine their obedience. Which seruice vpon them thus imposed, was gene∣rally distasted, as apparantly was shewed by their vn∣willingnesse His Souldiers vnwilling. Dio. lib. 60. thitherward, muttering and complai∣ning, that they must now be inforced to make warre out of the world, and protracting time, could hardly bee drawne forward, though the Emperour sent his second command. (4) But being at last embarked and crossing the Seas, their shippes were beaten with contrary winds, which still added discouragements vnto their procee∣dings, and had not an accident the same time happe∣ned, the edge of their courage had beene more aba∣ted: for euen in this distraction suddenly afiery learne shot it selfe from East to West, the same way that their Incouraged by a signe from hea∣uen. shippes made saile: which presently gaue hopes to their despairing hearts, being heathenishly interpreted for a signe of good lucke, and so sent from their Gods, whereupon without any resistance, they came to shoare and tooke land. (5) The Britaines that mistrusted no such sudden inuasion, and now thus surprised vnawares, dispersed∣ly secured themselues in woodes and marishes, there∣by to detract time, and the more to wearie the Ene∣my by delaies: which thing Plautius well perceiued, and with much labour, and hazard followed so ex∣treamly, that many he slew, and tooke prisoner Cata∣cratus their Captaine, the son of Cunobeline but late∣ly deceased, which brought Catacratus taken prisoner. such terrour amongst the Britains, that thereupon the BODVNI, the inhabitants of Oxford and Glocester∣shires, yeelded themselues to Plautius deuotion: for which seruice thus effected, the Senate decreed his Tri∣umphs; and it is probable that this defeat of the Bri∣taine forces, and surprise of their King, fell out in the sixt yeare of this Emperours raigne, by the reuerse of his money then minted with a triumphall arch and inscription, De Brittan: (6) But he following still the Enemy, beeing se∣conded by Flauius Vespasian (afterward Emperour) the leader of the second legion (the foundation of Tacitus in vit. A∣gric. whose succeeding fortunes was first laid here in Bri∣taine) gaue them againe another ouerthrow. The chiefest meanes whereof was a policie they had gotten to gail the Chariot horses, whereby their riders were maistered, and their whole powers disordered: ma∣ny Britaines in this battaile were slaine, and more in danger, had not the night ended theskirmish. (7) The next day the battaile was againe begun and maintained on both parts with equall aduantage, till C. Sidius Geta enforced the Britaines to retire, C. Sidius Geta his valour. whereby the victory rested in the Romanes: for which exploit Triumphall honours were assigned him, al∣though he had not yet attained to the Consular degree. In this Conflict, Vespasian hardly escaped, being sore oppressed by the Enemy, and in such sort, that had not Titus (his renowmed sonne) come to rescue, he had beene slaine, whose valour afterwards was tried in one and thirtie battailes, and in the Conquest of the Ile of Wight. (8) After this conflict, the Britaines withdrew The Britaines re∣tire to places of aduantage. themselues into places of more aduantage, and in the mouth of Thamisis neere her fall into the Sea, passed the shallowes and firme grounds in safetie, whereas the Romans ignorant of both, brought many into danger, and in their distressed passage, were sharpely assailed by the Enemie, in which turmoile, a bloody battaile was begunne, wherein Togodumnus a British Togodumnus slaine. Prince, brother to Catacratus, and sonne to Cunobe∣line, was slaine: Notwithstanding, the courage of the Britains was nothing abated, but rather exaspera∣ted to a further reuenge: for effecting whereof, new forces were gathered, and confluence of people assem∣bled from each part of the Ile. Plautius the Lieutenant seing daily the increase of their power, Vespasian imploied in other parts, and himselfe streitned in a place of danger, proceeded no further, but sent word to the Emperour of the doubtfull estate of their affaires. (9) At that time (saith Suetonius,) the Senate had Claudius the Em∣perour commeth into Britain with a great Army. by decree allowed Claudius his Triumphall ornaments. But he supposing that such a bare title of honour was in∣feriour to the Maiestie of an Emperour, and willing of himselfe also to enterprise some exploit whereby hee might winne the glory of a compleat Triumph, made choice before all other Prouinces, of Britaine, attempted by none since Iulius Caesar of famous Memory. And with great strength entred into the iourney, hauing with him a mightie Armie both of horse and foote, as also Elephants, a beast of great bignesse and burthen, Dion Cassius. lib. 60. Elephants first brought into Britaine. whose strangenesse then amazed the Britaines, and whose Carcases falling in this Land, their late found bones (no doubt) haue bred our errour, beeing sup∣posed to be of men, and not of beasts. (10) With very great danger he passed the Seas, and ioining strength with his Lieutenant and Vespasi∣an, they all together crossed the Riuer Thamifis, where Claudius entreth Britaine. presently they were encountred by the Britaines, who a while maintained the battaile very desperately, but in the end gaue place and fled, whom the Romanes pursued euen to their strong Camulodunum, then the seate of Adminius, Cunobelins sonne, as may aptly be He surpriseth Ca∣mulodunum. coniectured by the Medul of Britannicus the Emperors darling, figured in the front of this Chapter; which Citie they surprised and fortified with their owne Garrisons, which the Emperour in the eleuenth of his raigne, as appeareth by the other coine, turned to a Colony of Romane Citizens. Claudius now disarming the Britaines, remitted further punishment either v∣pon their bodies or confiscation of their goods: The which his fauourable clemencie moued those distres∣sed Britaines to such liking and loue, that they erected a Temple and Altar in his name, and gaue him diuine His clemencie maketh him to be honoured for a God. honour, as a God: The rest as vnable to resist, profe∣red their submissions, and promised a peaceable sub∣iection vnder the Romanes gouernement. (11) These things thus atchieued, at the end of sixe moneths Claudius in his ninth yeare returned and Claudius retur∣neth to Rome, & entreth in Tri∣umph. Sueton. in vita Claud. Sect. 17. entred Rome in triumph with more then vsuall maner, stamping againe vpon his monies his Arch of victo∣ry, as appeareth in the face of this Chapter, a perpe∣tuall trophie of his victories and memory of our ser∣uitude. After whose Triumphant Chariot rode Mes∣salina his wife, the Monster of her sexe for impudencie and lasciuious life: and vpon the toppe of his Pa∣lace he placed a Nauall Coronet in memoriall of the O∣cean by him sailed ouer, and subdued: withall assu∣ming to himselfe, and sonne, the Sirname Britanni∣cus: And honoured Plautius with his presence in his Triumphs for Britaine, giuing him the right hand, as∣cending the Capitoll, and besides graced diuers Cap∣taines that serued vnder him in that warre with Tri∣umphall Ornaments. So great an esteeme was held of the Conquest of so small a part of this Iland. (12) The British Historians relate these things The British Hi∣storians varie in relating Claudius doings in Britain. farre otherwise, reporting that their King Aruiragus, the yongest sonne of Kymbeline, withstood Claudius in his enterprise, with whom (say they) he came to com∣position by giuing him his daughter Genissa in mari∣age, in memorie whereof, he built the Citie Glauce∣ster, according to his name, which now is called Gloce∣ster: But Suetonius writing the life of Claudius, his wiues and children, nameth his daughters onely to be Claudia, Antonia, and Octauia, without mention of Genissa at all, and therefore not likely to haue any such: And Dion Cassius reporteth that Claudius him∣selfe Dion Cass. lib. 60. staied not aboue sixteene daies in Britaine, a time too short for the sending to Rome, and thence for the returne with his daughter, or for the building of so great a Citie as Glocester is. Neither indeede was Ar∣uiragus knowne in the daies of Claudius: But rather liued in the time of Domitian the seuenth in succession after him, as plainely appeareth by Iuuenal the Poet, in those his verses spoken to Domitian, which elswhere we cited. Whereby appeareth that the stirres of this King could not accord with Claudius raigne, and that the trueth of this report is much weakened from more sufficient authorities. But to proceede, Aulus Plautius (the first Lieutenant authorised ouer the Bri∣taines, Aulus Plautius first Lord Depu∣tie. vpon some occasion was thence reuoked, the warres not quieted, and with a small Triumph (as Ta∣citus saith) entred Rome. Vnto him succeeded P. Tacit. in vit. A∣gric. Tacit. Annal. li. 13. cap. 7. Ostorius Scapula, for reputation in martiall affaires nothing his inferiour, who at his first landing found all in an vprore: Of whose proceedings let vs heare Tacitus speake: The Britaines (saith he) that were yet Tacit. Annal. li. 12. cap. 8. vnconquered, ranged the Countries of the confederates, presuming both vpon the approch of the winter, and the Propretors vnacquaintance with his Army: But he know∣ing that the first successe breedeth either feare, or confi∣dence, gathered the Cohorts, and made to∣wards the Enemy, slaying all that made head against him, and disarming those whom hee most suspected. And to retaine Cogidunus the King in stricter assurance and fidelity to the Emperour, granted diuers Cities and States to him by way of Donation. The first that beganne to stirre, were the Icenians, the Inhabitants of Nor∣folke, Suffolke, Cambridge, and Hunting∣ton-shires, a strong people vnshaken with warres: And with them (at their instigation) their neighbours adioi∣ning. These together chose a fit place for fight, compassed in with a rude, but defensible trench, which had only one narrow entrance whereby the Horse∣men must be much impeached. This Rampire notwithstanding the Romane Captaine, with the onely aide of the * Allies brake downe, and disordered the Enemy euen in this their Confederates perchance is meant. owne fortresse, who seeing all passages for escape to bee stopped vp, (Ostorius hauing hemmed them in Neu in Northamp∣ton shire, saith Camde . with Garrisons betweene the Riuers * Antonia and Sabrina) shewed great valour in defending themselues, and by their deaths gaue place to the Romanes. This ouerthrow and slaughter of the Iceni wrought a more staied resolution in those that before were wauering betweene warre and peace. And the Army led against the Cangi, with waste and spoile consumed the Coun∣try, the inhabitants not daring to bee seene in field. Whereupon the Romanes pierced thorow the Land euen vnto the Sea-coast that lookes towards Ireland. A small resistance was made by the Brigantes, but without much trouble soone quieted by the execution of some few, and pardoning of the rest. (13) But the Silures (that is, those of South-wales) could not be brought to beare the Romish yoke of subiection, who besides their owne courage relied much vpon the strength and valour of their Prince Cara∣ctacus (whose Coine we haue heere expres∣sed) a man which had waded thorow many dangers, and in many aduentures both prosperous and luckie had gotten such re∣putation, that hee was preferred before all the British Captaines. This Generall know∣ing his owne strength vnable to match the enemie, by policie thought to supplie that want, and hauing aduantage of the Coun∣trey, remooued the warre vnto the Ordo∣uices, which is now North-wales, where all ioined to him that either feared or disdained to hold peace with the Romans. Heere he chose a place to en∣campe his host, euen on the top of a hill naturally de∣fensed His manner of encamping. from accesse: and where any doubt was, there he stopped vp all passage with heapes of stones in ma∣ner of a Rampire; neere the foot whereof ran a Riuer with a foord somewhat dangerous, and not easily found, where a troope of his best souldiers were set in order to receiue the Enemie. The more to animate their mindes, the Leaders His animating of his souldiers. went about exhorting and encouraging the Souldi∣ers, taking all occasions of feare from them, and put∣ting them in hope, with all inducements of resolu∣tion: especially Caractacus, who coursing hither and thither, protested that day and that battle should bee His resolution. the beginning either of a recouered libertie, or else a perpetuall seruitude and bondage: and euer hee cal∣led vpon the names of his valiant Ancestors, who for∣merly had chased Caesar the Dictator out of the Ile, by whose valour they were deliuered from Hatchets and Tributes, and enioied freely their wiues and childrens bodies vndefiled. The Souldiers also themselues shew∣ed as great forwardnesse, and as Echoes redoubled his words, vowing according to the Religion of their Countrie, neuer to yeeld for wounds or life, which they all were ready to sacrifice in the cause of their liber∣ties. This their apparant resolution much appalled the Romans cheerefulnes, and most of all the Captaines and Leaders, who before their faces saw the Riuer, on both sides of them had the hanging hils, and the Fort commodious for the enemie, but deadly vnto them: all which notwithstanding the common Souldiers despised, and demanded the battle. Ostorius, whose Ostorius his care. studie was chiefly to performe the parts of a Generall, passed the Riuer with some little difficultie, and lea∣ding his Armie vp to the Rampire, was met with such a showre of darts, that many therewith were woun∣ded and slaine. Yet at length breaking downe those rude compacted stones, ioined battle with the ene∣mie, and afront came close to handy strokes; wherein the Britaines hauing better courage then armour (for they had neither headpeece nor coat of defense) were sore galled with their Iauellings and two-handed swords, and so disordered, that they betooke them∣selues The Britaines put to flight. to flight. (14) This victorie as it was almost vnexpected, so was it made famous by the taking of Caractacus Caractacus wife, daughter, and brethren taken prisoners. Himselfe betrai∣ed by Cartisman∣dus. wife, daughter, and brethren, and himselfe flying for succor and protection to the Brigantes, was (as we haue before shewed) by Cartismandus their Queene betraied and deliuered into the hands of the Con∣querours after his nine yeeres most generous resi∣stance. Hee . Tacit. Annal. 12 cap. 8. Whereupon his fame being carried ouer the Ilands, and spread abroad thorow the Prouinces, was also renowned in Italie, and they desired to see him that so many yeeres had contemned their forces. Nei∣ther was his name meanly esteemed of at Rome; for whilest Caesars worth and power was there commen∣ded, a more glorious conceit was held of the conque∣red Caractacus: and against his comming to the Citie Caractacus led in triumph. the people from all parts were assembled, as to be∣hold some notable and most rare spectacle. The Em∣perours Guard in armes and good order were placed in the field before the Campe, thorow whom the Cap∣tiues and Trophies were carried, and presented after this manner: first the vassals of Caractacus going for∣most bowed their bodies to the people as they pas∣sed, and seemed by their ruefull countenances to dis∣couer the sense of their calamitie. The caparisons, his chaines, and other spoiles gotten in the warres, were carried after them. Then Caractacus his bre∣thren, wife, and daughter followed, and last of all himselfe, whose attire and stout behauiour filled the peoples eies with wonder and delight. His bodie, for His habit and attire. the most part, was naked, and painted with figures of diuers beasts. Hee ware a chaine of iron about his necke, and another about his middle: the haire of his Ex histor. magn. Britan. head hanging downe in curled lockes, couered his backe and shoulders, and the haire of his vpper lip parted on both sides, lay vpon his breast. Neither was his behauiour lesse noted then the strangenesse of his ha∣bit: for he neither hung downe his head, as daunted with base feare; nor craued mercie, as the rest; but His vndaunted∣nesse. with a confident spirit, and bold countenance, held on till he came before the Imperiall Seat, where ma∣king his stand, and a while beholding Caesars Maiesty, at last with great courage spake to this purpose. (15) If my moderation in prosperitie had beene His Oration to Claudius Caesar. answerable to the greatnes of my birth and estate, or the successe of my late attempts to the resolution of my minde, I might haue come to this Citie ra∣ther as a friend to be entertained, then as a Cap∣tiue to be gazed vpon; neither wouldst thou dis∣daine to haue receiued me on termes of amitie and peace, being a man of roiall descent, and a Com∣mander of many warlike Nations. But what cloud soeuer hath darkened my present lot, yet haue the Heauens and Nature giuen mee that in birth and minde, which none can vanquish, or depriue mee of. I well see, that you make other mens miseries the subiect and matter of your triumphs; and in this my calamitie, as in a mirror, you now contemplate your owne glory. Yet know that I am, and was a Prince furnished with strength of men and abiliments of warre; and what maruell is it if all bee lost, seeing experience teacheth that the euents of warre are Euents of warre variable. variable, and the successe of policies guided by vn∣certaine fates? As it is with me, who thought that the deepe waters like a wall inclosing our Land, and Britaines wall. it so situated by heauenly prouidence, as in ano∣ther world, might haue beene a sufficient priuilege and defense for vs against forraine inuasions: but I now perceiue that the desire of soueraignty admits no limitation; and if you Romans must command all, then all must obey. For mine owne part, while Ambition hath no bounds. I was able I made resistance, and vnwilling I was to submit my necke to a seruile yoke, so farre the law of Nature alloweth euery man, that he may defend Nature disdai∣neth seruitude. himselfe being assailed, and to withstand force, by force. Had I at first yeelded, thy glory and my ru∣ine had not beene so renowned. Fortune hath now done her worst: wee haue nothing left vs but our liues, which if thou take from vs, our miseries end; and if thou spare vs, wee are but the obiects of thy Clemencie. (16) Caesar wondring to see such resolutions and so free a minde in a Captiue estate, pardoned Cara∣ctacus, his wife and brethren, who being vnbound, did their reuerence to Agrippina the Empresse, that sate aloft on a Throne Roiall. This Conquest and Tri∣umph ouer Caractacus, ministred matter of discourse and admiration thorough out all Rome, and the Lords Tocit. Annal. li. 12. cap. 8. of the Senate held it no lesse honourable, then that of P. Scipio, who triumphed ouer Syphax the Numidi∣an King, or that of Perses, whom Paulus Aemilius van∣quished, or then any other King that had beene ta∣ken in warre, or exhibited to the view of the people. Then were also publicke Triumphall honours decreed for Ostorius; whose fortunes vntill then had beene very prosperous, but now began to be doubtfull, or Ostorius and his fortunes decline. rather to decline, either because Caractacus (the foile of his glory) was remoued, and thereupon (as though all had beene subdued) a more carelesse seruice enter∣tained, or else the courage of the Britaines was more The Britaines take heart again. inflamed to reuenge through the feruent compas∣sion of the fall of so mightie a King. (17) For immediately they enuironed the Camp∣master, and the Legionary Cohorts, which were left to build fortresses in the Country of the Silures, whom with eight Centurions, and the forwardest Souldiers, they slew, and had put all the rest to the sword, if res∣cue had not speedily come from the villages and forts adioining. The Forragers also and troope of horse that were sent to aid them they put to flight. Their victory. These affronts touched Ostorius to the quick, and lest their aids should grow to a greater head, he sent forth certaine light-harnessed companies, which with the Legionary Souldiers vndertooke the battle, and with small oddes was it continued till the night came, and parted them: diuers other Skirmishes afterwards were made, though for the most part in woods and marishes, whence taking their aduantage in sallying forth, they many times preuailed, sometimes by strength, some∣times by meere courage, and sometimes by chance; neither were they alwaies commanded by their Cap∣taines, but many times fought voluntary and without warrant. (18) The principal motiue that induced the rest to take Armes, was the example of the Silure, who were most resolutely bent, as beeing exasperated by certaine speeches that the Romane Emperour himselfe Caesars threats make the Britains more resolute. had vsed, which was, that as the name of the Sugam∣bri was destroied, and the people transported into Gallia, so the memorie of Silures should vtterly bee extinguished: And in this heate as men desperate (whose destinies were read and lots cast already) they intercepted the scattered troopes of the Romanes that vncircumspectly wasted and spoiled the Country, ta∣king of them many prisoners, and recouering rich booties, which they sent and distributed amongst their neighbours; whereby many other were drawne to reuolt: These proceedings sate so neere Ostorius his heart, who with long cares and trauels had wea∣ried his spirits▪ spent the strength of his bodie, and thereunto had now added the discontentment of his minde, that in these vexations hee gaue vp the Ghost, Ostorius dieth. the Silures reioicing that so worthy and victorious a Captaine was fallen in their warres. (19) But Claudius Caesar, lest the Prouince should make head, presently sent Aulus Didius for his Aulus Didius sent Lieutenant into Britaine. Lieutenant into Britaine; where, notwithstanding all his haste, he found all out of frame. For Manlius Va∣lens with his Legion had encountred the Britaines Tacit. Annal. 12. c. 8. Manlius Valens encountred the Britaines with ill successe. with ill successe, yet not so bad as the Ilanders gaue foorth, thinking thereby to terrifie their new-establi∣shed Gouernour: which report himselfe also in policie was contented to augment, thereby to purchase more praise in appeasing so dangerous stirres; or if hee could not, to retaine his own credit without his valours im∣peachment. These resisters had made many inroads into the subdued Countries; against whom vpon his first arriuall, Didius entred the field, and for a while Didius for a while keepeth them in awe. kept them in awe. (20) But Venutius a very expert man in Militarie affaires (trusty to the Romaines, and defended by their power so long as the mariage betwixt him and Cartis∣mandua continued) began a new rebellion: for Cartis∣mandua (in speciall fauour with the Romanes for the deliuery of Caractacus) abounding in wealth, peace, & pleasures (which commonly are the Nur∣ses of licentious liuing) fell in loue (as be∣fore was touched) with Vellocatus her husbands seruant, and harnesse-bearer, & forgetting her owne honour, preferred him before Venutius, and laboured to make him King. The good-will of the Country notwithstanding went general∣ly vpon the lawfull husband: who be∣ing deepely touched with this open iniu∣rie, raised a power against her and her Paramour. At the first this quarrell was onely betwixt them, vntill that Cartis∣mandua by policie had taken her husbāds brother, and some of his neerest kindred, prisoners. Whereupon the next Inhabi∣tants fearing her purposes, and disdaining to be brought vnder the yoake of a wo∣man so defamed, declared themselues for Venutius, & with a choice band of youth∣full Soldiers inuaded her Territories: whereof Didius Tacit. hist. li. 3. cap. 9. hauing intelligence, sent certain Cohorts to second her, and encounter them. In which conflict, the Romans for Cartismandua did preuaile; yet the kingdome remai∣ned to Venutius, and the warres still vnto them. (21) For the Silures were not altogether quie∣ted, & a Legion commanded by Caesius Nasica, fought luckily against the Britaines. In all which stirres Di∣dius Tacit. Annal. 12. . in person was absent, as being stricken in yeares, and hauing receiued many honours, held it sufficient to execute his charge by the assistance of others. The State of Britain thus standing, let vs so leaue it, during this Emperours raigne, which now began to draw to∣wards his last period, by the working of Agrippina his wife, and by her vpon this occasion. (22) It chanced, Claudius in his wine, to cast Claudius his own words the occasi∣on of his death. forth a word of great suspition, in saying: That it was fatall vnto him first to beare the leaudnes of his Messalina was his first wife, a woman of vnsa∣tiable lecherie, who was put to death. wiues, & then to punish them. She knowing her selfe guiltie in disinheriting of Britannicus, who was Claudius his owne sonne, for the adoption of Nero who was hers, besides other insolencies, wherewith she might bee taxed, sought therefore to cleare her owne way by ta∣king him out of the way: and with Locusta a woman skilfull in poisoning, and Zenophon a Physition, as Tacit. Annal. lib. 12. cap. 13. large of conscience, conferred for the maner of his death: who in fine, concluded that poison was the surest and the least in suspect, or at leastwise the most difficult to be proued against her. (23) This then resolued, they temper poison in Ioseph. Anti. lib. 20. ca. 5. a Mushrom, whereof he greedily did eate, and shortly after ended his life the thirteenth day of October, The continu∣ance of his raigne. when hee had raigned thirteene yeares, eight mo∣neths, and twentie daies, the yeare of Christ his incar∣nation fiftie sixe, and of his owne age sixtie foure. He ANNO DO. 56. was of stature tall, and of a pleasing Countenance, full His indowments of bodie. His imperfecti∣ons. of Maiestie and comely gray haires, his Head continu∣ally shaking, somewhat stammering in his speech, ve∣ry learned, but therewithall very forgetfull, and alto∣gether ruled by his wiues, and domesticall Seruants, the two ordinary banes of most men who are aduā∣ced Wiues and ser∣uants most mis∣leade great per∣sonages. to any eminent place of gouernement & cōmand. (24) This Emperour (saith Seneca) might make his boast that he was the first conquerour of the Britaines, for Iulius Caesar did but shew their Iland vnto the Romans, whereas Claudius made their necks yeeld to the chaines of their captiuities. And Aegisippus saith thus of Claudius, His witnesse is Britan, which liued without the world, but now by him reduced vnder the Romans Empire, and those whom the former ages knew not, neither themselues any seruitude, are now by him both made knowen, and seruants to the Romans. And againe: As great a matter it was to passe those Seas, as to haue triumphed ouer those Britains, wherein (saith he) euen the elements haue done homage vnto Claudius. In ioy whereof, and reuerence to the Gods, in his triumph he mounted the staires of the Ca∣pitoll vpon his aged knees, being supported and lifted vp by his sons in Law on either side, the glory of this Ilands conquest had so possessed this old Emperours mind. NERO. CHAPTER VII. T His violent and vnexpe∣cted death of Claudius, gaue breath and life vnto Neroes further hopes: for whilest the Consuls were assembled to make suppli∣cations for their Prince, (not knowing him alrea∣die dead) Nero suddenlie set open the Palace gates, and accompanied with shouts and acclamations, en∣tred the Cohorts that kept the watch, where of them Nero assumeth the Empire. and the rest of the souldiers he was saluted Emperour, the Senate as men affrighted with amazement, not once contradicting the same. (2) He was the sonne of Domitius Nero, and of Iulia Agrippina the daughter of Germanicus brother to His parents. Claudius the precedent Emperour, vitious by nature, as sprung of those parents from whom (as his owne Suetonius in vita Neronis. father Domitius said) no goodnesse could proceede: and the same vile disposition was perfected and aug∣mented by his owne affected study and pursuit of all possible leaudnesse, as one who could well fit his wanton and lasciuious humours to the vnripenesse of his yeeres, being not passing seuenteene when he as∣sumed the Empire. All religion he had in contempt, and all lawes violated, letting loose the reine to all vnnaturall lusts, and licentiousnesse of life. (3) For blood and libidiousnesse hee was held a most vnsatiate furie, and amongst men a very monster His excessiue lust and blood∣shed. of nature. His father he poisoned: vpon his mother he committed both incest and murder: vpon males, pollutions against nature: deflowred the Vestals (a matter sacrilegious & impious) slew his brother Ger∣manicus, Suetonius in vita Neronis. and his sister Antonia, his wiues, Poppaea and Octauia, his aunt Domitia, his sonne in law Rufinus, and his renowned Tutor Seneca; With such sauage slaughter of the Romane Nobilitie, that Tacitus (their best Re∣membrancer) was wearied to record their names, Tacit. Annal. 16. cap. 3. whilest with a seruile patience (as he termeth it) they died honourably. Rome set on fire by Nero. (4) The City Rome hee set on fire, charging the Christians with the fact, and inflicted such torments and death vpon them, that they were pitied of their enemies, and his owne cruelties thereby made more notorious. Whose Religion, though Suetonius tear∣med Suet. in vita Nero. new, and a wicked superstition; and Tacitus (as it were in contempt) nameth the Author thereof to be Christ, who in Tiberius raigne (as he with the Euan∣gelists Tacit. Annal. 15. cap. 10. agreeth) was put to death vnder Pontius Pilate Procurator of Iudea, where that religion first began; yet by him it is confessed, that these men were inno∣cent of the fact, and their doctrine to burst forth fur∣ther into many other parts, insomuch that Rome it Christians in Neroes Court. selfe did affect the same. Yea and in Neroes Court also some embraced that faith, as by the words of the Apostle is manifest, who from the Saints in Caesars house sent salutations to the Brethren. Phil. 4. 22. (5) And lastly, to fill vp the measure of his blou∣die Peter and Paul put to death. Euseb. li. 2. ca. 25. Tertul. Apol. ca. 5. crueltie, he crucified Peter vpon the Crosse, and be∣headed Paul with the sword, two principall Apostles of Iesus Christ, and worthy instruments of the worlds saluation; and forgetting the Maiestie of his estate, fell into the sinke of contempt and all sinnes, giuing his minde leaue to digest all vncleannesse, and his bodie ouer to worke any base exercises, attending nothing besides his Harpes and Harlots, whereby a carelesse (but yet a cruel) gouernment was intertained, and the Senate fashioning themselues to feed his loose humors, stroue each to outstrip other in their base flatteries. (6) In this state the Prouinces subiections began to A great ouer∣throw of the Romans. Tacit. Annal. 15. cap. 2. stand doubtfull, and the greatnesse of the Empire to ouercharge the foundation; for the Parthians vnder Vologeses gaue Paetus the Romane a great ouerthrow, and that in such wise, that those which escaped were tear∣med the vnfortunate Armie. And in Britaine their af∣faires proceeded with no good successe; for aged Di∣dius could doe no more then keepe that which he had already gotten: and Verannius his successor, only with small inroades assailing the Silures, was in his first yeere cut off by death, insomuch that Nero hauing neither Tacitus in vita Agric. Suet. in vit. Nero. will, motion, nor hope to propagate and enlarge the Empire, minded once to haue with-drawen the forces out of Britaine, had it not beene for very shame. (7) But Paulinus Suetonius attaining the gouern∣ment of that Prouince, in skill for seruice, and opinion of people comparable to any, sought to match his con∣current Corbulo, who with daily victories prospered in Armenia, himselfe wanting neither courage nor dis∣cretion to atchieue the like, only matter and occasion the Iland affoorded none. Therefore determining an expedition into further parts, he made preparation to inuade the Ile of Mona, separated from the Continent Anglesey inuaded by the Riuer Menai, and fronted vpon the midst of Ireland, both strong with inhabitants, and a receptacle of Fugitiues. (8) Against his approch the Ilanders had gathe∣red their powers, which stood thicke vpon the shoare readie armed to make resistance, their women run∣ning among in mourning weedes, their haire loose, and firebrands in their hands, like furies of hell, toge∣ther with their Druides (men of religion) who with hands and eies lifted vp towards heauen, cried for vengeance, and powred out curses as thicke, as haile. With the strangenesse of which sight, the Romans stood amazed, not offering one stroke; seeming rather to Romanes amazed at sight of the British. present themselues for a pray vpon their enemies weapons, then for the Conquest of their land or liues: which sudden and vnexpected discouragement, their Captaine soone redressed, by putting them in remem∣brance of their wonted valours, which now was farre ouermatchable vnto a fearefull flocke of weake wo∣men, or a company of rude and franticke men: wher∣upon their Ensignes were displaied, and the Enemy pre∣sently dispersed and slaine, themselues becomming masters both of the field, and whole Ile: which no soo∣ner was thus obtained, but sudden newes came to re∣call their powers, the Prouinces being raised to a pre∣sent reuolt. (9) For the Britaines in absence of the Generall, laid open their publique greeuances growne now both common and intollerable by the oppressions of the Romanes, who from the diseases of their Head, had sucked and dispersed their corruptions through∣out the Prouinces of the Empire: and Catus Decianus the Procurator here in Britaine, renewed the confisca∣tion The Receiuer of tribute his oppression. Di n Cass. lib. 62. of their goods, which Claudius had formerly re∣mitted. The Romane Colonie at Camulodunum, thrust out the ancient Inhabitants; seating them-selues in their possessions without any other recompence, sauing reproachfull termes, calling them their drudges, slaues and vassalls: besides, the Temple there erected in ho∣nour Tacit. An al. 14. cap. 10. of Claudius, was now become an eie-sore vnto them, as an Altar of their perpetuall subiection, while the Augustall Priests there attending, wasted all their wealth vnder pr text of Religion. But the very spring or head, from whence the cause of this sudden Rebel∣lion issued, was the present abuse offered to . Boduo, Queene of the Icenians, late wife to Prasutagus, de∣ceased * V dica. vpon the insuing occasion. (10) This Prasutagus King of the Icenians fa∣mous for his riches, which a long time hee had beene Prasutagus his Testament. gathering, made Caesar with his two daughters his heire, by Will, thinking by that flatterie, his kingdome, and house had beene sufficiently warranted from fu∣ture iniuries: which fell out cleane otherwise, for his kingdome of the Centurions, and his house by slaues were spoiled as lawfull booties: his wife whipped, and his da hters deflowred, and the chiefest in that Pro∣uince dispossessed of their rightfull inheritance, and the Kings kindred reputed and vsed as Slaues. (11) Whereupon the Icenians began seriously to discourse of their present miseries and bondage, made subiect not onely to a Lieutenant that sucked their blood, but likewise to a Procurator, that sought their Tacit. in vit. Agric. pag. 190. substance, while with a seruile feare they yeelded to please the meanest Souldier; As though the Heauens had framed them onely for seruitude, and the Earth appointed to beare their iniuries vnreuenged, whereas contrariwise, they saw both heauen & earth flexible to their deliuerance: For (whether by policie or chance) the Image of victorie at Camulodunum fell downe re∣uersed without any apparant cause knowne: the wo∣men Prodigies daily seene. distempered with furie, ranne in the streetes, sing∣ing, and prophecying destructions: strange noises were heard in the Court, and howlings in the Theater, and strange apparitions, and Edifices seene in the Riuer Thamisis: the Ocean it selfe betweene Gallia and them, seemed all bloodie, and the prints of dead bodies left in Dio. lib. 62. the sands at the Ebbe. Againe, waighing the present e∣state, they saw Suetonius absent, and busied to enlarge the Confines, the midst but slenderly guarded, and by Other Prouinces shake off the yoke. In the battaile a∣gainst Quintilius Varius. Tac. in vit. Agric. those who were readier for priuate gaine, then diligent to discharge the offices of warre. The examples of o∣ther Prouinces also whetted the edge of their encou∣ragements: for Germany (they saw) had well shaken off the yoke of subiection: The Parthians had reuol∣ted, and Armenia held play with Corbulo, as famous as Paulinus: Their cause was as iust, their land as well defensed; their ancestors as valiant in resisting the first Ring-leader Caesar; and themselues better experien∣ced of their aduersaries powers, and the r owne abili∣ments. So now hauing attained the hardest point, which was their assembled Consultations (a matter of as great danger to be taken with, as in acting their in∣tendments) in fine this was resolued, that libertie was Their Resoluti∣on. to be preferred, though bought with their liues; and bondage to bee auoided, if not otherwise then by their deaths. (12) These their often and noted assemblies brought suspitions of some designements, and the pro∣digies daily happening as they were motiues of enco∣ragements vnto the Britaines: So were they ominous signes to the Romanes, of either part framed in their owne imaginations, and construed according to their hoped or feared euents. (13) The Confederates in this businesse were not to seeke their Leader: their Queenes dishonours so ap∣parantly knowne, (and for matter of gouernement they made no difference of Sexe) her birth extracted from their Roiall blood, her hearts affection approued to her Countrie, her indignities receiued of the proud Queene Boudic chosen Leader. oppressors, and her haughtie spirit threatning reuenge; assured them of her vttermost endeuours: which accor∣dingly she effected to her dying day, and to her neuer dying fame. (14) The Romanes likewise prouided themselues, and in the absence of Suetonius, craued aide of Catus Dicianus the Procurator; who sent them not aboue two hundred men, and those but badly armed. These ioining with the rest made no great power, al of them relying more to the franchise of the place, then secu∣ring themselues with Trench or Bulwarke: And giuen ouer to pleasure, and play, as in the time of a publike peace. Which aduantages by the Enemy were wisely She surpriseth the Romanes. espied, and by boduo comming on as nobly pursued, when with sword and fire she wasted all in her way, the Temple onely excepted, whereinto part of the Souldiers were fled, but after two daies iege it was battered and taken. (15) In this heate of furie, the Britaines proceede, and meeting Petilius Cerealis Lieutenant of the ninth She putteth Peti∣lius Cerealis to flight. Legion, on a hasty March to rescue that which was al∣ready lost, they encounter his forces, and slew all his footemen, himselfe with his troope of Horse hardly escaping to his Campe, where in great feare he entren∣ched, not daring to attempt any further matter. At notice of these mishaps, Catus like a tall man, tooke to She forceth Ca∣tus to flie into Gallia. his heeles, and sailed into Gallia: by whose crueltie and couetousnes the Britaines were thus enraged to take Armes and reuolt, and their entrance thus fortu∣nately proceeding, gaue heart and hope to further successe. (16) For in this heat of blood and furie they set She sack th Ve∣rolanium. vpon, and sacked the free-towne Verolanium, both strong for garrison, and rich in Inhabitants: which Ci∣tie (as also Camulodunum had) felt the rage of their mercilesse hands, from whence great booties were car∣ried, and no lesse then seuentie thousand Citizens and Seuentie thou∣sand slaine by her Army. . in vit. Ne∣ro. sect. 39. Confederates slaine. This commotion in Britaine by Suetonius Tranquillus is accounted one of the most in∣fortunate losses to the Empire happening vnder Nero, and the more ignominious to the Romanes (as Dion ob∣serueth) Di . C ss. lib. 6 . in that is was performed vnder the command of a woman, neither experienced in the feates of warre, nor vsing the victory according to the Law of Armes: for not any prisoner taken in regard of ransome was saued, nor intercourse of exchange admitted, but kill, hang, burne, and crucifie, as though the measure of their reuenge could neuer be sufficiently heaped, or the wrath of their Gods satisfied with the blood of their Enemies. (17) By this time Suetonius the Lieutenant was re∣turned, and taking muster of his forces in London (a London long since renowned. Citie euen t n famous for concourse of Merchants, and of great renowne for prouision of all things ne∣sary) stood yet doubtfull whether hee should chuse that place for the Seat of warre, or no. But better ad∣uising, dislodged his Host, and with the fourteenth Le∣gion, the Standard-bearers of the twelfth, and other aids from places adioining, incamped vpon a plaine, enclo∣sed with woods, hauing a narrow entrance, and free from Ambush or enemie at his backe. (18) The Britaines likewise, inferiour neither in number nor courage, triumphed abroad by such troupes and multitudes, as the like had not beene seene, yea and so fierce of courage, and with such assu∣rance of hope, that they brought their wiues to the place to be witnesses of their valours. Boduo in her Chariot doing the parts of a most noble Generall, Boudicea suruei∣ her troopes. droue from troope to troope to see and commend their forwardnesse; and dismounting attended with her two daughters, and two hundred and thirty thousand re∣solute Britaines, gat her to a seat made of marishturfes, after the manner of the Romans, apparelled in a loose gowne of changeable colours, wearing a kirtle there∣under Her attire. very thicke pleited, the tresses of her yellow haire hanging downe to the skirts. About her necke shee had a chaine of gold, and in her hand held a light speare, being of personage tall, and of a comely, cheere∣full, and modest countenance, and so a while shee stood pawsing, in viewing her Armie, and being regarded with a reuerend silence, at length to this effect she spake Her Oration to her Armie. vnto them. (19) My Friends and Companions of equall for∣tunes, there needeth no excuse for this my present Tacit. Annal. li. 11. authoritie or place, in regard of my Sex, seeing it is not vnknowen vnto you all, that the wonted man∣ner of our Nation hath beene to warre vnder the The custome of this and other Monarchies to be gouerned by women. conduct of a woman; and not only ours, but also of the greatest Monarchies swaied vpon this vniuersall Globe: for the Empire of the Assyrians (the first and most famous that euer was) vnder the command Iustin. lib. 1. of Semiramis triumphed ouer the fierce Aethiopians; Semiramis. and the gold-veined India; Babylon for strength and beauty was both defensed and enriched by Nitocris Nitocris. her sole Empresse. The Scythians vnder Tomyris Tomyris. ouercame, and slew the great Conquerour Cyrus. Iustin. lib. 1. Aegypt gouerned by Cleopatra: yea and Romes Mo∣narkes Cleopatra. themselues ruled, if not ouer-ruled, by Mes∣salina and Agrippina the monsters of our Sexe. My Messalina and Agrippina. blood and birth might challenge some preemi∣nence, as sprung from the roots of most royall de∣scents: but my breath receiued from the same aire, my body sustained by the same soile, and my glorie clouded with imposed ignominies. I disclaime all Shee disclaimeth all superioritie. superioritie, and as a fellow in bondage beare the yoke of oppressions, with as heauie waight and pres∣sure, if not more. Had I with Caesars mother beene suspected of Treason, or with false Cartismandua de∣filed my Bed, to the disturbance of their peace, my goods might haue gone vnder the title of Confisca∣tion, Reioiceth in her innocencie. and these prints of the whip vnder pretext of iustice. But why name I Iustice in these grand Ca∣talogues of oppressions, whose Actors respect nei∣ther person, age, sexe, nor cause? For what abuse can be so vile, that wee haue not suffered; or indignitie so contemptible, that wee haue not borne? My stripes, yet felt and seene against their owne lawes, and the violent rapes of these my harmlesse daugh∣ters, The indignities offred by the Romans. against the Lawes of God and Man, doe witnesse well what gouernment they intend: and your wealths consumed by their wastefull wantonnesse, your painfull trauels vpholding their idlenesse, doe seale the issues of our succeeding miseries, if not timely preuented by one ioint endeuour. You that haue knowen the freedome of life, will with me con∣fesse (I am sure) that libertie (though in a poore e∣state) is better then bondage with fetters of gold: and yet this comparison hath no correspondencie in vs: for we now enioy no estate at all, nothing now being ours but what they will leaue vs; and nothing left vs, that they can take away, hauing not so much as our very heads toll-free. Other subdued Nations Dion Cass. lib. 62. by death are quit from bondage; but wee after death must liue , and our . Haue the ma vs the ends of the , and haue not assigned the end of our wrongs? Or hath Nature among all her free workes created vs Britaines only for bondage? Why, what are the Ro∣mans? Are they more then men, or immortall? Their slaine carcases sacrificed by vs, and th ∣trisied blood corrupting our Aire, doth ll vs they are no Gods. Our personages are more tall, our bo∣dies more strong, and our oints t: and (to say as it is) euery part of vs amed more fit for the speare then for the seade. But you will ay they are Tacit. Annal. lib. 14. cap. 11. our Conquerours. Indeed ouercome we are, but by our selues, our owne factions still giuing way to their intrusions: for had not the ator a Mandubrace? Caligula an Adminius? Claudius a Bericus, and Co∣gidunus? Caesar. Com. lib. 5. Nero (that strumpet, and our still-liuing shame) Cartismandua? Romes instruments, and Bri∣taines Britannith vipers. vipers? without which, you shall see Caesar in single fight, lose his sword, and after flie the Coun∣try (a dishonor ind lible) Tiberius forgoe his Tribute, though extremely couetous, Claudius glad to make peace, and be quiet. and Nero might still haue fol∣lowed his fiddling trade at home, if our discords had not made vp his Musicke heere abroad. Our dissen∣sions Tacitus in vita Agric. Domesticke con∣spirators most dangerous. therefore haue beene their only rising, and our designes still weakened by home-bred conspirators. Neither hath our noble resistance euer beene with∣out desert and note of honour: their publike triumphs being made more admirable by one Britaines Con∣quest, then vsually hath beene solemnized ouer whole Kingdomes. Caligula for beholding our cliffes only would haue diaine honours: and for∣getfull Claudius remembred vnto posterities (in his Britannicus) a glorious surname from vs. Our strengths haue beene acknowledged the maine sup∣port of other States, and shall it not bee supplied to maintaine our owne? We haue as much to keepe as Birth-right hath giuen vs, that is, our Iland pos∣sessed by our Auncestors from all antiquitie: Ours Caesar. Com. li. 2. by inheritance, theirs by intrusions, claimes so diffe∣rent in the scale of Iustice, that the Gods themselues Motiues inciting to pursue the Romans. must needs redresse, and set the ballance in their equal poise. We haue seene their propitious beginnings, in making vs instruments ouer seuenty thousand of our enemies; and yet in this reuenge our forces not diminished, but much increased in number and pow∣er: which thing, as it serues to our encouragements; so is it to their feare. For Catus hath set the Seas (a sure defense) betwixt him and vs; yet not a Britaine pursuing: for surely if any had, he would haue hid himselfe in the waues. Petilius the field-mouse doth keepe his hole, and with the Moale works the earth for his safest refuge: And Posthumus their Campe∣master is too wise to venture all at a cast. Only Plau∣tius fleshed by his late victorie ouer a company of vnarmed Priests, whose resistance consisted only in praiers, and a few weake women, whose weapons were only fire-brands, builds the hopes of his aspi∣ring minde, as Caligula did his Trophey of Cockle∣shels. For see we not him encamped rather to de∣fend his owne, then to offend others? His Armie crouched together, as fowles flocked against a storme, or rather like to fearfull Hares squatted in their bushes, who no sooner shall heare the crie of their pursuit, but their Muise or Fortresse will bee left: and for their last refuge, as Hares, trust to the swiftnesse of their speedy feet. Suddenly, as shee was thus speaking, shee let slip a Hare which shee had Her deuice at concluding her speech. secretly couched in her lappe, which with a great shout escaped thorow the Campe, and gaue occasi∣on to the Armie (who little suspected it was done by her of purpose) to construe it as an ominous and luckie signe of victorie. (20) And thereupon with great force they assaile their enemies, whiles Suetonius was likewise encoura∣ging his Souldiers to the like resolution. The four∣teenth Legion by his direction kept the strait as a sure place of defense, till the Britaines in the fury of their first onset had spent all their darts, which with good successe they had bestowed: but then failing and wea∣ried in their first comming on too hotly, the Romanes sallied out vpon the plaine, the Auxiliaries and Horse∣men with long launces making their way, and beating downe all that stood before them. The Britaines vna∣ble to endure or withstand such fierce assaults, were The Britaines vanquished. forced to giue backe, and at length sought to saue themselues by flight, but were hindred by their owne Waggons placed in the rere-ward of the Army, which gaue the more impediment to their retrait, in that they were then full of their women who in confidence of the victory came thither to behold the fight, which were among the rest all-slaine, without regard of sexe or mercie. This day was famous and compara∣ble in renowne for victorie to any other of former times, for therein were slaine of the Britaines to the Eightie thousand Britaines slaine. number of eightie thousand men: And the Land brought vnder an vnrecouerable subiection. (21) Boduo seeing the ouerthrow of her Army, Boudicea poiso∣neth her selfe. was notwithstanding vnuanquished in her owne Noble spirit, and scorning to be a spectacle in their Triumphs, or a vassall to their willes, after the example of Cleo∣patra, Tacit. Annal. lib. 14. cap. 11. shee made an end of her miseries and life, by poison. And Paenius Posthumus, Camp-master of the se∣cond Legion, seeing the good successe of the fourteenth and twentith: for that disobaying the Generall (contra∣ry to the discipline of warre) he had defrauded him∣selfe and followers of their parts of glorie in that ser∣uice, Paenius slew him∣selfe. Tacitus hist. lib. 2. cap. 4. for verie griefe slew himselfe: and for their good seruice there performed, Nero greatly honoured the eleuenth, thirteenth and foureteenth Legions, reposing a most sure trust in their valour and fidelitie, euer after∣ward. (22) Suetonius animated with this victorie, gathe∣red his Army, & encamped again, purposing to end the residue of the warre, if any resisters should remaine: And at that present were sent him out of Germanie two thousand Legionarie Souldiers, eight Cohorts of Auxiliaries, and a thousand Horse, wherby his strength was augmented, and the ninth Legion which had beene much weakened by the rashnes of Petilius, fully sup∣plied: The Britaines mi∣series. So that bootelesse it was for the poore Britains to make any further resistance, and such as did, or stood doubtfully affected, were daily put to the sword. But nothing distressed them so much, as did famine, and want of Corne, being a people in all ages more gi∣uen to warre then good husbandry, and rather relying vpon the prouisions of others, than by the plough to prouide for themselues, fierce of nature, and slowlie lending eare to peace, or their minde to such Arts as either nourish, or are nourished by peace. Iulius Classicia∣nus a receiuer. (23) In these stirres Iulius Classicianus, sent from Nero to succeede Catus in his office of receipts, an ene∣mie, & at variance with Suetonius, the more to cloud his renowne, gaue it forth for certaine, that a new Lieu∣tenant was to be expected, who without either ho∣stile rancour, or pride of a Conquerour, would intreat Promiseth Cle∣mencie. the yeelders with all Clemencie: And likewise by let∣ters sent to Rome, he signified that no end of warre was to be expected, so long as Suetonius remained Ge∣nerall, attributing euerie aduerse lucke to his intolle∣rable pride, and euery prosperous successe onely to the good fortunes of Caesar and State of Rome. These Great mens dissensions awaked Nero, fearing left the Britaines, thereby would be more forward to ad∣uantage, with whom experience had shewed there Tranquillus in vit. Nero. Sect. 40. was no dallying, and his former losses among them be∣ing againe recouered, he thought himselfe discharged and quit from all fatall Calamities, as Tranquillus doth Polycletus sent to reconcile Classi∣cianus and Sue∣tonius. affirme. Therefore he sent Polycletus, one of his freed seruitors, with Commission to examine the differences, and to interpose his authoritie to worke a reconciliation: at whose greatnes it was also thought that the Bri∣taines would haue quaked, and come in vnder feare. Which thing fell out otherwise: for howsoeuer the Captaine and Souldiers regarded him for his place, vn∣to whom he shewed himselfe both arrogant and terri∣ble, yet the Britaines made him but their laughing stocke, as being themselues borne free, and knew not Liberti or Free∣men, were such, as being first bond slaues, by their seruice ob∣tained freedome, and many of them about the Emperor came to be of great sway. Suetonius deliue∣reth vp his charge. Petronius his dis∣position. what the power of freed-men was, much admi∣red that such Commanders and Armies which had at∣chieued so great exploites, could be brought to obay, and yeeld account of their actions to so base a bond∣slaue, as they termed him. (24) But Suetonius growne great by his fortunes in these warres, and as it should seeme both suspected and feared of Nero, was by him commanded (the warres yet continuing) to deliuer vp his Armie to Pe∣tronius Turpilianus, who had lately giuen ouer his Con∣sulship in Rome, a man of a softer, and more intreatable condition; and as a stranger to the faults committed be∣fore, readier to receiue to fauour and forgiue: who ha∣uing composed the former troubles, not daring any fur∣ther, neither egged, nor prouoked the Enemie, but gaue himselfe to a quiet, or rather idle life, which hee thought might passe vnder the title of an honourable Petronius Turpili∣anus giueth vp his charge to Trebell. Max. peace. In which estate he gaue vp his charge to Trebel∣lius Maximus, and was after slaine by Galba, nothing obiected against him, but his faithfulnesse to Nero, in that he would not betray him, as the rest had done. Petronius Turpili∣anus slaine, be∣cause true to Ne∣ro. Iulius Vindex op∣poseth Nero. Tacit. histor. in vit. Nero. For Nero now growne Odious to God and Man, Con∣spiracies were continually attempted, though not in act effected, vntill that Iulius Vindex Lieutenant of Gallia opposed his proceeding, being the first stirrer, and the rowling stone that (as Tacitus tearmes it) tum∣bled Nero out of his Seate. (25) For hauing proclaimed Galba Emperour, an Proclaimeth Galba Emperour. old and weake man, at that time Gouernor of Arragon, neither priuie to the conspiracie, nor assenting to the title, he set vp daily many bitter and biting Edicts a∣gainst Nero, wherby he was rowsed from his lasciuious rest, and began to feare the fatall end, whereunto his impious life and bloody raigne had now lastly brought him; who destitute of all power of resistance, did now set his whole hope and refuge, vpon that meanes, to which the compasse of his time had euer pointed; for relying onely vpon his skill in Musique, hee intended Nero seeketh to fly into Eegypt. his flight into Aegypt, there to teach the instructions of that Art: into such sudden basenes was his minde deiected, that formerly had lashed out beyond all measure in luxurie, pride, and prodigalitie. Vnto this conspiracie ioined Virginius Rufus Lieutenant of high Germanie, with Nymphidius, Sabinus, and Sophonius Ti∣gellinus, Captaine of the Guard, who after Vindex his death, (which happened vpon an accident euen in his entrance to Armes) maintained the election of Galba: The Senate send to apprehend him. and the Senate as forward to Neroes destruction, pro∣claimed him Enemie to the State, and pronounced his punishment more maiorum, sending out each way to apprehend him aliue. (26) In this feare Nero attended with foure ser∣uants Nero hid th himselfe. onely, had hid himselfe in a Country Cottage, not passing foure miles from Rome; whence hearing his decreed iudgement, and demanding what was meant by that sentence, it was answered, that his necke should be locked in the forke of a tree, and his bodie He killeth him∣selfe. all naked, whipped to death; whereupon lamenting that so good a Minstrell should be made away, he ran himselfe through on his sword, and so rid the world of a Monster. His lineaments. Suet. in vita Nero. (27) Of stature he was indifferent, his body full of freckles, his haire somewhat yellow, his countenance rather faire then louely, his eies gray and dimme, his necke fatte, his bellie bearing out, and his legges slender and small; A most skilfull Musitian he was, and in His qualities▪ that Art sought to excell others, and to equalize A∣pollo himselfe, as also in his Chariot-riding to imitate the swiftnes of the Sunne. So prodigall in apparell, that he neuer wore one Garment twice, & so sumptu∣ous Ioseph. Bell. Iud. lib. 5. cap. 6. Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 5. in buildings, as is vncredible. He raigned thirteen yeares and eight daies, and died the eight of Iune, in the one and thirtieth of his age, and after the birth of His raigne and age. our Sauiour Christ the threescore and tenth: as Euse∣bius doth account. GALBA. CHAPTER VIII. W Ith the death of this Ty∣rant, ended the progeny Nero the last of the Caesars. of the Caesars, and the Em∣perours succeeding were af∣terwards Suet. in vit. Galb. Sect. 1. elected, either for the opinion of their owne worths, or els, (and that oftner) by the facti∣on and voice of the Souldi∣ers, The maner of choosing the succeeding Em∣perours. whose violence the Se∣nate euer feared to contradict, and whose Colonies in e∣uerie Prouince sought to raise their owne Generall to that high estate. In which time of Combustion, though little be recorded of the British affaires, yet be∣cause the Monarchy of this Iland was then and long af∣ter inuested in the Imperiall dignitie, we may not omit to speake somewhat of the ensuing Emperours, as the chiefe Gouernours of this kingdome. Vpon Neroes declining, diuers there were (as Vindex and Virgini∣us, Nymphidius and Sophonius) set vp against him, but Galba for his reputed integritie got the Garland from them all: who little dreaming of the Imperiall Dia∣deme, fortune set it vpon his head before his hand had Galba got the Empire ere hee looked for it. toucht the same: for Vindex in Gallia hauing procla∣med him Emperour, and himselfe in Arragon not free from Neroes hatred, hee sought rather to hazard his life with the Glorie of a Crowne, then depend vpon his mercie, who had sent secretly the sentence of his death. And therefore mounting the Tribunall, the more to impresse a fresh remembrance of former cruelties, he placed before his throne, the Images of Galba his policie to make Nero o∣dious. certaine Nobles executed by Nero, with some persona∣ges sent for out of exile, whose presence might pro∣uoke a deeper edge of hatred; and his Army about him readie for mutation, these, or the like words he spake. (2) My fellow Souldiers and friends, wee at this time are assembled, to bestow that vpon others, His Oration to his souldiers. which wee our selues haue smally enioied, I meane, libertie from bondage, and freedome from feares of a Tyrant. The life that I haue hitherto lead, will sufficiently discharge me from any aspiring con∣ceit, and my owne Conscience doth witnesse that I speake not vpon malice or priuate respects: It greeueth me to say, but it bootes not to hide, that, which euerie man seeth. Hath euer Bond-man vn∣der a cruell master passed a yeere of harder seruice, then we haue done fourteene vnder Nero? what kind of exaction hath he not proued to supply with extortion, that which with shame hee hath spent? what kinde of crueltie hath he not practised? If we would conceale or seeke to suppresse it, these dumb stones would declare them: For behold, he poi∣soned his Father and brother, abused and slew his owne mother, murdered his wife, his Tutor, and what els so euer valiant or vertuous in Senate, in Ci∣tie, in Prouince, without any difference of Sexe or Age. I neede not to speake of the sorrowful sighes, and bitter teares of so many yong gentlemen bereft of their fathers, so many wiues robbed of their hus∣bands, so many great men depriued of their Coun∣try, all which cry vengeance vpon such a Prince: a Prince? nay an Incendiarie, a Singer, a Fidler, a Stage-plaier, a Cart-driuer, a Cryer; no Prince, nay no man; that hath a man to his husband, and a man Nero described. to his wife, but a monster of mankinde: And in trueth Nero solemnely maried one of his youths cal∣led Doriphorus, and kept him as his wife: so like∣wise did he with Sporus, whom he endeauoured to transforme into a woman. a subiect, vpon whom, vice hath made her full ex∣perience, and raised her triumphs from the base of Caesars throne. Against whom, what Vindex in France hath alreadie intended, I am sure you doe know, and I, for my part, am most sorrie to heare. The whole course of my former life hath beene hitherto remoued from Ambition in Court, or from aiming too high abroad, and this little that remaines of my daies, I could hartily wish were to be spent in more ease: But sith I know not by what my mis∣fortune, some haue imposed vpon me a Part which I neuer meant to sustaine, and least of all at this age, I will not refuse, if you will also approue it, to sa∣crifice this old Carcase of mine for the wealth of my Country, not as Emperour or Augustus (which sacred names I adore afarre off, not daring to approch them) but as—And no further heard, was with great acclamations saluted Emperour. (3) But such is the height of glory, which is raised by the blasts of the multitude, that it fals againe as the Glorie like a Bubble. bubble burst in the swelling, which leaues neither cir∣cle nor signe of his former pride. And so is the state of Galba with one breath applauded, and placed vpon the Imperiall Throne; and that scarce cold, ere they dislike of their owne hastie election: for newes being brought that the State stood firme for Nero, and for certaine that Vindex in his quarrell was slaine, euen in his first enterprise of reuolt; that Virginius was sided by his Germane Legions, and his name inscribed in their banners; that Nymphidius was the man whose deserts could not be sufficiently honoured with lesse recompence then the princely Diademe: These di∣stractions so much ouer-swaied his aged and passio∣nate heart, that he retired to Clunia in great deiection, repenting himselfe of that which hee had done, and wished againe his priuate estate. (4) But the death of Nero commonly diuulged, and Virginius his refusals of the Imperiall Title, gaue strength and life to his former election, now further ratified by the full resolutions of the Armie: who the more to seeme both strong and valorous, though in∣deed a weake, sickly, and silly old man, Souldier-like in his coat of Armes shewed himselfe, and in that ar∣ray passed the vast mountains for Rome. With whose entrance, entred the dislike of his person, as one vn∣fit to support the state of others, that by age and im∣beciliitie was not able to sustaine his owne: to which were added the imperfections of his gouernment, car∣ried euery way farre vnder expectation. And long hee sate not before hee saw his owne defects: to re∣dresse which hee elected Piso Licinianus, Caesar, ioi∣ning Galba chuseth Piso Licinianus for his Caesar. him in power with himselfe, and declaring him his Successor, in a short and blunt Oration, in presence both of the Senate and Souldiers. (5) Whereat howsoeuer others stood affected, yet Martus Saluius. Saluius Otho conspireth Gal∣baes death. Saluius Otho (one, who for commerce in Tacit. hist. 1. leaudnes was very deare to Nero, and whose hope de∣pended vpon the common disturbance, for that his excesse in riot had now brought him to the brinke of beggery) much enuied therat; the rather because him∣selfe had entertained a hope that Galba would haue adopted him, and therefore as his concurrent set his own aspiring mind for the Crown. And euen now this time best fitted his attempts, as being the wane of Galbaes authority, and before the full of Pisoes power; his Astrologers and starre-gazers forwarding him with Astrologers and Starre-gazers. their vaine predictions, a kinde of people euer to Princes vnfaithfull, to hopers deceitfull, and in a com∣mon-wealth alwaies forbidden, yet alwaies retained. The souldiers likewise euer disliking the present, and affecting the new, fell without respect to Othoes side: amongst whom Sulpitius Florus, one of the British Co∣horts, slew Piso the elected Caesar; Galba himselfe being Piso slaine. Galba murdered. murdered and mangled by the Souldiers and band of Horsemen. (6) He was of a good stature; his head bald, his His description. eies gray, and his nose hooked, his hands and feet croo∣ked by reason of the gout, and a bunch of flesh or wen vpon his right side. A great feeder and Sodomite His vices. hee was, seuere in iustice, and ouer-ruled by his ser∣uants. Hee died aged seuenty three yeeres, hauing His age. out-liued fiue Princes. In prosperitie happier vnder the Empire of others, then in his owne; for hee sate only seuen moneths, and them with small contents. And raigne. In his flourishing age with great renowne he had ser∣ued in Germany: Africke he ruled as Proconsul, and the neerer Spaine vprightly and well; seeming more then a priuate man whilest he was priuate, and held capa∣ble of the Empire, had he neuer beene Emperour. THE FIRST PLANTING OF RELIGION IN BRITAINE. CHAPTER IX. T His short time of Galbaes gouernement, with the conspiracies against his Predccessour, admitteth small remembrances of our British affaires: which Prouince (saith Tacitus) Britaine in quiet repose. Tacit. hist. 1. ca. 3. among all other stirres a∣gainst both Nero and Gal∣ba, held amity, and stood in quiet; whether it was the farre distance of place, seuered by Sea from the seditions of the Reuolters; or that by continuall seruice against the Enemie the ma∣lice of their humours were spent, it is vncertaine. Therefore a while to digresse from the Succession of our British Monarkes, and to fill vp the emptinesse of those Times with matters incident to our selues, let it not seeme either tedious or superfluous, to speake of the planting of his Kingdome in this Iland, whose Rule in short time extended to the Ends of the Earth; and whose Ambassadours (as some haue written) a∣bout Christianity sup∣posed to bee brought into in Ne∣ time. Ex Antiq. Ma∣nuscript. Frec lphus , Tom. 2. lib. 2. cap. 4. William o Mal∣mesburie. the midst of Neroes Raigne, and in the yeere of Christs Incarnation sixty three approched for the In∣habitants saluation, Aruiragus then swaying the Scep∣ter of this Kingdome. (2) At which time (say they) were sent certaine Disciples out of France into Britaine by Philip the A∣postle, whereof Ioseph of Arimathea, that buried the body of Christ, was chiefe; who first laid the founda∣tion of our faith in the West parts of this Iland, at the place then called Aualon, (afterwards Inis Witrin, Bale Centur. lib. 1. Harding saith fourteene, cap. 47 Ioseph of Arima∣thea buried at Glastenbury. Gildas in vit. A ∣rel. Ambrosij. now Glastenburie) where he with twelue Disciples his Assistants preached the Gospell of life vnto the Ilan∣ders, and there left their bodies to remaine for a ioi∣full Resurrection. This doth Gildas affirme, and Malmesburie in his Booke of the Antiquitie of Glasten∣burie written to Henry de Bloys, brother to King Ste∣phen, Malmesburie. and Abbat of the same place, report, and is con∣sented vnto (for the matter, though all agree not tou∣ching the time) by the learned Antiquaries of later Cambden. in Brit. Bale, Cent. 1. Matth. Park. Antiq. Eccl. Brit. Polydor. Virg. & aly. times, grounded on the Testimonies of the best ap∣proued Ancient writers: who account the most hap∣py influence of Christianitie, to haue beene by those glorious conduits conuayed into these remote parts of the world: that so (according to the promise of God by Esaiah) The Iles a farre off which had not heard of his fame, should be conuerted, and haue his glorie to them de∣clared Esay 66. 19. among the Gentiles. (3) And if the credit of Dorotheus Bishop of Tyre, Dorotheus in the liues of Saints. (who liued to see the Apostacie of Iulian) weigh any thing with vs, in his tract of the Liues and Deaths of Luk. 6. 15. the Prophets, Apostles, and Disciples, he bringeth Simon Zelot (an Apostle of Iesus Christ) to preach the word, Simon Zelotes martyred in Britaine. Nicephor. lib. 2. cap. 40. Iohn Capgraue. and to suffer Martyrdome on the Crosse here in Bri∣taine: with whom Nicephorus, and after him Iohn Capgraue (in his Catalogue of English Saints) agree, saying that the same Simon spread the Gospell to the west Ocean, and brought the word of life into the Iles of Britaine: and, in the conuersion of Countries wrought by the Apostles, the same Nicephorus, with Nicephor. lib. 3. cap. 1. Egypt and Lybia assigneth Britaine also to be one. And the foresaid Dorotheus, as also Mirmanus, nameth A∣ristobulus one of the seuenty Disciples (the same whom Saint Paul in his Epistle to the Romans among Rom. 16. 10. others saluteth) to haue taught the doctrine of Salua∣tion, and to haue executed the office of a Bishop heere in Britaine. (4) To these first Planters and Sowers of this hea∣uenly Baronius in histor. Eccles. Mary Magdalen, Lazarus, and Martha in England. Seed, Caesar Baronius, that voluminous Histo∣rian, ioineth Mary Magdalen, Lazarus, and Martha, who (by his relation) being banished Ierusalem, in a masterlesse ship without tackling arriued in Gallia, and with them Ioseph of Arimathea, who afterward lan∣ded in Britaine (vt tradunt, as hee saith, out of an old Manuscript which he saw in the Vatican Library:) yea and with them also Eurgain the sister of Ioseph, who Eurgain the sister of Ioseph maried Siarklos a Britain. Georg. Owen in his Pettigrees. afterwards maried a Britaine named Siarklos, if the authoritie whereon George Owen-Harry doth ground that report, be of any credit. (5) But yet there are others, who vpon a very good ground from the words of Gildas (the most an∣cient Gildas de Con∣quest. Brit. of our British Historians) will haue the Sunne of the Gospell long before to haue risen in this our West, and this Iland of Britaine to haue enioied the very morning of his Ascent, the brightnesse thereof piercing thorow the mistie clouds of errour, and shining heere in Britaine euen in the daies of Tiberius, towards whose end Christ suffered his death, and by whose in∣dulgence towards Christians, their profession was propagated farre and neere. Which assertion the said Gildas doth not deliuer coldly or doubtingly, but with great confidence, & relying vpon good grounds, as it appeareth when he saith, Scimus, &c. Wee know for certainty, that this was in the latter times of Tiberius. Which was immediately after our blessed Sauiours Passion. To which vncontroleable testimonie some others haue added (though not perhaps on so vndoubted warrant) that S. Peter the Apostle preached the word of S. Peter the Apo∣stle supposed to haue preached in Britaine. Act. 15. 7. life in this Iland, as to other Gentiles he did, for whom God had chosen him, that from his mouth they might heare the Gospell and beleeue, (as himselfe allegeth) and that hee heere founded Churches, and ordained Priests and Deacons, which is reported by Simon Me∣taphrastes out of the Greeke Antiquities, and Guiliel∣mus Metaphrastes. Eisingrenius in the first of his Centurie, who saith that Peter was here in Neroes time; whereas Baronius Centur. 1. part. 7. dist. 8. thinketh it was in the raigne of Claudius, when the Iewes were banished Rome, and that therefore Paul in his Epistle to the Romans mentioneth him not. Indeed Baronius and some others plead very hotly for S. Pe∣ters preaching heere: but I see not well how it can Baronius. stand either with Eusebius his account, which keepes him so long at Rome after he was Bishop there, or with Eusebius. Onuphrius, who denieth that he went west-ward (be∣ing Onuphrius. expulsed by Claudius) but to Ierusalem, and thence to Antioch, where he liued till the death of Claudius: whence it must follow, that if Peter were heere at all, it was before euer he went to Rome, and that the Gos∣pell was preached heere before it was in Rome, if Peter were the first (as some hold) that preached there: both which may be the more propable, if wee consider the huge multitudes of Christians (fifteene thousand, saith Baronius) which dispersed themselues into all parts of the world vpon the martyring of S. Steuen at Ierusalem, (which was presently vpon the death of Christ) and that Ioseph of Arimathea was one of that number, Baronius doth confesse. I am heere conten∣ted to step ouer that Monkish tale reported by Alure∣dus Riuallensis (the writer of King Edward the Confes∣sors A Monkish tale of S. Peter. life) that a holy man (forsooth) studious and carefull for a Gouernour to succeed, was in his sleepe told by S. Peter that the Kingdome of England was his, wherein himselfe had first preached, and would also prouide him Successours. For s eing it was a dreame, for a dreame wee leaue it, and Peter among the other Elders to attend his Throne, that now sit∣teth Apoc. 4. in glorious Maiestie, and who in this life minded no such earthly preheminence, no not to diuide be∣twixt Luk. 12. 13. brethren, though the Kingdome and rule of all things was his alone. (6) Certes Peter was principally the Apostle of the Circumc , and therefore more likely to haue spent his endeuours on them: but for Paul (the Docter of the Gentiles) his arriuall heere may seeme more war∣rantable, S. Paul preached in Britaine. who doubtlesse (after his first releasement from Rome) confirmed the doctrine of Christ to these Westerne parts of the world, and among them, as may appeare, to this Iland of Britaine, as both Sophronius Sophr. in his Ser∣mon of the nati∣uity of the Apo∣stles. Theodoret. de cu∣randis Graec affectionib , li. 9. Patriarke of Ierusalem, and Theodoret an ancient Do∣ctor of the Church, doe affirme and approoue, saying that Fishers, Publicans, and the Tent-maker (meaning S. Paul) which brought the Euangelicall light vnto all Nations, reuealed the same vnto the Britaines. That Paul came into Illyricum, Gallia, and Spaine, and filled all those parts with his doctrine, both Eusebius, Doro∣theus, Euseb. lib. 3. ca. 1. Doroth. liues of Saints. Epiphan. lib. 1. Tom. 2. Rom. 10. 18. and Epiphanius doe testifie: and of this generall Ambassage the Apostle himselfe saith, that the sound of the Gospell went thorow the earth, and was heard vnto the ends of the world: which his sayings cannot more fitly bee applied to any other Nation then vnto vs of Britaine, whose Land by the Almightie is so placed in the terrestriall globe, that thereby it is termed of the ancient, The Ends of the Earth, and deemed to be situ∣ated . lib. 27. c. 7. Ioseph. bell. Iuda. lib. 2. cap. 16. Tacit. in vit. Agr. Solinus. in another world; for so in an Oration that Agrip∣pa made to the Iewes, and Agricola to his Romans, it is called: which made Solinus write, that the coast of France had beene the End of the Earth, had it not beene for Britaine, which was as another world. And in Dion Dion Cass. lib. 60. we read, that the old Souldiers of Gallia, whom Clau∣dius commanded for Britaine, complained that they must bee inforced to make warre out of the world. And of this Land and latter Apostle (if credit may be giuen to a Poet) Venantius Fortunatus thus recordeth: Transijt Oceanum, & quà facit Insula Porrum, Quas{que} Britannus habet terras, quas{que} vltima Thule. He crost the seas vnto the land, and vtmost coasts of Thule, Ariuing at the Ports and Iles where Britains bare the rule. (7) Thus for Paul: well knowen in Rome by his long imprisonments, and (at that time) in reuerend regard for his doctrine with many there: among whom also there were some Britaines that embraced the faith, whereof Claudia Rufina (remembred by Martial another Poet) was one, whom he thus extols: Claudia caeruleis cùm sit Rufina Britannis Martial. lib. 54. Edita, cur Latiae pectora plebis habet? Quale decus formae? Romanam credere matres Italides possunt, Atthides esse suam. How hath Dame Claudia, borne of Britaines blew, Won fame for wisdome with our sages graue? Her comely forme and learning, as their due, Rome claimes for hers, and hers would Athens haue. This Claudia is by the learned commended to haue Matt . Par . Ar . in A iq. Eccl. Brit . , &c. beene most skilfull in the Greeke and Latine tongues; of whom heare them (not me) speake. At the com∣mandement of the Tyrant Nero (say they from Taci∣tus) many Noble Britaines were brought to Rome, who remaining there their Confederates; they held it an honour to haue their children named after the no∣bilitie of the Romanes: and from Claudius Casar was this Ladie Claudia named, who according to her worth was matched in mariage to Rufus a gentleman of Rome, then a Coronell, after a Senator, a man of a milde disposition, naturally modest, a great Philosopher in the Sect of the Stoickes, for his sweetenesse of beha∣uiour called Pudens, who by his graue perswasions caused Martial (the wittie but wanton Poet) to re∣forme many things in his writings, and by him is cō∣mended for his humanitie, pietie, learning, and elo∣quence: as also his wife Claudia the Britaine, for her beautie, faith, fruitfulnesse, learning, and languages. In proofe whereof, Bale hath mentioned three seuerall ed writings. D . of the of the D ciples. V lib. 1 . 2. Tim. 4. 1. treatises, besides others by her compiled, both in the Greeke and Latine tongues. Dorotheus nameth P dens to be one of the seuentie two, and Volater affir∣meth them both Pauls disciples, from whom he sen∣deth greeting to Ti theus in these words: and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren salute thee. But some may obiect, that Martials Clau∣dia could not be that Ladie, who liuing in Neroes time gaue hospitalitie vnto Peter and Paul at their being in The same Clau∣dia that Paul and Martial speak∣eth of. Rome, for that she could not retaine such beautie and perfection as the Poet to her doth ascribe in the raigne of Domitian, the seuenth in succession from Nero, the time being too long (saith Ado, Bishop of Treuers, Vsuardus and others) for beautie to be so freshly pre∣serued. Now these account her age then to be sixtie; but if we reckon according to Eusebius, wee shall see that hee sets the last of Claudius in the yeare of grace fiftie sixe, and the first of Domitian in eightie three, be∣twixt which, are but twentie seuen yeares, and yet Paul came not to Rome till the tenth of Nero, and in his thirteenth yeare, from the prison wrote his Epistle to Timothie, as the same Eusebius declareth: so that from Euseb. Eccles. hist. lib. 2. cap. 22. hence vnto Domitian, is left but foureteene yeeres, a time no whit vnpossible to retaine Beautie, though twentie yeares and many moe of her age had beene formerly spent; seeing that in those times Plutarch praiseth Alcibiades to be passingly faire when he was Alcibiades his beautie in old age. threescore yeares of age. This Claudia then with Pauls spirituall Manna, is said to send likewise the choisest and chastest of the Claudia sends both Pauls and Martials wri∣tings into Bri∣taine. Poesies of Martial (whose verses generally are no les∣sons befitting Ladies) for new-yeares gifts vnto her friends in Britaine, both for to feede their Soules with the bread of life, and to instruct their mindes with les∣sons best fitting vnto ciuill behauiour; which thing moued the Poet himselfe with no small selfe-glorie in his verse thus to write: Dicitur & nostros cantare Britannia versus. Martial. lib. 7. Epig. 10. And Britaine now (they say) our verses learns to sing. (8) It hath also passed with allowance among the learned Senate of our Antiquaries, that when Claudius & Nero began to banish and persecute the Christians Tacit. Annal. 15. cap. 10. in Rome, (whose superstitions, as Tacitus pleaseth to tearme them, from Iudea had infected the Citie it selfe) many Romanes and Britaines being conuerted to the Faith, fled thence vnto these remote parts of the earth, where they might and did more freely enioy the libertie of their Professions, vntill the search of Tyrants by the flame-light of Persecutions, had found out all secret places for the safeties and assemblies of Gods Saints: as after in the daies of Dioclesian we shall finde. And from this Sanctuarie of Saluation the sad lamenting Lady * Pomponia Graecina, the wife of Aulus Plautius (the first Lord Lieutenant of Britaine) brought Aulus Plautius his wife became a Christian in Britaine. that Religion, whereof she was accused and stood in∣dited vpon life and death, which was none other, then the Christian Profession, seeing the same both by Tacitus and Suetonius, is euerie where termed the Tacit. Annal. l. 13. 7. & lib. 15. 10. Suetonius in vita Nero. Sect. 16. strange superstitions and new kinde of Sect that the Christians imbraced, and for which they were accoun∣ted vnworthy to liue. (9) And much about these times (as Beatus Rhe∣nanus in his Historie of Germanie, Pantaleon and others B. Rhenan. in his Hist. of Germany. Pantaleon. doe report) one Suetonius a Noble mans sonne in Britaine conuerted to the Faith by the first Planters of the Gospell in this Iland, and after his Baptisme called Beatus, was sent by the Brethren from hence vnto Rome, to be better instructed, and further directed by Saint Peter himselfe; and returning thorow Switzer∣land, found such willingnesse and flocking of the peo∣ple to heare and receiue the Doctrine of Christ, that he there staied and built an Oratorie not farre from the lake Thun, and neare the Towne called Vnderfewen, wherein preaching and praiers he imploied his time to the day of his death, which happened in the yeare of grace 110. And that there were Christians in Britain at these times I make no questiō, thogh some exceptions may Holinshed de∣script. Brit. cap. 9. be taken against the Monk of Burton the reporter ther∣of, who saith in the 141 yeare and raigne of Hadri∣an, nine masters of Grantcester were baptized themselues & preached to others the Gospell in Britain; howsoeuer he faileth in the Emperours name, which yeare was the second of Antonins Pius his successor, and ascribeth to these men Schoole-degrees, altogether vnknowne for nine hundred yeares after, yet these do not hinder the truth of the thing, though that Monke was none of the best Historians. It is reported also that Patricke the Irish Apostle, and Canonized Saint, long before the Patrick the Irish Apostle preach∣ed in Wales. Raigne of King Lucius preached the Gospell in many places of Wales; As also that Ninianus Bernicius of the race of the British Princes conuerted the Picts to the Religion of Christ. Vnto these aforesaid authorities and testimonies howsoeuer we stand affected: yet it is certaine by Chemnitius citing Sabellicus, that the Britaines were with the first Conuerts: And Tertullian, Chemnitius (in ex∣amin. Co il. Triden.) ex Sabel∣lic . who liued within two hundred yeares of Christs Na∣tiuitie, sheweth no lesse: Who the more to prouoke the Iewes against whom he wrote, calleth to witnesse the fruitfull increase of the Gospell of Saluation, through many Countries and Nations, and among them na∣meth the Britaines to haue receiued the Word of life, Tertullian. cont. Iud s cap. 7. the power whereof (saith he) hath pierced into those parts whither the Romanes could not come. Whence Petrus Cluniacensis supposeth the Scotish men the more ancient Christians, as not being in the like subiection to Petrus Cluni. ad Bernard. the Romanes, as other then were. (10) Origen, who flourished not much aboue two hundred yeares after Christ, in his Homilies vpon E∣zechiel sheweth, that the first fruits of Gods haruest was Origen. in Eze. ∣mil. 4. gathered in the Iland of Britaine: who consented to the Christian faith by the doctrine of their Druides: that taught one onely God: with whom Hector Boetius agreeth, saying, that some of these Druides condem∣ned Hector Boet. Chro. Scot lib. 2. The Druides al∣lowed not Ima∣ges nor any visi∣ble forme of the God-head. the worship of God in Images, and allowed not the applicatiō of the God-head vnto any visible forme: which might be the cause why Claudius the Emperour forbad their Religion, as sauouring in these things too much of Christianitie, whom likewise he banished Rome, as some from Suetonius coniecture. Of these Suetonius in vita Claud. Sect. 25. Druides wee shewed before, that their offices were most imploied about holy things, and that their doctrine chiefly consisted in teaching the immortalitie of the Tacit. Annal. l. 14. cap. 10. Casar. Com. lib. . soule, the motions of the heauens, the nature of things, and the power of the Gods: yea and Postellus from others will inforce, that they prophecied likewise of a virgins Postellus. conception. These were the helps, saith Tertullian, that caused the Britaines so soone to imbrace the Doctrine of Christ, and thereupon immediately after his death doth Gyldas fasten our conuersion, where he writeth, That the Glorious Gospell of Iesus Christ, which first ap∣peared to the world in the later time of Tiberius Caesar, did Gyldas de Exci∣di Brit. euen then spread his bright beames vpon this frosen Iland of Britaine. (11) Whereby wee see the waters of life, flowing from Ierusalems Temple, into these farre set Coun∣tries and vttermost Seas, to be made both fruitfull & Ezech. 47. 8. wholesome, according to the sayings of the Prophet, that in that day the waters of life should issue from Ierusa∣lem, halfe of them toward the East Sea, and halfe of them towards the vttermost Sea, and shall remaine fruitfull Zachar. 14. 8. both in Sommer and winter: and euen in the infan∣cie of Christianitie, both the Apostles themselues, and also the Proselytes their Disciples to become fishers therein for the Soules of Men, as Christ in chusing of them said they should bee; whereby his Kingdome Matt. 4. 19. was soone enlarged vnto these Ends of the Earth, and Psal. 2. 8. his Throne established among those Heathen, whom God his Father had giuen to be his. So fruitfull and famous was this spreading of the Gospell, that Baptista Mantuan, a Christian Poet, compares the increase thereof with that of Noah, thus alluding vnto it: Sicut aquis quondam Noe sua misit in orbem Pignora sedatis, vt Gens humana per omnes Baptist. Mant. Debita Coelituum Patri daret orgia terras; Sic sua cùm vellet Deus alta in regna renerti, Discipulos quosdam transmisit ad Vltima Mundi Littora, doct ros Gentes quo numina ritu Sint oranda, quibus Coel placabile Sacris. In English thus: As Noah sent from the Arke his sonnes, to teach The Lawes of God vnto the World a right; So Christ his Seruants sent abroad to preach The Word of Life, and Gospell to each Wight: No place lay shadowed from that glorious Light: The farthest Iles, and Earths remotest bounds, Embrac'd their Faith, and ioi'd at their sweet sounds. (12) To which effect also the sayings of S. Iohn Chrysostome, Bishop of Constantinople, enforce, who Chrysost. in Serm. de Pe cost. shewing the increase of Christianitie, and the successe of the Gospell preached, sheweth the power thereof to haue extended, not only to the Countries farre ia∣cent in the Continent, but also to the Ilands situated in the Ocean it selfe, and amongst them expresly na∣meth this our Britaine; whose Inhabitants (saith hee) haue also consented to the word which is planted in euery heart, in honour whereof they haue erected their Temples and Altars. And againe: Those Britaines (saith hee) which had formerly fed vpon humane flesh, making no difference betwixt the blood of man and beast, now through the power of the word by them embraced, haue learned the law of true pietie, and giue themselues to a religious abstinence, and holy fasts. Of which Bar∣barisme S. Ierome also complained, that some of those Aduers. Ioui . li. 2 Nations vsed to eat the buttocks of boies, and Paps of Virgins, which in their Feasts were serued for the daintiest dishes. But elsewhere speaking of the Bri∣taines conuersion, he saith, that they had turned them∣selues Epitaph. Mar∣cellae Viduae. from their westerne Paganisme, and now had di e∣cted their faces towards Ierusalem in the East, whose beau∣tie shined in the word of God. (13) And thus wee see by the planting of the Go∣spell in this Iland, the saying of the Psalmist accompli∣shed, that God would giue his sonne Christ the Heathen Psal. 2. 8. for his inheritance, and the Ends of the Earth (the proper attribute of this our Britaine) to be his possession. And the successe in Historie most apparantly sheweth these parts (by an especiall prerogatiue) to bee Christs King∣dome. For albeit that Ierusalem and Antioch may right∣lie Act. 11. 26. claime the precedencie of all other places, the one being as it were the chamber where Christians were first borne, and the other the font where they were first Christened with that most sacred name: yet britaine in some other graces hath outstript them all, hauing the glory to be graced with the first Christian King that Britaine had the first Christian King. Ex Archi . Ciuit. London. euer raigned in the world, which was our renowned Lucius, the first fruits of all the Kings that euer laid their Crownes at the foot of our Sauiours Crosse: as also for producing the first Christian Emperour that Britaine had the first Christian Emperour. euer by publike authoritie established the Gospell tho∣row the world, which was Constantine the Great, borne and brought vp heere in Britaine by Queene Helena, a most vertuous and religious British Lady: Helena mother of Constantine a Britaine. vnto whose daies the succession of Christianitie did heere continue, as by the martyrdomes of many Saints vnder Dioclesian is apparant. Heerein also raig∣ned the King that first vncrowned the head of the vsur∣ping King Henry the Eighth the first that quailed the Pope. Apoc. 9. 2. King. 18. 4. Gen. 26. 18. Beast, and triple-headed Cerberus, and freed the Land from his deuouring Locusts: putting downe Ido∣latrie with Hezekiah that brake the Brasen Serpent: and with Isaack new digged the Wels that those Philistines had stopped. And lastly hath this Iland produced that most royall and Christian Monarke, whose learned pen hath first depainted Antichrist, and pierced the heart King Iames. of all Papall Supremacie, as the sword of Gedeon did Zalmunna ( For so the word Zalmunna signifi∣eth, Iudg. 7. 20. the Image of trouble) King of Madia . And as a Lion hath he met that crooked Isa. 27. 1. Serpent in the way of his vsurped authoritie; whereby in short time vndoubtedly the Hos. 13. 8. Kall of his heart will be bro∣ken, if other Potentates likewise by his most godly ex∣ample, cast off the yoke of vassallage, and in their se∣uerall Dominions gouerne (as free Princes ought) the people that GOD hath committed to their charge. So that in those and many other the like Princes of this happy Iland, most properly is performed that propheticall promise made vnto the Church of Christ: that Kings should become her nursing Fathers, and Queenes should be her nursing Mothers: Of both which may be Isa. 49. 23. truly said to Britaine, in imitation of that of Salomon; Many kingdomes haue done gloriously, but thou hast sur∣mounted them all. Pro. 31. 29. (14) And of such power hath Christ beene in these His Possessions, that euen the Hostile Kings and Conquerours thereof, were they neuer so sauage and I∣dolatrous Britaine conu ∣ted her Conq ∣rors to the faith of Christ. at their first entrance, yet when they here had seated for a time they became milde and religi∣ous, and gladly submitted their hearts to the Religion of those, whose necks themselues held vnder the yoke of subiection. (15) Such were the Romans in this Iland, whose Ho . c. 9. Deputies at the day-spring almost of Christianitie were conuerted; as Trebellius, Pertinax, and others, which submitted themselues to that profession, and were motiues to King Lucius more publikely to maintaine the same: as also Constantius the father of great Con∣stantine, that here in Britaine permitted the profession of the Gospell, with the erections of Churches for the true seruice of God, and prohibited the superstitious worships of the Gentiles. (16) The Saxons after them (in time, but not in Idolatrie) had neuer tasted the liuing waters of Siloh, till they were here seated in Christs Possession, where they changed their affections as farre from their won∣ted manners, as did the Messengers to Iehu, which tur∣ned after his Chariot to destroy the Altars of Baal: or 2. King. 9. 18. as Saul and his seruants, who no sooner had entred Naioth in Ramah, but that their spirits were ioined to the Prophets, and the heat of their furie, with their 1. Sam. 19. 20. garments, cast downe at Samuels feet. (17) The Danes likewise, their Conquerours, and Successors in this Royall Throne, euer vntill then were both bloudy and barbarous, and therefore of all our Writers commonly called the Pagan Danes; whose ma∣ny desolations and ruines remaine as records of their cruelties in many places euen vnto this day: yet being a while in this Land, King Guthurn, with thirtie of his chiefe Princes and people, were drawen by the va∣lour Or and vertue of King Alured to receiue the Christian Faith, by whose bounty thereupon they enioied the possession of a faire portion of this Kingdome. And afterward Canutus, their greatest King, no sooner al∣most had this Imperiall Diademe set vpon his head, but that hee held it his chiefe Maiestie to be the vassall of Christ, confessing him only to be King of Kings: and with such religious deuotion as then was taught, crowned the Crucifix at Winchester with the Crowne C crow d the Crucifix with the Crowne hee wore. H . . lib. . P chr. li. . c. 20. . li. 1. Acts and Mo . lib. 3. p. . he wore: and neuer after, thorow all his raigne, by any meanes would weare the same: and the Danes his Souldiers remaining in England, began by little and little to embrace Christianity, and in short time were al conuerted to the Faith. Thus then we see the happie increase of these holy seeds springing from the fur∣rowes of this blessed ground: and the Tents of Se to be spread vpon the Mountaines of Britaine, wherein God (according to his promise) perswaded vs who Gen. . 27. Orig vpon , . . are of Iapheth, to dwell. (18) As hitherto we haue searched the first foun∣dation of our Faith, so neither want wee testimonies concerning the continuance of the same in this Land vnto following Posterities; although the iniurie of Time and Warre haue consumed many Records. For the Britaines that were daily strengthned in their re∣ceiued faith, by the Doctrine of many learned and godly men, left not their first loue with the Church Apoc. 2. 4. of Ephesus, but rather tooke hold of their skirts, as the Prophet speaketh, vntill the tortures of Martyrdome Zecha. 8. 23. cut them off by death: And those Fathers euen from the Disciples themselues, held a succession in Doctrine, (notwithstanding some repugnancie was made by . . the Pagans) and preached the Gospell with good suc∣cesse, . euen till the same at length went forth with a b lder countenance, by the fauourable Edicts of A∣drian, useb. . 4 c. . &c. 13. & lib. . cap. 5. Antonius Pius, and Marcus Aurelius Emperors of Rome (as Eusebius hath noted:) and in Britaine was established by the authoritie of Lucius their King: whereby this was the first of all the Prouinces (saith . . . lib. 5. . . . Marcus Sabellicus) that receiued the Faith by pub∣like ordinance: Of the te chers of those times Bale from some other hath these verses. Sicut erat celebris cultu numero{que} Deorum Cum Iouis imperium staret, Britannica tellus: Sic vbi terrestres caelo descendit ad or as Expectata salus, patribus fuit inclyta sanctis. Qui Neptunicolûm campos, & Cambrica rura, Coryneas{que} casas, locadesolata, colebant. As were the Britaines famous for their zeale To Gentle Gods, whiles such they did adore▪ So, when the Heau'ns to Earth did Truth reueale, Bless'd was that Land with Truth and Learnings store: Whence British Plaines, and Cambri as desert ground, And Cornewalls Crags, with glorious Saints abound. In which number were Eluanus & Meduinus, those Floren. Wigorn. Two learned Di∣uines sent to the Bishop of Rome. two learned Diuines, which were sent by King Lucius vnto Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, with whom retur∣ned two other famous Clerkes, whose names were Faganus and Damianus; these together, both preach∣ed Alij Fagatius vel Fagatius & Di∣uines. and baptized amongst the Britaines, whereby ma∣ny dailie were drawne to the Faith: And, as a wor∣thy and ancient Dicetus Deane of London: a Ma∣nuscript in the Kings Libratie, ad n. 178. Historian saith: The Temples which had beene founded to the Honour of their many Gods, were then dedicated to the one and onely true God: For there were in Britaine eight and twentie Flamins, and three Arch-flamins, in stead of which, so many Bishops and Arch∣bishops were appointed: vnder the Archbishop of London were the Prouinces of Loegria and Cornubia: vnder Yorke, Deira, and Albania: vnder Vrbs Legionum, Cambria: By which meanes, this happy Kingdome vn∣der Saint Dauids in Wales. that godly King, was nobly beautified with so many Cathedrall Churches, and Christian Bishops Sees, before any other kingdome of the world. That this Lucius should be the Apostle to the Baua∣rians, or that his sister Emerita was crowned with the King Lutius the Apostle to the Banarians. Aegidius Scudus de Prisca Rhaetia. Hermanus Sche∣delius, cap. 3. flames of Martyrdome fifteene yeares after his death, I leaue to the credit of Aegidius Scudus, and Herma∣nus Schedelius the reporters, and to the best liking of the readers. But most certaine it is, that the Christian faith was still professed in this Iland, sound and vndefi∣led, as Beda witnesseth; notwithstanding the cruel per∣secutions Beda. Hist. nglic lib. 1. cap. 4. of the bloody Emperours. 19 For, all this time (saith the said Dicetus) Christi∣an Religiō flourished quietly in Britanny, til in Diocle∣sians Dicetus ad annum 287. time, their Churches were demolished, their ho∣ly Bibles castinto Bone-fires, the Priests with their faithfull flocke bloodily murdered. In which num∣ber, about the yeare two hundred ninetie three, as we read (in Beda, Malmesburie, Randulphus, and others) Albane with his teacher Amphibalus were both of them martyred for the profession of the Gospell at the old Malmesburie. Randulphus. Towne Verolanium: as also in Leicester, those two Noble Citizens, Aaron, and Iulius, with multitudes both of men and women in sundrie places (saith Beda) as shortly after no lesse then a Thousand Saints suffered Beda lib. 1. ca. 7. At Liechfield 1000 Saints suf∣fered death. Matth. 27. Liechfields Armes. death at Liechfield, wherupon the place was called ano∣ther Golgotha, or field of blood: In memorie whereof, the Citie beareth for Armes to this day, in an Eschu∣cheon of Landskip, sundry persons diuersly Marty∣red. And yet after these times also the Britaines con∣tinued constant in Christianity, and the censures of their Bishops (for the great estimation of their Con∣stancie, pietie, and learning) required, and approued in great points of Doctrine among the assemblies of some Generall Councels; as that of Sardis and Nice, in the time of great Constantine (the first Christian Empe∣rour, and this our Country man, whose blessed daies gaue free way to that Profession, to the Councels Au∣thoritie, and to the whole world Peace) had wee our Bishops present; whose forwardnes against the Arrian Heresie, afterwards Athanasius aduanceth in his Apo∣logy The Bishops of Britaine with∣stood the Arrian Heresie. vnto Iouinian the Emperor, among three hundred Bishops assembled at the Councell of Sardice, in Anno three hundred and fiftie: whose words (as Nicephorus reports them) are these. Know most Christian Empe∣rour Nicephorus Eccle∣siast. Hist. Athanasius Apo∣lo. 2. (saith he) that this faith hath beene alwaies preach∣ed and professed, and that all Churches of Spaine, Britain, France and Germany at this day with one voice doe ap∣prooue the same. As also at that of Ariminum, in the yeare three hundred fiftie nine, and in the raigne of Constantius, who caused foure hundred westerne Bi∣shops to be there sommoned in fauour of the Arrians, whereof three were out of Britaine, (as Sulpitius Seue∣rus the good Bishop of Burges hath reported) that Sulpitius Seuerus, lib. 2. gaue their suffrages against that Heresie. These doth Hilarie tearme the Bishops of the Prouinces of Bri∣taine, Hilarie in an E∣pist. to the Bi∣shops. by whom they were somewhat derided, because beeing farre from their owne Countrie they liued v∣pon the Emperours charge. And Beda testifieth, that from Dioclesians time they both reedified their for∣mer Temples, and founded new also in memorie of Bed. lib. 1. cap. 8. their then fresh-bleeding Martyrs, and enioyed a ge∣nerall and ioifull peace in their religious profession, till that Arrian Heresic hauing first filled the Conti∣nent, sought and found passage ouer the Seas into our Iland. Gennadius in his Catalogues Illustrium Diuorum Gennadius in Ca∣tal. Illus. Diu. tels vs of an other learned Bishop of Britaine, Fastidi∣us; who in the time of Cestius Bishop of Rome, wrote vnto one Fatalis a booke devita Christians, and ano∣ther de viduitate seruanda; of much diuine learning and comfort. Chrysanthus likewise is recorded by Ni∣cephorus, to be sonne of Bishop Martian, who hauing Nicephorus in Ec∣cles. Hist. beene a Consular Deputie in Italie vnder Theodosius, and made Lieutenant of Britaine, where with great praise he managed the common wealth, was against his will afterward made Bishop at Constantinople of the Noua∣tians, that called themselues Cathari, that is, pure, ma∣king a schisme in the Church by their deniall of Sal∣uation, to such as fell into relapse of sinne after Bap∣tisme once receiued. This is that Bishop of whom we read, that of all his Ecclesiasticall reuenewes he reserued only for himselfe two loaues of bread vpon the Lords Tripart. Histor. day. And in the first Tome of Councels is mention of Restitutus Bishop of London, whom (because that, as is most probable, Christian Religion had in those pri∣mitiue times taken more firme footing in Britaine then in France) the French Bishops called to their Na∣tionall Councell, the second at Arles, in Anno three hun∣dred thirty fiue, that he might with his Suffrage ap∣prooue their Decrees. About the yeere foure hundred seuenty, was a Prouinciall Councell held in Britaine for the reforming of Religion, and repairing of the ruined Churches, which the Pagan mariage of Vortiger had decaied, to the great griefe and discontent of the peo∣ple, a pregnant signe of the continuing zeale, which vnto those daies had left a glorious memorie. (20) And the Ensigne of Arthur, wherein the Arthurs Ensigne. Vincentius in his specul Historiali. Virgin with her sonne in her armes (as is noted by Vin∣centius) was portraied, so often displaied for Christ, and his Countries libertie, against the Pagan Saxons, is as a seale to confirme vs of their Profession, and doth shew the badge of that ages Christianitie. But the fa∣mous Monasterie of Banchor, as a College of diuine Phi∣losophers, and by Clariuallensis truly acknowledged to be the Mother of all other in the world, and her Monkes Clariuallensis. Bangor in Wales the first Mona∣sterie in the world. Bed. Hist. Eccles. l. 2. 6. 2. distributed into seuen seuerall parts, euery part num∣bring three hundred soules, and earning their bread by their daily labours, doth notably witnesse to all succeeding ages, that Christian Religion was then both planted and preached in this Iland. And in the Synod held at Austins Oake were seuen old Britaine Bishops, besides other Doctours, who met with that Romane Legate, and not in points of doctrine, but rather in their seuerall rites and ceremonies did varie, by any thing that in that Assemblie appeared. For as it is most vndoubted, that (if we speake properly) Ierusa∣lem is the Mother of vs all, and of all Churches; and our Beda lib. 2. cap. 2. former allegations doe euince, that the first Planta∣tion of the British Faith was altogether by Iewes and others of the Easterne Church: so the very rites of this Religious College of Banchor do euidently proue, that their first institution in Religion came from the East, Beda shewing that in all of them they dissented from the Romane Church; yea, and that they neuer did, nor then would acknowledge any authoritie of the Bi∣shop of Rome ouer them in matters of the Church and ser∣uice of God. All which accordeth right well with that before cited out of Zachary, that the waters of life should issue from Ierusalem. And S. Hierome, who spake most properly, in saying, the Britaines leauing Paganisme, had turned their faces to Ierusalem in the East. The foundation of the said College is ascribed to King Lucius, from whose time vnto the entrance of this Austin the Monke, foure hundred thirty eight yeeres were expired: in all which space we haue seene that the Christian Faith was both taught and embraced in this Iland, notwithstanding the continuall persecu∣tions of the Romans, Huns, Picts, and Saxons: which last made such desolations in the outward face of the Church, that they droue the Christian Bishops into the The Bishops of Yorke and London driuen into the Deserts. Acts and Monu∣ments, lib. 2. Heb. 11. 25. deserts of Cornwall and Wales. In which number were Theomis and Thadioceus Bishops of London and Yorke, chusing rather to suffer aduersitie with the people of God, then to enioy the pleasures of sinne for a season. By whose labours the Gospell was plentifully propa∣gated among those vast mountaines, and those parts especially aboue all other made very glorious, by the multitudes of their holy Saints and learned Tea∣chers. (21) Lastly, (for the close of all) that these testi∣monies are sincerely by vs produced, for the first preaching and planting of the Gospell, and by such meanes and men as we haue declared, and particular∣lie by Ioseph of Arimathca and his associates, the con∣sent of all Writers, both forraine and home-bred, doth sufficiently approoue: and the reuerend regard had of the place, with the many Charters thereof to this day remaining, are strong inducements for those our first Apostles Residencies and Burials: whereof one, exemplified vnder the Seale of King Edward the third, is to be seene at this day, reciting that the Abbey of Glastenburie being burned in the time of King Henrie Glastenbury Ab∣bey burnt. the second while it was in his hands, at the request of the Patriarke of Ierusalem (then present in England) in∣stigated further both by the Bishops and Nobilitic, hee did reedifie the same, causing diligent search to bee Glastenburie Ab∣bey new built by Henry the second made for the ancient Charters of that foundation, and among many recited in that exemplification, in one of them it is called, Origo Religionis in Anglia: in ano∣ther, Tumulum Sanctorum, ab ipsis discipulis Domini aedi∣ficatum, fuisse venerabilem. Also in the same Charter amongst many other Kings, there is mention made of King Arthur, to be a great Benefactor vnto that Ab∣bey; King Arthur a great benefactor to Glastenburie Abbey. The Armes of King Arthur at Glastenburie. whose Armes vpon the stone walles, both in the Chapell (called S. Ioseph) and in diuers other places of the Abbey, are cut: which is an Eschucheon, whereon a Crosse with the Virgin Mary in the first quarter is set, and is yet to this day remaining ouer the Gate of en∣trance, and is held to be also the Armes of that Abbey. This place is said to haue beene giuen to Ioseph and Glastenburie Ab∣bey giuen to Io∣seph by Two diuines ent by to Rome from Gla∣stenburie. W lles called Belga. his brethren, by Aruiragus then King of Britaine: and from hence were those two diuine Doctors sent to E∣lutherius by King Lucius, as by their Epithetes doth appeare: the one of them called Eluanus Aualonius, or of Glastenburie; and the other, Meduuinus of Belga, that is, Welles, neere vnto this place. And to these per∣sons and place, Polydore Virgil, that dwelled among vs, Angl. hist. lib. 2. and had perused most of our Antiquities, ascribeth the originall and precedencie of our Christian Faith, in these words: Haec omnia Christianae pietatis in Britannia extitêre primordia, quam deinde Lucius Rex accendit & adauxit, &c. And our other latter Writers likewise with him agree of this place, further affirming, that at first but poore, and without all pompe, it was their Oratorie, built only of wrethen wands, as both In his catalogue of Saints. Cap∣graue, V ta. lib. 1. Bale, In his preface. Maior, De Antiq. ar. cap. 7. Scroope, Chap. 47. Harding, Thorne. Thorne, and others affirme: Afterwards by diuers Princes raised vnto greater glory, with many large priuileges & Char∣ters granted; to wi , of , , , , Many to . , , the Con∣querour, Rufus, and others: all which were diligently perused by King Henry the second, as we haue said, & that Rectorie in these Charters continually termed The Graue of Saints: The mother Church: he Disciples foundation, and dedicated vnto Christ, as the first place in this Land wherein hi Gospell was fi st preached and em∣braced. (22) To conclude this digresson, growen much greater then was intended, we see it is most apparant, that the Britaines had a settled opinion in , proses∣sed Christianity ore it came Ro . Esay 49. 22. Dan. 11. 31. Micah 4. 8. Esay 2. before the sound thereof was heard from me; and that the Lord had heere set vp his Standard, whereun∣to these Ilanders resorted as to the Tower of their strength, and was the first Kingdome of the Gentiles, that are said to bring their sonnes thus in their armes, and their daughters thus vpon their shoulders, vnto the Lords Sanctuarie: whose knowledge continually in∣creasing, hath hitherto, to Englands great ioy and fame, beene still continued, though the spirituall sparkes thereof for a season haue sometimes beene couered in the cinders of the Pagans desolations, or with the superstitious worships of mans inuentions; both which now dispersed as clouds before the Sunne, the light appeareth in his full strength, and the most pure waters of the word run vntroubled. This Iland then, in this thing made happy before the most, the Inhabitants became Instructers of others, and in their earthly vessels bare this heauenly liquor, which thorow their golden Conduits ran into many other Countries, and filled their Cesternes with this water of life. For from hence was Netherland conuerted to Christiani∣tie, as testifieth the story of Swithbertus: Burgundie by Swithbertus. our Columbanus, saith Sigebert: Scotland by Brandanus, Sig bert. as Bernard the French Monke affirmeth: Swedia by Bernard. Petrus de Nata∣libus. Matthew of Westminster. The Britaines con erted ma∣ny Countries. Gallus, as saith Petrus de Natalibus: and Frisia by Wilfred, as is recorded by Beda and Matthew of Westminster: the Franconians, Hessians, and Thuringians, by Winifred our Deuonshire man: the Norwegians by Nicolas Brekspere of Middlesex: and the Lithuanians by Thomas Walden of Essex. Againe, if we shall cast our eie on all the Reformed Churches in Christendome, and with them on Luther, Husse, and Prage, they will all confesse, they first deriued their light from the learned Wickleffe of Oxford; the Lampe of whose sacred knowledge hath il∣lumined not onely all the corners of this Kingdome, but also all those forraine States, whom it hath pleased God to deliuer from the thraldome and vengeance of Babylon: so that with the German Poet, to Gods glorie, and Britaines praise, the English thus may sing: Quin se Relligio multùm debere Britannis Seruata, & latè circùm dispersa, fatetur. Religion doth confesse, to Britaine deepe she stands In debt, by whom preseru'd, she now fils forraine Lands. In which regard, Polydore Virgil doth rightly call Polydor. Virgil. England the Parent or Mother-Monasterie of all Eu∣rope. As likewise Peter Ramus termeth Britaine to bee Peter . twice Schoole-mistresse vnto the Kingdome of France. Annals of Flanders. And the Annals of Flanders testifie, that no Nation had so many Diuine Nobles (they might likewise haue said, so many Noble Diuines) as England hath had; nei∣ther any more bountifull to Gods Saints. Our Kings for sanctitie ranked before all other Potentates of the earth, as Vincentius recordeth: Our Nobles truly ho∣nourable, . and the sonnes of Princes: Our Diuines and Eccles. 10. 17. Ier. Lam. 4. 7. renowned Nurseries of learning and Religion, shining like the two greater lights in our British firmament. And all of vs claiming our spirituall lots of I ritance Ezech. 47. 22. in the midst of the Tribes of Israel. OTHO. CHAPTER X. B Vt leauing Christs procee∣dings Ann. Do. 70. to the dispose of himselfe, let vs returne to the subiect from whence wee haue wandered, and continue the successions of Great Britaines Mo∣narchs, vnto them that haue held it, whether by chance of warre, or voice of Election: In which sort (as is said) Galba got it, and but short time kept it: And from him Otho tooke it, and a shorter time enioied it. (2) Whose Originall (saith Tacitus) was from Otho his original. Tacit. Hist. 2. cap. 17. Ferrentium, his Father a Consull, his mothers blood somewhat disparaged, but yet not base; his youth run ouer with voluptuous wantonnesse and prodigall ex∣pences, more ready for disturbances, then depending vpon preferment or dignitie of State; and hauing gone thorough all his wealth, retained onely the hear∣tie affections of the Souldiers, which Galba had vtterly alienated. Neither did Otho himselfe bandy against Galba, but Vitellius in Germanie was fauoured against Vitellius much fauoured. both; Two persons so vile and ambitious, as was much feared, would proue the scourge of the Empire, and the ruine of Rome. (3) Vnto Vitellius sided the Britaines, vnder the Conduct of Tribellius Maximus, (remembred before) a man vnfit for warre, and vnexperienced of seruice, compounded altogether of couetousnesse, and for his niggardly sparings, and vnmercifull pollings, exceed∣ingly hated of his Armie: which was further aggra∣uated by Roscius Calius, Lieutenant of the twentieth In chap. 7. sect. 24. Legion, his ancient Enemie, betwixt whom the sparks of enuie shortly burst forth into flames of recipro∣call accusations. Trebellius being charged of insuffi∣ciencie for command, with the beggering of the Pro∣uince, Roscius Calius & Trebellius accuse each other. and Legions; and he againe accusing Calius of factious behauiours, & dissoluing of discipline: through which dissensions a negligent regard was held of the Souldiers, who carried themselues arrogantly, euen a∣gainst both; and as men that had rather be doing ill, The Souldiers thereby disorde∣red. then doing nothing, grew daily into mutinies. In these stirres Maximus finding himself vnable to with∣stand Roscius, (the common affection swaying on his side) with his friends and followers entred Germanie in the quarrell of Vitellius, and ioined those British forces to maintaine his cause, who now presuming vpon his owne strength, and others his Confederates, ambitiously plaied the Prince, growne to that height euen of nothing. (4) Otho his Concurrent (in this thing only com∣mendable) sought by all meanes to stay the effusion of more ciuill blood, and that alreadie spent, so pos∣sest his thoughts, that his minde was still distracted and nightly affrighted with the seeming appearance Otho affrighted in the night. of Galbaes ghost: for which causes hee sent conditi∣ons of peace to Vitellius, offering him an equall part Sueton. in vita O∣tho. sect. 7. His offer to Vi∣tellius. in the Empire, and to giue him also his daughter in mariage. But Vitellius disdaining any competition, refuseth all Capitulations, and prepares himselfe for the warre. Otho thus constrained, sets forth his forces, and in three seuerall skirmishes had the victo∣rie, Hath the victory in three skirmi∣shes. Lost the day in the fourth. but in the fourth at Brixellum lost the daie; yet not so much weakned or vnrecouerable, (his Ar∣mie in number and courage surmounting the o∣ther) as himselfe was vnwilling to trie the chance of warre any more; for beeing importuned by his Captaines and Leaders, to reenforce the Battaile, with Importuned by his Souldiers to renew the bat∣tell, is vnwilling. many reasons, and probabilities of an assured victo∣rie, in a thankfull and short Oration, answered thus their Petitions. (5) To hazard your vertues and valours for one Mans estate, I hold dangerous, and needlesse it is, His Oration to his Souldiers. that my life should be prized at so deere a rate; alrea∣dy fortune and I haue had sufficient experience each of others, and not the least in this my short time of glorie, wherein I haue learned, it is harder to mo∣derate affections in the excesse of felicitie, then ei∣ther industrie or hazard for attaining the same. These ciuill warres Vitellius beganne; which I for my part purpose not to continue; and hereby let Posteritie esteeme of Otho, that others haue kept the Empire longer, but neuer any that left it more vali∣antly. Let this minde therefore accompany me to the Graue, that you for your parts would haue died for my sake, and I to saue your liues die voluntarie and vnuanquished. I blame not the Gods, nor enuie your Emperors rising glorie: It is sufficient that my house hath touched the highest straine of Honour, and my selfe to be left in records, The soueraign Mo∣narch of the World. (6) And thereupon solemnely taking his leaue of He killeth him∣selfe. the whole Army, went to his Tent, and with his dag∣ger wounded himselfe vnder the left pappe, whereof immediately he died, in the yeare of his age thirty se∣uen, and daies of his raigne ninetie fiue. He was of His age and raigne. stature but lowe, feeble in his feete, and vnto so great a minde, his bodie not any waies proportionable; his His lineaments and habite. face without haire and woman-like, his attire nice and delicate, and his life and death nothing at all conso∣nant or agreeable. VITELLIVS. CHAPTER XI. W Hen certaine newes of O∣thoes death was brought Ann. Do. 70. Vitellius, he presently assu∣med the name of Caesar, and administred the affairs of the Empire, with no lesse authoritie then the abso∣lute Commander of the World. And of such accep∣tance was the accident, that he dedicated the dagger wherewith it was done, Vitellius glad of Othoes death. vnto Mars in his Temple at Colleyn, as the luckie in∣strument of his aduanced Estate. (2) Naturally ambitious hee was, and now the Sueton. in vit. Vi∣t ll. cap. 10. Ioseph. bell. Iud. lib. 5. cap. 8. same the more inhaunced by his strengths of the Ger∣man Souldiers, and the flatteries of the Senate, which euer bare saile with the fairest winde. His entrance into Rome was aboue measure magnificall, hauing the Ot o magnificall aboue measure. naked sword of Iulius Caesar borne before him, with sound of Trumpets, Ensignes, Standards, Banners, and Flags, accompanied with an Armie worthie of a better Prince then Vitellius was. (3) His originall is diuersly reported: either fra∣med His descent di∣uersly reported. according to the affections of his flatterers, or blasted with the tongues of deprauing backe-biters; & both in extremes, extremely disagreeing. For Q. Eu∣logius, as Suetonius writeth, deduceth his descent from Cap. 1. Faunus King of Aborigines, and Lady Vitellia his wife, worshipped in many places for a Goddesse. But Cassius Seuerus affirmeth him to bee sprung from no better roote then a Cobler, and a common naughty-packe Tacit. bist. 3. c. 13. the daughter of a Baker. Howsoeuer, true it is, that Lucius his father bare thrice the Consulship in Rome, was Prouost of Syria, and in such credit with the Em∣perour Claudius, that in his absence and expedition into Britaine, he had the whole charge of the Empire committed vnto him: himselfe in speciall fauour with Tiberius, and in vse for his strumpets: with Caius, for Vitellius in fauor with diuers for∣mer Emperours. his Chariot-running: with Claudius, for his dice-plai∣ing: and with Nero, for his flatterie: vnto whose Ghost in publike shew hee sacrificed, and disposed the Emperiall affaires at the discretion of base Stage-Plaiers. (4) His vnmeasurable gluttony was such, that the His excessiue gluttonie. Sueton. in vit. Vi∣tell. cap. 13. whole imploiments of his Captaines were to prouide him Cates, and that in such excesse, that two thousand dishes of fish, and seuen thousand of fowle, were serued to his Table at one supper; and yet was he not ashamed to commend his owne Temperance, in a set Oration before the Senate and People, who well knew him to be guiltlesse of that vertue: insomuch that Tacitus re∣porteth, in those few moneths wherein hee raigned, he had wasted nine hundred millions of sesterces, which Tacit. hist. 2. c. 27. His huge ex∣pence of trea∣sure. Ioseph. bell. Iud. lib. 5. c. 13. amounteth to seuen millions, thirty one thousand, two hundred fiftie pounds sterling. And Iosephus thinketh if he had liued longer, the whole reuenues of the Empire had not beene sufficient to maintaine his Gluttonie. A Prince otherwise no way memorable, as being in∣deed without skill in profession of Armes, without counsell in matters of the greatest importance, com∣monly drowned in surfet, and farre vnmeet to weld weighty affaires. (2) These defects found ready vent to his Oppo∣sites, and gaue libertie of speech in the Assemblies of Vespasian his Abettors for the Empire. their Estates: amongst whom Vespasian was held the only Morning-Starre, worthy to ascend on the setting of this darkend Sunne; vnto whom Licinius Mutianus, Gouernour of Syria, was no auerse, Marcus Clunius Rufus of Spaine stood very well affected, and Tiberius Alexander of Aegypt for him the formost. Also with him sided the Kings Sohemus, Antiochus, and Agrippa, with the beautifull Queene Berenice: vnto whom Ve∣spasian and his sonne Titus were well knowen, Gouer∣nours Tacit. hist. . c. 3. together in the Prouinces of Syria and Iudea. (6) The first that did reuolt were the Illyrian The first reuol∣ters from Vi∣tellius. Bands: to suppresse which, Vitellius sent vnto Vectius Bolanus Lieutenant of Britain, for aid of that Prouince, hauing had good experience of their seruice in his warres before. As when Hordeonius Flaccus brought Tacit. . . c. 0. eight thousand Britaines to his quarrell against Otho. As also when Trebellius Maximus (formerly mentio∣ned) ioined them to the German forces. Which last Tacit. i . Agric. man had now againe resumed his former place in Bri∣tannie, without either Maiestie or Authoritie; but ra∣ther ruled by way of intreatie, and at the discretion of the Souldiers. (7) Vnto whom, this Vectius Bolanus succeeded for Deputie: a man of no great parts in warre, but more temperate, and not odious for any crime. His answer vnto Vitellius was, that the Countrey of Bri∣taine stood not so quiet, that he might spare any num∣ber thence, the Souldiers and Confederates hauing their hands full, to hold all vpright. Neither (in truth) were they fast to his side, but rather affected Vespasian, Hist. 3. cap. 9. whose reputation in warlike affaires was first gotten amongst them in Britaine, in the raigne of Claudius: though we find in Tacitus, that the Vexillaries of three Hist. . c. 9. Hist. 3. cap. . British Legions followed Vitellius in his expedition against the Illyrian Armie, wherein the flower and strength of all the Britaines are reported to haue been, and that their fourteenth Legion came to his aide, in whom notwithstanding he had no good confidence: but hearing the daily reuolts of the Prouinces, and the approch of Vespasian, was minded to resigne his dig∣nitie vnto him, had not the out-cries of the people beene against it. (8) Finally, when he had raigned only eight mo∣neths, Hi . and fiue daies, as Iosephus accounteth, he was slaine in most ignominious maner: for his hands His de . Ioseph. bell. I . cap. 3. were bound behinde his backe, a halter fast about his necke, his clothes rent and torne, a sword point set vnder his chinne, and head held backward by a bush of haire, as condemned malefactors were vsed, to the end, that he might see and bee seene of all, to satisfie their malice and augment his miseries. Hee died aged fiftie seuen; and as hee is set in the Table His age. after Malmesburie, Huntington, and others our Eng∣lish writers, the ninth Calends of Ianuarie: But yet it should seeme by his edicts set out against Astrologers, that commanded all of that profession to depart out of Rome and Italie before the first day of October, that much about that time he should die: for Suetonius re∣cordeth, that the said Astrologers set another against him in the words as follow. WEE GIVE WAR∣NING Suee. in vita Vitel. Sect. 14. BY THESE PRESENTS VNTO VITELLIVS GERMANICVS, THAT BY THE CALENDS OF THE SAID OCTO∣BER HEE BEE NOT SEENE IN ANY PLACE WHERESOEVER. (9) Of stature he was exceedingly tall, his face red, and a fat paunch, and somewhat limping vpon one legge, by a hurt formerly receiued. FLAVIVS VESPASIAN. CHAPTER XII. Vespasian. Petilius. S O acceptable was the fall of this Prince, and such Ann. Do. 72. hopes reuiued at the en∣trance of his Successour, as that all mens mindes were raised to an expectation, that the glorie of the Em∣pire, so much Eclipsed through the ciuill broiles of Galba, Otho, and this last Vitellius, should now shine againe in the beautie of her former libertie, by the desired gouernement of aged Vespasians worth and estimation. Vespasian; whose integritie, valour, and seruice, had beene sufficiently approued by his many Expeditions in all the Prouinces wherein he had to doe. (2) His descent was from the Flauian family, and His originall. Sueton. in vit. Vespas. sect. 1. that but base and obscure: his Father called Titus Flauius, his Mother Polla Vespasia, his Wife Domilia, and his Sonnes Titus, and Domitian, both Emperours suc∣ceeding after him. (3) In his yong yeares, hee serued as a Militarie His imployments in former ti es. Tacit. in vita A∣gric. . 189. Tribune in the Countrey of Thracia, and as Questor in the Prouinces of Crete, and Cyrene: Vnder Claudius the Emperour, he went forth into Germanie, as Lieu∣tenant of a Band, and from thence was sent into Bri∣tannie, to be Leader of the second Legion, where the foundation of that greatnes whereunto after hee at∣tained, was first laid: for as Suetonius hath written, therein with victorie hee fought thirty set Battailes, and was also Conquerour of the Ile of Wight: whereby two mightie Nations were subdued to the Romanes, and twentie Townes wonne from the Britaines: for which exploits he had Triumphall ornaments, worthily assigned him by Claudius, whose owne Triumph, (as Iosephus saith) was gotten without his paines, but by the only prowesse of Vespasian. After this, he gouer∣ned Iosephus el. I d. lib. 3. cap. 1. Africke with singular integritie and much ho∣nour, and was lastly sent by Nero for his Vice-roy in∣to Syria vpon this occasion. (4) There had beene spread thorow all the East∣parts, Sueton. in vit. Ve∣spasi. Sect. 4. an old Prophecie and setled opinion constantly be∣leeued, that it was appointed by the Destinies, there should come out of Iurie him that should be Lord of the whole world: which how it serued for the Iewes to re∣uolt, or for the Romanes to apply onely vnto Vespasi∣an, An ancient pro∣phecie in all the East parts. the euent sheweth, which cannot agree to any o∣ther, then to the person and power of Christ Iesus, there borne, and throughout the whole world still raigning: Yet vpon the confidence of such an accomplishment, the Iewes reuolted from the Romanes obedience, and The cause of the Iewes reuolt. slew their President Sabinus by name, putting to flight Gallus, Lieutenant Generall of Syria, that came to his aide, and got from him the maine Standard, or Ensigne of the Eagle. This Nation was so populous and strong, that none was thought fitter to stay their attempts, then was Vespasian, who with great honour and approbation, reduced that Prouince vnto their former subiection, and there remained the short time of Galba, Otho, and Vitellius their Raignes; of whose Ioseph. de Ballo Iud. proceedings there Iosephus writeth at large, vnto whom I must referre the vnsatisfied Reader. (5) All which times, the ciuill stirres amongst the Romanes, gaue the Prouinces occasion to attempt their former liberties; as did the Batauians, Germanes and French, with whom the Britaines also tooke hart Taci . Hist. 3. cap. 9. to reuolt: But the first that sided with Vespasian, were two thousand expert Souldiers, drawne out of the Mesian Legions, and sent to aide Otho against Vitel∣lius; who marching as farre as Aquileia, they heard there of the certaine death of Otho, and thereupon ta∣king the aduantage of the offred opportunitie, with an vncontrolled libertie, committed many robberies and outragious villanies: In so much, that fearing con∣digne punishment, they held it their best policie, to combine some speciall man by their fauours vnto them, whereby their facts might bee either quite smoothered, or lightly reprehended; neither in their opinions was any so gracious for desert or power, as was Vespasian, and therefore with one assent they pro∣claimed him Emperour, and wrote his name in their Vespasian chosen Emperour by the Mesian Souldi∣ers. Banners, thinking themselues as worthy to make an Emperour, as were the Legions either of Spaine, or Ger∣many. (6) Of the like minde were his owne Legions in Syria and Iurie, growne now so famous by the pro∣secution of those warres, that they highly conceited his valour, and their owne sufficiencie to bee inferiour to none: And therefore all on the sudden at Caesarca, both Captaine and Souldier salute him Emperour; which By his owne. Ioseph. bell. Iud. lib. 5. cap. 10. title when he resolutely gainsaid and refused, with drawne swords they threatned his death. Thus then being brought into danger euery way, he sent his let∣ters vnto Tiberius Alexander, Lieutenant of Aegypt, who likewise at Alexandria, presently proclaimed him Emperour. (7) At this time Vectius Bolanus sent by Vitellius, Tacit. in vit. A∣gric. fol. 187. was Lieutenant of Britaine, there ruling in a gentler and milder manner then was fit for so fierce a Nation: for the Souldiers hauing gotten head, by the remisse Gouernment of Trebellius Maximus, continued the same loosenesse in discipline still: and Bolanus in stead of awe and Obedience, retained onely their affections and good wils. But most especially the short Raignes of these last Emperours (whose beginnings were alto∣gether imploied to satisfie their licentious pleasures, and latter times spent for the defense of their Liues from violent Deaths) gaue way to many imperfecti∣ons of the Gouernors, and misdemeanours of the com∣mon Souldiers. (8) But when Vespasian had assumed the Empire, Petilius Cerealis Deputy in Bri∣taine. great Captaines and good Souldiers were sent into the Prouinces, and into Britaine, Petilius Cerealis, that had formerly there made proofe of his seruice vnder Ne∣ro, in the warres against Boduo, and afterwards in o∣ther parts, as against the Gaules and Batauians, with prosperous victories. The fame of this man strooke Yorkeshire, Lancashire, Westmerland, and the Bishop. ricke of Durha . great terrour into the hearts of the wauering Britains, and amongst them of the * Brigantes, the most popu∣lous State of the whole Prouince: against whom at his first approch he warred, and in many battles, and some of them bloudy, the greatest part of these people were wasted, and their Countrey came into the Romish subiection. (9) Whereby the glory of Cerealis might well haue dimmed the fame of his Successour, had not Iuli∣us Frontinus a great Souldier also, sustained the charge Iulius Frontinus subdueth the Britaines. with reputation and credit, in subduing the strong and Warlike nation the South-Wales. Silures: where he had, beside the force of the enemie to struggle with, the straits, and difficult places of rockes and mountaines, for accesse. (10) After whose gouernment (no further Acts being mentioned) Iulius Agricola, who in Rome had Iulius Agricola Lieutenant in Britaine. beene Questor, Tribune, and Pretor, and Lieutenant in Aquitania, was sent Generall into Britaine by Vespasian the Emperour, the yeere before his death. This man formerly had there serued vnder the command of Petilius Cerealis, whereby hee had gained experience both of the People and Prouince; and at his first ap∣proch gathered the Ensignes of the Legions, and other aids of the Auxiliaries, (who for that yeere attended an end of their trauels, because the Summer was al∣most spent) lest by protracting time, the violence of the Ordouices should further burst foorth, who a lit∣tle before his entrance, had vtterly almost cut off a wing which lay on their Borders, the rest of the Countrey, as men desirous of Warre, allowing their example. Against these Agricola addressed, who kept them∣selues in places of aduantage, and durst not descend into indifferent ground. Hee therefore being him∣selfe formost, lead vp his Armie to their encounter, and seconded with the courage of his trained Souldi∣ers, put them all to sword and flight, whereby the Hee ouercōmeth the Ordouices. whole Nation was almost quite destroied. (11) And now that his fame began to ascend, he knew well that with instance it must be followed, and as the first affaires had issue, the rest would succeede; he therefore deliberated to conquer the Iland Mona, from the possession whereof Paulinus Suetonius was reuoked, by the generall Rebellion vnder Boduo. But in a purpose not purposed before, and ships wanting, the policie of the Captaine deuised a passage; for hee commanded the most choice of the Aids, to whom the shallowes were well knowen (and without whom the Romans did almost attempt nothing) to put ouer at once, and suddenly to inuade them. These Bri∣taines, after the vse of their Countrey manner, were most skilfull swimmers, and in swimming armed, able to gouerne themselues and horses. The Monaans thinking themselues secure, for that no Ships were seene in their Riuer, now thus suddenly surprized, as men amazed, firmly thought that nothing could bee inuincible to them, who came with such resolutions to Warre, and therefore they humbly desired Peace, and yeelded the Iland vnto Agricolaes deuotion. He winneth the Iland o Mon . (12) Who now in these prosperous proceedings of his fortunes, sought not with any glorious relations or letters of aduertisements, to improoue and aug∣ment the greatnesse of his honour; but rather in see∣king to suppresse his fame, made it shine more bright; and addressing himselfe for ciuill gouern∣ment, reformed many abuses in his House, his Campe, and in the whole Prouince, and those especially that most touched the poorer sort, as by moderating the Agricola good to the poore. increase of Tribute and Corne, wherewith the Britains were daily burdened: by the suppressing of which enormities (and the like) an honourable opinion of him was euery where entertained, and a generall in∣clination vnto Peace, which partly by the negligence, partly by the auarice of former Gouernours, had beene no lesse feared then Warre it selfe. (13) And whereas the Britaines hitherto still har∣ried with Oppressions and Warres, had little leisure or will to apply themselues to things which accompany Peace, and are the ornaments of Ciuil and settled Soci∣eties, and therefore were prone vpon euery occasion to reuolt and stirre: to induce them by pleasures to quietnesse and rest, he exhorted them in priuate, and helpt them in publike, to build Temples, Houses, and Places of Assemblies, and common resort; and likewise prouided that the sonnes of their Nobles should be in∣structed His good course in winning the people from wildnesse. in the liberall Arts and Sciences, commen∣ding the industrie, and preferring the wits of the Bri∣taines before the Students of France, as being now growen curious to attaine the Eloquence of the Ro∣man The Britaines ciuili ed. Gentrie, (yea euen the Gowne, the habit of peace and peaceable Arts) and to delight in gorgeous Buildings, Banquets, and Baths. (14) And thus farre had Agricola proceeded be∣fore the death of Vespasian, whose managing of the Imperiall dignitie was euery way answerable to so high a place, and whose death was as much lamented, as his Vertues did surmount his Predecessours. But as tou∣ching Agricola cureth the blinde and the lame, and that miracu∣lously. his miraculous cures of the Blind and the Lame, as they serue not either to bee vrged or inserted in this our present Historie; so yet may they conuince the in∣durate Atheist, whose conscience is seared with the sinne of incredulitie of the Miracles wrought by our blessed Sauiour Iesus Christ. For if the wisest Historians Suet. in vit. Ve∣spas. sect. 7. of those times haue beleeued themselues, and left Re∣cords vpon their credit to following posterities, that by his touch onely hee cured a Lame-man, and with his Tacit. hist. 4. c. 35. spittle opened the eies of the Blinde, being a mortall∣and sinfull man; shall it then bee doubted, that hee Agricol es mira∣cles conuince Atheists that d ∣ny our S uiours miracles. which knew no sinne, neither receiued the gift by mea∣sure, either in power could not, or in act did not worke such Miracles as were the witnesses of his God-head, and for such are recorded to confirme our faith? But to our purpose. (15) When Vespasian had liued threescore and nine yeeres, seuen moneths, and seuen daies, and had Vespas dieth peaceablie. Eus b. Eccles. Hist. lib. 3. ca. 12. & 13. raigned ten yeeres, as Eusebius saith, he died peaceably in his Bed; which no Emperour since Augustus euer did, hauing beene a great Scourge and Instrument of God against the miserable Iewes; whose kingly race from Dauids line he sought by all meanes to extirpate, that A great scourge of God against the Iewes. so all their hopes and expectations might for euer be cut off. (16) Hee was of a middle stature, well set, and strongly compact: his countenance not altogether His endow nts of body. in it. V ∣ t. 23. H ver s. amiable, neither any waies deformed: a great fauou∣rer of Learning, very Liberall, a Iust, Wise, and Most Vali∣ant Prince. TITVS FLAVIVS VESPASIAN. CHAPTER XIII. Titus Emp. Agricola Lieut. P Resently vpon the death of this Emperour, Titus Ann. Do. 81. his eldest sonne, sirnamed Flauius Vespasian, without al contradiction was recei∣ued and obeyed for his Titus made Em∣perour without all contradicti∣on. rightfull successor: aswell for that his Father in his life∣time had made him his Partner in the Empire, and at his death by Testament declared him his Heire; as also for the generall opinion conceiued of him, for his inbred goodnes and noble conditions; called & esteemed the louely darling and delight of mankinde. In∣deed Called the de∣light of mankind. of a most comely presence he was, & fitted there∣unto with all heroicall vertues, a great Souldier, lear∣ned in the Arts, a good Oratour, a skilfull Musitian, Sueton in vit. Tit. Sect. 1. Fitted with all heroicall Ver∣tues. His imployment in former times. and could by artificiall characters write both very fast and very faire. (2) His youth he spent in Militarie qualities, and serued in Germanie and Britaine with exceeding com∣mendations, and in Iurie warred with the like glorie, which is nothing impaired by the learned stile of his Recorder Iosephus, vnto whom againe for these af∣faires I must referre the curious Reader. (3) Ierusalem, with the slaughter of eleuen thou∣sand Ioseph bell. Iud. lib. 6. & 7. He wonne Ieru∣salem in the life∣time of his fa∣ther. Iewes, euen on the birth day of his daughter, with such honour he wonne, that thereupon present∣ly he was saluted Emperour, euen in the life time of Vespasian his Father: and from that day carried him∣selfe as his Associate in the Empire; for with him hee Triumphed, and with him he iointly administred the Censorship, his Colleague he was in the Tribunes autho∣ritie; and his Companion also in seuen Consulships: In all which, though the Edicts went forth in his fathers name, yet were they penned by himselfe. Of this his victorie ouer the Iewes, hee left the remembrance to posteritie by stamping vpon the reuerse of his coines IVD. CAP. with pictures expressing his Tri∣umph and the Iewes ouerthrow, which in the front of this Chapter we haue also placed. (4) Somewhat he was blemished with the loue of His faults. Berenice, the beautifull Queene of Iewrie, and much more with the murther of Aulus Cinna, only through iealousie conceiued of her: and whether that was the sinne whereof at his death he repented, is vncertain, when lifting vp his eies to Heauen, hee complained His repentance at his death. why his Life should be taken from him, that except∣ing one offence deserued not to die. As himselfe in glorie wielded the Emperiall Scepter, so did his Sub∣stitutes gouerne the Prouinces; at which time in Britaine, Agricola was President, and therein had spent almost two yeares vnder the raigne of Vespasian, in such maner as wee haue declared. (5) In his third yeare, he discouered new Coun∣tries, and parts of this Iland, yet vntouched, or at least∣wise not thoroughly subdued, as altogether vnsatiate Tacit. in vit. A∣gric. Agricola enlar∣geth the Empire. of that which was gotten, & sought to draw the con∣fines of the Empire with a larger compasse: therefore marching Northward to the Frith of * Taus, wasted TVVEEDE, as is thought. all as he went, and without any resistance fortified the places with Castles and Bulwarkes, which hee stored with sufficient prouision; where euerie Garrison win∣tring, garded it selfe, and with the Summers seruice, e∣uer repaired the Winters euents, whereby euermore the Enemie went to the worse, and his designes pros∣pered as himselfe wished. (6) The fourth Summer was spent in perusing and ordering that which he had ouer-runne. And if the glory of the Romane name could haue permitted, or so beene satisfied, it needed not to haue sought o∣ther limits of Britaine: for The frith of Dunbret on. Glota and Edenb rough frith. Bodotria, two armes of two opposite Seas, shooting farre into the Land, and onely diuided asunder by a narrow partiti∣on of ground, the same was both garded and fortified with Castles and Garrisons: so that the Romanes were absolute Lords of all the South-side, and had cast the Enemie as it were into another Iland. (7) In this state stood this Prouince of Britaine at the death of Titus, whose short raign hath left no long matters of discourse, and his Acts greater vnder other Emperours, then when he was Emperour himselfe; yet that little time wherein he gouerned, was with Iustice, Liberalitie and Loue of all. A great Enemie he was to Promoters, Pettifoggers, and Extortours of penall lawes, Titus gouerned with loue of all. which Cancker-wormes of Common-wealths, and Cater∣pillers to Courts of Iustice, he caused to bee whipped and banished out of Rome. Louing and familiar hee was to all his Subiects, and so desirous to giue them satisfaction, that his vsuall saying was, No man ought to goe sad from the speech of a Prince. Mercifull he was to the poore, and so readie to do them good, that one day being spent by him without any notable action, in sorrow he said: I haue quite lost a day. He died the His propensiti to do good. Euseb. li. 3. ca. 15. His age & raigne. thirteenth of September, the yeare from Christs Nati∣uitie eightie three, when he had raigned two yeares and two moneths, and in the two and fortieth yeare of his age, beeing poisoned by Domitian his Brother uagrius l. 3. c. 41. and Successour. FLAVIVS DOMITIAN. CHAPTER XIV. Domitian Emp. Agricol Licut. D Omitian attaining the Em∣pire Ann. Do. 83. by the death of Titus, (wrought by himselfe) as farre differed from him in vertuous conditions, as he was linked neere him in consanguinitie of blood: His youth not spent in Sueton. in vit. Do∣mit. sect. 1. Armes, with his Father and Brother, but inertiously consumed in lasciuiousnesse and penurie. (2) At Rome hee was in the Vitellian troubles, where, with Sabinus his Vncle, he had beene murde∣red, His escaping killing. had not the Sexton of the Capitoll hid him in his house, and in the habit of a Minister vnknowen, thence escaped: which place afterwards, when hee Tacit. hist. 3. c. 13. He dedicateth a Temple to Iupiter. came to be Emperour, he gorgeously built for a Tem∣ple to Iupiter his supposed Preseruer, and consecrated himselfe in the lap of that heathenish Idoll. Hee very speedily apprehended the hope of an Empire, for no sooner was his Father made Emperour, but that hee as∣sumed the name of Caesar, and in Rome caried himselfe with such prodigalitie, and so liberally made promi∣ses of the Imperiall Offices, that his father hearing thereof, said, he maruelled why his sonne sent not one to succeed him in his place. But to dissemble and cloake his idle conceits, he gaue himselfe to the study of Po∣esie, (although with little affection, as the end proo∣ued) for which notwithstanding both Pliny and Mar∣tial Plinie in his Pro∣eme of naturall historie. Martial in his Epigram. Ro. Emp. fol. 134. Sueton. in vit. Do∣mit. sect. 4. doe highly commend him, as it is the manner of men to admire the very shadow of a good quality in Princes and great ones: and so doth Iuuenal and Sue∣tonius praise his braue minde, for his shewes in the Amphitheater, wherein not only men, but women al∣so were brought, and forced to fight for their liues with wilde beasts: a cruell spectacle neuerthelesse, and vnbeseeming to humanity. (3) His first entrance into state and dignitie was neither greatly applauded nor gainsaid, hee seeming to carrie an equall mixture, and his vertues to hold le∣uell with his vice. But Ambition now supported with Soueraignty, did quickly set the scale onely for the worse side. The affaires of the Empire hee altogether neglected; and impatient of labour, or affection to Armes, daily retired into a priuate chamber or Gal∣lery, wherein hee vsually applied himselfe onely to His vaine mis∣spending the time. catch Flies, and with the point of a bodkin to pricke them thorow: whereupon one being asked what company was with the Emperour, replied, Not so much as a flie. In which princely exercise let vs a while leaue him, and returne to his better emploied Lieutenant Agricola. (4) Who now in the fifth yeere of his gouern∣ment Tacit. in vit. Agric. tooke the seas, and with many prosperous con∣flicts subdued some adiacent places and people, be∣fore that time vnknowen, and furnished with forces those parts of Britaine, which lay coasted against Ire∣land: to which Countrey also hee had a minde, and Agricola his opi∣nion of Ireland. would often say, that if the Romans were therin plan∣ted, the Libertie of the Britaines would soone be bani∣shed quite out of sight, and out of hope. (5) Now in the sixth yeere of his Prefecture, be∣cause a general rising of al the farther Nations beyond Bodotria was feared, and passages were all beset with power of the Enemies, he manned a Fleet to search the creekes and harboroughs of the ample Region beyond it, and with his Armie marched further He searcheth the creekes and har∣boroughs. North. The Britaines heereat, especially at sight of their ships, much amazed and troubled, knowing now that the secrets of their Seas were all discouered, and no refuge left if they were ouercome, armed themselues with great preparation; and the Caledoni∣ans (a most puissant and strong Nation in those parts) Caledonians most puissant. the formost; who, as challengers, braued the Romans so boldly, and in such manner, that some counselled the Generall to retire his forces on this side Bodotria, and rather of his owne accord to depart, then to bee repelled with shame. (6) Agricola, whose courage could not be clou∣ded with any dastardly feare, held on his intents; and hearing by prisoners taken, the manner of his Ene∣mies proceedings, ordereth his host accordingly, di∣uiding his armie into three battles, and so lay entren∣ched; the weakest whereof, containing the Ninth Le∣gion, the Britaines by Night assailed, and hauing slaine the Watch, brake into their Campe with a furious noise: to whose rescue, Agricola sent his Light horse∣men, and a Band of foot, whose Ensignes and Armour glittering in the appearance of day, so rebated the edge and further purposes of the Britaines, that they gaue backe to the gates of the Trench, where, in the straits the conflict was sharpe and cruell, till in the end they were forced to quit the field. Vpon this battle so manfully fought, and so famously won, the Romans presuming that to their prowesse all things were now easie and open, cried to lead into Caledonia, and to finde out the limits of Britaine, with a course of Agricola search∣eth out the li∣mits of Britaine. continued Conquests: and those which erewhile were so wary and wise, waxt forward and bold after the euent, and grew to speake bigly▪ such being the hard condition of Warres, that if ought fall out well, all challenge a part, misfortunes are onely imputed to one. Contrariwise, the Britaines presupposing that not valour, but skill in the Generall by vsing the occa∣sion, had carried it away, abated no whit their won∣ted courage, but armed their youth, transported their Children and Wiues into places of safety, and sought by Assemblies & Religious rites to establish an Associ∣ation of the Cities together. And so for that yeere both parties did depart, incensed to further preparations. (7) In the beginning of the next, Agricola sen∣ding his Nauie before, which by vnexpected spoiling in seuerall places, should induce a greater and more vncertain terrour, followed himselfe with his Armie by Land: hauing drawne to his partie some of the va∣liantest Britaines, whom by long experience in Peace, he had found most faithfull for his Warres: and so arriued at the Mount Grantzbaine. Grampius, where the Britaines had lodged themselues before, and as men nothing deiected by the vnfortunate chance of the former battaile, had now prepared themselues attending on∣ly for Reuenge or Seruitude. And being taught, that common danger must be repelled with mutuall Con∣cord, by Leagues and Embassages they assembled the The Britaines ga∣ther a great power. power of all their Cities together, aboue thirtie thousand armed men, as by view was taken, besides an endlesse number of youth which daily flocked vn∣to them, and many lustie Old men renowmed in the former warres, and bearing the Badges due to their honour; at what time, Galgacus, for vertue and birth, of all the Leaders the Principall man, seeing the mul∣titude Galgacus their Generall. hotly demaund the Battell, is said to haue vsed this, or the like speech. (8) When I behold this present Assemblie, and consider the cause of this instant necessitie, I haue His Oration to the Britaines. Tacit. in vit. Agric. reason to presume, that this day, and this our agree∣ment in consent, will giue a happie beginning to our freedome, and an end of troubles vnto our I∣land. The cause of a flourishing e∣state. The necessitie of resolution. For, wee which inhabite these furthest Pro∣montories, know no Land beyond vs whereunto wee may flie, nor no Seas left vs now for safetie, the Romane Nauie thus (as you see) surueying our Coasts: So that combat and armes, which men of valour desire for honour, the very dastard of force must now vse for his securitie. Wee that are the A dishonour for the cheife of a Nation to be dastards. flower of the British Nobilitie, and are seated here in the vttermost part of the Ile, saw neuer yet the borders of those Countries which serued in slaue∣rie, our eies being vnpolluted and free from all con∣tagion of Tyrannie. Our former Battailes fought with the Romanes had their euents, yet so, that re∣fuge Former battailes not vnfortunate. and hope rested still in our hands; wee haue hitherto liued in libertie, whereas none beside vs are free; vs hitherto this Corner and secret recesse hath defended, now the Vttermost point of our Land is laid open: and things the lesse they haue beene within knowledge, the greater the glorie is to atchieue them. But what Nation is there now beyond vs? what else see we but Water and Rocks, and the Romanes within, Land-lords of all, nay ra∣ther Robbers of all, both in Land and Sea? whose Subiection will not auaile. intollerable pride by humble subiection in vaine shall wee seeke to auoid. If the Country bee rich, they seeke to winne wealth; if poore, to gaine glo∣rie: but neither East nor west, can satisfie their gree∣die affection, much lesse this cold North can set an end to their desires. To kill, to spoile, and take a∣way The Romans go∣uernement and peace. by force, that falsely they terme Empire and Gouernement: and when all is made a waste wilder∣nesse, that they call Peace. Most deare vnto man are his Children and blood; but those are pressed for their warres, and serue as their slaues, we know not where; our Goods are their tributes, our Corne their prouision; our Wiues, Sisters and Daughters, in Warre violently forced, in Peace vnder title of friends and guests, shamefully abused, and our own Bodies worne & consumed in pauing of Bogs and other seruile drudgeries, with thousands of stripes, and many indignities more. Slaues which are borne to bondage are sold but once, and after are fed at their Owners expences; but Britanie dai∣ly buyeth, daily feedeth, and is at charges with her owne Bondage. We are the last to be conquered, The last to bee conquered ought most to resist. and therefore is our destruction most sought, as be∣ing the most vile in account: No Fields we haue to manure, no Mines to be digged, no Ports to trade in, and to what purpose then should they reserue vs aliue? Besides, the Manhood and fierce cou∣rage of the subiect, pleaseth not much the iealous Manhood and fitnesse of place more suspected of a iealous So∣ueraigne. Soueraigne: and this Corner being so secret, and out of the way, the more securitie it yeeldeth vs, in them it workes the greater suspition. Then, seeing all hope of sauour is past, let vs take courage to de∣fend and maintaine our owne safetie as well as our honour. The Icenians led by a Woman, fired the Colonie, forced the Castles; and if that luckie be∣ginning had not beene ended in a carelesse security, the Southerne Britaines might with ease haue shaken Womens valour ought to shame mens coward. . off the yoake. We as yet neuer touched, neuer sub∣dued and borne to bee free, not slaues to the Ro∣mans; wee (I say) now are to make proofe of our This time the fit∣test to prooue our valour. valour, and to shew in this encounter, what men Caledonia hath reserued for her selfe. And do you thinke, that the Romanes are as valiant in Warre as they are wanton in Peace? I assure you, nothing The Romanes wanton in peace. lesse: for not by their Vertues, but by our Iarrings, they are growne into fame: and of the enemies faults they make vse to the glory of their owne Ar∣mie, composed (we know) most of diuers Nations; and therefore as in prosperitie they hold not al∣alwaies Their Armie composed of diuers nations. together, so doubtlesse, if fortune turne a∣side, their seruices will appeare: vnlesse you sup∣pose the Gauls and Germanes, and (to our shame be it spoken) many of our owne Nation, (which now lend their liues to establish a forraine Vsurper) bee lead with hearts affection; whereas contrariwise it is apparant, that Terrour and Distrust, (weake work∣ers to conserue loue) are the onely cause; which once remoued, then those that haue made an end to feare, will soone begin to hate. All things that may incite vnto victorie are for vs: the Romanes haue no Wiues to harten them on, if they faint; no Parents to vpbraid them, if they flie; most of them They are desti∣tute of many en∣couragements. haue no Countrie at all, or if they haue, it is by in∣trusion taken from others: A few fearefull persons stand here before vs, trembling and gazing at the strangenesse of the heauen it selfe, at the Sea, and at the Woods, whom the Gods haue deliuered, mew∣ed vp and fettered into our hands. Let not their braue shewes of glistering Gold or Siluer, any way dismay you, which of themselues neither offend nor defend. And be you well assured, amongst our enemies wee shall finde many on our side; The Britaines will agnize their owne Cause; The Gauls will remember their wonted libertie and former e∣state; And the rest of the Germanes will leaue and forsake them, as of late the Vsipians did. What then shall we feare? The Castles are emptie; the Colonies peopled with aged and impotent persons; the free Cities discontent, and in factions, whilest those Many Cities in factions. which are vnder, obey with ill will, and they which doe gouerne, rule against right. Here you see be∣fore vs is the Generall and the Armie, on each side Tributes, Seruitudes and other miseries insepara∣ble; which whether we shall continue for euer, or cast off subiection as free-borne Britaines, it lyeth this day in this Field and your approued manhoods Wherefore I beseech you in ioyning Battell, beare in your Minds your worthy Ancestors, your Selues, and following Posterities, which if you faile, shall for euer liue in subiection and slauerie. (9) This speech was so vehemently deliuered, and so cheerefully of them all receiued, that with songs and confused acclamations (after their accustomed fashion) they clustered together on heaps, and some of the boldest aduanced forward, whilest Agricola like∣wise was incouraging his men, who straightwaies ranne to their weapons, and rushed on furiously to∣ward the Enemie. (10) The Britaines were marshelled in the high∣er ground, fitly both to the shew, and to terrifie: the first Battalion standing on the plaine, the rest on the ascent of the hill, knit and rising as it were one ouer another; the middle of the field was filled with clat∣tering and running of Chariots and horsemen. Agrico∣cola seeing their number to exceede his, drew his bat∣taile The number of Britaines exceed the Romanes. in length, and leauing his horse, aduanced him∣selfe before the Ensignes on foote. (11) In the first assault before the ioyning, both sides encountred with discharge of their darts, wherin The first encoun∣ter. the Britaines, employing both art and valour, with their great swords and little Targets, auoided the vo∣lue of the Romans, showring down withall great store of theirs vpon them, wherewith they were both gal∣led and sore wounded. Agricola seeing his men thus stoutly resisted, tooke another course: for, spying the aduantage, he commanded three Hollanders. Batauian Coherts, and two of the Liege in the Low Countries. Tungrians, to presse forward, and bring the matter to handy strokes and dint of sword, a thing which (in respect of their long seruice) they were very expert in; but contrariwise to the Britaines very preiudiciall, by reason of their little Bucklers, and huge swords, being blunt pointed, and no waies fit for the close in fight. This command aduantaged the Romans much; for these with the pikes of their Bucklers, when they came to deale blowes; so man∣gled the faces of the Britaines, that they were not able to stand before them; and the rest, gathering courage vpon emulation of these, ascended the hill, bearing downe all that was in their way, so that many halfe dead, and some wholly vntouched, were ouer-passed, and left for haste of winning the field. In the meane while the Chariots mingled themselues with the bat∣tle The Britaines Chariots disor∣der the horse∣men. of footmen, and the troopes of horsemen began for to flie: who albeit they had lately terrified others, were now distressed themselues, by the vneuennesse of the ground, and thicke rankes of the enemy, and were forced to fight standing still, and by the maine weight of horses to beare downe one another. The wandring Wagons also, and masterlesse horses, as chance or feare did guide them, ouer-bare many times their friends, and thwarted their way that met them. (12) The other Britaines that kept the hill, and had leisure to behold the manner of fight, beganne to come downe by little and little, and sought to com∣passe the backe of the enemie; which intent Agricola soone preuented, by sending foure wings of Horsmen, retained purposely about him for sudden dispatches and chances of warre. These so fiercely assailed them, The fight fierce on both sides. that a most sharpe and bloody battle ensued, wherein the Britaines on each side were beaten downe and slaine, notwithstanding many of them shewed both valour and reuenge euen to the end: the rest disban∣ded, turned their backes, and fled towards the desert; whose pursuit was followed vntill Night, and fulnesse The Britaines discomfited. of blood made an end of the chase. (13) Of the Romans side were slaine (if wee must credit their owne friends) onely three hundred and fortie persons, and of them, one of extraordinary note The Romans losse. and account, Aulus Articus per∣chance. Articus, Captaine of a Cohort, who vpon a youthfull heat, and fiercenesse of his horse, was carried amidst his enemies. Of the Britains fell ten thousand, and their designes so defeated and The Britaines that died. broken, that as desperate men, they forsake their hou∣ses, and in despight set fire on them themselues: the hurt persons they carrie and draw with them, and call them that are vnhurt, hoping to be releeued by them. One while they chuse out holes to lurke in, for their liues safetie; eftsoones in great haste forsake them, as doubting therein their owne securitie. Dispersed a∣sunder, they lament, and attend death: assembled to∣gether, expostulate of their meanes and life: one while conceiuing a glimmering of some small hope, another while deiected with vtter despaire: Some∣times at the sight of their dearest beloued, mooued to pitie; but much oftner stirred to rage, for reuenge; and many of them, euen by way of compassion; slew their dearest Wiues and Children, to rid them from their future miseries. (14) Agricola hauing made euery where a desola∣tion and silence, withdrew his Armie towards the Anguse in Scot∣land. Horrestians, where taking hostages for their fidelitie, sent the Admirall of his Nauy to saile about the North Cóasts of Britaine, who with strength and store tooke Agricola sendeth to discouer the North coasts. the Seas, their terrour gone already before, himselfe with easie and gentle iournies disposed his foot and horsemen in their Wintring places, and planted Gar∣risons vpon the Borders betweene Glota and Bodo∣tria. And his Nauie with prosperous winde and suc∣cesse arriued at the Port . Trutulensis. (15) Thus, after many conflicts, about the space of one hundred thirty six yeeres from Iulius Caesars Histor. m gn. Brit. Lib. 2. cap. 17. first entrance, the vtmost limits of Britannie, and the Iles of the Orcades lying on the North side of it, were by the valour and industrie of Iulius Agricola first dis∣couered, Britanny w olly discouered by Agricola. and made knowen vnto the Romans: and the South part of the Ile, in the fourth yeere of the raigne of Domitian, (being the yeere of our Sauiour eightie Ann. Dom. 86. six) reduced into a full Prouince, the gouernment whereof was euer annexed and appropriate to the Dio lib. 55. Roman Emperours themselues, and not at the disposi∣tion of the Senate, as other Prouinces were. (16) This state of affaires in Britannie, Agricola Agricola writeth to Domitian. signified by letter, without any amplifying termes to Domitian the Emperour, who (after his manner) with a cheerefull countenance and greeued heart, receiued the Newes; being inwardly pricked with feare and dis∣daine, that his late counterfet Triumph of Germanie (wherein certaine slaues bought for money, were at∣tired, and their haire dressed as Captiues of that Coun∣trey) was had in derision, and iustly skorned abroad; whereas now a true and imperiall victorie of so many thousand enemies subdued and slaine, was currant and famous in euery mans mouth: as being indeed a thing dangerous, that a priuate mans name should be exalted aboue his Prince. In vaine then had hee sup∣pressed the studie of Oratorie, and other worthy poli∣ticke Arts, thereby to keepe downe other mens re∣putation, if he should in Military glory be disseised by another. And to be a good Commander of an Army, was to be aboue priuate estate, that being a Vertue peculiar for a Prince, and therefore not lightly to be passed ouer. With these and the like incentiues his minde was tormented; yet thought he it best to dis∣semble his malice; vntill the heat of his glory, and loue of his souldiers were somewhat abated. And foorthwith he commanded for Agricola, Triumphall Agricola recei∣ueth Triumphall ornaments. ornaments, statue, honours, and what else vsually conferred in lieu of Triumph; hee yet remaining in charge, from whence, with the like policie also, hee was shortly displaced. For Syria, by the death of Ati∣lius Rufus, lay destitute of a Lieutenant; and that place reserued for Men of great qualitie, Domitian gaue foorth was purposed for Agricola, and sent him both his Patent and Successor into Britaine; who thereupon deliuered vp the Prouince in a peaceable estate vnto Salustius Lucullus, and returned to Rome. (17) Where the life of Domitian was now grown vnmeasurable vaine. The surname Germanicus he as∣sumed to himselfe, for some small seruice therein Suetoni in vita Domitiani. Domitian his vice . done. The Moneths September and October he chan∣ged into the names of Germanicus and Domitianus, be∣cause that in the one hee entred his Empire, and in the other was borne. He caused his Statue to be made in gold, and commanded, himselfe to be called GOD. His cruelty euery way matchable to his pride. The Senatours and Nobles vpon small surmises hee murde∣red: many new tortures hee inuented: Confiscations and Banishments, were fauours, not punishments. A∣mongst all which, the Christians bare a part, whose Second Persecution this Tyrant raised and began. The great Euangelist Iohn hee banished into the Ile of Pat∣mos, Hee banished S. I su. Euseb. Eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 15. Apocal. 1. 9. Daniel 10. where hee receiued his Reuelations from Iesus Christ, appearing vnto him in no lesse Maiestie then Daniel before time had seene him in his Visions, and both (after a sort) in one and the same manner: their Visions alike, and almost to the like end: For as Daniel saw a Lion, Beare, Leopard, and Monster with Ten horns, persecute the Iewes Gods people, and to fall before the Stone cut without hands, which brake into powder the Image of their Tyrannicall Gouernment, to giue place to the peaceable Birth and Kingdome of Christ; so Iohn saw one Beast compacted of these foure, mou∣thed Apocal. 13. 2. like a Lion, footed like a Beare, spotted as the Leopard, and horned for number and power with the Monster, retaining their Tyrannie in raising Persecuti∣ons in the Church of Christ, and clouding with Idolatry the brightnesse of his Word: which shall bee cast into the Lake of fire and brimstone, when Christ shall binde vp Satan, and by his appearance abolish the 2. Thess. 2. 8. Man of Sinne. (18) Among many others slaine by Domitian, Sa∣lustius Lucullus whom he had made Lieutenant Gene∣rall Salustius Lucullus put to death. Sueton. in vit. Do∣mit. sect. 10. His offence. of Britanie was one, and the onely cause is repor∣ted to bee, that hee had deuised and made certaine Speares or Launces for seruice, which hee caused to be called Lucullians after his owne name; which was a matter held very suspitious by Domitian, who thought euerie memorable act done by another, did plucke a feather from his plume. And in these cour∣ses continued so long, that lastly hee grew odious to all, euen to his nearest friends and followers which himselfe had raised, who, together with his Wife, con∣spired his death. (19) The chiefest in the Action was Stephen, a Procurator and Steward to Domicilla his Empresse, who faining himselfe lame of the left arme, in deliue∣ring him a scroll containing the names of the con∣spirators, The actors of his death, and the treache e stroke him into the bellie with his sword, & the rest comming in, with seuen wounds made an end of his life; whose death was so acceptable to the Se∣nate, that they disgracefully abused his carcase, cast The Senate glad. downe his scutcheons and Images, and forbad all ma∣ner remembrance of him; albeit some of the Souldi∣ers The Souldiers en∣raged. asmuch stormed, seeking to reuenge his death, and canonized him for a God. (20) Of stature he was tall, his complexion faire, His personage. his countenance modest, his head verie bald, his eies red, full, great and dimme, of a comely forme, onely his bellie bearing out, his legges small, and his foote somewhat short. He died the eighteenth day of Sep∣tember, His death, age & raigne. Euseb. Eccles. li. 3. cap. 8. aged forty fiue, when hee had raigned fifteene yeeres, the yeare of our Lords incarnation ninetie eight, with whom both Tacitus and Suetonius end their Historie. The Resisters of the Romans proceedings in this our Iland of Britaine, in the daies of this Emperour Domitian, for these Southerne parts, was Aruiragus, as from Iuuenal wee haue said; and in the Northerne Caledonia, was Galgacus their Captaine; whose Coines, as Remaines and Monuments of their neuer∣dying fame, wee haue heere againe inserted. NERVA. CHAPTER XV. Nerua Emp. H Itherto haue wee pursued Ann. Do. 98. the successions in the Bri∣tish monarchie, together with the Inuasions, at∣tempts, and successe of af∣faires, for the Conquest of this Iland, vnder the first twelue Emperours of Rome: And that from such wri∣ters, who though they were the most fauourable Registers of things done by the Romanes, yet had they best meanes to know, and publish their Histories with warrantize of truth. But after the death of Domitian died many Records, and Domitian beeing dead, soone after many Records were lost. the Prouinces proceedings (especially those that most concerne Britaine) left vncertaine; and therefore are neither with the like largenesse prosecuted, nor with the like authoritie auouched. And were it not that these Romane Emperours succeeding, did onely conti∣nue the succession of our British Monarchs, many of them might be quite omitted, as neither themselues, nor deputies, allies, or enemies once spoken of con∣cerning our affaires, and the Gouernement of this Pro∣uince, during those times so maimed and defectiue (in respect of any warrantable relations) that hardly a method can bee obserued to the fitting of a conti∣nuall Historie. Yet as we finde it, let vs haue libertie Hist. magn. . lib. 3. cap. 1. to deliuer it, and rather to expose Truth in the meane attire that Time hath left her, then by disguising her Plutarch in the life of Pericles. in richer roabes to abuse the World, and make her seeme nought else but a counterfeit, as Plutarch in the life of Pericles hath complained. (2) Domitian therefore thus made away, Cocceius Cocceius Nerua aged & prudent. Nerua, a prudent, honourable, and aged person was elected Emperour by the Senate, assisted by Petronius Secundus, Captaine of the Praetorian Armie, and Par∣thenius chiefe Chamberlaine, and one of the Murthe∣rers of Domitian. His birth was noble, and of Italy in the Citie Narnia, and of the Prouince Vmbria: ru∣ling so well as he may be esteemed too good a Prince, long to continue in so bad an age. (3) What Lieutenants vnder him were in Britain Gau r. Monmou∣thensis. o vnder his Successor Traian, I find not in Record: but our English Writers from the Arch-Deacon of Monmouth, bring a succession of British Kings, and a∣mongst them Marius, who conquered Rodorick, King Flores Historiar. W. l. of Malm. a∣scribeth this me∣morial to be ere∣cted for Marius a Consul of Rome. Polycbr. lib. 4. c. 12 of the Picts accompanied with the Scots, whose Tro∣phie erected neere vnto Carleill, remained a long time after, bearing the inscription of his victorie: and after him his sonne Coilus brought vp in Rome all the time of his youth, retained their fauours, and paid them tribute without constraint. Albeit by Iuuenal, it see∣meth that Aruiragus the father of Marius, a great re∣sister Aruiragus the fa∣ther of Marius. Chap. 6. sect. 12. of the Romanes, liued in the raigne of Domitian, as hath beene touched, vnlesse you will say, that Meurigus and Aruiragus was the same Marius, as a worthy Antiquarie affirmeth. But through these vncertaineties and disagreements occasioned by the silence of better Authors, our Histories rest doubt∣full, and so must wee leaue them, returning to finish Humfrey Lhuyd in the Breu ary of Brit. vp briefly the Raigne and Life of this good Emperour Nerua. (4) Who hauing reformed many enormities, and Also in an old Manuscript is called We met. cap. 43. Cocceius Nerua recalled from banishment the Christians. Dion Cass. lib. 68. Iohn the Euange∣list returned from Pathmos. Euseb. lib. 3. c. 1. 18. Eutropius. remitted many greeuous Tributes and exactions, as that of Carriages mentioned on the reuerse of the prefixed Coine, minted by authoritie of the Senate, in eternall memorie of his goodnes; recalled from ba∣nishment the Christians seuerally dispersed, and suffred them to enioy the freedome of their profession. At which time Iohn the Euangelist returned from Path∣mos, (wherein he had beene confined) vnto Ephesus, a Citie in sia the lesse. And Nerua raigning only one yeare, foure mone s and nine daies died (of a passi∣onate anger conceiued against a Senator) in the yeare Dion Cassius. of Christ his incarnation ninetie nine, the twentie se∣uenth day of Ianuary, & seuentie sixth of his own age. TRAIAN. CHAPTER XVI. Traian Emp. V Nto Nerua succeeded Vul∣pius Traian in the Roman Empire; borne neere vnto Seuill in the Territories of Spaine: of a noble familie, Ann. Do. 99. but was much more en∣nobled in himselfe for his princely endowments, which moued Nerua in his life time to adopt him into Se tus Aurelius. so high a calling, and the whole Senate after his death ioifullie to confirme his Election, and so often to ho∣nour him with the title of the Most Excellent Prince, in publike dedications, as on the Coine aboue. Traian raised the Romans to the highest glory. (2) Hee raised the Romane Empire vnto the very highest pitch of glory, and spread the power of their Command into the largest circuit that euer before or since hath beene possessed. For the Kingdome of Da∣cia hee subdued; Armenia, Parthia, and Mesopotamia Dio. Cass. lib. 68. made subiect; Assyria, Persia, and Babylon conquered; passed Tigris, and stretched the confines of the Roman Empire vnto the remotest dominions of the Indies, which neuer before that time had heard of the Roman Indians neuer heard of the Ro∣mans till Traians time. Name. And indeed, if wee looke vpon his politicke managing of the gouernment, he may seeme (in com∣parison of others) a right worthy, memorable and Traians affability and moderation towards his sub∣iects. Eutropius. louely Prince, of much affabilitie, and familiaritie euen with his inferiours, and of such cariage towards his Subiects, as he himselfe would wish his Prince (he said) to vse towards him, if he were a Subiect. A great ob∣seruer also of Iustice, insomuch that when he inuested any Pretor, in giuing him the Sword, he commanded him to vse the same euen against his owne person, if he violated Law or Equitie. But yet against the good Christians he vsed neither of both: nay hee stirred vp their Third Persecution, wherein Ignatius and many The third perse∣cution of the Christians. Euseb. Eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 30. other worthy Saints of God, receiued the Crowne of Martyrdome, in such cruell manner, as that his other vertues are much clouded by that taxation: for mol∣lification whereof, he was compassionately intreated by Plinius Secundus his Tutor; whose Epistles to that purpose are yet extant. (3) The Iewes in his time rose vp in armes against the Gentiles, and in Cyrene, Aegypt, and Cyprus, slew Iewes made at against the Gentiles. a great number: against whom Traian sent his Cap∣taines with forces sufficient, and in diuers parts of the Empire put the Iewes to death, in such infinite num∣bers, as that Massacre is accounted the greatest Exe∣cution Traian his slaughter vpon the Iewes the greatest th euer was. that euer had beene in the world, God suffring this their punishment to light vpon them for their in∣fidelitie and obstinacie against his Christ. (4) Finally, after his Conquests in the East, retur∣ning towards Rome, at Seleucia in Asia the lesse himselfe Dion Cassius. Polycbr. lib. 4. cap. 13. was conquered by the stroke of death, by a fluxe the seuenth day of August, after he had raigned nineteene yeeres, six moneths, and fifteene daies, the yeere of our Redemption one hundred and eighteene, and of his age sixtie foure: whose ashes brought to Rome, were inclosed within the Crowne of a goodly Pillar, wrought of one intire stone, containing one hundred forty foot in height. (5) Of stature he was bigge, of complexion swar∣thie, thinne of haire both head and beard, a hooked Traians portrai∣ture. nose, brode shoulders, long hands, and a pleasant eie; whose liuely Image was borne in Triumph after his death, and that in most glorious and pompous man∣ner, in celebration of his great renowne and fame at∣tained in his life. (6) How silent soeuer writers haue beene for this Emperours affaires in this our Iland, yet it is to be thought that vnto this, as wel as vnto other Prouinces, both Propretors, Lieutenants, Presidents, Pretors, and Proconsuls were sent, and euery Citie to haue their mu∣nicipall Magistrates. The Pretor that yearely proclai∣med solemne Sessions, wherin himself sate aloft vpon Ro erdus in Pro∣tribunal. a high tribunall seate, and guarded with his lictors a∣bout him in great estate, did execute his authoritie throughout his owne iurisdiction, and determined all causes brought before him, where rods and axes were prepared for the common people, that were en∣forced to receiue a new Ruler euerie yeare. And sure∣ly as this yoke of bondage was grieuously borne of euery Prouince, vpon whose necke, it was imposed & laid: So the Britaines vnderwent the weight of that subiection with such vnwillingnes, that in the time of this Traian, they reuolted and rebelled, though pre∣sently suppressed, as it is euident out of Spartianus. (7) The care that this good Emperour had for the weale of his Subiects is proiected by his prouidence in making waies passageable from place to place, whereof remaine many testimonies by those his Cau∣seies drawne with wonderfull diligence, euen thorow the whole Iland, which now, though dismembred and cut in peeces by the Countrie people, where∣thorow they passed, yet doe many remnants thereof remaine, especially in pastures, or by-grounds out of the rode way, with bankes so high, that euidently they shew themselues. Of these Causeies Gallen writeth as followeth: The waies (saith he) Traian repaired, by pauing with stone, or raising with bankes cast vp such peeces Galen lib. 9. cap. 8▪ Met . of them as were moist and miry: by stocking vp and rid∣ding such as were rough and ouergrowne with bushes and briers: by making bridges ouer Riuers that could not bee waded thorow: where the way seemed longer then needed, by cutting out another shorter: if any where by reason of some steepe hill, the passage were hard and vneasie, by tur∣ning it aside thorow easier places: now in case it was haun∣ted with wilde beasts; or lie waste and desert, by drawing it thence thorow places inhabited, and withall laying leuell all vneuen and rugged grounds. Along these Causeies the Emperour caused to bee set little pillars or Columnes, with numerall Characters cut in thē, to signifie how many miles was from place to place. Of these Sidonius Apollinaris writeth thus: Antiquus tibi nec teratur agger; Cuius per spatium satis vetustis Nomen Caesareum viret columnis. Breake not the ancient Causeies strong, Whereon the Columnes stand along, Nor names of Caesars doe not wrong. HADRIAN. CHAPTER XVII. Hadrian Emp. Cneus Trebel. Lieut. A Fter the decease of Tra∣iane, his Nephew Aelius An. Do. 119. Hadrianus, by the consent of the Armie, who swore to him obedience, was proclaimed Emperour, the Polych. lib. 4. c. 14. Senate likewise confirming their choice, as beeing a man indued with gifts both of Art and Nature, answerable to the fortunes of his Estate. His birth was of Spaine, in the Citie Italica, neere vnto Cicill, where Traian was born, his Father Noble, and his Mother in Cales descended of an honourable stocke. (2) A great Mathematician he was, skilfull in A∣rithmeticke, Geometrie, Astronomie, and Iudicious Astro∣logie; learned in the Greeke, and Latine Tongues; in which languages he wrote both Poesie and Prose: well seene in Physicke, and knew the Vertues of Hearbes, Rootes, and Stones: A singular Musitian both for Theorie and Practise; and could both limme & carue with approbation of the skilfull: but aboue all, is Spartian . Hadrianu of an admirable me∣morie. the admirable report of his Memorie, who neuer for∣got any thing that he either read or heard. (3) His first businesse for the Empire, was rather a care to hold securely what was gotten, then by Hadri policy. enlarging the bounds to endanger the Best: and there∣fore lessening the Compasse, and bettering the strength, he planted his forces along the Riuer Eu∣phrates, and assigned that for the Easterne limits, lea∣uing out India, Armenia, Media, Assyria, Persia, and Mesopotamia, as Countries too remote for the Romans to hold to their profit. By which his doings other Prouinces tooke occasion to reuolt, thirsting after Li∣bertie, Britaines attempt alteration. and among others the Britaines (as euer most impatient of Seruitude) attempted alterations, whose Lieutenant Cneus Tribellius (Successour to Iulius Agri∣cola) could not so gouerne his Souldiers which were Ho ingshed lib. 4. cap. 20. Cneus Trebellius Lieutenant of the Britaines. growne out of discipline, and by long rest farre out of Order, but that they fell at variance among them∣selues, and disquieted the most peaceable of the Bri∣taines by their licentious maners. (4) The Northerne Inhabitants, that were more at libertie, and imboldened by their Bogs and Rocks vnaccessable, set themselues to withstand their wrōgs, to whom also many others ioined their affections and forces, whereupon some bickering insued with losse and blood; to represse which Iulius Seuerus was Iulius Se sent to suppresse the Commoti∣ons of the Bri∣taines. sent by Hadrian: but ere hee could settle the Com∣motion, was againe recalled and imploied in Syria, to suppresse the Iewish rebellion. (5) These stirres here still continuing, the Empe∣rour tooke it to be of such importance, that he resol∣ued Hadrian hims came into Bri∣taine to suppresse rebellion. in Person to addresse for Britannie, which he per∣formed in his third Consulship, the yeare of Christ One hundred twentie foure, attended on by three Legions: of which, his Army for this exploit was then composed, as appeareth by his money in the en∣trance of his life, fixed in memorie of this vnderta∣king: With these hee encountred the Northerne Riders; recouered such holds as they had taken, and forced them into the Woodes and Mountaines, whither the Romane Horsemen without danger could not pursue them. But perceiuing the Aire too sharpe for the Romanes constitution, and the Soile rough and of lesse profit then the rest, hee made a Fortification or strong Wall of Earth, which (as Lam∣pridius Adrians wall. A li. Lamprid us. saith) did continue on the West from Ituna, (that is, the Riuer Eden in Cumberland neere Car∣leil) vnto the Riuer Tina, or Tine at Newcastle in Northumberland in the East, and was no lesse then Eightie miles in length. This Wall (saith he) was made of stakes driuen deepe into the ground, and bound together in the maner of an hedge, and with Turfe and Earth intermured as a Rampire or Bulwarke to defend the Incursions of the wilder Britaines and ill Neighbours that daily molested the peace of the Ro∣manes. Hadrian his worke finished, and the Prouince re∣duced to the obedience of the fatal Gouernesse Rome, at whose feet he had laid againe the name of Britaine, as appeareth in the first Reuerse of his Coine, placed in the fronture of this Chapter) triumphantly returned to Rome, and for his honourable aduenture and Ex∣pedition had his name inscribed vpon his Coine with this addition: THE RESTORER OF BRI∣TANNIE. Adrians Coines. (6) Neither after this seemed the Southerne Bri∣taines greatly to contend, but patiently bore the yoke of subiection, which Time and Custome had made lesse painfull, the rather, for that they saw themselues to stand in neede of the Romanes helpe against the in∣roades of their owne Countrimen, whose crueltie was now as much feared, as in former times the Inuasion of Strangers: whereupon they conformed themselues more willingly to the Romane Lawes, both in Marti∣all and Ciuill affaires: which were then principallie directed by Licinius Priscus, who had beene not long Licinius Priscus Lieutenant of Britaine. Hist. magn. Brit. lib. 3. cap. 1. before imploied by Hadrian in the seruice of Iewrie, and was at this present Lieutenant of Britannie. (7) This Iewish warre happened in the eigh∣teenth yeere of the Raigne of Hadrian, who suddenly Dion Cass. assailed and slew where they came, both Romaines & Christians: for reuenge whereof, besides an infinite number of them slaine and tortured, their Citie Ieru∣salem was also raced euen to the ground, and another Ierusalem raced to the ground. built, but not altogether in the same place, and the name therof changed to AELIA: the Iewes vtterly banished thence, and (as Aristion Pellaus writeth) not Euseb. lib. 4. cap. 6. Iewes not per∣mitted to looke to Ierusalem. lawfull for them to looke towards that Citie nor Soile, no not through the Chinke or Creuice of a dore: And vpon the Gate that leadeth towards Beth-lehem, hee caused a Swine to be engrauen, a Beast by the Law ac∣counted A swine set on the Gate of Ierusalem. most vncleane, and by them abhominable. (8) But as this Emperour was exasperated against the Iewes, so was hee gratious and fauourable to the Adrian fauorable to the christians. Christians, and the rather at the request of Quatratus, a Disciple (as is supposed) of the Apostles; who wrote vnto him concerning them; and of Aristides a learned Philosopher of Athens, who made an Apologie for their defence; so that the Persecution then in practise was forbidden by Hadrian in a publicke Edict; who (as Lampridius writeth) was minded to haue built a Lampridius . Se eri. Temple to the seruice of Christ, had not some disswa∣ded him therefrom. In extremitie of sicknes he de∣signed Caesar, Lucius Aelius, whose Coyne wee haue hereunder expressed. A man deare to this Emperour, if we consider at how great a rate hee bought for him the acceptation of the Commons and Militarie men: And how short a time the blaze of that Honour con∣tinued: for hee died so soone, that Hadrian himselfe had wont to say, Ostendent terris hunc tantum fata, nec vltra Esse sinent.— (9) When hee had raigned in great honour and loue the space of one and twenty yeeres, fiue mo∣neths, and fifteene daies, hee died, the eighth or Spartianus. Dion Cassius. Polycbr. tenth of Iulie, of a dropsie: which maladie so tor∣mented him, that willingly he refused all sustenance, and languished away through faintnesse. Hee was of personage tall, and very strong, of a good complexi∣on and amiable countenance, wearing the haire of his head and beard long, and died aged sixty two, the yeere of our Lord God, One hundred thirtie nine. Vnder this Emperour M. F. CL. PRISCVS LICINIVS, was the Propraetor of Britannie, and imploi∣ed in the Iourney of Iurie with Hadrian; as appeareth by this antique Inscription in a broken Marble. M. F. CL. PRISCO. ICINIO. ITALICO. LEGATO. AVGVSTORVM PR. PR. PROV. CAPPADOCIAE PR. PR. PROV. BRITANNIAE LEG. AVG. — — — LEG. IIII. GALLICIAE. PRAEF. COH. IIII. LINGONVM. VEXILLO. MIL. ORNATO. A. DIVO. HADRIANO. IN EXPEDITIONE IVDAIC. Q. CASSIVS. DOMITIVS. PALVMBVS. ANTONINVS PIVS. CHAPTER XVIII. Antonin. Pius Emp. Lollius Vrbi∣cus Lieut. N Ext vnto whom succee∣ded Antoninus, (for his An. Do. 139. many vertues) surnamed the Pious: and by the Se∣nate, Father of his Countrey. This man did not onely equall his Adopter and Pre∣decessours, in wisdome and other princely qualities, but was also compared, for his peace and policie, vnto Numa Pompilius the se∣cond King of Rome, who for his renowned gouern∣ment, is so famously in their Histories recorded. His birth was in Lombardy, the son of Aurelius Fuluius, and Nephew to Titus Aurelius Fuluius, that had beene Con∣sul, and held other Offices of dignity and State. The whole time of whose Raigne was so spent in peace, that small remembrances remaine of any martiall af∣faires: yet such as we finde in Britannie we will deliuer. (2) At his first entrance into the Empire, about the yeere of Christ, One hundred thirtie nine (as appeareth by the money minted in memorie of the Antoninus raig∣ned in peace. reduction of Britaine) the Northerne Britaines in that part of this Ile began to stirre, and made inroads into the Prouince, notwithstanding the Rampire or Wall The Northerne Britaines rebell in the beginning of Antoninus raigne. that Adrian had made. Against whom Lollius Vrbicus Lieutenant heere vnder Antoninus, brought his power, and with some skirmishes put them backe: taking from the Brigantes part of their Land, as a Mulct, for the waste they had done to the Genounians, a Prouince adioining vnto the Brigantes, whose people had put themselues vnder the Emperours protection. Which done, he repaired the Wall with stronger Fortifications; Adrians Wall fortified. or (which is more probable) raised vp another not farre from the same, to double the defense: for (saith Iulius Capitolinus) Lollius the Legate to Antoninus ouer∣comming Iulius Capitolinus. the Britaines, built another turfe Wall to diuide the Prouince, and to impeach the incursions of the barba∣rous. Notwithstanding the honour of this seruice (as is testified by the ancient Panegyricke) was (by one M mertinus in a Panegyricke Oration, in praise of Maximian. Fronto) attributed wholly to Antoninus the Empe∣rour himselfe: who, although absent and in his Palace at Rome, yet sitting as it were at the Helme of a Ship, did command and direct the enterprise, and therefore had right to the glory thereof. This Wall also (as M. Cla∣renceaux coniectureth, hauing seene it so tracted in an Cambden Brit. ancient Chorographicall Chart) was drawen from the Riuer Tine vnto Carleill: but Time and Warre haue worne it now away. (3) In the meane while a new insurrection was kindled among the Yorkeshire, Lancashore, Westmerland, Northumberland. Hist. magn. Brit. lib. 3. cap. 11. Seires Saturnius Admirall of the British Fleet. Brigantes, that annoied some of the Romane Confederats. But by the discretion of the Generall, it was quenched before it came to flame: for vpon the first rumour of the Reuolt, Lollius marched thither with part of his Armie, commanding Seius Saturnius, Admirall of the British Fleet, to waffe vpon the North of the Iland both to defend the Coast from danger, and also vpon occasions to further the Land∣seruice, if need were: by which meanes, the Brigantes were easily reduced to obedience, euen by the pre∣sence onely of the Lieutenant, who for his good seruice done in Britaine, during the short time of his imploiment there, obtained the surname Britannicus. This may by the first figure in the face of this Chap∣ter (being in the third Consulship of this Emperour) be coniectured to haue hapned in the yeere of Christ one hundred forty one; and by inscription of the last Coine in that ranke it is manifest that there was some other expedition against Britaine the yeere following. (4) I cannot omit, though not directly pertinent to our purpose, the care that this good Emperour ge∣nerally Antoninus Pi a great defender of the Christia . had for the distressed and persecuted Christi∣ans (who no doubt by his bounty enioied much tran∣quillitie heere in Britaine also) in whose defense hee wrote to his Deputies in Asia, and published an Edict against their Accusers, the effect whereof (from Eu∣sebius) . Eccles. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 13. is this: (5) The Emperor Caesar Marcus Aurelius An∣toninus The Edict of An∣toninus for prote∣ction of the Christians. Augustus, Armenicus, Pontifex Maximus, fifteene times Tribune, thrice Consul, vnto the Com∣mons of Asia sendeth greeting. I doubt not but the Gods themselues haue a care that wicked persons shall bee brought to light: for it much more doth appertaine vnto them, then it doth vnto you, to punish such as refuse to yeeld them worship. But this course which you take doth confirme them whom you persecute, in this their opinion of you, that you are impious men, and meere Atheists; whereby it commeth to passe, that they desire in the quarrell of their God rather to die, then to yeeld to the wils of such as you are, and to embrace your forme of Religion. Let it not seeme vnseasonable to call to your remembrance the Earth-quakes, which lately happened, and which yet are to your great terrour and griefe; because I vnderstand that in such like accidents you cast the enuy of such com∣mon misfortunes vpon their shoulders, whereby their confidence and trust in their God is much the more increased: whereas you being still ignorant of the true causes of such things, doe both neglect the worship of the other Gods, and also banish and per∣secute the seruice of the Immortall God, whom the Christians doe worship, and you persecute to the death all the embracers of that Profession. In the behalfe of these men many of the Prouinciall Presi∣dents haue written before vnto our Father of famous memory: to whom he answered, that they should not bee molested, vnlesse they were proued to haue practised Treason against the Emperiall State: and touching the same matter some haue giuen notice vnto me; to whom I haue answered with like mo∣deration as my Father did before me. And by this our Edict doe we ordaine, that if any hereafter bee found thus busie in molesting these kinde of men without any their offence, we command that hee Iulius Capitol. that is accused vpon this point, be absolued, albeit he be proued to be such a man as he is charged to Antoninus person and vertues. bee, that is, a Christian: and he that is his Accuser shall suffer the same punishment, which he sought to procure vpon the other. This Edict was promulged at Ephesus in the Gene∣rall Councell of all Asia: so fauourable was this good Emperour to the true Professours, and (indeed) to all sorts of men, hauing that Apothegme of Scipio Afri∣canus rife in his mouth: That he had rather saue one Sub∣iects life, then kill a thousand Enemies. (6) He was of Stature tall, of a seemely presence, in countenance Maiesticall, in maners milde, of a sin∣gular wit, verie learned and eloquent, a great louer of Husbandrie, peaceable, mercifull and bounteous; in the last of which vertues, he so much exceeded; that thereby he set going whollie his owne priuate estate & demaines, whereat when his Empresse much repined, he told her, that when hee vndertooke the Title and State of an Emperour, he then did forgoe the interest and proprieties of a priuate Person: meaning that a Prince is not much to respect his priuate wealth, so as the publike wealth and welfare of the State may bee aduanced. In fine, this large Euloge and praise is fa∣stened on him, that neither in his youth he did anie thing rashly, nor in his age any thing negligently: In which honourable course, hauing raigned twentie and two yeares, (some say twentie three) seuen mo∣neths, and twentie sixe daies, he died of a feuer at Lo∣rium the seuenth of March, the yeare of his life seuen∣tie fiue, and of Christ one hundred sixtie two. MARCVS AVRELIVS. CHAPTER XIX. Marcus Au∣rclius Emp. Calphurnius Agric. Lieut. F Rom the vertuous exam∣ples An. Do. 162. of the good Emperour Pius; proceeded a branch of no lesse towardlinesse and fruitfulnesse, Marcus Aurelius, Antoninus, Verus, Philosophus (for by so many honourable names is he remembred:) and al∣though hee sprung not from Pius, as from his natiue roote, yet was he his adopted Sonne, and graffed into his Stocke and alli∣ance by the Marriage of his daughter Faustina: Hee was the Sonne of Elius Verus who died Praetor, and whose Pedigree is brought from Numa Pompilius, the Iulius Capitol. Lucius Verus chosen. Caesar. second King of Rome; and his Mother was Domitia Camilla, daughter of Claudius Tullus. (2) This man chose to him for his Associate in the Empire, Lucius Ve∣rus, the sonne of Lucius Ceionius Com∣modus, whom Pius had adopted (but died before him) and therefore this Verus was respectiuely commended vnto Aurelius; betwixt whose na∣tures and conditions was as much oddes, as betwixt Day and Night; The one very moderate, louing, and industrious, the other proud, carelesse and cruell: the fruits whereof, the poore Christians felt, whose chiefest pillers, Polycarpus, Bishop of Smyrna, and Iustinus Martyr, an excellent Phi∣losopher, with infinite more, were put to most cruell deaths; and by him the fourth persecution of Gods Saints was be∣gun: whose licentious and bloodie life, lasting in Authoritie the space of nine yeares, was cut off by an Apoplexie in the pre∣sence of Aurelius beeing then in expidition towards Germanie, whose Coine wee haue here expressed as wee finde it minted with his face and reuerse. (3) Aurelius the Emperour following the warres against those, who there reuolted, was inclosed about with his Enemies, called the Quadi, and suffered great mortalitie both by Pestilence, and much more by want of Water, whereby himselfe and Host were al∣most consumed: At which time many Christian Souldiers being in his Campe, and commanded (as Ionas was) to call vpon their God, they fell prostrate on the ground in praiers, and obtained of him so plenteous a shower of raine, as therewith after fiue daies extreamest drouth and thirst, the whole Army was refreshed, and the Quadi contrariwise by Thunder Aureli obtai∣neth t ne by the Christians praier. Eutropius. Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 5. Acts and Monu∣ments. & Lightning were quite dispersed and ouerthrowne. (4) This wonder (saith Eusebius) is reported euen by those Historians, who fauoured not Christianitie: and the prudent Epistle of the Emperour himselfe, (which hee wrote to the Senate for confirmation of this miracle, yet extant) doth warrant the same: wher∣upon he both mitigated the rage against Christs Pro∣fessours, and (by testimonie of Apollinaris) named that . P. Oro . Tertulli n. Legion of the Christians, for an euerlasting remem∣brance, The lightning Legion. (5) In his Raigne Calphurnius Agricola was sent Lieutenant into Britannie, where the inhabitants sought some alterations of the State, sore repining at the oppressions of the Romanes. But the Surname A∣gricola reuiuing the remembrances of their former ouerthrowes, so daunted their Courages, that at the presence of the Generall, who came amongst them to preuent all occasions, they gaue ouer their intended enterprise: for which, and for many other his poli∣cies there vsed, he worthily deserued great commen∣dations, but (for the most part) the glorie of all such seruices was attributed to the Emperours themselues, and the paines in attempting, and perrils in obtaining did commonly breed nothing but disgrace and enuy after victorie, to those by whom it was atchieued. Yet besides the stories, the memorie of his being heere Lieutenant, is deliuered to posteritie, by this Inscrip∣tion, once erected in the Picts Wall, an Altar to the Goddesse Suria, and now preserued by S r . Robert Cot∣ton of Connington, amongst other Monuments of like qualitie. DEAE SVRI¦AE SVB CALP¦VRNIO AGR¦ICOLA LEG. AVG. PR. PR. A. LICINIVS. CLEMENS. PRAEF. C. oH. 1. HAMMIo R. ✚ So also Lutius Verus, (whom this excellent Em∣perour had in the yeere 162. as appeareth by his Coine of Concord, set in the entrance of his life, ele∣cted his College in the Empire) to supply the defect of merit in himselfe, tooke from the Conquest of Aui∣dius Cassius, and other his Captaines in Armenia, Par∣thia and Media, the Trophies of their victories, with which he filled vp his Title, and adorned his Money, expressed in the beginning of this Chapter. (6) About these times, albeit other things went not so happily with Britaine as might haue beene wished, yet one felicitie then befell her, which did both counteruaile her owne calamities, and ouer∣poize the good fortunes of all other Nations: and that was the blessed rest of the Gospell of peace in this warring and vnpeaceable Kingdome, a great part thereof being gouerned at that time by King Lucius, N ius. Lucius and Leuer-Maur doe both signifie Great Brightnes. Tacitus in vita Agricola. surnamed Leuer-Maur. For that was the policie and ancient custome of the Romans (as Tacitus saith) to vse euen Kings themselues for their instruments, to bring the people into bondage. And Antoninus Pius ending warre, permitted Kingdomes to be gouerned by their owne Kings, and Prouinces by their owne Comites (as saith Capitolinus.) This King disliking the Capitolinus. Paganisme and Idolatry of his people, (though, as wee haue shewed, among many of them the truth of Christs Doctrine was both taught and embraced, euen from the first planting thereof) and being incited both by the exemplary life and piety of the Christians, . Hare∣ Marty log. Sanctorum. and also by the manifest miracles wrought amongst them, and encouraged moreouer by the fauourable Edicts of the Emperours in their behalfe, and by the good affections and forwardnesse of their Deputies heere, Trebellius and Pertinax; he gaue leaue to their Religion by publike warrant, and was the first Chri∣stian King in the world, and Britaine the first Prouince Lucius the first Christian King. that embraced the Gospell by publike authority, as Sa∣bellicus saith. (7) This Lucius (as before wee haue touched) to . 7. lib. 5. be better furnished with Christian Lawes for himselfe and Subiects, missa legatione ab Imperatore Romanorum, & à Papa Romano Eleutherio, (as Nennius saith) for in Nennius. this purerage the Church was so humble, to vaile (as farre as might be) her actions in the Imperiall licence, sent two learned Clerkes, whose names were Eluanus Liber La n∣sis Eccles. Florentius Vig rn. Beda lib. cap. 4. Flores riarum. and Meduuinus, skilfull in the Scriptures, to Eleutherius Bishop of Rome: whose Reply to his most godly De∣mand (because the fauourers of the Papall Authoritie either doe doubt it, or altogether deny it) I haue thought good heere verbatim to insert, as I my selfe This Record is now in the hands of the right wor∣thy Antiquarie, Sir Robert Cotton Knight. haue found it, in a most ancient Manuscript, amongst the authenticke Records and Constitutions of the Citie of LONDON. The originall Epistle of Eleutherius Bishop of ROME vnto Lucius the first Christian King of BRITAINE. (8) SCripsit Dominus Eleutherius Papa Lucio Regi Britanniae ad correctionem Regis & Proce∣rum Regni Britanniae. Petistis à nobis Leges Romanas, & Caesaris vobis transmitti, quibus in Regno Britanniae vti voluistis. Leges Romanas & Caesaris semper reprobare possumus, Legem Dei nequaquam. Suscepistis enim nuper (miseratione diuina) in Regno Britanniae, Legem & Fi∣dem Christi. Habetis penes vos in Regno vtram{que} Pagi∣ am: ex illis (Dei gratia) per Consilium Regni vestri sume Legem, & per illam, Lege Dei patientia. de patientia vestrum rege Britan∣niae Regnum. Vicarius verò Dei estis in Regno, iuxta Pro∣phetam Regem; Domini est terra, & plenitudo eius; orbis terrarum, & vniuersi qui habitant in eo. Et rursum, iuxta Prophetam Regem: Dilexisti iustitiam, & Odisti iniquitat , prop vnxit Deus Deus tuus l titia pr con∣sorti . o. ī. {pro}p̄. . te Deus Deus tuus o. l. p̄. cō. cae. Et rursum, iuxta Prophetam Regem: Deus iudicium tuum, &c. Non enim dixit iudi∣cium, ne{que} iustitiam Caesaris. Filij enim Regis, gentes Chri∣stianae & populi Regni sunt, qui sub vestra protectione & pace in Regno degunt & consistunt, iuxta Euangelium: Quemadmodum gallina congregat pullos sub alis. Gentes verò Regni Britanniae & populi vestri sunt; quos diuisos, debetis in vnum, ad concordiam, & pacem, & ad fidem, & legem Christi, ad sanctam Ecclesiam congregare, reuo∣care, fouere, manutenere, protegere, regere, & ab iniurio∣sis & malitiosis, & ab inimicis semper defendere. Vae Regno cuius Rex puer est, & cuius Principes manè come∣dunt: non voco Regem propter paruam & nimiam aetatem, propter par∣uam nimiam aeta∣tem. sed propter stultitiam, & iniquitatem, & insanitatem: iuxta Prophetam Regem: Viri sanguinum & dolosi non di∣midiabunt dies suos, &c. Per comestionem, intelligimus gulam: per gulam, luxuriam: per luxuriam, omnia turpia & peruersa, & mala: iuxta Salomonem Regem: In ma∣leuolam animam non introibit sapientia, nec habitabit in corpore subdito peccatis. Rex dicitur à regendo, non à reg∣no: Rex eris dum bene regis: quod nisi feceris, nomen Re∣gis non in te constabit, & nomen Regis perdes, quod absit. Det vobis Omnipotens Deus, Regnum Britanniae sic regere, vt possitis cum eo regnare in aeternum, cuius Vicarius est is in Regno praedicto. Cui cum Patre, &c. The same in English: POpe Eleutherius thus wrote to Lucius King of Bri∣tannie, for the reformation of the King and the Nobi∣litie of the Kingdome of Britaine: You desired vs to send vnto you the Romane and Imperiall Lawes, which you would vse in your Kingdome of Britannie. The Roman Lawes and the Emperours wee may at all times mislike, but the Law of God by no meanes. By the Diuine Clemen∣cie you haue of late receiued in your Kingdome of Britannie the Law and Faith of Christ: You haue with you in your Kingdome beth the Old and New Testament: out of them (in Gods name) by the Counsell of your State, take you a Law, and therewith by Gods permission, gouerne your kingdome of Britannie: For you are Gods Vicar in your Kingdome, as the kingly Prophet saith, The earth is the Lords and the plenty thereof, the whole world and they that dwell therein. And againe in the same Pro∣pheticall Psal. 89. 11. King; Thou hast loued righteousnesse and hated iniquity, wherefore, God, euen thy God, hath Psal. 45. 7. anointed thee with the oyle of gladnesse aboue thy fellowes. And againe: Lord giue thy iudgements vnto the king, and thy iustice vnto the Kings sonne. He saith not, The iudgement or iustice of the Emperor. And Psal. 72. 1. the Kings sonnes are the Christian Nations, and Peo∣ple of the kingdome, such as liue and abide together in your Kingdome, vnder your Protection and peace; according to that in the Gospell: As the Hen gathereth her Chick∣ens vnder her wings. The Nations of the Kingdome of Britanny are your People, who being now seuered, you Matth. 23. 37. ought to gather them vnto Vnity, Concord and Peace, and reclaime them to the Faith and Law of Christ, and to the holy Church, to foster them, cherish them, protect, and rule them, and alwaies to defend them from all iniurious, malicious, and hostile attempts. For, Woe be to the king∣dome, whose King is a child; and whose Princes rise early to banquetting: Neither doe I call a King a child, for the tendernesse of his Age, but for the folly and wicked∣nesse and madnesse of his disposition: As that roiall Pro∣phet saith: Wicked and bloud-thirsty attaine not to halfe their Age. And by banqueting I meane gluttony; by Psal. 55. 23. gluttony, luxury; by luxury all filthinesse, peruersity, and lewdnesse: according to that of King Salomon: Wise∣dome shall not enter into the wicked soule, nor shall it dwell in a Body enthrald to Sinne. A King hath his name from Ruling, and not from his Kingdome: and so long shall you be indeed a King, while you rule well; which if you doe not, the name of a King will not continue with you, but you shall lose that roiall title; which God forbid. Al∣mighty God grant you so to rule your Kingdome of Bri∣tanny, that with him, whose Vicar you are in your said Kingdome, you may raigne eternally. To whom with the Father, &c. (9.) The date of this Epistle (as by some other Copies it appeareth) being the yeare of the second Cambden. Consulship of Commodus and Vespronius, may giue great light and satisfaction to such as are curious to know the truth, and to reconcile the differences of our Hi∣storians, touching the time: That Consulship being a∣bout the yeare of Christ one hundred and eighty: which was at the beginning (if not a little before) of Commodus his raigne; and therefore whereas some re∣fer it to the one hundred sixty ninth yeer after Christs Passion, it is apparant to be the only error of transcri∣bers, who so writ in stead of one hundred seuenty nine after his birth; which was, anno currente, the ve∣ry time of Commodus being Consul the second time: and on this yeere agree; both forrain and domestick Sabellic. Ievvell. Fox. writers of this matter. And albeit the very texture of this Epistle, carieth with it the true Character of Anti∣quity, yet because our worthy writers, mentioning Parsons 3. Con∣uersions. Part. 1. c. 4. this Epistle, are charged of flat forgery (by such who challenge to be Masters in all ancient knowledge) we will adde somewhat, to wash off those false aspersi∣ons, both from the Record, and from the mentioners thereof. Their first exception is; that the Latin Copy would doubtlesse haue been produced by them, if it had not beene Ibidem. counterfeit. Whereto what need we answer, sith now we haue produced it, and can produce as many, as there are Copies of King William the Conquerors Lawes, wherein it is expresly repeated? The next is, that the English translations of it differ each from other. A reason more childish then the former, sith euery man hath a seuerall conceit of that he translateth, and sometimes the very Originalls, (by transcribers igno∣rance or omission) cause variety of translation, as may appeare in the variae lectiones of this Copy prefixed. The last, but most saucy and ignorant exception is, that the places of Scriptures mentioned in the letter, are so Parson ibid. sottishly and senselesly applied, as is vnworthy to be fa∣thered on the learned Eleutherius. Let vs therefore in a word, bring the diuinity of this Grand-censurer to the touchstone: For Eleutherius proueth, first, that Kings are Gods Vicars in their kingdome, because the whole Earth is properly Gods, and therefore Kings haue it not as their owne, but as his Lieutenants: Next, that as Dauid typically, and Christ impliedly, was by God an∣nointed King, for the execution of Righteousnesse and Iustice, so euery godly King ought to make that the on∣ly end of his high honor, that being by God aduanced, he might likewise aduance Righteousnesse, Iustice, and the seruice of God, whose vassall he is: and that there∣fore Gods iudgements and Lawes, are to be preferred by them, before all humane Lawes: with which they should rule and cherish their godly subiects as their children: and protect them and gather them vnder one faith as Christ (their master) doth, who therefore compareth him∣selfe, to a Hen gathering her Chickens vnder her wings. The defects of which Princely duties, Eleutherius most liuely expresseth afterward, in so proper appli∣cations, as if the learnedst fathers on these places be duly examined, they will be found no whit to exceed the apprehensions of this Godly Bishop. But if Robert Cowback, would haue cast his eie on the moderne Popes, and their Cardinals applications of Scrip∣tures, what would he then say? God made a greater light and a lesse: therefore the Pope is as much greater then the Emperor, as the Sunne is bigger then the Moone. Christ said to Peter, Kill and eat: therefore the Pope may excommunicate and depose Kings (yea and kill them too for a need.) Peter said, Behold two swords; therefore the Pope hath both Temporall and Spirituall Iurisdiction ouer the world. So God said to Ieremy, he should plant and transplant: therefore the Pope may dispose and transpose all Kingdomes at his pleasure. Christ to Peter, Cephas is a stone but all serues their turne. thou art Cephas, and Cephas is a head; therefore the Pope is head of the Church. Domini sunt Cardines Terra. The earth is the Lords: therefore the Cardinals are the Lords of the Earth. On such pillers and applications of Scriptures, is the whole Papall greatnesse founded, and yet these late Scribes can scoffingly cauill at the godly applications of ancient Eleutherius. But to our purpose. (10.) This Epistle with two other Preachers, Capgraue. Marianus. Faganus and Daminius, sent vnto King Lucius, did not a little encourage him in his godly purpose, in so∣much that receiuing Baptisme, the Temples of the Lucius his refor∣mation of mat∣ters vpon the Bi∣shops letter. Records of Saint Asaphs Church. Chester as saith an old Manu∣script. chap. 34. S. Peters Church in Cornhill buil∣ded by Lucius. Heathenish Flamins and Arch-Flamines euen thirtie one in number, were conuerted into so many Christi∣an Bishops Sees, whereof London, Yorke and Carlein, now Saint Dauids; were made the Metropolitants of the Pro∣uince. (11.) A table remaining in the Parish Church of Saint Peter in Cornhill London, recordeth that the foundation thereof was by this King Lucius, and that Church to haue been the Cathedrall to that Arch∣bishops See. There be that ascribe the foundation of Poll. Virg l. Wil. Harrison. W. Lamb. Pera . Saint Peters Church at Westminster vnto him; vnlesse the places are mistaken. Others affirme that this King Lucius likewise built a Church within Douer-castle, to the seruice of Christ, endowing it with the Tell or customes of that Hauen. Differences there are about the time of his Raigne, but none at all for his conuer∣sion and establishing of the Christian Faith. As for Fabi . those who would haue this Lutius after his Baptisme to saile into Gallia and other forrein parts, where sub∣duing many Pagans, he became the Apostle to the Ba∣narians, and that his sister Emerita fifteene yeeres after Emerita a Mar∣tyr in the City Augusta. was martyred in the City Augusta: I find thereof no warrant in any sufficient writer; but in this all others agree, that he raigned twelue yeeres, and lieth buried in Gloucester. (12) This good Emperour possessed the Seate of Maiestie, nineteene yeares and eleuen daies; where∣in he alwaies approued himselfe, in wit excellent, in life vertuous, verie learned and eloquent, full of Cle∣mency, Instite, and Temperance, nothing inferiour to most of the worthiest Emperours before him, nor matchable in qualities by many of the MOnarchs that Tertull. by Onuphr. Dion. Cassius. followed him: He died the seuenteenth day of Aprill the yeare of our Sauiour one hundred eighty one, and of his owne age fiftie nine: leauing to the world a misse for the present, and to posterities a perpetuall memorie of his vertues; and happy had he been, saith Capitolinus, had he not left behind him a Sonne. Valerianus lib. 2. LIVIVS AELIVS AVRELIVS COMMODVS ANTONINVS. CHAPTER XX. T HE prudent life, and loue conceiued of so good a Fa∣ther, Ann. Dom. 181. gaue hopefull signes and ioifull entrance vnto Eutropius. the Raigne of yong Com∣modus, his soone degenera∣ting Sonne; who had no∣thing from him but Na∣ture, and that also much suspected: The knowne Adulteries of Faustina, his Mother strongly confir∣ming the opinion of Bastardie. (2) At nineteen yeeres of age, he was inuested Emperor, his raigne not long, but life as loose and im∣pious Commodus his qualities. as the worst: in sottish pride equalizing Caligula, for intemperancie another Vitellius, and in cruelties a second Domitian. Three hundred Concubines continu∣ally he kept, and vpon one of them, named Martia, so doted, that he wore her painted Picture vpon the outside of his Garment; and instiling his money Her∣culi Commodiano or Romano, which was stamped about the yeere 193. Sometimes (Hercules- like) would shew himselfe roabed in a Lions skinne, bearing a Club in Cassiodor. his hand in stead of a Scepter. Other whiles wantonly clad in the habit of an Amazon woman; alwaies cost∣ly, but seldome ciuill. (3) The Month August, he named Commodus, September, Herculeus, and December, Amazonius, ac∣cording Commodus alte∣red the Months. to his owne or his Concubines names. Com∣mendable in nothing but for his skill in darting, and for some small breathing of the persecuted Christians; which came not of himselfe, but (as Xiphilinus wri∣teth) by the mediation of Martia his beloued Concu∣bine, Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 19. who was found very fauourable to their do∣ctrine: But the outragious wickednesse of his life made him so hatefull to all, as that his death was of∣ten Acts and Monu∣ments. plotted; and once by some of the Noblest, with whom Lucilla his owne Sister conspired; for which fact he put her, with the rest of the conspirators, to death. The Empire and all things els he wielded at the discretion of others, attending only his voluptu∣ous pleasures, howsoeuer the State or Prouinces fared vnder him. (4) In Britanny the Northren Borderers brake thorow the Wall, and finding the Frontiers but weak∣ly guarded entred the Prouince, where suddenly they surprized the Roman Generall; and killing many of the Souldiers, ranged the Country, wasting (without re∣sistance) all where they went. Commodus at Rome, hea∣ring these stirres in Britaine rouzed vp his spirits, and sent one Vlpius Marcellus to stay their fury; who with great difficulty forced them back beyond the Wall: Vlpius Marcel∣lus sent Lieute∣nant into Bri∣taine. and seeing the carelesse seruice of the Souldiers, reui∣ued againe the ancient discipline of Warre, that by long ease had been left off by the Romans. The repressing of this incursion, as it seemeth by some reuolt of the prouince, was about the yeere of Christ one hundred eighty six, as appeareth by the monies of this Empe∣ror set in the entrance of his life, at which time in memory of some worthy expedition and victory a∣gainst the Britains he stamped them. (5) This Lieutenant Marcellus is reported to be Dion. Cas. lib. 72. Vlpius Marcellus a man of great vertues. of a maruellous great temperance and strange diet; for all the time of his abode here hee would eat no Bread, but such as was baked in Rome, neither slept he more then would maintaine nature, whereby both his priuate businesses and proiects for publike serui∣ces were commonly dispatched by night. Seuere he was in the execution of his place, not led by fauour of the person, nor staid from iustice by corrupted Bribes; esteeming Money only for necessity, and riches no fur∣ther then made for publike good: But those his ver∣tues though now with vs they get him honour, yet then did purchase him Enuie with the Emperor. Who liued (saith Lampridius) for his Subiects mischiefe and his owne shame: For Commodus hearing Marcellus daily Lampred. commended, construed his Praise to be his owne Re∣proch; and doubting lest he should grow too high, thought good to crop him off betimes, and so sent him Letters of discharge. (6) The Armie then feeling the raines loose that ere-whiles had beene borne with a stiffer hand, fell straight to a disordered mutinie, and therein procee∣ded with such boldnesse as they openly refused any longer to acknowledge Commodus for their Soue∣raigne: At which time Perennius was a chiefe Agent and so ruled all in Rome for the Emperor, as that he en∣tertained a hope to be himselfe (in time) an absolute Perennius the greatest substi∣tute vnder Commodus. and sole-ruling Emperour, and hauing now fit occasi∣on offred to spread his power further; he tooke vpon him to redresse these disorders (whilst Commodus wal∣lowed in his lasciuious idlenesse) and displacing some worthie Captaines at his owne pleasure, sent other persons of meane respect or parts, to command those Legions in Britaine, that formerly had been led by Noble Senators and men of Consular dignity, where∣by greater mischiefe began to accrew and ciuill dis∣sensions daily to burst forth, the Armie scorning their vpstarst Commanders, and the Captaines insulting o∣uer the Souldiers, (of all sides) the Aides so disquieted, that had the Britaines followed the aduantage, the whole Prouince at that time had been in hazard to be lost: vpon which distractions no lesse then fifteene hundred Souldiers at once went out of the Land to Rome to complaine their wrongs vnto Commodus: where charging Perennius to bee the stirrer of these troubles, with an intent thereby to raise himsefe or his sonne to the Emperiall Maiesty (a string that can∣not be touched without sound in a Soueraignes eare) they were so farre heard and beleeued that Perennius was to them deliuered to be put to death, which ac∣cordingly Perennius deli∣uered to the Bri∣tish Souldiers to be put to death. they accomplished with all extremity. (7) Then was sent for Lieutenant into Britaine Heluius Pertinax, a man of low birth, but high For∣tunes, being risen from the state of a common Souldi∣er, Lamprid. Heluius Pertinax sent Lieutenant into Britaine. to the dignity of a Consull, and had been Com∣mander before that time ouer many Prouinces. Him had Perennius discharged from Britaine, and with dis∣gracesent and confined into Liguria where hee was borne, whose credit Commodus again with such fauors repaired, that he gaue him the Sirname Britannicus, which glorious title also himselfe had taken about the yeere 184. At his first entrance and ariuage, he assai∣ed Out of a coine of this Emperors instiling him Brit. in the 8. yeere of his Tribuneiship and 4. of his Consulship. by rough hand to suppresse the rebellions of the Army, and aduentured his person so farre in some tu∣mults that he was stricken downe and left for dead: but afterwards proceeding with better aduice he composed those troubles with most seuere punish∣ments of the principall offenders: whereby notwith∣standing he presently grew odious to all, and there∣upon so far feared his own safety, that he made suit Heluius Perti∣nax made suit to be discharged of his office. to the Emperor to be discharged of his Lieutenantship. (8) Vnto him succeeded Clodius Albinus in the Gouernment of Britaine, a man of great birth, forward Histor magna. Brit. lib. 3. cap. 7. Clodius Albinus sent Lieutenant into Britaine. enough, and fortunate, for which the Emperor Commo∣dus either vpon fauor or feare, did honour him with the title of Caesar, though Albinus seemed vnwilling to accept of the same, and afterwards discouered his dis∣position more openly in approuing the Ancient and free state of the Romans. For vpon a false report of the death of Commodus, he made an Oration to the Legi∣ons in Britanny in fauour of the Senate, whole kind of Clodius Albinus more affecting Senators then Emperors. Gouernment he much commended and preferred before the rule of the Emperors: Of which his affecti∣on when Commodus vnderstood, he sent Iulius Seuerus in all hast, to take charge of the Armie: and Albinus Iulius Seuerus Deputy. retired himselfe from all publike affaires, vntill the death of Commodus, which not long after followed, and was wrought vpon this occasion: He hauing assig∣ned many to die, and to that end had inrolled their names in a scroll, it chanced Martia his Concubine to light on the same, wherein she saw her selfe allotted Commodus pur∣pose discouered by his Concu∣bine. for one: And reuealing this his purpose to others, that stood in the same list, and in the like danger; they to∣gether thought best to secure their owne liues by his death: and with poison, stabs and strangling made him away, when he had liued one and thirty yeeres, Eutrop. Lamprid. Maximus. foure moneths, and viciously raigned thirteen yeeres eight moneths and fifteen daies, the yeere of Christs natiuity one hundred ninety and three: the night be∣fore the Kalends of Ianuarie. (9) Of stature he was indifferently tall, of a fine constitution of Body, very faire of complexion, with Commodus his portraiture. cleere eies and golden locks, neither in person nor in Princely parts resembling his Father: How ioifull the death of this Tyrant was both to People and Senate, their execrations pronounced against him, and their assemblies in the Temples to giue thanks for their de∣liuerance, do manifest, as is at large reported by Lam∣pridius, who wrote his life, and stiled by al, Host is huma∣ni Lampridius. Maximus. Generis, The enemy of Mankind: The very name of the diuell. PVBLIVS HELVIVS PERTINAX. CHAPTER. XXI. V PON the person of this Heluius Pertinax (of whom we are now to speake) For∣tune An. Do. 194. (as it seemeth) meant to make the full experi∣ence of her power, and from a very slender foun∣dation to raise the buil∣ding of her owne Pride: His birth was but poore, and parents as meane, whose Father from a seruile condition got to be free, and traded in Mercery wares for his liuing: himselfe educated according to his Dion. Cassi. lib. 73. birth rose by degrees to mount the Chaire of all wordly glory, and to be the Monarch of the whole world. (2) At first a Schoole-master, and taught the Grammar; next a Ciuil-Lawyer, and pleaded causes in Courts; and lastly, a Martial-man, and serued in Campe: where Fortune attended him with such fauou∣rable successe, that within fiue daies, out of the ranck of a common Souldier he was preferred to bee Cap∣taine of a Cohort, in the Syrian warres against the Par∣thians, which ended, he was imploied into Britannie, Missia, and Germany, and also had charge in chiefe of a Fleete vpon the Flemmish Seas: he serued likewise in Dacia, with such honourable proofe of his valour, as that wise Emperour Marcus Aurelius held him in high esteeme, and afterward made him Senator of Rome. Then was hee assigned Gouernour of all Sy∣ria and Asia, the greatest place of Credit and reputa∣tion that might be; and from thence sent againe in∣into Britaine, chosen out as the principall man, of note for to stay the Commotions there raised against Com∣modus, where in the Field he was left for dead: but thence also returning after hee had gouerned foure seuerall Consular Prouinces, was created Preconsull of Africa, and immediately after Praefect of Rome. Nei∣ther yet made he his stand there, (though the grea∣test of any subiectiue degree) till hee had mounted the Throne of Maiesty, and had obtained the com∣mand ouer All: which fell to his lot by the death of Commodus; and by the meanes of Martia, Aelius Lae∣tus, and other Conspirers of his end. (3) For the Murther being done in the dead of the night, Laetus in great haste repaired to Pertinax his lodging; at whose sight the Old man in bed, ex∣pected nothing but Death, as supposing him sent from Commodus to no other end. But Laetus salutes him by the vnexpected name of Emperour, carrying him with acclamations vnto the Army, and in the morning to the Senate, where, of them all with great ioy, he was confirmed Augustus. Heluius Pertinax made Emperor. (4) His first businesse was to bridle the Licencious liues of the Praetorian Cohorts & iniuries done by them vnto the Romane Citizens, which gained him such ha∣tred, Heluius Pertinax enuied by the Praetorian Cohorts. that it was cause of his death: For these men growne disordered and lawlesse in the raigne of Com∣modus, held themselues wronged; to be nowlocked vn∣der the constraint of Lawes ciuil Gouernement: and these only enuied the peace & prosperity of Pertinax, Sabellicus. whereas all the Prouinces abroad at the very hearing of his Election, and fame of his Imperiall vertues, laid a side their weapons; and disired to embrace peace with a Prince so nobly qualified. (5) The first that conspired against his life, was one Falco; whom notwithstanding he freely forgaue, yet punished certaine Souldiers thereto accessary: where∣upon, the rest assembling themselues in tumultuous and furious manner, with their drawn swords inuaded Heluius Pertinax asslaulted by his Souldiers. his Palace. Hee seeing their purposes sought no e∣scapes, but descending the Palace, met them in the base Court: At whose presence and Maiesty they were much amazed, and a while made a stand: vnto whom with great grauity, and without shew of any feare, he thus spake vnto them. Heluius Pertinax his speech to his Souldiers. (6) Souldiers and Companions, if you come to kill me, (as I thinke you doe) you shall therein per∣forme an act neither valorous, nor otherwise very commendable for you, no, nor any way grieuous vnto my selfe, for euery mans life hath his limit, and to mine, by Natures course, the last period cannot be farre: Or thinke you that I feare death, who now am so ripened for it, and haue already gotten the very height of all renowne vnto my Name? Surely you are deceiued: but at this I grieue, that my life and short time of Gouernment, which I had deuo∣ted to the good of all, should seem so disgustfull vn∣to any; as to deserue a violent and hastned death, es∣pecially by you, who are by office, the Guarders of my Person: you (I say) whose charge and Oath is, to secure your Soueraigne from perill, and now seek to sheath your Swords in his breast, shall either leaue a Testimony of my bad life deseruing it, or brand your places with such staines of Treason, as Time shall neuer weare away. And what I pray is mine offence? for maintaining your Lawes? why, it was the charge your selues imposed vpon me. Are Lawes too strait? surely, not to the vertuous, who are euen a Law vnto themselues: are they need∣lesse? why then were they made? and being made, why should they not be executed? If the death of Commodus grieue you, was I the cause? If he were made away by Treason, your selues are conscious of my innocency. And this I assure you, in the word of a Prince, that his death shall depriue you of no∣thing, which you require, if you require nothing but that which is honest and iust. My life, whilst I was a Subiect, was spent with you in Warre, now (be∣ing your Soueraigne) is consumed with cares for your Peace: which if you free me of, by taking it a∣way, my troubles shall thereby end, but your con∣science shal begin to grone vnder the guilt of blood and perchance bee touched with too late Repen∣tance. (7) His words were spoken with such a mouing grauity, and vnmoued resolution, that the formost in the attempt gaue back, and were ashamed of their au∣dacious enterprise, but the rest furiously driuing for∣ward, Pertinax killed by his Souldiers. one Trusius with a Lance ran him into the Breast, whereupon Pertinax couering his Head with his robe, quietly yeelded his body to the traiterous strokes of them all, and so died that poore, old, and innocent Em∣peror. The yeeres of his life, saith Iulius Capitolinus, were sixty, seuen moneths, and twenty fiue daies: But Dio, Spartianus and Herodian accounteth them to ex∣tend Pertinax his raigne. to sixty eight: Eusebius to aboue seuenty: The like disagreement there is for the short time of his Go∣uernment: Euseb. li. 5. c. 24. Eutrop. l. 8. for Eusebius saith that he raigned not fully six Moneths: Eutropius saith but three: Iulius Capitoli∣nus and Aurelius Victor, eighty fiue daies: Dio, Herodi∣an, and Spartianus, two Moneths and twenty eight daies: how long so euer, thus he liued, and thus he di∣ed, the fift Calends of Aprill. (8) He was of an honorable and Maiesticall pre∣sence, strong of body, large and full breasted, long bearded, curle-headed, smooth of Speech, and indiffe∣rently eloquent. DIDIVS IVLIANVS. CHAPTER XXII. T HE state of man continu∣ally attended with vncer∣taine An. Do. 194. chance, apparantly doth shew, the weake con∣dition that nature enioi∣eth, and with what vnsure∣nesse the seat of maiesty is possest, as is seene by the precedent Emperor, who sitting at peace in his Pa∣lace at Rome, renowned, beloued, and guarded with the strengths of Europe, Asia, Africa, AEgypt, and Greece, was notwithstanding surprised and slaine at noone day, by a Band of Souldiers, not much exceeding the number of three hundred, and all escaping vnpuni∣shed, the deed was so suddaine and mens minds so di∣stracted, that it could not be fully beleeued, though witnessed by sight. (2) The Senators mistrusting each others, aban∣doned the Citie, and the Citizens in secret secured themselues, all in an vprore, but none for reuenge of the treason: The murtherers, in as great feare as any, fortified their Campe, and with weapons in hand stood vpon their guard: But seeing all in a maze, and nothing against them attempted, a further boldnesse (the like before neuer heard of) ensued: for by a Com∣mon Crier they made Proclamation for the sale of the Ae Spartianus Proclamation for the sale of the Empire. Didius Iulianus bu h the Em∣pire of the Ro∣man Souldiers. Empire, to any man that would giue them most: which offer was readily accepted by Didius Iulianus (a man of much more wealth then honesty of life, and a Lawyer, saith Eusebius) who with larger promises then euer were performed, obtained the Emperiall Diadem. (3) His birth was in Millen, the sonne of Petroni∣us Didius Seuerus, his mother Clara Emilia, and him∣selfe brought vp in seruice vnder Domitia Lucilla, the mother of Marcus Aurelius, by whose fauours, he was first made Questor, next Edile, & then Praetor in Rome. In Germany as a Captaine hee serued vnder Aureliu, then was he appointed Gouernour of Dalmatia, ∣thinia, Didius Iulianus his imploiments in State before he was Emperor. and of the Lower Germany, and was Consul with Pertinax, and afterwards Proconsul in Africa. These were his risings and meanes to that Maiesty, which not long he kept: for hated in Rome and not approo∣ued abroad, Syria chose for Emperor their owne Ge∣nerall, Pescenius Niger, Germanie, Septimius Seuerus. By whose consent Clodius Albinus leader of the Britaine Syria chuseth their Generall. Germany chuseth theirs. Armie was first elected Caesar, and then his fellow in the Empire, whereby the Aegle, the fairest of Birds became monstrous, and in one Body bore three Heads. (4) For Albinus at that time hauing gotten a∣gaine the gouernment of Britaine, where erecting his Albinus Gouer∣nour of Britaine. a Competitor for the Empire. owne Statues and stamping his picture in his Coynes, gaue great suspition that he intended to be a Compe∣titor, and with his Army a foot meant to haue gained the Emperiall seat it selfe, by aduantage of Septimius forces, absent in suppressing of Pescenius; which to di∣uert inforced Seuerus vntill better oportunity, to de∣clare Albinus his companion, for he much more fea∣red him then either of the former: Because Didius in Rome, and Pescenius in Antioch consumed their times in banquetting, and vnmartiall disports, whiles Albi∣nus managed his office most souldierlike, and was highly esteemed and honored of them. (5) Seuerus hasting towards Rome, was met in I∣taly by Ambassadors from Didius, with faire offers of Seuerus wageth warre for the Empire. Re useth com∣position. He is proclaimed Emperour. peace, and possession of halfe the Empire: but refu∣sing composition and making still forward, the Senate that so lately declared him a traytor, now proclaimed him an Emperor: And the Souldiers vnsatisfied of the couenanted promises, and in hope to purchase fa∣uour with Seuerus, slew their Chapman Didius in his Palace, the Calends of Iulie, being but fiue daies after he had done himselfe as much for Pertinax, when he Iulianus slaine. His raignes continuance. Eutropius. Spartianus. Dio. had raigned, as Eutropius saith, seuen months: Spar∣tianus saith but two, and Dio sixty six daies: the yeere of his age fifty seuen, and of our Sauiours appearing in our flesh, one hundred ninety and foure. SEPTIMIVS SEVERVS CHAPTER. XXIII. Sept. Severus. Clodius Albinus. S Euerus hauing by this blou∣dy accident of the giddie An. Do. 194. multitude gained with more facility then he ex∣pected, the fatal seat of go∣uernment, it was his next in place to suppresse Pes∣cenius by force, and Albi∣nus by falshood: whose Actions & liues since they hapned with this Emperor, and ended with his sword, I will record together, be∣ginning with Cains Pesceni∣us first, since first he fell vn∣der the fortune of this man. This olde man in the yeere of Christ one hundred ninety foure, was elected Emperor by Acclamation of the Syrian Armie, of which (though begun but by a handfull in respect of all the other Emperiall for∣ces) he had good hope, since to the honor of that God∣desse he dedicated the first marke of his Soueraigntie, the minting of his mony. A person he was of seemly stature, louely feature and faire skinne, except his Neck, which differing so farre from the rest gaue him the sirname of Niger: his complexion was ruddy, his Body fat, his voice so piercing, that it would be heard a mile off: and his haire for more ornament long hee wore in reflected curles vpon his shoulders. A commendable souldier and well bearing himselfe in the military offices hee vnderwent. In his Lieutenancy abroad he was seuere, and at home he so well acted his part when hee was Consul, as in his Clemency and Iustice hee seemed emulous of Pertinax. Thus all his life he enioied the goodnesse of his merit and fortune, and had not his ambition begun, where his yeeres were ending, had so parted: For no sooner had hee put on the Robe Emperiall, but Seuerus defeated his Armie at Cizi∣cum, pursued him to Antioch, and tooke him at Eu∣phrates, sending to Bizanti his head a Trophie of the Conquest, and to his wife, children, and follow∣ers (vnto whom at first this Victor granted banish∣ment) in the end denied life. (1) Now as soone as Seuerus made his appróch neer Rome, he gaue command that the Pretorian Cohorts should attend him disarmed, which done, he vehe∣mently checkt them for their proditorious trechery against Pertinax, and pronouncing sentence, depriued them both of name, honor, and armes of Souldiers, and banished them from Rome, and the circuit there∣of for one hundred miles distance: which act of his wonne him such reputation, that in Rome the whole Story of Pertinax his ruine, and Seuerus his aspiring to his Throne, was at large portraited in an excellent peece of worke, of solide molten brasse, as Herodian relateth, though he ascribeth the occasion of it, to a dreame of Seuerus. (2) Those two obiects Didius and Niger, who gaue some hinderance to Seuerus his beginning, being thus defeated of their high hopes; the third, which was Albinus, seemed now a more dangerous cloud, which would altogether ouer-cast his brightnesse & glory, if it were not dispersed or blown back in time: and therefore to make faire weather with him, hee created him Caesar and his Successor in the Empire, but afterwards his good fortunes thus swelling in the Albinus made Successor in the Empire. East, and himselfe still courted by Ambassadors from all parts, with their tender of subiection, he began to grow proud, and to disdaine any Copartner in State: His death practised. and thereupon first secretly sought the destruction of his Caesar; which failing, he then proclaimed him Traitor and Enemy to Rome. Proclaimed Traitor. He wageth w te against Seuerus. (3) Clodius Albinus brought into these vnexpect∣ed dangers, prepared his strengths, and with the choice of all Britaine entred France, and neere vnto Lions tooke the field against the Emperour; but with no better successe, then Pescennius had done in Asia the lesse, in the same place (as Herodian, Eutropius and Spartianus affirme) where Darius was first ouer-throwne by Alexander. The Armies ioining, a bloo∣dy Battaile was fought, which through the great prowesse of the Britains went at first so sore against Seuerus, that being beaten off his Horse, despairing of Victorie, and almost of Life, cast off his Imperiall Robe, and flying, ignobly hid himselfe. Laetus one of Seuerus his Captaines, kept aloofe all this while, of purpose as was thought, to bring the Emperour to ruine, and now vpon report that hee was slaine, came on most furiously with his forces, in hope of win∣ning both the day, and the Empire to himselfe: Albinus vanqui∣shed by Seuerus. whereupon the Emperor drawne againe into the field, the day was his by the meanes, but not the mea∣ning, of Laetus: whom on attainder of his Treason he afterward put to the sword. That day a great part of the flower of Britaine was slaine, together with their valiant Leader Albinus, a Captaine of exempla∣ry Seuerity and Martiall discipline, a great admirer of Hannibal and Marius; for the Scipio's he thought them rather fortunate then valiant, and in the time of his seruice in this Iland, there was no toile which hee commanded his souldiers, but himselfe would beare therein a part, euen in carrying of burdens on his Backe: and yet so farre from vaunting of his va∣lour, as that when an Historian would haue recorded his noble Acts, he willed him to write of theirs who were already dead, whom he need not to flatter; hol∣ding it a foppery to write of those, of whose fauour or wrath the Inditers stood in hope or feare: Being such a one, no maruaile if Seuerus so feared him, as he did, which he shewed euen after hee was slaine, by putting incredible numbers of great Personages both in the City and Prouinces to death, with this one Pretence, for all, that they wished well to Albinus. After this ouerthrow Seuerus forthwith sent Hera∣clianus hither, to keepe the rest of the Britaines in qui∣et, and to be Lieutenant in Albinus his roome, as Spar∣tianus writeth: Of whose affaires therein little remem∣brance Spartianus. is left, onely it seemeth by a Coine of Seuerus minted in his second Consulship, which fell in the yeere of our Sauiour one hundred ninety eight, and about the period of this his last Competitor, that the Britaines gaue not at first their seruice and seruitude to this man, vntill he had made the purchase of it by his sword; the brand of which he hath left to posteri∣tie in figuring the Goddesse Victory seated vpon spoiles, and writing in a shield, Victoria Britan. Vnto this Lieutenant, Virius Lup succeeded Pre∣sident of Britaine, as Vlpian the Lawyer termes him, Virius Lup made President of Britaine. and was about the yeere of Christ one hundred nine∣ty seuen, as appeareth by this Inscription erected at Olinaca amongst the Brigantes, in memory of the ree∣difying of that place by this Emperor and his eldest Hekely in Yorke∣shire. Sonne, then first designed Caesar, by which the time is discouered, and in this stone inserted. IM. SEVERVS. AVG. ET ANTONINVS CAES. DESTINATVS RESTITVERVNT CVRAN∣TE VIRIO LVPO. * LE G. E∣ORVM PR. * PR. Iegatio. Pro Prat re. (4) This man strengthned the Prouince especi∣ally in the North, with many strong Castles, repai∣ring many places ruined either by fire or fury of the bordering swords: Of which Bow : vnder S more in Rich∣ shire. Lauat Rae, where the first Cohort of the Thrasiaus lay, was one, as appea∣reth by this Altar there erected to the Goddesse For∣tune, and since remoued to Conington the house of Sir Robert Cotton in Huntingdonshire. DEAEFORTVNAE VIRIVS LVPVS LEG. AVG. PR. PR. BALINEVM. VI IGNIS. EXVST. VM. COH. I. THR ACVM. REST. ITVIT. CVRANTE VAL. FRON. TONE PRAEF EQ. ALAEVETTO He warred against the Maatae and North Britaines with such bad successe, that he was forced to redeeme his peace with mony, and was so much weakned by losse of his men, that he sent to Rome for present sup∣ply, with relation of his great danger, and the Ene∣mies why brought into Britaine. strength: which newes touched Seuerus to the quick; and notwithstanding his yeeres (sixty at the least) and gout wherewith hee was continually grie∣ued, yet would he vndergoe that iourney in person himselfe, aswell to satisfie his owne vaine glorious humours, as to traine his Sonne Bassianus from his li∣centious life, wherein he wallowed idly in Rome, who together with his brother Geta, accompanied their Father into Britaine. Aemilius Papini∣anus a famous Lawyer. (5) The Britaines then hearing of the Emperors approch, sent him their Embassage for intreaty of peace, whereby the Iland might haue been setled and secured without blood, but the old man (saith Sabelli∣cus) had so vnsatiable a desire to beare the glorious Sirname of Britannicus, that he preferred warre, and accepted not their proffered subiection. (6) Seuerus thus entred, Geta was appointed to remaine in the South of the Prouince, and to gouerne those parts that stood in quiet, assisted by Aemilius Papinianus the famous Lawyer, whose Tribunall seat was held in Yorke; himselfe and Bassianus marching fur∣ther Fifty thousand of Seuerus army dead through toylesome labor and sicknesse. into the North against the Maatae and Caledoni∣ans their neighbours, both which bare themselues boldly vpon the aduantage of their Countries, their waters brackish, and vnholsome drinke for their Ene∣mies, the aire sharpe and contagious to their constitu∣tions, and the soile it selfe so pestred with Loughs, Bogs, Meares, and Mountaines, that the Romans were forced to make way by continuall Labour, in cutting downe Woods, in building of Bridges, and in dray∣ning of Meares, so that by distemperature of diet, con∣tinuall Sabellicus. labour, contagiousnesse of Aire, and afflictions by sicknesse, fifty thousand of them perished, and that without Battaile, saith Dio: many Souldiers also, Herodian. whose spirits were spent, and through feeblenesse could not keepe ranke in their March, were for meere Caledoniane desire peace. pitty slaine by their fellowes, lest they should fall in∣to the hands of their Enemies. (7) These miseries, notwithstanding old Seuerus indured and fought many Battailes, but (as Sabellicus confesseth) euer with more difficulties to the Romans then to the Britaines, and yet in some small skirmishes he went away Victor, and continued his courses with such resolution, that lastly the Caledonians thought good to intreate their peace; which vpon these condi∣tions was granted: first, that they should forthwith lay aside all hostile Armes, without any further resistance: next, that they should deliuer into the Romans Posses∣sion, those Countries that were next abutting on their Prouince: and lastly, that thence-forth they should liue in quiet, attempting nothing against the publike Peace. (8) The State thus setled, Seuerus bethought himselfe of some further meanes to secure the Pro∣uince, by building many In-land strengths anew, and repairing those with Stone and Cement which for∣merly were but of Turffe and earth, as appeareth by this Inscription found in the Ruines of one of his workes neere vnto the Riuer VRE, in the County of Richmond erected. IMP CAES. L. SEPTIMIO PIO PERTINACI AVGV.—IMP CAESARI. M. AVRELIO APIO FELICI AVGVSTO— — — BRACCHIO CAEMEN—TICIVM VI NER VIO—RVM SVB CVRALA SE∣NECINON AMPLISSI∣MIO PERIL. VISPIVS—PRAELEGIO— A wall from Sea to Sea. Herodian. Spartian. Pol. Virg. de Reb. Angl. lib. a. Hect. . And neglecting the vttermost and vast Northerne parts of this Iland, drew a Wall or Fortification, which might serue as a Rampire and diuision betwixt the sa∣uage and more ciuill people, stretching it selfe thorow the whole Iland, euen from Sea to Sea; that is, from the Bay of Itun (otherwise Solweyfrith) in Scotland, to the doore of Tine or Tinmouth, containing in length One hundred thirty and two Miles, as Sextus Aurelius Vi∣ctor, Eutropius, and others account them, and by some Seuerus surna∣med Britanni∣cus Maximus. more. This Wall he built of Turfes and Timber strong∣lie fensed with Bulwarkes and Turrets, neere vnto (if not vpon) the foundation of Adrians Wall, the tract whereof thorow the Countries of Westmorland and Northumberland, is more pleasing to bee seene, then easie in word to be expressed. For which his Acts thus heere atchieued about the yeere of grace two hun∣dred and eleuen, he assumed to himselfe his much de∣sired Sirname Britannicus Maximus, causing in his owne and his sonnes Coines that inscription to bee stamped. (9) And recording to posteritie the glory of his first atchieuement heere, vpon the reuerse of those his moneies, whereon he sometimes formed a Trophy erected vpon spoiles with two Captiues, vndersetting the word VICT. BRIT. sometimes a winged vi∣ctorie: grauing a Shield, hung on that tree which is the meede of Conquerours, VICTORIAE BRI∣TANNICAE: and sometimes in such a forme and disloy∣altie. phrase as is expressed in the entrance of this his life. And now retired to Yorke, he left his eldest sonne to fi∣nish this worke of warre by him begun, as being ra∣ther allaied then altogether ended. (10) Bassianus thus set in the one part of the Iland, as Geta was in the other, sought rather to gaine the af∣fections Caledonians rebell. of his Army, by a loose libertie to doe what they list, then to manage the trust reposed on him, by the restraint of Martiall Discipline, and exaction of Mi∣litarie duties: hoping by such his plausibilitie and in∣dulgence, to purchase to himselfe their best concur∣rence for the obtaining of the Empire, which hee so thirsted after, as that hee often tampered with them to raise him, by the fall of his father. A generall Mas∣sacre of them by Seuerus. (11) The Caledonians vnderstanding the disso∣lutenesse of his Campe, and the want of a better Cap∣taine, suddenly assailed the Romans, putting many to the sword, and taking great booties, (which they dis∣persed amongst their neighbours) without any regard of the obligation of their former Couenants: whereat the testie old man was so much disquieted, and so farre enraged to reuenge, that hee gaue an expresse charge to make a generall Massacre, without excepti∣on of any; vsing in his speech to his Souldiers, these verses borrowed out of Homer: Nemo manus fugiat vestras, cadem{que} cruentam: Non foetus, grauidâ Mater quem gestat in aluo, Horrendam effugiat cadem.— Let none escape your bloudy rage; with terrour let all die: Spare not the mother, nor the child that in her womb doth ly. (12) This (which seemeth to haue beene the worke of Seuerus second yeere in Britannie, Anno two hundred and twelue for so it is expressed vpon the monies of himselfe and sonnes) may (and with a fit and easie inference from the same authoritie) seeme to haue beene heere the fortune and effect of two en∣counters and Conquests that same yeere: for whether we obserue the two seuerall coines of victorie then minted, on one of which is the Statue of that armed and winged Goddesse, at whose feet are two Captiues prostrate bound; or the other bearing on it a double figure of that Lady, grauing the sculpture of the for∣mer, VICT. BRIT. vpon a Shield, it can conclude no lesse in probabilitie. (13) Seuerus remaining in Yorke, where the Sixth Legion called Victrix kept, (which place afterwards grew to be one of the chiefest for account among the Brigantes, as commonly the Sta of the R dus The seed-plots of our Cities and T . Colonies were the seed-plots of all our Cities, and prin∣cipall Townes) grew feeble and sicke, being weakened with age, and wearied with trauell, his maladie more increasing by the disturbances of the Enemie, and the daily disloialtie of Bassianus his sonne, insomuch that despairing of life, hee called his Counsell and Captaines before him, and vnderlaid with pillowes, he thus ad∣dressed his speech. (14) Eighteene yeeres almost haue I wielded the affaires of the Empire, and borne on my shoul∣ders S erus his speech to his Counsell and Captaines. the burden of her encombred estate, both at home and abroad; at my first entrance, troubled euery where, now at length quiet, euen here in Bri∣taine, the most vnquiet and molestious Prouince of all: The profit of which trauels I must now leaue for others to enioy, and with ease in peace to keepe that which I with care and warre haue gotten. If therefore amity and mutuall concord, be embraced (the only sinewes of a Common-wealth) the glory of the Empire shall yet shine more bright, sith by con∣cord we see that small things grow to greatnesse, whereas contrariwise, discord is the ruine of all. I die and must leaue the successe of all to my Succes∣sors and Sonnes by Nature, though the Elder vnna∣turall: I meane Bassianus new made Antoninus and your Emperor, who often ere this hath sought to gaine that title by his sword and my death; but knoweth not the dangers that attend a Diadem, nei∣ther remembreth that high places are continually garded with Enuie and Feares. But so blind is Am∣bition, as it seeth not that a Soueraignes greatnesse is such vnto others, but least in himselfe, and that the things possessed are not the very things they seemed: It is not these Titles therefore can make man happy, the line of his life being drawne forth with so many vncertainties, and the height of his power laid vpon so weake foundations. My selfe Spartianus. at this instant may serue for example, of whom this may bee said, I was all things, yet nothing, seeing I I must pay my debt to Nature, and leaue my ex∣ploits in East and West to bee registred (either at your disposall) for matters of moment, and good of the Empire, or blotted to the reproch of my gouernement, with the shadowing pencile of Ob∣liuion. That therefore my care for the welfare of this State may suruiue my selfe, and bring forth the happie fruits thereof when I am withered, this shall be my last and onely request, that you will e∣uer assist my sonnes both with your counsell and aide, whereby they may rule according to Lawe, and you obay according to Right, that so in you both, the good of the Empire be aboue all things re∣spected. With which words hee ended both his speech and his life. (15) This Emperour by Historians is rancked with the best, both for his warres, wherein hee was verie fortunate, and for his wisedome in gouerning the Em∣pire: and yet is he taxed very sharply both by Sabelli∣cus for sundry vices, and by Eusebius for stirring vp the fift Persecution of the Christians in the tenth yeere of his Raigne. In which Ireneus the learned writer, a∣mong many others, suffred Martyrdome: howbeit, towards his end, he became more milde to them, as saith Saint Ierome: as also that he was a diligent reader of the excellent workes of Tertullian, whom vsually he termed his Master. (16) This Emperour was by birth an African, to which Country his affection & graces were so much, that the illustrious Citie of those parts, recorded vpon their coyne his many fauours by this Inscription, IN∣DVLGENTIA AVG. IN CARTH. and in∣shrined Bed . him amongst the Gods of that Nation. He was the sonne of Geta, his mother Pia Fuluia: him∣selfe rough, cruell, couetous, and ambitious, and his nature, relishing too much of the Punick craft and simulation: otherwise a most expert Soldiour, and a worthy Prince, more battles hee fought, and more victories obtained, then any other that euer had ru∣led before him the Romane Empire. In a word, of ver∣tues and vices so equally composed, that lastly this grew into a customed speech: It had beene good that this Emperour had neuer beene borne, or beeing Emperour, that hee had neuer died. (17) Of stature he was tall, and of a comely per∣sonage, Seuerus his de∣scription. his countenance seuere and representing Ma∣iesty, his beard white and long, and the haire of his head he wore vsually curled. He was very learned in the Mathematicks, a good Philosopher, an eloquent Orator, and of a deep sounding voice. Hee raigned eighteene yeeres (saith Eusebius) by Dion Cassius, He∣rodian, Euseb. Eccl. Hist. lib. 6. ca. 7. and Eutropius, seuenteen yeeres, eight months, and odde daies. He died in Yorke, the fourth day of A∣pril, Seuerus dieth at Yorke. The first Ides of Ianuary, saith Sauils Table. in the yeere of Christ two hundred and twelue, not so much of sicknes, as of discontent and greefe, or (if our British writers may bee credited) of a deadly wound giuen by Fulgence, Captaine of the Picts, who as the Monke of Chester saith, was brother to Martia, the first wife of Seuerus and mother of Bassianus. His Polychr. l. 4. . 19. second wife was Iulia Domna the mother of Geta, (though some thinke that she was mother to both) a woman of a surpassing beauty, and an earnest instiga∣tor of the two Bretherens reconciliation, had she not been blemished with other vices, as after we shal here. M AVRE. BAS. CARA. ANTO. BRIT. Brethren. P. SEPT. ANTONI. GETA BRIT. CHAPTER XXIIII. Bassianus Caracalla. Septimus Geta. B Assianus Caracalla, and his Brother Septimius Geta, to∣gether An. Do. 212. were declared Em∣perours by old Seuerus in his life time, and both of them by their father sur∣named Antoninus, a name very gracious in the e∣steeme of the Romans, the elder so stiled about the yeere of Saluation two hundred and fiue, and the yonger foure yeeres after, (as it appeareth by the min∣tage of their moneys;) were approued and applauded by people and Senate, and of all men saluted and ac∣knowledged for Emperours. Bassianus the Elder, stiling himself Britannicus Maximus, as it should seem, was ad∣mitted his Fathers fellow Emperour at Yorke at his re∣siding there, to quiet the Northern Britains; wherein Godd. 3. Tit. de rei vi dicatione lege. 1. also hee gaue him the name Antoninus; for so implieth that famous Law, bearing iointlie the names of Seue∣rus and Antoninus, enacted by them at Yorke, touching the interest and right that masters haue to the goods and possessions of their seruants. His mother, the first wife of Seuerus, was Martia a British Lady (say our British Historians, though Sabellicus doth iudge her G ss Monmouth. Sabellicus. to be an African) and himselfe better beloued of the Britaines for her sake, then for his owne. Geta was the sonne of the Empresse Iulia, a second wife, a woman of passing beautie and surpassing lust, who beeing perswaded (by some Oracle or dreame) that her husbands successour should be an Antoninus, Some s y it was his ame. Sabelli∣cus. lost her Sonne should lose his hope of the Empire, she importuned Seuerus to bestow the name of Anto∣ninus also on Geta; who with it gaue him likewise the title of Caesar, about the yeere two hundred and two. And to vnite the affections of his two sons, aswel as to eternise their memories, he minted their features vp∣on one Medall, inscribing the one side ANTONI∣NVS PIVS AVG. PON. TR. P. IIII. the o∣ther, Herodian. Sabellicus. P. SEPT. GETA. CAES. PONT. hauing the yeere before matched thē together vpon the reuerse of his owne money, and incirculing their heads with this word, AETERNITAS IMPERI. as if the separation of their affections were the dissolution of his and the worlds Empire. (2) Vpon Seuerus his death, Antoninus Caracal∣la, hastning for Rome, profered good conditions of peace to the Britaines, who long tired with warres accepted thereof, and hostages were giuen for conser∣uing the same. Whereupon the Empresse Iulia ac∣companied with both the Caesars, departed hence, ca∣rying with them the funerall ashes of the deceased Emperour in a goldē Vrna to Rome, where they solemn∣ly consecrated him a God: the ceremony wherof (be∣cause it concerneth so great an Emperour and Monarch of this kingdome) is not vnworthy the inserting. In the Porch of his Palace was a bedsteed all of Iuo∣ry, dressed with richest bedding and furniture of gold, wherein was laid his image protraited to the life, but yet in manner of a sicke man. On the left side sate all the Senators and Princes in blacke mourning weeds; on the right, all the great Ladies, cladde in white (which then was the mourning colour of that Sexe.) The Physitians diligently comming to visit him, and feeling his pulse, as if he were aliue, doe signifie that his disease did still increase vpon him. This they all did seuen daies together: at last, as if then hee were Forum was the ch place of publicke mee ung and plead∣ings. dead, all the prime of the Nobility carrie him in his Iuorie Bed to the * Forum, where all the Patrician youth, & Noble Virgins, incompassed him with most dolefull Hymnes and ruefull ditties. Thence againe he was remoued to Mars his field, where was erected a foure-square frame of Timber, of a huge height and compasse, the stories still mounting to the toppe with sundry ascents, and richly beautified with strange va∣rieties of gold and purple ornaments, and images of great Art and price: On the second of which ascents, was placed the Emperours said Bed and Statue, with infinite store of sweetest odours, brought thither from all parts of the Citie: which done, the yong No∣bles brauely mounted on Horsebacke, rid round a∣bout in a kinde of dance or measure, and another sort likewise (who represented great Princes) in their Coa∣ches, whereupon his successor in the Empire, first set∣ting fire to the frame, forthwith all the people did the like on all sides: and when the whole began to be on flame, an Eagle secretly enclosed within, was let fly out of the toppe; which soaring a great height, and out of sight, the people followed it with shouts and praiers, supposing that therewith the Emperours soule was carried vp to heauen. And thus Seuerus, which was before a man of Gods making, was now become a God of mans making: and the more to preserue the memory of his fathers glory, Caracalla erected a mag∣nificent Edifice, which he instiled Seuerus his Porch, wherein with most exquisite Art, and admired work∣manship, were portraited all his Fathers warres and triumphs, atchieued here in Britaine or elsewhere. Sabellicus. (3) But presently after, these two vngodly sonnes of this new supposed God, so much emulated each o∣thers glory, that the deadly sparkes of enuy, blowne a long time with the bellowes of their ambitious de∣sires, brake out into the flames of murther and blood, being brethren by one Father, but not by the same mother (as it is said) & in this only like, that they were both starke naught, though both in contrarie kinds of Vices. And albeit the Empresse Iulia had sought by all meanes to make peace betwixt them, both for∣merly, here in Britaine, and now, after their returne to Rome: yet the desire of a sole Soueraignty, had beene a long time so rooted in Bassianus his heart (for which he had twice attempted his Fathers life, and so much hasted his death, that hee slew his Physitians, because they had dispatched him no sooner) could not indure an equall (much lesse a confronter) in authority, and therefore in the Court and in the armes of the Em∣presse, he slew her sonne Geta, in a time least suspected, Geta slaine in his mothers armes. when he had sate with him in state and disdaine, the terme of one yeare and twenty two daies. Herodian. (4) And to cloake this fratricide with shew of con∣straint, first to the Souldiers, and then in the Senate, he accuseth his Brother to haue sought his death, and that in defence of his owne life, he was forced to slay the other, and flying to the Pretorian Cohorts for the safetie of his life, as though further conspiracies had been intended against him in the City, & at his return commanded Papinianus the famous Ciuilian, to excuse Dio Spartianus. the murther in his Pleas at the Barre: which when he refused, hee caused him to bee slaine, as also all those, Papinianus slaine for refusing to desend a mur∣ther. that had beene acquainted with Geta; whereby so ma∣ny of the Nobilitie perished, that he was thereby ac∣counted another Nero in Rome: and by his fauorites the name of Geta was raced out of all monuments & imperiall inscriptions, as we haue seene some of thē defaced vpon some Altar stones found here in Brit. (5) Of nature he was subtile, and could well dis∣semble with them whom hee feared, and make shew of loue where hee deadly hated; alwaies fitting him∣selfe to the humours of flatteries: Among the Ger∣mans, counterfetting their gate and garments; In Greece, be like Alexander, bearing his necke somewhat awry; In Troy, would resemble Achilles; alwaies so Ca∣melion-like, as the Romans (his followers) were there∣with ashamed. In a word, Caracalla (saith Dio) neuer thought of doing good, because (as himselfe confessed) he ne∣uer Dio. knew any goodnes. (6) And to fill vp the measure of all iniquitie, as one regardlesse of humanity or shame, he married Iu∣lia his mother in law, late wife to his owne Father (a sinne (saith S. Paul) not to be named among the Gen∣tiles) 1. Cor. 5. 1. and by Sext. Aur. Eutrop. and Spar. reported vp∣on this occasion. It fortuned that Iulia in presence of Caracalla, either by chance, or of purpose rather, let fall the vaile which she wore, discouering thereby her Sextus Aurelius. Eutropius. Spartianus. Sabellicus. naked breasts and beauty, which was great; whereat the Emperour casting his lasciuious eie and bewraying his affection, presently said, Were it not vnlawfull, I should not be vnwilling: to whom she replied (without Iulia her wicked speech. respect of modesty) that all things were lawfull to him that made lawes for others, but was subiect himselfe to none: forgetting at once both the murther commit∣ted vpon Geta her sonne, and the scandals that accom∣panied so foule a sinne, the pleasure wherof they did not long enioy, both their deaths (by Gods ven∣geance) soone after ensuing. (7) For Caracalla remaining in Mesopotamia, and carrying (as it seemeth) a guilty conscience, and suspi∣tion of his life, sent to Maternus, whom hee had left Antoninus seek∣eth to sorcerers. Gouernour of Rome, to assemble all the Astrologers & Mathematicians (vnto which learned imposters he al∣waies gaue especiall credit) and of them to enquire how long he should liue, and by what death he should die. Maternus hauing so done, wrote for answere, that Macrinus his Prefect of the Praetorium (then with him in his expeditiōs) went about to murther him. Which is thought rather in enuy of Macrinus to haue beene fained, then by any Astrologicall directions so giuen forth. This letter and others comming to Caracalla his hand, at such time as hee was busie about his dis∣port, he deliuered them to Macrinus to reade, and giue him the report at his returne. In perusall wher∣of finding himselfe to be accused of Treason, and fea∣ring lest by the sequell hee might bee brought into greater danger, he incensed one Martial a Centuri∣on (whose brother the Emperour had lately slaine) to Sabellicus. murther him; which was soone performed, and oc∣casion in the fields offred: for Caracalla stepping aside from his traine to ease nature, Martial, as though he had beene called, ran hastily in without hindrance or Antoninus Caracalla kild. suspect, and with his dagger stabbed him to death; but being too late perceiued, was yet so hastily pursued, that he was hewed to peeces before his tongue could reueale the principall Traitour. Iulia his incestuous wife hearing of his death, with poison slew her selfe at Antioch, leauing her shame to suruiue her life. (8) Antoninus Caracalla, saith Eusebius, raigned Em∣perour Antoninus Cara∣calla his raigne. Euseb. Eccl. Hist. lib. 6. ca. 20. seuen yeares and sixe moneths, but Herodian, Spartianus, and Dio allot him sixe yeeres and two mo∣neths: he died the eight of Aprill, and yeere of Christ two hundred eighteene. The testimonies of these many writers notwithstanding, together with the place and circumstances of his death, and the person by whom it was committed, the British Historians do contradict, reporting him to bee slaine in Britaine in Battaile against the Picts, by one Carauceus a man of a lowe and obscure birth. But by this it may seeme Old Ma scr. cap. 136. some wounds receiued by him in those British warres, gaue occasion to that errour. He left a sonne not by his incestuous mother, nor by Glantilla his wife, whō he exiled into Sicily; but by a mistris, whose name was Iulia Simiamira his cosen German, and indeed no bet∣ter Eusebius cals her Sa iam, alij Sa∣rius, and her mo∣nies Iulia , that she was his whore, not his wife. Sabellicus. then a common strumpets which corrupt rootes brought forth as bitter fruits, euen Heliogabalus, of whom hereafter we shall haue occasion to write. OPILIVS MACRINVS. CHAPTER XXV. Opilius Ma∣crinus. Diadumenus. I N prosecuting our inten∣ded An. Do. 218. course, for setting downe the Acts and Liues of sundry Emperours, heereafter succeeding, I know I shall hardly satisfie my Readers, being no way able to giue content to my selfe, in that, on the one side, finding very few re∣membrances concerning the state of this our Iland, till the raigne of Dioclesian, the Historie of that Inte∣rim may seeme impertinent to our purpose; and yet on the other side, considering how vnfit it is, that the Succession of all our British Monarks should be inter∣rupted (that Royall Title being likewise annexed to those other Emperours) I suppose it will bee expected, that somwhat also be said of them, though managing their affaires in places farre remote. It seemeth that the continuall striuing for the Imperiall Diademe, and their neerer hazards at home, made them contented to giue Britaine some peaceable breathing, and so de∣priue vs of the Romane Records of those times: which want if I should supply out of our home-bred British Writers, I might be thought, not so much to repaire the ruines of our Monuments, as to heape more rub∣bish vpon them. And therefore (necessitie so enfor∣cing) I must craue patience, if I proceed to the rest of our Countries Monarkes, though I cannot to the re∣sidue of our Countries Exploits and Affaires in those daies. (2) Opilius Macrinus from obscure and base pa∣rentage, An. Do. 218. by fauours of the Emperour, without any no∣table desert in himselfe, first aspired to the Office of a Prefect, and at last by the election of the Souldiers, to the Dignitie Imperiall. So farre from suspicion of Ca∣racallaes death, by the outward appearance of a see∣ming sorrow, that hee was held of all most free from the Treason, and the second person worthy of their voice. For first, the Title was conferred vpon aged Audentius, a man of good sort, much experience, and an excellent Captaine; whose wisdome could not bee Audentius refu∣seth the Empire. drawne to aduenture his life vnder the weight of so vneasie and dangerous a Crowne, but excusing him∣selfe by the priuilege of his age, as farre vnfit to wield the troubles (much lesse to increase the glorie) of the Empire, refused their offers, but with returne of as many thankes as they had giuen him hands or voices. Whereupon they againe consulted and determined for Macrinus, which as willingly receiued, as Audenti∣us refused: vnto whom they swore fealtie, but not long after failed in performance. (3) He made for his Caesar, Diadumenus his sonne, Diadumenus appointed for Caesar. Called Antoninus changing his name (a vsuall custome at their election) into Antoninus, because that name was gracious a∣mong the Romans. The Senate at home confirmed all that the Armie had done abroad; vnto whom it seemed their right, as it were by prescription, to haue the election of the Emperours. (4) His first expedition was against Artabanus King of the Parthians, that hasted against the Romans, for wrongs receiued by Caracalla deceased: but after three great and dangerous Battles, came to an attone∣ment, and a peace betwixt them concluded. After this, as free from further troubles, he returned to An∣tioch in Syria, and there spent his time in Banquets, and other sensuall pleasures, being drenched so farre therein, that the Armie began to dislike his Gouern∣ment, and to fauour young Bassianus the sonne of Ca∣racalla, Antoninus sonne of Caracalla. then present at E esa a Citie in Phoenicia, with Moesa his Grandmother by his Mothers side, who there had built a Temple consecrated to the Sunne, and therein ordained him a Priest; for which cause he Antoninus called Heliogabalus, that is, A Priest of the Sunne. was called Heliogabalus, that is to say in the Phoenician Language, The Priest of the Sunne. (5) To this Temple in their vaine deuotions re∣sorted many of the Romane Souldiers; and seeing the beautie of the youth, allured Moesa to bring him to their Campe: where knowne to be the sonne of Cara∣calla, the Souldiers proclaimed him Emperour, and Herodian. maintained his right against Macrinus; who after this reuolt, met young Heliogabalus in the Confines be∣twixt Phoenicia and Syria, where was fought a blou∣die Battle, and Macrinus forsaken of all, and driuen Capital. to flie; who with his sonne hasting thorow Asia and Bithinia, came lastly to Chalcedon, where he fell sicke, and was there, together with Diadumenus, put to Mar and Diad put to death. , raigne. death the seuenth day of Iune, the yeere of Christs In∣carnation two hundred and nineteene, when hee had raigned one yeere, one moneth, & twenty eight daies. ANTONINVS HELIOGABALVS. CHAPTER XXVI. Antoninus Heliogabalus Emp. Y Oung Bissianus, surnamed Heliogabalus, the sonne of An. Do. 219. Caracalla before mentio∣ned, thus elected, and pro∣spering at his entrance, gaue hopes to his raisers, of many princely parts, and signes of those things that in sequele by better proofe appeared to be on∣lie signes indeed: for nature had plentifully adorned him with the complements of her gifts, had his mind beene answerably furnished with vertue. But as the one was ouer-prodigall and lauish in his outward forme, so was the other as sparing and defectiue in bestowing of her inward gifts. insomuch that both in minde and garment, he seemed to bee that which in truth he was not. This Emperour, as appeareth by the reuerse of his money, tooke it no meane addition of honour to his Imperiall Dignitie, to be stiled, The Priest of the Sunne; which in the Assyrian Tongue is called El, from whom he tooke the surname Elagabal. (2) Assoone as hee had settled the Empire firme vpon himselfe by the death of Macrinus, he began to discouer his owne dispositions, and in wantonnesse, apparell, lightnesse, and diet, to exceed any that had Heliogabalus ex∣ceedeth in wic∣kednesse all o∣thers before him gone before him in Rome; and so farre differed from the manners of men, that modestie will not suffer vs to record his greatest vices. (3) His apparell was rich, and most extreme cost∣lie, and yet would he neuer weare one garment twice: his Shooes embellished with Pearles and Diamonds; his Seats strowed with Muske and Amber; his Bed couered with Gold and Purple, and beset with most costly Iew∣els; his Way strewed with the Powder of Gold and Sil∣uer; his Vessels (euen of basest vse) all Gold; his Lamps burning with no other Oile then the Balmes of India and Arabia; his Fish-Ponds filled with no other water then of distilled Roses; his Ships (in his Naumachies or Ship-fights) floted in a Riuer of Wine; his Bathes most stately built, and againe after they were once vsed, presently pluckt downe; his Plate of finest Gold, but neuer serued twice to his Table; his Rings and Iewels most rich, yet neuer worne twice; his Concubines ma∣ny and chargeable, but not one laine with twice; his Diet so profuse, that at euery supper in his Court, was vsually spent a Thousand Pound Sterling: inuiting the chiefe Citizens to a Feast, hee strewed all the Roomes with Saffron, as it were with Rushes, saying, That such Cattle were worthy of such costly Litter. Neere the Sea, with him no Fish was eaten: in the Land, no Flesh: whole Meales made of the Tongues of singing Birds and Peacocks, or of the Braines of most costly crea∣tures, alwaies saying, That meat was not sauorie, whose sauce was not costly. And indeed so costly it was, that the reuenewes of Germany, France, Britaine, Spaine, Italie, Sicilia, Graecia, Asia, Syria, Aegypt, Arabia, and all the Ilands, were not suffcient to defray the charges. (4) In his Progresse, six hundred Chariots followed him, laden with Strumpets, Boyes, and Bawdes, for whom he built a Stewes in his Court, wherein himselfe in the attire of an Harlot, made to them solemne and A lius Lamprid. set Orations, terming them therein his Fellow-Souldiers, Herodian. and Companions in Armes, with Instructions for them how to practise with most varietie their filthy Luxu∣ries. In regard of which kinde of actions, one doth make this doubt, whether were greater his bound∣lesse Prodigalitie, his stupendious Lecherie, or his fop∣pish Foolerie: the last of which his Imperiall Vertues, he gaue proofe of, when he gathered in the City ten thou∣sand waight of Spiders, professing that thereby he vn∣derstood how great a City Rome was: at another time, ten thousand Mice, and a thousand Wizels, which hee brought forth in a publike shew to the people, for some wise State-purpose, like the former. (5) In Rome he built a Temple consecrated to the Sunne, (like to that in Phoenicia, whereof himselfe was Priest) commanding the Christians therein to wor∣ship: as also a Chatter-house for women to meet and determine of their Attires; and brought into the Se∣nate-house his mother Semiamira, allowing her a Voice among the Senatòrs. In modestie I forbeare to write the particulars of his vn-manly libidinous filthinesse, adding only that which a iudicious Author speakes of him: Kings (saith he) as they haue greater power to sinne then other men, so haue they lesser safety in sinning then any man; for being set aboue others in the eie of the World, they are as Markes that are aimed at, and lie o∣pen to the shute of Reuenge. And so was the state of this Superlatiue Monster, whose owne Conscience still stung him, euen in the midst of his sweetest sinnes, and therefore euer expecting some violent end, hee prepared Silken Halters richly wrought to hang him∣selfe, if need were; and Golden Kniues to stab himselfe, or cut his throat; and built a goodly Tower of excee∣ding height, adorned with Gemmes and Gold of inua∣luable cost, that thence he might cast himselfe head∣long, hauing these words oft in his mouth, That how∣euer he died, his death should be pretious in the eies of all men. But he failed of his hope, though not of his de∣sert; for against him the Praetorian Souldiers suddenlic arose, no wrong offred them, more then vnto others, but out of a Iustice in God, who repaieth sinne with sinne, and suffreth not such outragious wicked ones to escape vnreuenged. (6) These breaking into his Palace, found him not in estate answerable to his calling, but hidde (for feare) in a homely place suteable with his dirty condi∣tions: A Priuy. Sabellicus. from whence with Acclamations thorow the streets of Rome, more like a Dogge then a Man, they dragged him with his mother, saying, The Bitch and her whelpe must goe together: and after their furie spent, threw their bodies into the Common Sinke of the City, and thence into Tyber, sinking them downe with great stones, lest the carkases cast vp with the waues, should either find buriall, or infect the aire. The Se∣nate approuing all that was done, decreed that his name should be obliterated out of all monuments in Rome, and neuer any Antoninus (a name before very gratious) should rule againe their Empire: so odious was the remembrance of this Image of Ignominy. (7) He was aged but foureteene yeeres when hee became Emperour; by Herodians computation, he raig∣ned sixe yeeres, and died at twenty: By Aurelius Vi∣ctors he died at seuenteene, & raigned not fully three yeeres: Eusebius saith, that he raigned fully foure: Onu∣phrius Euseb. Eccles. hist. lib. 6. cap. 20. would haue him to liue eighteen yeeres, & to dy the 8 day of March, Anno two hundred twenty three. ALEXANDER SEVERVS. CHAPTER XXVII. Alexander Seuerus Emp. B Efore the death of Helio∣gabalus, his Cosin German An. Do. 223. Alexianus, by the working of his mother Mammea, was made his Caesar, whose vertues daily increasing, with his age, gaue hopes to the better sort of some happier times by his meanes: but so farre in∣censed Heliogabalus (who hated nothing more then vertue), and so dimmed his fame, that he often assai∣ed to take away his life by trechery: But suruiuing him, whom no man wished to liue, he was with pub∣licke blessings, and vnspeakable ioy elected Emperour; * his name they changed from Alexianus to Alexan∣der, Lampridius saith, he was borne on the day that A∣lexander the great died, and had therefore his name. and his surname giuen of old Seuerus. (2) He was the sonne of one Varius, a Syrian borne, and of Mammea, sister to Simia ira, though there are who say that both the sisters attending on their Aunt Iulia the Empresse, were gotten with child by yong Caracalla, and so he father of Alexianus: how∣soeuer, Sabellicus. Lampridius. he was brought vp in learning from his child∣hood, hauing a naturall propension to all humane vertues, and diuine pieties: He was very skilfull in the Mathematicks, Geometrie, Musicke, Caruing, and Herodian. Painting, & composed some Bookes also of Poetrie; so great a louer of the liberall Arts, that he allowed the Sabellicus. professors thereof annuall stipends for their further encouragement: and that which most is, hee much fauoured the Christians, from whom he tooke to him∣selfe examples of life, and vrged their Precepts vnto others, and this one especially Lampridi the truest relator of this Emperours acts: (for Herodi∣an speakes on spleene) saith, he caused this Chri∣stian poesie to be written all about his Pallace, and sometimes com∣manded by voice of a pub∣like Crier. Lamprid . Sabellicus. NOT TO DO TO OTHERS WHAT WEE WOVLD NOT HAVE DONE TO VS. Their Christ he honoured (though as a Heathen man) and would haue had him consecrated among the Romane Gods: vnto whom he also was minded to haue built a Temple, had not his Idol-Priests hindred the same, but a place of their holy assemblies he allowed them by his Imperiall warrant: for when certaine Vinteners or Victuallers laid claime to the place whereunto the Christians resorted to pray, he thus decided it, That it was much fitter that God therein should be worshipped, then belly-gods should be pampered to surfet there. (A good do∣cument of a Heathen for some Christians, who turne places consecrate to Gods diuine seruice into Sheep-Coates, or to the like prophane vses) This good in∣clination Alexander Seue∣rus incited to Christianity by his mother Mammea Euseb. Eccles. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 20. Ierome. of Alexander the sonne, was vndoubtedly stirred vp by the instigations of Mammea his mother, who, as Eusebius witnesseth, had sent for Origen (the Christian Doctour) from Alexandria to Antioch: by whom she was so wel instructed, that Ierome giues her the honourable Title of a most holy Woman. (3) Himselfe, though yong, ruled the Empire with great Wisedome and Iustice: admitting onely such for his Counsellors, as were men vncorrupt, sage and learned, skillfull in the Ciuill Law, and experi∣enced Sabellic . in Antiquities of elder times, and preferring none to any office or charge by suite, but only by the commendation of each mans worth and fitnes for the place: In regard whereof, he caused Turinus (one of his Courtiers who tooke money of diuers, with promise to procure the Emperours fauour in their suites) to be put to death by smoake, the Crier pro∣claiming, That hee had sold smoake, and therefore with smoake he should die. And likewise to cut off, in Law∣yers their continuall selling of Iustice (the bane of all Common wealths) for a fee, hee granted a publike & set reward to such as should plead gratis. By which courses, his ciuill affaires were nobly managed, and his warres likewise proued as prosperous: for hee tri∣umphed with great glory ouer the Parthians: The Germanes also, who in furious manner had passed the Riuers Danuby, and the Rhine, in many skirmishes he put backe, and forced them to their former obedi∣ence. Bountifull and liberal he was both to the people & soldiers, as by the reuerse of his Coine aboue prefix∣ed is seene, wherin is expressed the fourth Donatinum and Congiarium, bestowed by the bounty of this Em∣perour vpon the Souldiers and common people, of which Lampridius maketh mention in his life. (4) But as Enuy euer attends persons of Estate, and a desire of change, breeds a dislike of the present, so the Roman Legions growne farre out of order by the prodigious Gouernement of the last Emperour, proued now vnnaturall to their dread Soueraigne: whose warres drawing him into Germanie, and thence hither into Britaine, hee found some of his Souldiers Sabellic and o∣thers. here so tumultuous, that he thought fit to vse exem∣plary seuerity towards them, whereupon they, being secretly backt, (as is supposed) by Maximinus (a po∣tent man in the Armie, raised onely by the Emperours fauour) they traiterously assailed him, and together with his mother Mammea, murthered him in a vil∣lage Seuerus and his mother murthe∣red. then called Sicila, though others say he was slaine in Germany, in the Citie Mogunce, and some in France, no other cause mouing them, but onely his vertue, the eight day of March, when hee had raigned (by Lampridius) thirteene yeeres and nine daies, aged by Herodian, and Iulius Capitolinus, twenty nine yeeres, Seuerus the time of his raigne. three moneths and seuen daies, the yeere of our Sa∣uiour, two hundred thirtie sixe. CAIVS. IVLIVS. VER VS. MAXI. EMP. CHAPTER XXVIII. CAIVS. IVLIVS. VER VS. MAXI. CAES. Maximinus Emp. Maximus Caesar. M Aximinus, a man barba∣rous by birth and disposi∣tion, (himselfe a Thracian, his father named Nicea, borne in Gotland, very ob∣scure, his mother Ababa of An. Do. 236. little better rancke) spent his youth in keeping of Cattell, the pouerty of his parents admitting no bet∣ter maintenance: yet afterwards his fortunes brought him vnto great aduancement, and that by working vpon the outward obiect of his person, be∣ing for shape and strength (if the reporter deserue credit) rather to be thought a vast Giant, then descri∣bed for a goodly man: For Iulius Capitolinus, affirmes Iuli. Capitol. Maximinus of a huge stature. his height to be eight foote and an halfe by Geome∣tricall measure, and his Body answerable in euery pro∣portion, insomuch, as he did weare as a Ring on his thumb, the * Bracelet which his wife vsed to weare on Capitolinus calles it Dextr cherium, being a broad plate of gold, set with rich Iewels, an ornament in vse amongst the Romane Ladies. her arme, a stature thought vncredible; and yet Iose∣phus, an Author of great credit, doth confidently re∣cord, that one Eleazar a Iewe accompanied Darius the Kings sonne of Persia vnto Rome, (sent by Vitelli∣us to Tiberius for an hostage) whose height, as he saith, was fully seuen cubits, a measure surmounting this. (2) This Maximinus increasing strength with Ioseph. Antiq. l. 18 cap. 6. growth, left his trade of Cattle-keeping, and resorted to the Romane Campe then in Syria, where for his ad∣mirable Maximinus his meanes of rising to preferment. height, he was admitted by Septimus Seuerus into the rancke of a common Souldier, and shortly after, preferred to bee one of his Guarde. Bassianus made him a Coronell, and Heliogabalus gaue him the leading of certaine foote: but the last Emperour A∣lexander, aduanced him to be a Captaine of the fourth Legion, whose death notwithstanding hee disloiallie practised (of such force is the desire of Soueraignty, which makes men forget all bonds of gratitude and Herodian and Aurelius Victor y that this was done, Alexander yet liuing. loiall trust) and was thereupon by the Souldiers ele∣cted Emperour, with fealty sworne vnto him. (3) The ignoble Vpstart thus borne from the Maximinus of a naughty dispo∣sition. dunghill, vpon the wings of Fortune, vnto the seat of Maiestie, thought the increase of his pride was an in∣crease of State; and knowing hee had nothing for which he might deserue to be loued, he studied in the whole managing of his estate, how by all meanes hee might be feared. Hee therefore displaced Senatours, Captaines, Souldiers, and whom not? with murders, banishments, and confiscations of their goods: all such especially he did cut off, whom hee supposed to haue knowledge of his base beginnings. The Christi∣ans Euseb. Eccles. hist. lib. 6. cap. 27. Maximinus per∣secuteth the Christians. His death at∣tempted. likewise vnder him were martyred, (whereof Ori∣gen wrote a Booke, not now extant) and he is by Wri∣ters accounted the sixth Persecutor of Gods Saints: so that, whereas his flatterers at first called him Milo, Antaeus, and Hercules, for his strength; now they all tearmed him, Busiris, Phalaris, and Cyclops, for his sa∣uage crueltie. (4) But his life being odious to God and Man, Herodian. was often attempted to be taken away; first, by Maxi∣mus, a man of a Consular dignitie; then by Quarci∣nus (whom Capitolinus calleth Ticus) set on by the old Souldiers of Septimus Seuerus, that had beene dis∣graced by Maximinus; and lastly by the Army in Africa, who elected Gordianus (their Proconsul, a very Gordianus elect∣ed Emperour, and his son e elected his Caesar. worthy and learned man of fourescore yeeres old) Emperour, and his sonne (of the same name and Princely qualities) his Caesar: the Senate likewise con∣firming all that they had done. He tooke to himselfe the surname Africanus either in respect of his Pro-Consulship which he exercised in that Prouince, or else as descēded from Scipio his family who bore that surname: His sonne Gordianus likewise was stiled Au∣gustus, as appeareth by his Coines, whereon hee writ∣eth himselfe AVG. and vpon the Reuerse, Liberali∣tas AVG. I. two Emperours sitting. Maximinus then in Hungarie, and hearing there∣of, rather like a mad man raged at his misfortunes, then either by courage or wise forecast endeuoured to redeeme them. (5) In the meane while, aged Gordianus with the An. Do. 238. Ensignes and glory of an Emperor, entred Carthage, with blessings and acclamations of ioy: whereat his old enemie Capeltanus, Gouernour of Numidia and Mauritania (Prouinces in Africke) much enuied; and gathering forces in Maximinus his name, made head against him, and shortly gaue him Battle, wherein Gordianus the younger was slaine before the walles of Gordianus the younger slaine. the Citie. The father seeing his Caesars disastre, and himselfe an Emperour onely nominall, and his new risen Sunne to haue passed the circle of his height, and now to approch to the setting and fall, wished a∣gaine his priuate estate; and in despaire, griefe, and disdaine of his enemies successe, with the Girdle which he wore, strangled himselfe to death, when hee had Gardianus the fa∣ther strangled. beene stiled Emperour only twenty six daies: whereat Maximinus was not a little ioifull, and the Senate no lesse perplexed, seeing themselues depriued of their hopes, and now laid open to the Tyrants will, who like a Lion came raging on, threatning reuenge in all their blouds. (6) The State thus standing, all the Peeres and Princes thereof assembled themselues together at Rome: and in the Temple of Iupiter, after long deba∣ting of their present dangers, concluded, that Maxi∣mus Pupienus and Clodius Balbinus together should bee Emperours; men of great account and fauour with the people. These taking Oath and Imperiall Robes, leuied forces to maintaine their cause: and Balbinus taking charge of the Citie, Pupienus marched to meet Maximinus, who in great pride had passed the Alpes, entred Italie, and now laid siege against Aquieliea; in which this was very memorable, that The Citizens wiues cut off the haire of their heads, to make bow-strings for resistance of so hatefull a Tyrant: where after long as∣sault preuailing little, his discontented Souldiers fell to mutinie: and entring his Pauilion, at noone day without resistance slew both him and his sonne, bea∣ring the same name whom hee had created his Caesar, Maximinus and his sonne slaine, and whose monies, as he minted them, we haue inser∣ted at the entrance of his Empire. Their heads for a Trophy they sent before them to Rome, where with such acceptations they were receiued, as that the Se∣nate acknowledged themselues to be rid of a Monster. (7) Hee was, as is said, exceedingly tall, his body great, and ioints proportionable, faire of face, full eies, and of such strength as is vncredible: and accor∣ding to his limmes, so was his diet; for hee daily de∣uoured Maximinus his intemperance in di t. Iul. Capitol. Euseb. Eccles. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 27. forty pound waight of flesh, and thereto dranke six Gallons of wine. He died aged sixty yeeres and odde, when he had raigned three yeeres, in the yeere of our Lord two hundred thirty and eight. PVPIENVS MAXIMVS Emperours. CLODIVS BALBINVS CHAPTER XXIX. Pupienus Maximus Emp. Clodius Bal∣binus Emp. P Vpienus Maximus and Clo∣dius Balbinus thus elected together for Emperors, the An. Do. 238. one in action, and the o∣ther resident, a great sedi∣tion chanced betwixt the Senate and Souldiers, which grew to a bloudie issue a∣mong the Citizens, and Rome it selfe was set on fire in sundrie places; the Emperours presence and au∣thoritie little preuailing: which strucke such feare in∣to their hearts, that they accounted these times most vnfortunate, and themselues and present estate to be most desperate. But the death of Maximinus (and his head happily brought them at the instant) gaue present life to their dying hearts. And Pupienus com∣ming to Aquieliea as much quieted the Armie, sent backe the Lieutenants to their places of charge, and with great pompe and praise returned to his Fellow-Emperour. (2) The parentage of Balbinus is reported to bee both noble and ancient, made Citizens of Rome by great Pompey, and himselfe borne at Cales in Spaine. Pupienus Auncestors were much latter, yet had hee borne many Offices of Magistracie, and euer dischar∣ged them with wisdome and valour: both of them highly accounted of in Rome. (3) Peace thus established beyond all expectation, with shoutes and applauses the Emperours enter the Senate-house, where (according to the custome and their deserts) they were stiled, The Fathers of the Senat, I l. Capitol. with thankes as to the onely preseruers of their liues and estates: and some extolling the Senate highly for their prouident foresight, in clecting such sapient and worthy Emperors, contrarie to the rash and vndiscreet practise of such as chose their Gouernours to fit their owne fancies, rather then the charge to which they aduance them; and whose bad liues brought com∣monly their vntimely, but deserued deaths. The Pretorian Souldiers tooke themselues to bee taxed with those aspersions, and the rather, because the Ger∣man Strangers were brought in to be of the Guard, as if themselues were not to bee trusted: so turning their spleene against the present Emperours, sought to set vp a new, which shortly after they found opportunitie to effect. (4) For these Emperours, though aged and wise, The Emperours enuy one ano∣ther. were not so linked together in affection, as they were neere ioined in authoritie: and therefore the winde of emulation had the easier passage betwixt the chinkes of their owne conceits; the one prizing his wisdome and gouernment to be more iudicious; the other, his birth and Nobilitie to be more honorable: and each of them hauing his owne Guard, stood vp∣on his owne Guard, though one Palace contained them both: and both their endeuours euer well con∣sorting for the businesses of the Empire. (5) At this time the Prouinces of Parthia and Ger∣manie grew vnquiet, and by ciuill discords, endange∣red their subiections: to represse which, the Emperors agreed to goe in person, the one into the East, the o∣ther into Germanie. Now whilest these great prepa∣rations were in making, the Capitoline-Games were ce∣lebrated in Rome, whereunto all (almost) resorted, but especially the new-come Guards of the Emperours. The Pretorians finding the aduantagious time, which they had long waited for, suddenly in armour assailed the Court; which Pupienus perceiuing, sent in all haste for Balbinus, and both their Guards for defense. But his Fellow-Emperour, vpon a vaine suspicion detra∣cted time himselfe, and hindered the forwardnesse of the Guards, so that these Traitours had easie accesse into both the Emperours Chambers, where in their rage they dispoiled them of their Imperiall Robes, and haled these poore aged and innocent Emperours, like two Theeues thorow the middest of the Citie: Lastly, they slew them, and left their bodies to de∣spightfull ignominie. (6) These Emperours raigned together one yeere, and somewhat more, and died the yeere of Christ two hundred thirty nine: in which yeere hap∣pened so great an Eclipse of the Sun, that the noone∣day thereby became as darke as the mid-night. M. ANTONINVS GORDIANVS. CHAPTER XXX. M. Antoninus Gordianus Emp. G Ordianus (for Antoninus he An. Do. 239. might not be called, a law formerly acted inhibiting the same) was the sonne of a daughter to old Gordi∣anus (that had made away himselfe in Carthage, as is declared) at the age of ele∣uen yeeres was created Caesar by the Senate, with Pupienus and Balbinus; and at their deaths by the Pretorian Souldiers, elected Emperour, not yet fully fourteene yeeres of age. Greatly was he strengthned by the Alliance and Counsell of one Misitheus, his Prefect and Instructer, whom for his great learning he so honoured and loued, that he tooke his daughter for his wife; and by whose onely direction, he pros∣perously administred his State affaires. (2) Touching the affaires of our Prouinces pro∣ceedings, or what Lieutenants were imploied in Bri∣taine since Virius Lupus there placed by Seuerus (since whose death our Storie hath spent twenty seuen yeeres) we finde not recorded. Yet now in the raigne of young Gordianus, some glimmering light for her Gouernour appeareth by an Altar-Stone found in Cumberland at a place then called Old Carleil. Castra Explorato∣rum, with an inscription for the happy health of the Emperour Gordian the third, his wife Furia Sabina Tranquilla, and their whole Familie: which votiue Altar was erected by the Troupe of Horsemen sur∣named Augusta Gordiana, when Aemilius Chrispinus a natiue of Africa gouerned the same vnder Nonnius Philippus Lieutenant Generall of Britaine, in the yeere of Christ, two hundred forty three, as appeareth by the Consuls therein specified: whose forme and in∣scription wee haue followed by the Stone it selfe, now remaining at Connington among many others, in the custodie of Sir Robert Cotton Knight. IOM. PRO SALVTE IMPERATORIS M. ANTONI GORDIANI. P. F. INVICTI AVG. ET SABINIAE TVR IAETRANQVILECONIVGIEIVSTO TAQVE DOMV DIVIN. EORVMA LA AVG. GORDIA. OB VIRTVTEM APPELLATA POSVIT: CVI PRAEEST AEMILIVS CRISPINV. S PRAEF. EQQ. NATVS IN PRO AFRICA DE TVIDRO SVB CVR. NONNII PH LIPPI LEG. AVG. PROPRETO... ATTICO ET PRETEXTA TO COSS. In his fift yeere, the Parthians vnder the Leading of Sapor their King, had passed into the confines of the Romane Prouinces, as farre as Antioch in Syria, which Citie they had taken, with spoile of the Countries ad∣ioining: against whom, the yong Emperour in warlike maner addressed himselfe, and in person prepared to vndergoe the warres. (3) In Rome the Temple of Ianus that long had stood shut, he caused to be opened, a sure token that tropius. Gor us ope∣neth the Temple of Ia . warres were in hand: and departing the City, passed the Straits of Hellespont, and tooke his way thorow Mysia, to stay the Gothes that were come downe to in∣habit Thracia. Thence marching to Antioch, reco∣uered the Citie, forcing Sapor to forsake the Prouince, and to content himselfe with his owne demaines. (4) But long this Sunne went not without a Cloud, nor his fauourable fortunes without a checke; H er. Ili des 4. Mi beus poiso∣ned by Philip. for Mi theus, his Nest r, paying Natures debt before it was due (being poisoned by Philip, as Eutropius af∣firmeth) was wanting in counsell, & missed for trust: to supply which, Philip (an Arabian, and of ignoble parentage) was made his Prefect; wise (I must needs say) had hee beene moderate; and valiant in Armes, had he beene true. But the glory of a Diademe beheld with the false light of ambition, so dimmed the eie of his dutifull affection, and blinded the senses of his a∣spiring mind, that he, who from nothing was risen to be somthing, thought that also nothing worth, whilst it was shadowed with the name of a subiect. First therefore he sought to winne credit with the Souldi∣ers, to whom he was facible; to regard the poore, to whom hee was liberall; and in all things to outstripe his Soueraigne, to whom he was treacherous. Yong Gordianus vnable to endure his Prefectors designes, Philip his trea∣chery. or his owne disgraces, and perceiuing the marke whereat he aimed, complained his wrongs in open as∣semblies, and to the Souldiers after this tenor. (5) I got not this state from my Parents by Gordi his speech to the Souldiers. birth, nor yet by any deserts (I must confesse) in my selfe, being the least of many that did deserue it bet∣ter: but it was you, my fellow Souldiers (vpon what fate I know not) that haue made me what I am. If then I haue defrauded your hopes, by carrying my selfe vnder your expectations, I wish to bee set in the place where I first was; or rather (if I so de∣serue) my life, and state, may at one instant be en∣ded by your vnerring hands: For Noble mindes cannot brooke to be curbed with the bitte of base indignities, nor suffer their vassals to bee Corriuals of their Maiestie. It is a iealous obiect (I must needs confesse) and many times casts great suspition whē is small occasion, but I, for my part, haue alwaies thought of that humour, that men causlesly ica∣lous, doe most iustly deserue what they vniustlie feare; and both your selues will bee my witnesses, how farre I am from the touch of that staine, and also the dailic occurrents of my Caesar, (if so low I may terme him) doth make more then manifest. I am but yong, yet elder by sixe yeares then I was; my body tender, yet exposed to the chaunce of warre; my counsell raw, yet bettered by your wise∣domes; and my conquests in my selfe nothing, but yet in your valours both glorious & famous. What then are mine errours, that I may amend them? or your discontents that I may redresse? for by the powers of heauen I protest, it is your loues which I most esteeme, and the good of the Empire, for which I onely wish to liue; the first is in your pow∣ers to bestow at your pleasure, but the other in me (if it be possible) shall liue euen after death. (6) These complaints notwithstanding, Philip so politickly, nay, rather traiterously brought his owne proiects to passe, as that the yong innocent Emperour was displaced, and abandoned of all: in which di∣stresse he first sued to be made his Caesar, and that de∣nied, to be his Praetorian Prefect: but neither would bee had, yet at length the charge of an ordinary Cap∣taine, was with some difficulty granted him. But Phi∣lip bethinking himselfe of the greatnes of Gordianus his blood, his loue and esteeme both in Rome and the Prouinces, and his owne vertues equalising any, hee commanded him to be slaine in the twenty two yeere of his age, and the sixt of his raigne. The Senate hea∣ring Gordia us slaine. thereof, elected M. Marcius, and after him again, L. Aurel. Seuerus, Ostulianus. But Philip through the giddie multitude, preuailed against both. This Em∣perour though yong, so well demeaned himselfe, that the Senate by authoritie added to his titles TV∣TOR REIPVBLICAE, and PARENS PRIN∣CIPVM POPVLI ROMANI, and after his death euen by his owne murtherers, his Monument of faire Stone was raised in the confines of Persia, and vpon his sepulchre this inscription set DIVO GORDIANO VICTORI PERSA∣RVM VICTORI GOTTHORVM VICTO∣RI SARMATARVM DEPVLSORI ROMA∣NARVM SEDITIONVM VICTORI GER∣MANORVM. SED NON VICTORI PHI∣LIPPORVM. To the Sacred Gordianus vanquisher of the Persians, Gothes, and Sarmates, extinguisher of the Romane Ci∣uill discords, and subduer of the Germans, but not of the Philippians. (7) He was of condition most noble and louely, Gordianus his vertues. of behauiour gentle, very studious and giuen much to learning; hauing in his Librarie no lesse then three∣score and two thousand Bookes, as is reported. The truth is, that wicked people were not worthy long to enioy so vertuous, so clement, so peereles an Empe∣rour. He died in the moneth of March, in the yeere of our Redeemer two hundred forty fiue. M. IVLIVS PHILIPPVS EMP. CHAPTER XXXI. M. IVLIVS PHILIPPVS CAES. Iulius Philip. Emp. Iulius Philip. Caes. W Hat man is there, who considering those forepas∣sed An. Do. 245. murthers, of so many, and so mightie Monarchs, would not, by the specta∣cle of others calamities, be induced to preferre the se∣curitie of a moderate e∣state, before the desire of Soueraignty; whose glori∣ous content is onely in appearance, but the cares and hazards are both reall and perpetuall. But of so attra∣ctiue vertue is the Load-stone of Maiesty, through the imagined felicity thereof, that most mens desires are drawne to that one point of the Compasse, and if a little faire winde of fortune shall blow on them; they will launch forth with their full sailes into that Mare incognitum, a Sea of vnknowne calamities. And amōgst others, such were the blinde desires, and such the vn∣happy euent of this Iulius Philippus the Arabick Bar∣arian. Of parentage obscure and ignoble, as Victor and others affirme, who pluckt off the imperiall robes of his Liege-Lord, to inuest himselfe. (2) Being now accepted as Emperour by the Soul∣diers An. Do. 245. Victor. Eutropius. in Parthia, he wrote to the Senate of the death of Gordianus, as though it naturally had happened, and with faire pretensions of his good purposes, but more through the feareof his Parthian Souldiers, ob∣tained their consents; whereupon shuffling vp a most dishonourable peace in those parts, and decla∣ring his sonne Philip for his Caesar, (whose Coines with his, we haue set in the beginning of this Chap.) hee made all speede towards Rome: where, the yeere Aurelius Vi r. insuing, his shewes and games were exceedingly mag∣nificent, for the Celebration of the Birth-day (as we we may terme it) of Rome, that beeing, the thousand yeere from her foundation. (3) It pleased God at length to touch this Empe∣rours heart, both with such a sense of his owne fore∣past Sabellic . Orosius. Eusebius. sinnes, and also with the light of heauenly truth, that he hath the honour of being the first Emperour baptised into the faith of Christ, together with his sonne Philip, and his wife Seuera: though the pub∣like authorizing of the same Profession was reserued for the blessed times of our British Constantine. The meanes of his conuersion from Idolatrie, were Fabia∣nus and Origen, who by letters exhorted him therun∣to: and for the same Profession, were both himselfe and sonne murdered by Decius his Captaine, though others report, that Decius did rather hate Christianitie for their sakes, then them for their Professions sake. And howsoeuer Pomponius Laetus accuseth him to bee Pomp. Laetus. a dissembling Prince, yet Eusebius declareth the effects of his Profession farre otherwise: for Philip (saith hee) seeking to communicate with the Saints, could not bee ad∣mitted, till such time as he had made open confession of his Euseb. Eccles. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 33. Faith; at which time he ioined himselfe with those, who for their sinnes were brought to examination, and was pla∣ced in the roome of the Penitents, because that in many things he had beene faulty: which willingly he obeied, and declared by his workes his sincere and religious minde to∣wards God. Which may the rather appeare by Sabel∣licus and Bergomensis, who shew, that the hatred of De∣cius Sabellic. . 7. lib. 7. against Philip and his sonne was conceiued, for that they had committed the custodie of their Trea∣sures vnto Fabianus the Christian Bishop of Rome, who baptized them, as some write; though others say, Poncius the Martyr did it. Polychro . lib. 4. cap. 21. Gothes infest Mi∣sia and Thracia. (4) The Gothes againe descending from Scythia, infested Misia and Thracia with a mighty Armie, see∣king their habitations in those Countries as former∣lie they had done: against whose irruptions, the Em∣perour sent one Marinus a most valiant Captaine, who no sooner came into those parts, but drew the Souldi∣ers into a Rebellion, and proclaimed himselfe Empe∣rour, taking (as he said) his example from Philip, that had in like sort raised his title by his Soueraignes fall. But the Souldiers that had newly erected him, as sud∣denly againe threw him downe, and in their mutable affections slew him. . (5) Into whose Charge was sent Decius, a man of great experience, who also no sooner was in the Ar∣mie, but they forced the Imperiall Ensignes vpon him, Decius enforced to be Emperour. and (as some report) against his will: hee therefore sent secretly to Philip, declaring this attempt of the Souldiers, and how hee meant to make escape from them with persisting in his dutifull allegeance. But the Emperour fearing this to be but policie in Decius, lest by delay he might giue him more strength, omit∣ted no time to vphold his owne, and with a mightie Armie vndertooke these affaires himselfe, not trust∣ing any more to the disposall of his Captaines. And immediately departing Rome, with a sterne resoluti∣on, and ouer-hard hand, held the reine of that begun Expedition, whereby he presently lost the loue of the Armie, and Decius was accounted the more worthy of rule, whom in Verona they forthwith proclaimed Emperour, and cut off Philips head thorow the teeth, Philippus and his Caesar slaine. E trop. Capitol. before they had departed Italie. At newes whereof, the Pretorians slew Philip his Caesar and sonne, a man of so obseruable composednesse, as that he had beene neuer seene to laugh in all his life. And thus the two Philips ended their raignes. (6) Iulius Philippus (saith Eusebius) raigned seuen Euseb. Eccles. ist. lib. 6. cap. 38. yeeres: but Eutropius and Victor giue him onely fiue; whose death happened in the yeere of Christ Iesus, two hundred and fiftie. GN. MESSIVS, QVINCTVS, TRAIAN, DECIVS. CHAPTER XXXII. Tra. Decius Emp. Dec C s. Hostil. D Ecius elected Emperour by the Persian Legions, pro∣claimed An. Do. 250. in Verona by the Romane Souldiers, and in Rome confirmed by the Voice of the Senate, was of them all with wonted flat∣teries stiled Augustus. (2) His Birth was no∣ble, of the City Cabali in Decius his pa∣rentage. the Lower Pannonia, now knowne by the name of Hungarie: himselfe well experienced, wise, and vali∣ant, and wielded the Empire as a worthy Prince, had he not blemished his raigne with a staine of Tyrannie, a scourge of the Chri . and persecuted Gods Saints with such a Heathenish rage, that he is rightly noted by learned Writers, to be the seuenth Horne of the Persecuting-Imperiall-Beast, Apocal. 13. whose sauage cruelties towards the innocent Christi∣ans, is most lamentable to be heard, but more to their . Or . smart that suffred and felt it. (3) The Grid-iron he made the Altar, whereupon Ambr. l b. 2. de Virgin. blessed Laurence offered his body in sacrifice; the Stewes the Temple, wherein Theodora the vnspotted Virgin worshipped her Christ; the comfortlesse De∣serts, the refuge of aged Chaeremon, Bishop of Nilus; Euseb. Eccles. hist. lib. 6. cap. 41. Vincent. Niceph. lib. 5. cap. 27. and the Caue, the Sanctuarie of the seuen Souldiers, fa∣buled by Nicephorus for seuen Sleepers: and so barba∣rous was he that way, that he put to Martyrdome ma∣ny children, as Vincentius, citing Hugo, affirmeth. Vinc. lib. 11. e. 52. Sabellicus. Fabianus and Cornelius, both reuerend Bishops of Rome, hee slew; Alexander, Bishop of Ierusalem, imprisoned Euseb. Eccles. hist. lib. 6. cap. 38. to death; and Great Origen, after he had scourged him at an Iron-stake, his feet hee lockt in the Stocks foure paces asunder, where he so continued certaine daies, inuenting such tortures and strange temptations a∣gainst the guiltlesse Christians, as are most admirable to heare. But long hee raged not, ere God in his iu∣stice tooke reuenge, and brake him to peeces as a Potters Psal. 2. 9. Vessell. (4) For the Gothes that had inuaded Mysia and Thracia, continuing their Irruptions into the border∣ing Prouinces, drew him into an Expedition for those parts, where being betraied by Trebonianus Gallus Pomponius Letus. Iornandes. his owne Captaine, he saw his two sonnes, Decius and Hostilianus, (whom he had admitted in fellowship of Empire with him, and whose monies wee haue with his expressed) slaine before his face; and himselfe to Decius and his Caesar their deaths. Cassiodor. intombe his body, as a last refuge, in a deepe whirle∣poole; wherein it was so swallowed vp, as it could neuer be after seene; hauing no other honour of Bu∣riall, nor place of remembrance where his bones should rest. And according to his Death, so was his Descent: for neither hath he Father, Mother, nor Wife mentioned (for ought I know) by any Writer, (for of Salustia Barbia Orbiana, it is doubtfull whether to him or his sonne Hostilian she were wedded) nor his Acts so exactly registred, as were those of the preceding Emperours, his sinnes so deseruing it, and God in his reuenge so punishing it. (5) Aurelius Victor and Eutropius say, that hee raigned two yeeres and odde moneths: but Eusebius Decius his raigne Euseb. Eccles. hist. lib. 7. cap. 1. affirmeth his raigne, not fully two yeeres: most hold him to haue died at the age of fifty, and in the yeere of Christ, two hundred fifty two. C. VIBIVS TREBONIANVS GALLVS, Emperours. C AIVS VIBIVS VOLVSIANVS, CHAPTER XXXIII. Tre. Gallus Emp. Vibius Volusi. Emp. T His ouerthrow of the Ro∣mans, and death of Decius, An. Do. 252. in outward semblance was so greeuously taken by Trebonianus Gallus, that no man was so forward for reuenge as hee, and therefore the last in suspi∣cion of Treason. The Ar∣mie hee strengthned, and daily encouraged, pretending great seruice against those barbarous Scythians, but all to gaine credit and liking of the Souldiers, whereby hee soone atchieued his desire, and with their applauses was proclaimed Emperour. Gallus elected Emperour. His parentage. (2) By Birth, he was descended of an honourable Familie in Rome: but true honour cannot harbour where dwelleth treachery and falshood, as it was with him, when appointed by Decius to bee Gouernour of Mysia, and to keepe the passages from the inuading Gothes, the desire of Rule so corrupted his minde, that he plotted with them against the Armie, and betraied the trust and life of his Soueraigne. (3) Neither is he stained with the blot of Trea∣sons Pomp. Lat . Bloud . Sabellicus. only, but also with a carelesse and cruell gouern∣ment; for with the Gothes hee made a dishonourable peace, whereby the Romans (who were Lords of the World) became Tributarie by a yeerely pay to those vnciuill Scythians, who neuerthelesse in short time brake their Truce with him, sacking and spoiling the Prouinces of Thrasia, Mysia, Thessalia, and Mecedonia: the Persians then also by their example entring Meso∣potamia and Syria, made spoile euen thorow Armenia. (4) Gallus little regarding these troubles abroad, consumed his time idly in Rome, rather as a Bondman to his owne voluptuous desires, then a Conquering Monarch; taking for his companion and Fellow-Em∣perour, his sonne Volusianus, as appeareth by inscrip∣tion of Coine placed before, a very childe, whose yeeres did quit him of any Capitall Crime. But him∣selfe not perceiuing the infortunate successe of Detius for persecuting the innocent Christians, stumbled (as Gallus persecu∣teth the Chri∣stians. Euseb. Eccles. hist. lib. 7. cap. 1. Vniuersall Pesti∣lence thorow all the world. Paul Orosius. Eusebius saith) at the same stone, and banished them whose Praiers preserued his prosperous estate: at which time followed so vniuersall a Pestilence, that no Prouince in the world was free from the same: and his wicked Life and most vnfortunate Raigne hastened now vnto their period. (5) For the Gothes continuing their furies be∣gunne, Aemilian. Maurus his victorie. his General Aemilian. Maurus ouerthrew them with a wonderfull slanghter; whereby hee grew so famous, and Gall so contemptible, that the Souldi∣ers (euer affecting change) proclaimed him Emperour, the newes whereof soone roused Gallus from the Bed of his lasciuious pleasures, and with his sonne entred the quarrell against Aemilianus, whose fortune was to slay them both in fight, the yeere of Christs Incarna∣tion, Ga and his sonne . B op Hist. lib. 7. cap. 9. two hundred fifty three, after hee had raigned not fully two yeeres, and liued (as Victor testifieth) forty and seuen: whereupon the Armies ioining their forces together, conferred the Imperiall title and En∣signes vpon the Conquerour. C. IVLIVS AEMILIANVS. CHAPTER XXXIV. Aemilianus Maurus Emp. A Emilianus succeeding Gal∣lus by the only election of An. Do. 253. the Mysian Armie, was by birth an African in the Prouince Mauritania, of Parentage base and ob∣scure; who being risen by the Warres from meane places of seruice, and no better then a Common Souldier, aspired to the charge and credit of a Cap∣taine Generall. Aemilian. Maurus his descent. (2) His Election at first was contradicted by the Italian Bands, in fauour of Valerianus their owne Lea∣der, whom they sought to raise Emperour, the Senate also inclining thereto, the fame of the man among them was so renowned. The most voices therefore heard on his side. Some haue rather accounted Aemi∣lianus an Vsurper, then ranked him in the catalogue of lawfull Emperours. (3) But seeing Eutropius doth allow him the place, Entropi we are not to dispute his title or claime: only his short time of gouernment admitteth no matters of large discourse, being cut off in the budde, before the graft had time to spring. For his Armie disliking what themselues had done, and hearing of the worths and election of Valerianus, laid down their weapons born in his defense, and tumultuously murdered him in the Aemilius. Maurus his end, and con∣tinuance of his raigne. heat of their blouds, after hee had raigned in name, without action, the space almost of foure moneths. (4) So vnconstant is the state of worldly felicitie, and may bee compared to a mastlesse Shippe, which without Tackle is left to the mercie of the raging Seas, that is one while caried with the faire windes of hope towards the hauen of wished desires, but straightwaies ouerwhelmed with the waues of despaire: and most especially him that is borne vpon the opinions of the giddy multitude, now carried aloft vpon the flouds of their fawning fauours, and anon left in the sands of their retiring ebbes, with a sudden shipwracke of all their fore-gone fortunes. And these aduentures too soone Aemilianus felt, who the same yeere that hee thus put foorth to Sea, lost all his aduenture, and therewith his life, Anno 253. P. LICINIVS VALERIANVS. CHAPTER XXXV. Valerianus Emp. I F euer the saying of the Anno Dom. 254. wise Athenian Solon (spo∣ken to Croesus the rich king of Lydia) was true, That no Herodot. in Clio. man can be happy before the day of his death: then most truly may it be verified of this Valerianus the next succeeding Emperor: whose yeers were multiplied with increase of honour, vntill they came to seuenty and seuen, but then were clouded with such ignomini∣ous miseries, as the like had neuer hapned to any Ro∣maine Emperour before him, and (I may well say) to no other Monarch in the world before liuing: Such is the Ordinance of our great God, sometimes from the Dunghil to raise men of low degree, and to place them with Princes in the Chaire of Maiestie; then againe to bring down the Mighty from their Seate of Glory, & to leaue them chained with the poorest Captiues, & basest Vassals. For such was the State of that Great & Proud King of Babel, who from the height of Maiesty fell in∣to Dan. 4. 27. the cōditions of an vnreasonable Beast. And so was it with Valerianus, though not vtterly abandoned frō the Societie of men, as Babels King was: yet was he cari∣ed Captiue vnto a Nation whose Society was scarce hu∣maine, and where his vsage was more then barbarous. (2) This man was both nobly descended, and of Valerianus his descent. so great esteeme among the Romans, that beeing but a priuate, and then also absent, they chose him for their Censor, an Office of high dignitie, conferred e∣uer Treb. Pollio. vpon the Best, as Trebellius Pollio, who wrote the History of his Life, hath declared. Eusebius reporteth his beginning to haue beene gracious and milde to∣wards the Christians, aboue any of his Ancestors what∣soeuer; yea euen those who were themselues openly Valeria a pro∣tector of the Christians. accounted Christians: insomuch, that his Clemencie was their Protection, and his Court the Sanctuarie of their safeties. But Satan (whose hatred sleepeth not) stirred vp an Egyptian Sorcerer against them, who so Paul. Orosius. a Necromancer seduceth Vale∣lerian. inchanted the Emperors heart, that with great crueltie he began the Eighth Persecution, & so raged, that some haue appropriated the sayings of the Apocalyps in the thirteenth chapter vnto him, as to whom power Apocal. c. 13. was giuen for two and fortie monethes ouer the Saintes of God, and a mouth to vtter great blasphemies: Of which Dionys in Epist. ad Hermam apud Eusebi . opinion is the ancient Dionysius Alexandrinus. Many indeed were the Martyrs that he caused with horrible tortures to die, and more had done, if the iust reuen∣ging Sabellicu Vola∣teranus. hand of God had not cut him off. (3) For Sapores the sauage King of Persia, making great spoile in Syria, Cilicia, and Cappadocia, drew Vale∣rian Valerianus taken prisoner by Sapor from Rome into Mesopotamia, to withstand his rage, where striking Battell with him was left (either by Treason or Chance) without sufficient Guard to secure his Person, and was there taken Prisoner by the Persians, hauing then raigned seuen yeeres (whereof two were spent in spilling of the bloud of Saints) and thence forward, the rest of his life was enthralled to a most miserable and mercilesse seruitude: For the Tyrannizing Persian puft vp with this fortunate gale, Trebel. Pollio. to an excessiue swelling of pride; whensoeuer he was disposed to take Horse, made Valerianus his Foot-stoole, causing this Greatest Monarch of the World to whom all Nations did homage, to bow downe his necke and backe for himselfe thereon to tread, and mount into his Saddle: In which vnsufferable slauerie, his old bo∣dy indured without release, to the end of his most Pompon. L tus. wretched life, which by some Authours account was full seuen yeeres more; the very time of the Babylonian Aureli s Uictor. Kings abasement. (4) But herein the misery of Valerianus is much greater then Nabuchadnezars was, in that God both re∣stored him to his former glory, and indued him with heauenly grace to confesse his sinnes; whereas Valeri∣anus perished in the desperate calamitie whereinto he was fallen; as Eusebius sheweth in these words: Eusebius in serm. ad Conuen Sanctorum. And thou Valerian, forasmuch as thou hast exercised the same cruelty in murdering the subiects of God, therefore hast proued vnto vs the righteous Iudgement of God, in that thy selfe wast boundin Chaines, and caried away for a Cap∣tiue Slaue with thy Glorious Purple and thy Imperiall At∣tire, & at length also cōmanded by Sapors King of the Per∣sians, to be slaine, & powdred with salt, hast set vp vnto all men a perpetuall Monument of thine own wretchednesse. (5) How vnspeakeable the cruelties were which this wretched Emperor endured by that Tyrant, may hence appeare; in that not only those which were Al∣lies to the Romaine Empire, but also the Barbarous Kings, and friends of Sapores were moued with com∣miseration, and distaste, as Trebell. Pollio proueth by their own letters sent for his release, the copies where∣of he there produceth. Other Princes also of the East, as of the Bactrians, Albanians, Ilberians, and Scythians, inhabiting Mount Taurus, had such sense of these ig∣nominious vsages, that they disdained to receiue the letters from Sapor of his Victorious successe, and sent their Ambassadors to Rome, profferring their assi∣stance for the redemption of their Emperour; yet all a∣uailed not, and Sapor held still his Prisoner, abating no∣thing either of his owne pride, or his Captiues miserie, Valeria s had his Eyes puld out. but in the end (so hellish a fiend is reuenge) comman∣ded his Eyes to be pulled out, and so for age and griefe he died, as Eusebius saith: being, as Agathus (a writer of credit) reporteth, flaied aliue by direction of this Flaied aliue. vnhumane King. Thus did God punish one Tyrant by another, and thus himselfe felt those torments vnpit∣tied, which hee had without pitie inflicted on others. The race of whose Raigne is accounted to bee seuen yeares before his Captiuitie, wherein he liued almost so long as Galienus his sonne sat Emperour, and died in the yeere two hundred sixty one. P. LICINIVS GALIENVS. CHAPTER XXXVI. Gallien. Emp. Aureolus. Odenatus. V Alerian now Captine in Persia (while Odenatus gras∣ping An. Do. 261. the aduantage, tooke vpon him the Empire of the East; & the now guide∣lesse Armie of Rome, occu∣pied onely in spoile and mutinie, their leaders in faction, and the whole State astonished in affrigh∣ted terrour and amazement) Balista (a gallant gen∣tleman) first of the Romans mooued with the instant miserie of the Common-wealth, resolued by electing Rome in distur∣bance for electi∣on of an Em∣perour. anew an Emperour, to preuent the apparant ruine of his owne Country: yet neuer in this his worthie resolution, once dreamed of Gallienus, (though before chosen Augustus in the full fortune of his father) but the affection of the Armie forcibly setled the Garland vpon Macrian and his two sonnes, as the most wor∣thie; Marianus with his sonnes ele∣cted, subdued and slaine. who with his eldest not long after subdued by Aurcolus vsurping Illyria (against Gallenus then recei∣ued Soueraigne by the Roman Senate) and his youngest betraied to murder by plot of Odenatus, left the dis∣tracted Empire to those three, of which the last disdai∣ning 1. Aureolus in Illyris. 2. Gallienus in Rome. 3. Odenatus in the East. Odenatus ouer∣commeth the Persians. much the indignitie offred to the State of Rome, by that base captiuitie of Valerian, whose calamity no∣thing touched the sense of his vnnaturall sonne, en∣tred a warre against the Persians, and tooke from them their Cities Nisabis and Carras. But such was the mo∣deration of this man, that although hee had power of an independant Soueraignety, yet he held still a good correspondencie and intelligence in all his actions of Gouernment, with Gallienus, to whom he sent (as mo∣nument of Victorie and Reuenge) such of the Persian Nobilitie as became his Prisoners: and thus Odenatus did conquer, and Gallenus triumph. But such was the basenesse of the other, that when he could not by any Galie seeketh Odenatus his death. Princely vertue in himselfe, eclipse the true merit of Odenatus, he endeuoured to deface by treacherie what he could not suppresse by valour. But in this failing, hee made him then (through feare) copartner of his Empire, stiling him Augustus, and stamping his face and the Persian Triumph vpon the publike Coine of the State, by approbation of the Senate, leauing him a∣lone to defend those Frontiers of the Empire, whilest himselfe, neither regarding his old fathers miseries, (most miserable that he had so vnnaturall a sonne) the dishonour of the Romane State, nor the reuolts of the Prouinces, wherof newes was daily brought him, spent his vnprincely thoughts vpon fruitlesse deuices, as in reseruing sundry Fruits and Flowers, that they might grow greene and flourish all seasons of the yeere; and (which was worse) vpon women and wanton dallian∣ces. Yet had hee a Ladie of excellent beauty and al∣lurements, Cornelia Salonina Pipara, to his wife, the daughter of the King of the Martomanni, whose fea∣ture wee finde often minted vpon her Monies. His sonne by her Saloninus hee adopted Caesar, of whom there is no more remembred in Storie, then that hee was borne noble, trained vp princely, and perished through the errours of his father, and not his owne. And to his brother Licinius Valerianus (to whom the father had giuen the title of Caesar) he added the ho∣nour of Augustus. And therefore we haue not held it improper, to adioine to his their monies in the front of his life. (2) The calamities of this Emperours time were so many, as almost exceed credit: and Signes shewed both in the Heauens and the Earth, manifested his wrath, that sate vpon the Throne of Iasper, from whose presence issued Thundrings, Lightnings, and Voices. For Apoc. 4. 3. Trebe . Pollio. Strange sigh s in the Heauens. (by Writers of best credit) the Sunne was clouded as vnder sackcloth, and not seene for many daies toge∣ther. Earth-quakes great, and fearfully resounding, o∣uerthrew Great and migh∣ty Earth-quakes. Cities and other edifices, shaking the ground so terribly, that vast Caues, and hideous gaping bowels of the earth were thereby laid open, and whereout (no lesse strangely) flowed great streames of salt waters. The Earth roared, and seemed to thun∣der, when there was no voice heard in the aire. The Sea ouer-swelled her bankes, and brake into many Continents, drowning Countries, Cities, and People: and (besides all these) so violent a Pestilence raged, that in Rome no lesse then 5. thousand persons died in a day. (3) These miseries somewhat mooued this Hea∣thenish Emperour to remorse: and thinking thereby to pacifie the wrath of the Diuine Powers, hee staied the Gali staied the per cutions of th Christians Eus b. Eccles. st. lib. 7. cap. 12. Apoc. 1. 16. Persecutions of the Christians, sending out his Edicts in fauour of them. For not only the Heauens, Earth, and Seas declared the anger of their God, out of whose mouth went a two-edged sword, but the Prouinces also seemed to be remoued out of their places. The Souldiers of all parts electing their owne Generals, aduanced no lesse then Thirty at once, who assumed the title of Empe∣rours, Thirty Empero onc . but are recorded to Posterities by the name of Vsurping Tyrants. And as they were all deadly oppo∣site each to other, so were they iointly almost all bent against Galienus; whereby the Roman Empire was more oppressed with her owne forces, then euer it had been by forraine Powers. And since sixe of them assumed the Purple Robe in this Westerne Angle of the mpire, it will not be impertinent to the course of Story, with a light touch to remember them, and to expresse their Monies, as we haue done the rest of those that held the reines of gouernment in these parts of the Romane World. M. Cassius Labienus Posthumus after the death of Saloninus (who was committed to his education by Gallienus) assumed the Empire, by aide and encou∣ragement of those of Gallia, ouer whom he had born the office of liefetenancie by fauour of Valerian the Emperour. And these againe, as all Populars gree∣die of Innouation from him and Iunius Cassius Posthu∣mus his sonne, tooke both honour and life, after ten yeares gouernment. This opportunity either made by L. Aelianus, or fitly taken, mounted him vp with ease into that Emperiall throne, in which he sate not with like fortune of continuance, though of con∣clusion. To this man succeeded together, M. Aurelius Victorinus, and Lucius his son; both in a Tumult neere Colayn by their souldiors murthered. And had not the inordinate lust of the elder, blemished his other ver∣tues, he had to al the most excellent Emperors bin no∣thing inferiour, in the best of their other vertues. (7) The restlesse humor now of the giddy Com∣mons, next setleth it selfe vpon Aurelius Marius, a so∣ueraigne sutable in his meane condition to their base affections (for he was no better then a Black-smith) yet to him a man of their own meanes & making, they were no lesse vnconstant and cruel, then to the rest: af∣ter three daies, setting an end of his gouernment, with a sword of his own forging. And therfore Piuesius Te∣tricus, the father and sonne, though ascending the throne of Maiestie, with the greatest applause of that people, and filling it vp with much merit and happy successe of their own, when they considered the insuf∣ferable insolencies and desperate practises of that pro∣phane ranke, chose rather to adorne Aurelians Tri∣umph, in a voluntarie captiuitie, then to liue and rule at the deuotion of a lawlesse multitude. And these times seemed no lesse fatally bent to bloud, disorder, and tyranny in other parts as well as these: For the Pannonians raised Ingenuus: The Myssians, A. Regillia∣nus: The Egyptians, Aemilianus: In Africa Celsus was proclaimed: In Illyricum, Aureolus: and in the East, Pomp. Laetus. Odenatus (a man the more famous for Zenobia, his glo∣rious and magnanimous Wife; Whose valour was so feared of Galienus, that to make him his, hee admitted him his Fellow-Emperor, with the Stile of Augustus as we haue remembred before.) The Panlus Oros. Germans inuade Italy: The Cassidor. Gothes waste Greece, Pontus and Asia; The Samartians seize Iornandes. Eusebius. Austriche and Hungary: The Persi∣ans robbe Syria: The Saxons breake into Gallia: The Franks into Spaine: In a word, all are in vproares, Apoc. 6. 4. the second seale opened, and the Red-horse prepared for Battaile, whose Rider had receiued a great and sharpe Sword, with Commission giuen him to take Peace from the Earth: and these times of troubles are so fa∣mous in Storie, and the reuolutions of Acts so agree∣able to the words of the Prophecie, that they may seeme iustly a most exact accomplishment of that sa∣cred Galienus times prophesied of by the Euangelist S. Iohn. vision. (5) Finally, when Gallienus had raigned from his first Associating with his Father the terme of fifteene yeeres, Martian, Heraclianus, and Ceronius, three of his principall Captaines, (compounding together that one of them should bee Emperour) plotted his death, whiles hee besieged the Citie Millan, where they traiterously murthered him, the yeere of our Lord Galienus his death and conti∣nuance of his raigne. two hundred sixty nine, after that hee had suffered the Empire to be rent in peeces, and vsurped by many Forraine and barbarous Nations. M. AVRELIVS FLAVIVS CLAVDIVS. CHAPTER XXXVII. Fla. Claudius Emp. R OMES glory thus decli∣ning, and the Imperiall An. Do. 269. Foundations thus vnder∣mined, the aspiring tops of all that beautious frame beganne to shake, and to foreshew the signes of her approching fall. And had not the Fates euen at that instant raised a stay to vn∣derprop the Walles, those mounted Towers which so long had braued the Skie, had beene laid leuell with the Ground, and made the ruines of All-consuming Time. (2) For whereas by the strange confusions vnder the late Emperour, the Eagles body was burdened with the waight of those thirty heads at once: of which num∣ber though many of them by their owne mutuall ra∣uening were consumed before the death of Galienus, yet the mightiest, as Aurelius Gouernour of Dalmatia, Tetricus and Victorinus, who held Britaine and Gallia; and Zenobia (the Heroicke Queene and wife of Odena∣tus) all the East; to omit the Murderers of Galienus, that durst not make their claime, (their deed so ill disgest∣ed) all these were still remaining and strong, at such time as Flauius Claudius by the Souldiers was elected before the Walles of Milan, and confirmed with much ioy by the Senate in Rome. (3) This Flauius was descended of noble Paren∣tage, His descent. out of Dalmatia, by some; or as others say, of Dardania, and sprung from the Troian Bloud. But Au∣relius Victor will haue him the sonne of Gordianus the Aurel. Victor. Emperour before spoken of. Howsoeuer, a most wor∣thy man he was, an excellent Captaine, of singular Flauius Claudius his vertues. continence, a iust Iudge, a louer of strangers, seuere to the wicked, but most benigne to the vertuous: so that we may well say, In Rome was a new world; or at least, In the World was a new Rome. (4) His first Expedition was against Aurelius, that held Milan, whom he there slew, and ioined his Soul∣diers to his owne strength. But preferring the gene∣rall good before his particular quiet, he addressed his warres for the East, against the Gothes, who (as Iornan∣des their Story-writer reporteth) had infested those Iornandes. Gothes inuade the Empire. parts of the Empire (for fifteene yeeres continuance) with continuall irruptions, and had now lately entred friendship with many other like barbarous Nations, inuading Thracia, and the Countries before them, e∣uen Paul Orosius. vnto Macedonia: and thence taking their way thorow Hungarie, came downe the Riuer Danubie, with two thousand Saile of Ships, fraught with Munition Two thousand saile of Gothes. and Men. To meet these, Claudius prepared: but be∣fore his Encounter, he wrote thus to the Senate: (5) Renowned Fathers and Reuerend Lords, vn∣derstand Claudius Letter to the Senate. ye for certaine, that three hundred and twen∣tie thousand men of warre are entred our Confines, whose waight doth seeme to burden the Earth it selfe, and whose warre-like preparations make these parts of the Empire to tremble and quake; with whom I am now to strike Battle: wherein if the Conquest be mine, the ioy will be yours. But if I fall, yet I pray remember that I fight after Galienus hath raigned, and rent the strength of the Romans in these remote Prouinces, and after the Rebellions of Lollianus, Posthumus, Eugenius, Regillianus, Celsus, and others, who haue so weakened the sinewes of our Armes, and broken the Swords and Launces of our defense, that I may well say, wee want, if not strength, yet weapons wherewithall to fight. And to our shame be it spoken, Zenobia a Woman com∣mands all our Crosse-bowes, and bends them against our vnarmed brests. How small soeuer therefore our performance shall bee in this seruice, repute it (I pray) for great, and wish our proceeding may sort to the weale of the Empire. (6) Which done, with no daunted spirit he entred Gothes van∣quished. Battle, and with more then wonted courage fought so valiantly, that he slew and tooke Prisoners, to the number of three hundred thousand fighting men, with two thousand Shippes laden with Munition, so that whole houses were filled to their toppes with Tar∣gets, Shields, Swords, and Launces, and other abili∣ments for Warre, whereof he wrote againe to Rome: and following the Enemie with successe of Victorie, in Thracia neere Bizantium, in Macedonia neere Thes∣salonica, droue the Gothes out of those parts which they had so long infested, and restored the wonted bounds of the Empire. Thence marching into Ger∣manie, neere the Lake called Garda, gaue that reuolted Nation a great ouerthrow, where (as Eutropius and Victor doe report) hee vanquished two thousand of those strong Germans, and there established againe their subiection to the Romans power. And now min∣ding to goe forward against Tetricus and the puissant Zenobia, a Feuer did first cut off his purpose, and short∣lie after his life: a thing very strange and rare in that Flauius Claudius died a naturall death. age, as by the course of their raignes wee haue hi∣therto seene; not that so great a Monarch should die, (they being all of the same earthly mould that mea∣nest men are) but that in those daies a Roman Empe∣rour should die in his bed, as other men doe, of a na∣turall death. (7) Hee was of personage tall, his bodie well His personage and qualities. composed and strong, bright and cleere eies, his face great and full; and of life most temperate and chaste. Hee raigned one yeere, tenne moneths, and fifteene daies, and died the fourth of Februarie, in the yeere of Christ, two hundred seuentie one. His Statue of Gold was set vp in the Capitoll, and his Tar∣get of the same metall hung vp in the Senate-house, himselfe (in honour of his admired worth) placed among the Romane Emperours that were deified for Gods: such an estimation and loue did his vertuous life procure vnto him euen after his death. M. AVRELIVS QVINTILIVS. CHAPTER XXXVIII. A. Quintilius Emperor. Q Vintilius, the Brother of Claudius, and Vice-Roy in An. Do. 271. his absence for the Guard of Italy, was by the Ar∣mie whereof hee had com∣mand, proclaimed Empe∣rour Eutropius. immediately vpon the Newes of Claudius his death: The Senate as ioi∣fully confirming his Ele∣ction, as they were sorrowfull for their losse of his most worthy Brother. Brethren indeed they were by Quintili bro∣ther to the last Emperour. nature, and in conditions not much vnlike; so that what seemed to bee past in the one, was in the other supplied and still remaining: For this M. Aurelius Quintilius, was both wise for Ciuil Gouernment, and ex∣perienced for Warres, wanting no complements of an absolute Prince. (2) But long his glasse stood not without a turne, nor his Fortunes fauning without a frowne▪ For the victorious Souldiors which in his expeditions had fol∣lowed Claudius, and thought themselues worthy of the first voyce in Election, proclaimed Aurelianus for Emperour, a most valiant Captain; and of whose pro∣wesse there had been so sufficient experience, as that Quintilius knew hee could not stand against him. And therefore mistrusting the strength of his Title, and affections of his Souldiours, reputed it ignomini∣ous for a noble minde, to die with lesse honour then he attained vnto, and enioied by his life: and therfore resoluing to die an Emperour, chose rather by a volun∣tary cutting of his own veines, to powre out his life Quintilius cut his own veines, and so bled to death. with his bloud, then to hazard the chance of vncer∣taine warres, or to returne to his priuate estate. And thus no longer raigning then seuenteen daies, He raigned but seuenteen daies. (which short time could minister little matter of lar∣ger discourse) hee died with his brother the same moneth of February the twentith day, and yeere of Christ his incarnation, two hundred seuentie one. L. DOMITIVS AVRELIVS VALER. AVRELIANVS. CHAPTER XXXIX. Val. Aurelianus Emperor. S O short was the Raigne of An. Do. 271. the last Emperour Quintili∣us, that Aurelianus who followed him▪ may be said to be the Successor of Clau∣dius, and not of him: being elected by his Legions in the East, as soone as the o∣ther had beene in Italy (though confirmed before him of the Senate in Rome) continued still his riuall for Maiestie, and attained the top of that high set Gole, whereof Quintilius failed, before his foot had well mounted the first step. Aurelianus his descent. (2) This Valerius Aurelianus was of parentage neither honourable nor rich, and yet his fortunes carried him to the height of both. Some recount his birth was of Dacia; others of Mysia; both so doubtful that Flauius Vopiscus, (the copious Writer of his Life) leaues it vndecided, and to the censure of his Rea∣ders. Fla. V p. His risings were by the Warres; wherunto from his child-hood hee had a naturall inclination: and for continuall carying of his weapons, was commonlie called Aurelianus the Sword-bearer. (3) His seruice was sufficiently knowne to the Ge∣nerals of diuers Prouinces, who had forty sundry times imploied him in the charge of a Lieutenant: and vnder Claudius in Persia he was the Coronell of the Horse. In the warres of Sarmatia he is reported to haue slaine forty Enemies with his owne hands in one day; and at other seuerall times, to the number of nine hundred men, as both Vopiscus and Theoclius haue affirmed. And generally so famous were his deeds, both before he was Caesar, and after, as that he is by some compa∣red Aurelianus com∣parable with Caesar and Ale∣xander. with Iulius and Alexander. (4) Vpon the ratifying of his election by the Se∣nate at Rome, hee hasted not thither to be saluted and enstalled Emperour, but foorthwith marched against the Sueuians and Sarmates, who sore infested the Em∣pire with warres: and hauing soone subdued them, and quieted those parts, in great haste hee came into Italie against the Germans, who with Fire and Sword had gone as farre as Milan: and them likewise with great valour hee forced thence. Then entring Rome with great pompe, caused the Walles to bee repaired and inlarged, which was not lawfull but onely for Vi∣ctorious Aurelianus inlar∣ged the walles of Rome. Emperours. But long he staied not, ere he re∣turned into Syria, against the stout Queene Zenobia, whose braue resolutions, and warlike power for fight, her Letter in answer vnto him (when being sorely ti∣red, he profered her wealth, life, and liberty to yeeld) Chap. 37. Sabellicus saith she both tired him, and put him to flight also. doth manifestly declare: the tenour thereof being as followeth. (5) Zenobia, the most mighty Easterne Queene, to Aurelianus, Romes Augustus, sendeth greeting. Zenobia her Let∣ter to Aurelianus. Neuer Captaine to this day, in vsing Penne in stead of Speare, or filed Words for Weapons points, hath more sufficiently discharged the parts of Warre, then thou to me in Writ hast done: wherein I well perceiue thy drift, and blame thee not, that seest me but a Woman: which Sex you men make subiects only by your smoothing tongues. But know, Au∣gustus, thou dealest not with a Roman Dame, nor with her who vpon base conditions will subscribe her honour; but with Zenobia, the The great Citie Palmyra (saith Iosephus) was built by King Salomon; whence their Nation tooke the name. It bordered vpon the Parthians Kingdome in the middle betwixt it and the Ro∣man Empire. Palmyrean Queene, in whose womanly brest the manly heart of great Odenatus doth still-liue and lie. These cour∣ting tearmes doe ill beseeme a Campe, and worser him who would be stiled a Mars. But yet thy Gol∣den Showre hath rained beside our Lappe; nor wee a Ouid. Metam. li. 6. Venus to meete thee for thy sport, but with our Launce in hand to trie our lawfull right, and with our Swords to answer thy demands in bloud. I am a Woman; so was Tomyris was a valiant Scythian Queene, who slew King Cyrus, and all his Host: and filling a ves∣sell with their bloud, did cast in Cyrus head, say∣ing, Bloud hast thou thirsted, now drinke ther∣of thy fill. To this doth Zeno∣bia allude. Tomyris; thou knowest the rest: in Armes against Augustus; so was Cleopatra, who ra∣ther chose to sting her selfe to death, then liue a sub∣iect (though a Prince) vnder great Octanian. Art thou his better? thou art deceiued: or I her worse? nothing lesse: who from her person doe deriue my Pedigree, and from her courage will maintaine my cause. I am a Queene, and raigne beloued, was Romes Empresse, obeied and honoured; and the wife of Odenatus, whom all you Romans greatly feared. Are my powers weake? The Persians (whose strength you well haue tried) will supplie. Are my Souldiers few? The Saracens haue more that will assist: and the Armenians are wholly at my command. If then Theeues and Robbers in Syria were sufficient to ouer-throw thine Armie, what hope is left thee to escape our hands, when all these our strengths shall be thus conioined in one? Therefore the same offers that to me thou hast sent, the same to thee I heere re∣turne, and will performe, if thou in time embrace this truce. (6) This haughtie answer of that vndaunted Queene, put more fire to the furie of Aurelianus, who tooke the Letter in such scorne, that hee threatned death to the Inditer, (whom he supposed to be Longi∣nus the Philosoper, who was alwaies with her, and her Instructer) which afterwards he did accomplish: for destroying her seuerall Aids before they could meete together, and besieging Palmyra her strong Citie, hee brought the same to such distresse, that in the end hee tooke her Captiue; and glad of such a prey, carried Zenobia van∣quished. her himselfe to Rome, where following his Chariot of Triumph, attired in Tissues and richest Robes of price, shee was lead his Prisoner in Chaines of Gold: vpon whose presence the Spectators with admirations so much gazed, that somewhat it dimmed the Maiestie Zenobia het beautie. of Aurelianus: for shee is said to be exceedingly faire, though not very white, but somewhat browne: her eies blacke and bright, her teeth shining like pearles, her bodie tall, and of most stately proportion, her Flau. Vopisc. countenance modest, milde, and pleasing, her voice sweet, her conuersation honest, her minde chaste, and body continent, wise, temperate, and learned in the Greeke, Latine, and Egyptian tongues. Yea the atchiue∣ment of this Conquest was held so notable, that hee reputed himselfe the Restorer of the East, as it appea∣reth by the reuerse of his money here prefixed in the entrance of his raigne. (7) These Acts of Aurelianus made him so fa∣mous abroad, and feared at home, that Tetricus which had held out against Galienus, came in vnder his pro∣tection, holding it more safe to bee a Subiect in qui∣et, then a Commander against an Opposite of so in∣uincible a minde: by whom thereupon hee was made Gouernour of Campania, and of other Prouinces in Italie. (8) Hitherto this Emperours successes were very prosperous (we may well suppose) for his indulgence to the Christians, whose assemblies he permitted, and whose Bishops he so fauoured, that at their request hee banished Paulus Samosatenus the Heretike out of their Councels, and published an Edict in the behalfe of their Synods. But afterward Satan minding to sift the Wheat, Euseb. Eccl. Hist. lib. 7 cap. 39. Paul. Orosius. Aurelianus at first a fauourer, now a persecutor of the Christians. Aurelianus scard with a Thunder∣bolt from heauen Psal. 2. 10. that the Chaffe might be his, stirred vp this Emperour to raise the Ninth Persecution, and to send foorth his Edicts for the destruction of Gods Saints: which whilest he was in perusing, and about to set his hand and seale, a Thunderbolt from Heauen strucke into his presence, and so neere vnto his person, that all accounted him to be therewith slaine, God warning him by this his Messenger to be wise, lest he perished in his own waies; as shortly after hee did, being slaine by his Seuants, Aurelianus slaine. through the Treason of Mnestheus his Secretarie, the nine and twentieth day of Februarie following, neere vnto the Citie Bizantium, when hee had sate Emperour Entropius. Aurelianus. foure yeeres, eleuen moneths, and seuen daies, the yeere of our happinesse, two hundred seuenty six. (9) He was of stature tall, of body well shaped, a pleasing countenance, and of a seemely presence, a His feature of body and minde. great feeder, and very seuere, whereby he was as much feared as beloued, and therfore reported to be a good Physitian, but that he ministred too bitter P tions; and was Canonized after his death among the holy Empe∣rours: in the second yeere of whose raigne, the Great . Constantine of Helena in Britaine was borne. M. CLAVDIVS TACITVS. CHAPTER XL. Claudius Ta∣citus Emp. T He former seditions en∣ded An. Do. 276. by Aurelianus, and the state of the Empire remai∣ning Aurelianus being dead no man sought to be Emperour. now in quiet, no man appeared to sue, much lesse tumultuouslie to striue for that Royal Dia∣dem; but all the great Commanders (as though they made courtesie in gi∣uing way each vnto others) stoode at the foot of Ma∣iestie; no man attempting higher to mount. The soul∣diors Senate and Soul∣diers strain cour∣tesie who shall choose the Em∣perour. sent to the Senate, to designe the man whom they best liked; the Senate requested the souldiers to elect him whom they held worthiest; in which respectiue complements, and most kinde correspondencie of all parts, eight moneths passed with a peaceable Inter∣regnum, as writers report. (2) It seemeth, the fresh sense and fearefull expe∣riences Eusebius Vopiscus. Orosius Oneuphrius. of the former heady proceedings, made men more wise, then to seeke their owne deaths, and espe∣cially the Generals to be better aduised, then to runne desperately vpon their owne destructions. A change vncredible, that Thirtie ere whiles would needs be sti∣led Emperours, among the tumultuous Souldiours (though they were sure to buy the vse of that name with their dearest bloud) and not one now in peace could bee found, either hasty to seeke it, or verie wil∣ling to accept it. (3) At last both Senate and Souldiours, hauing in their eye M. Claudius Tacitus, a man very Noble Claudius Tacitus elected Emperor and of Consular degree, of great age, singular learning, & long experience in Magistracie; him by a ioint and conspiring suffrage, they all elected to their Empire: but he hauing before hand some inkling of this their purpose, got him out of the way, liuing very secretly two moneths at his Rurall Mannor, flying (saith Vopiscus) that high dignity which he fore-saw would proue his ouerthrow. And when they did by Embas∣sages often sollicite him to accept of their Election; sending him the Ensignes and Stile of Augustus: hee againe returned them, though with harty thanks, yet absolute deniall, alledging by reason of his age and in∣firmitie, that hee was euery way vnable to discharge their so great expectations. (4) But after much inter-course, and many in∣treaties passed, at length (the necessitie of the State so requiring) he accepted their offer, though not with much contentment to himself, who knew the waight of so great titles would proue heauy & alwaies dange∣rous for him to beare; but with vnspeakeable ioy, was receiued by the whole State, which promised all bles∣sed hopes to the state vnder so worthy, so wise, so ver∣tuous, learned, and so iust an Emperour. (5) For as before his aduancement, he was of Ex∣emplary composednes and vertuous disposition, so in Claudius Tacitus his vertues. this high Estate, his life was temperate, and without al pride, & so desirous to be a Preceder of moderation, & singularity vnto others, as that he would not per∣mit his Empresse to weare any Iewels of high price, nor to vse other customable superfluitie, or excesse in his owne house. For learning and learned men, whom he euer embraced in his priuate Estate, he now by all meanes endeuored to honour and aduance, and pub∣likely professed that what Imperiall vertues hee had, hee was to ascribe them to his study of good letters: For which cause, hee was wont to call Cornelius Taci∣tus (that worthiest Historian of the Romans State) his Father, and commanded his workes to be careful∣ly preserued in euery Library throughout the Em∣pire; and ten times euery yeare to be transcribed on Claudius Tacitus his care to pre∣serue the works of Cornelius Tacitus. publique cost. All which notwithstanding, many of that worthy Authours Bookes haue since miscaried. (6) But his vertues were too great for the world long to enioy: and sith his Raigne was but short; it is bootelesse to lengthen it with long discourses: For his Peace continued without any memory of Warres; and his short time (wherein hee did nothing without consent of the Senate) was spent rather reforming o∣ther mens vices; and abuses of the Lawes and State, then in displaying his owne vertues; which doubt∣lesse (if their faire streame had not beene vntimely stopt) would haue proued incomparable to any his fore-goers; and vnmatchable by any his followers. What death hee died is left vncertaine; Eutropius Eutrop. l. 9. thinketh him slaine, by his rebellious souldiers in Asia, vpon his voiage against the Persians: but Victor re∣porteth Aurel. Victor. that hee died a naturall death, and that of a burning-feuer, in the citie of Tharsus: And Flauius Vo∣piscus, (who wrote his life) ith his death came vpon a surcharge of griefe, by reason of factions; whereby Vopiscus. (the infirmitie of his age thereto helping) his vnder∣standing was crazed, and his heart broken, whereof hee died, when he had raigned six moneths, and twen∣ty Claudius Tacitus his Raigne. daies, the yeare of Christ Iesus, one hundred se∣uentie six. M. ANNIVS FLORIANVS. CHAPTER XLI. M. An. Flori∣anus Emp. N O sooner was the death of Tacitus diuulged, but his An. Do. 277. brother Florianus (much vnlike him in that point) tooke vpon him the Name and Authoritie Imperiall, Florianus made himselfe Em∣perour. without expecting any e∣lection either of Senate or Souldiers, and therfore not likely long to stand sure. And although in all other princely parts hee was not much vnlike his brother, yet hauing so great an Op∣posite as Probus was, on whom the Easterne Armie had conferred the same Title, the blossomes of his conceited hope withered euen in the budde, and perished before they had any time of growth. (2) For no sooner came to his eares the newes of Probus his election, but he found that heady and pre∣cipitate attempts were pleasing in their Beginnings, but full of difficulties in their Proceedings, and most disastrous in their Successe: and therefore despairing both of Men and Meanes to raise the Building, whose Florianus his death. foundation he had so hastily (but too weakly) laid, he caused his owne veines to be cut, as Quintilius before Chap. 38. him in like case had done, whereby he boldly bled to death, after hee had enioyed a Titular Soueraigntie only eightie daies, saith Eutropius: but Vopiscus saith, Eutrop. lib. 9. Vopiscus. Florianus his raigne. not altogether two moneths, and thinkes him killed by the Souldiers, in the Citie Tharsus likewise, in the yeere of Christ two hundred seuenty and seuen. M. AVREL. VALER. PROBVS. CHAPTER XLII. Val. Probus Emp. T HE Easterne Armie most potent and famous at the An. Do. 277. death of Tacitus, from them was expected the new Emperours election, which accordinglie they did, but with much more wisedome and deliberate circumspection, then the Souldiers of those times were accustomed to doe. For euery Captaine of the Armie singled out his owne Companies, and in seue∣rall Assemblies exhorted, that all affections laid aside, they would applie their mindes to thinke of the wor∣thiest man, on whom they might conferre their voi∣ces and fauours. At which time, the opinion of Pro∣bus his worth had so generally possessed the hearts of▪ all men, that the shout and crie of all was vniforme; Let vs haue Probus for our Emperour. This being signi∣fied to Rome, the Senate with applause and thankes ap∣prooued and confirmed his Election, with additions to his Title, Augustus, The Father of his Countrey, and Probus called the father of his Countrey, and the highest Bishop. the highest Bishop. For in those times, euen amongst Heathens, the sacred Title of a Bishop was accounted an additament of honour euen to an Emperour: (2) He was borne in Hungarie in the Citie Sirmi , of honourable Parentage, especially by his mothers His desce side. His fathers name was Maximus, a man famous in Militarie Seruice, who died Tribune at the warres in Egypt: and himselfe very young, but very valorous, by the Emperor Valerianus (who so loued him for his vertues, that he vsed to say of him, that of all men he best deserued the name Probus, that is vertuous) was made a Tribune also. In which Office, with great praise he ser∣ued Sabellicus. vnder Galienus, Aurelianus, & Claudius the Empe∣rours; vnder whom besides other exploits he fought seuerall single-combats to the great honour of him∣selfe and Countrey, and receiued as markes of victo∣ries, many Ciuicall Crownes, Collars, Bracelets, Launces, Banners, and other Ensignes of Martiall de∣uice and Priuiledge. Preferred to be Generall in Afri∣ca, he subdued the Marmarides: In Egypt the Palme∣rines; vnder Aurelianus the Sarmates and Germans; vn∣der Claudius the Gothes; and in all places so famous Probus compa∣rable with Han∣nibal and Caesar. for his Acts, that hee was compared with Hannibal and Caesar. (3) His first seruice after hee became Emperour was in Gallia, against the Germans, that had made them∣selues Probus slayeth 400000. Germans. Lords thereof, where in one Battell, continuing two daies, he slew foure hundred thousand of them, and Henr. Mutint. recouered seuentie Cities from the Enemy, as himselfe signified by his own Letters to the Senate. After this warring in Sclauonia, he quieted the Prouinces of Mus∣couia, Russia, and Polonia: And entring Thracia, did no lesse in Greece, Syria, Arabia, Palestina, and Iudea; whence passing into Persia, hee had honourable com∣positions of Narseus their mighty King. Wherupon issued so vniuersall Peace, that there were no warres heard of in all the Prouinces of the Empire; insomuch that it was a common Prouerbe, The very mice durst not gnaw for feare of Probus. But long this lasted not, ere hee was disturbed: for the Egyptians erected one Sa∣turninus, a Captaine both wise and valiant, for Empe∣rour, Saturninus cho. sen Emperour. and that so sore against his will, as he was like to be slaine by them for gaine-saying their desires; and by a speech deliuered to his Erectors, he made known to them his aduers es from so dangerous an ambi∣tion; to this effect. (4) Fellowes and Friends, by my whole ende∣uours I haue alwaies sought to preuent that, which His speech to his Electors. now I see I cannot shunne, I meane the Throne of Maiestie; which howsoeuer to others, it may seeme full of glory and securitie, yet to my self, I fore-see it will proue, both base and dangerous. Base, for that I am no more the master of mine owne affections; which hitherto in my priuate estate were bestowed freely, & where I thought best, but must hēce-forth be caried at other mens dispose, and cast vpon those that deserue them least. That little time that I vvas wont to take, in retyring my selfe to my selfe, must now be straitned to serue others; and my thoughts wholly spent to preuent those weapons, which are borne (in shew) for my defence, but are (in truth) the keyes of mine Imprisonments. I cannot go with∣out a Guard: I cannot sleepe, without a watch; I cannot eate without a Taster; these are but bonda∣ges to a free condition, and neuer neede in a pri∣uate fortune. That it is dangerous, it is no lesse appa∣rant: for besides the sharpe-pointed & waighty sword, hanging onely by a twisted-thred ouer our heads, Probus is not a Galienus to compound for the Dia∣dem, but to touch his scepter, is to awake a sleeping Lion: What should moue you then, to stir vp his wrath, to seeke my death, and your owne destructi∣ons? For assure your selues when I die, I shal not die alone: So all our fame purchased in so many yeers imploiments, shal be lost by this one daies worke: and my Conquests in Africa, of the Mores, and in Spaine, branded lastly with the eternall scares and infamie of Rebellion. (5) These speeches (as Flauius Vopis. the Writer ther∣of receiued them from the report of his Grand-father, who was, there present and heard them) could no∣thing at all diuert the resolution of the Souldiers, but that they persisted and maintained their Election a∣gainst Probus: who vpon notice thereof hastning to∣ward them with a mighty power, offred them par∣don, as one vnwilling to shed Ciuill-bloud, or to lose so worthy a man as Saturninus was: but vpon refusall of his proffered Clemencie, hee gaue him a most sharpe battell, wherein most of the Reuoulters were ouer-throwne, and Saturninus in the assault of a Castle Saturninus his death. besieged, was slaine, to the great griefe of Probus, who sought to haue saued his life. (6) But with his death ended not all Ciuill Vopiscut. Broiles: for Bonosus & Proculus two monsters of that Bonosus and Pro∣culus rebell a∣gainst Probus. age (though of different kinds of vices) opposing themselues against him, and assuming the Title and Robes Imperiall, vsurped the Prouinces of Britaine, Spaine and some part of Gallia, knowing that in these places Probus was not much beloued. Bonosus vvas borne in Britaine, but brought vp in Spaine, without note of action, but onely in his cups, for hee was e∣steemed the greatest drinker of all men liuing: inso∣much as Aurel. said of him, he was born, nō vt viueret, Sabellicus. sed vt biberet; not to draw breath, but to draw in liquor: & yet (as it seemeth) hee was in good account vnder the said Aurelianus, hauing a charge of Ships vpon the Ger∣mane Seas, which either by treacherie or negligence were burned by the Enemy, in the mouth of Rhine, and (as Probus tooke it) not without the priuitie of Bonosus: who therefore not daring to stand to the tri∣all, made all his powers against the Emperour, but was in Battell ouercome, and despairing euer againe to make head, put his owne in a halter, whereup∣on it was said, that a Barrell was hanged, and not a Bonosus death. Man. (7) Proculus was a Lygurian borne, as vnsatiate a vassall to Venus, as the other to Bacchus; and there∣withall Sabellicus. so impiouslie impudent, that as hee had a heart to commit any filthinesse, so a forehead to boast of it openly, as appeareth by his owne Let∣ters, wherein hee vaunteth, how many scores of Sabellicus. faire Virgins hee depriued of that faire name in one fortnight; but this Graund-General of Venus Camp was suddenly forsaken by his Souldiers, and came to his deserued end. (8) Some stirs there were at that present in Brita∣ny, by the incitements of their Gouernor, vvhose name though Histories doe not specifie, yet he may seeme to bee that Cl. Corn. Lalianus, whose ancient Coynes are found in this Iland, and not else-where: and his meanes to the place, was Victorinus a Moore, in great Victorinus a Moore his Stra∣tagem. fauour with Probus: who taking himselfe not cleare from suspition got leaue of his Emperor to repaire vn∣to Britaine, where giuing it out that he was come thi∣ther for safetie of his Life, was courteously receiued by the Generall. Whom secretly in the Night, hee murthered, and then speedily returned to Rome; ha∣uing by this Expedition, both appeased the tumults in the Prouince, and approued his fidelitie to Probus. About this time (as is recorded) certaine Vandals and Burgundians that had inuaded Gallia, were sent Hist. Mag. Brit. lib. 3. cap. 10. Vandals and Bur∣gundians sent to inhabite in Bri∣taine. into Britaine by the Emperour to inhabite, who though they had troubled the Romans peace in Gal∣lia, yet did them good seruice in Britaine to stay their subiection; and the Britaines themselues for some good seruices were now suffred by these Empe∣rours, Vopiscus Sabellicus. to plant Vines, and make Wines, with other matters aswell for pleasure as profit. Wine made in England. (9) At length the Empire in these West parts stan∣ding vniuersally quiet, Probus determined a iourny in∣to the East, to end at once all forraine wars; saying, he would shortly bring it to passe, that the state should need no more Souldiers: (which speech they tooke very in∣dignely) & hauing passed Illyricum in Sclauonia, was by some of his own Army (for curbing, as they cōceiued, with an ouer-hard hand their dissolute & idle maners) conspired against & treacherously murthered, in No∣uember Probus his death. the second, and yeere of Christ, two hundred eighty two, hauing raigned fiue yeeres and foure mo∣neths: others say, six yeeres: where notwithstanding they erected for him a most honourable Sepulchre, wherein was engrauen this Epitaph: Here lieth the Vopiscus Entropius. Eusebius Eccl. hist. lib. 7. cap 29. Emperor Probus, iustly for his goodnes called Probus, of all the Barbarous Nations and Tyrants a Conque∣ror. M. AVRELIVS CARVS, VVITH CARINVS AND NVMERIA∣NVS HIS SONNES. CHAPTER XLIII. M. Aurel. Carus Emp. Carinus, Numerianus, Caesars. P ROBVS thus slaine in the midst of his Army, with∣out Anno 282. any apparant cause ministred, the Souldiers were stricken into a great feare and mistrusted each other to be guilty of the Treason, no man therefore diligent to finde out the beginner, nor hastie to pu∣nish the bloudy executors; but holding the right of Election to remain in themselues, they presently chose Carus for their Emperor, who had been the Pratorian Prafect valiant, sufficient, of worth and esteeme; whereunto the Senate likewise consented. (2) From whence or what parents we should de∣riue his birth, is vncertaine, and of diuers writers di∣uersly reported. For Flauius Caecilianus, who wrote the storie of his time, as Vopiscus doth report, saith, that he Flauius. . Vopiscus. was borne in Sclauonia, or as we call it Moscouia. Onesi∣mus an ancient writer affirmeth his birth was in Rome, and that his father was a Sclauonian indeed, but held for a citizen, as he citeth by letters from Vopiscus: Au∣relius Victor, Eusebius, and Paulus Orosius wil haue him a French man, and borne at Narborne: but whence so∣euer, Uictor. . Orosius. his princely parts deserued these his princely preferments, and no waies for the short time of his raigne, carried he himselfe vnder expectation. Two sonnes hee had of vnequall conditions, Carinus and Numerianus, these both he made his Caesars, with the Card and Nu∣merianus Casars. Name and Power of Augusti. (3) His first proceedings was to finde out the murtherers of Probus, whom hee seuerely punished, which tooke away all suspition of treason in himselfe. Then marching against the Sarmates, whose furie had pierced so far into Panonia, that they threatned Italy it selfe, he ouerthrew with the slaughter of sixteen thou∣sand, and tooke twenty thousand of them prisoners. And leauing Carinus (his elder sonne) to gouerne Bri∣taine, Gallia, Illyricum, and Spaine, himselfe with the younger, Numerianus, prepared for the East against the Persians, in which expedition he tooke in his way Me∣sopotamia, Seleucia, and certaine cities whom the ene∣mie had entred: and being surprized with sicknes, and not able to trauel, pitched his Pauilion vpon the shore of Tigris, where in the midst of his armie (about the yeere of our saluation 283.) garded from all suppo∣sed Carinus slaine by a thunderbolt. dangers and assaults of man, felt the vnexpected stroke of death euen from the hand of God himselfe: for in his bed by a thunderbolt falling from heauen, he was slaine, with many others then present with him in his tent, and the same consum altogether with lightning fire. (4) The terrour thereof so daunted the courage of his whole army, that no further they proceeded in their enterprise: and his death was so grieuous vnto Numerianus now elected Emperor, that with conti∣nuall weeping (a fault in few Sonnes who are raised by their fathers fall) his eies were so weakened, that he could not indure any light. Vpon which accident, Ar∣rius Aper, (his wiues father) tooke occasion to conspire his death, hoping thereby to attaine the Empire him∣selfe. For hauing at all times free accesse to his pre∣sence, at length in his closet hee secretly, murthered him; pretending to the armie, that his infirmitie only kept him from sight; and so leauing his body to putri∣fie and corrupt, in short space by the very sauor there∣of the treason was descried, and the Traitor slaine by the hands of Dioclesian, who was both his Iudge and executioner. (5) His Empire thus ended before it was well be∣gunne, the Armie proclaimed Dioclesian, a Principall man in the Campe for Emperor: who to vphold his ele∣ction, made al his power for Gallia, against his Concur∣rent Carinus, a man of profuse sensualitie, who there had caused himselfe to bee proclaimed, and in his fa∣thers absence had so ruled there and in Britaine, that P phyrio liuing at the same time, gaue out this testi∣monie, Hierome. that Britaine was a fertile Prouince of tyrants. Betwixt these two Captaines, many skirmishes were fought with variable successe, till lastly in a set battell, Carinus was slaine by a Tribune, whose Wife he had de∣filed; whereby the Imperiall Title was ioyntly confer∣red vpon Dioclesian. (6) The time that these three, the father and two sonnes raigned, is reported to be two yeers and some∣what more; and this last to die the yeere of Christs na∣tiuitie, two hundred eighty foure. C. AVRELIVS VALER. DIOCLESI∣ANVS IOVIVS AND M. AVRELIVS VALERIVS MAXIMIANVS. CHAPTER XLIIII. Val. Diocles. Emp. Val. Maxi∣mian, Caesar and Emp. T He Empire thus deuolued to Dioclesian, with appro∣bation of the Senate, hee euery way studied to bee accounted worthy of the same, as knowing well his birth was no way answe∣rable to his present lot: and therefore chose for his Caesar, Maximianus, a man of better descent, very honourable, wise, and va∣liant, as was manifested in his first seruice against the Gaules, whom with an infinite number of pesants in that prouince, troubling the peace of the Romans, hee with much slaughter ouercame. For which exploit so fortunately accomplished, the Emperor made him his Consort in the Gouernment. (2) Dioclesians parentage is vncertainly reported by Writers, some making him the sonne of a Notary, Paulus Orosius. Eutropius. and others of a meere Bondman; but all agreeing that his Country was Dalmatia, and his ofspring very base. This man being but a Common Souldier, consulted with a Witch for his future successe; who told him (if you please to beleeue the reporters) that he should become an Emperour after he had killed a Bore: to which he gaue credit, and euer after was a great ene∣mie to that beast, and in time grew vnder Probus to so great account for dexterity in expediting his affaires, that he was made Steward of his house, and now lastly elected to the Empire. (3) The very first thing that he attempted, was the punishmēt of his predecessors death: for which Arrius Aper being conuicted before his tribunall seat, him∣selfe rising suddenly from the Throne, ran him tho∣row with his sword, in outward shew for zeale of Iu∣stice, as not able to endure so foule a fact: but in truth to fulfill the Prediction of his hostesse, the Druid; for that Aper signifieth a Bore. After which act, he held Flauius Vopiscus. his Empire fully established. (4) To let passe many imploiments and troubles of the State, these two Emperors chose to themselues two Caesars, whereby the One-bodied Eagle became a∣gaine Eutrop. Signon . O pbet. foure-headed, and each almost of an equall au∣thority. Dioclesian chose Galerius Maximinus, and Maxi∣mianus, surnamed Herculius, chose Constantius Clorus a Pomp. Laetus. An. Do. 286. An. Do. 291. Roman Senator, enforcing them to put away their for∣mer Wiues, & to take their Daughters, for an assurance of loue by the bonds of that Alliance; of whom the former was imploied for defence of Illyricum, and the other afterwards into Britaine against the Rebellions there raised by Carausius, whose coine is here set. Carausius a Bri∣taine raiseth re∣bellion in An. 287. Bed. hist. Ang. lib. 1. cap. 6. (5) This Carausius by birth a Menapian, but of low Parentage, as Beda and Eutropius saith; who being Beda hist. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 6. appointed Admirall by the Romans to guard the Bri∣tish Seas, from the Pyracies of the Saxons and Lower Germans, who with continuall robberies wasted the coasts, abused his authority both in suffering those Pi∣rats to passe vnder Compositions, and in taking many Shippes and much substance from the true Subiect to his owne vse: whereby in short time hee became very rich, and (like a cat set to keepe mice from the larder) did more mischiefe then the Robbers themselues. Sa∣bellicus reports, one very politike custome whereby he inriched himselfe; and that was by suffering the Pirats to take as much spoiles as possibly they could before hee would surprise them; whereby they were his in∣struments to rob others, and nothing to better them∣selues. (6) Maximianus then warring in Gallia, and fea∣ring the greatnes of his wealth and power, sent secret∣ly to slay him by treacherie; and in the meane while surprised many of his principall men at Now called B ∣leyn in Picardy. Gessori∣acum. (7) Carausius now rich & compassed with friends, seeing his destruction thus intended and sought, thought that death was but death as well to Prince as to Peazant: and therefore with a bold resolution, and aid of the Picts or Northerne Britaines, (who had been alwaies enemies to the Roman Subiection) put on the Purple Robe, and vsurped the Authoritie and Title of Emperour, which hee most valiantly maintained in sundry Battles, and so kept it for the terme of seuen Carausius defen∣deth his vsurpa∣tion seuen yeers. Maximianus a∣gainst Carausius. yeeres. (8) Against him Maximianus set forward with a puissant Armie, and marched to the British Ocean: but there vnderstanding the power of his Enemie, and finding himselfe in want of men for Sea-seruice, hee pitched downe his Tents: and knowing Carausius a man meet to command the Ilanders, and able to de∣fend them against the other Warlike Nations, sent him offers of peace: the making of which is remembred vnto vs by the Coine of Carausius before expressed, whereon are stamped the Portraitures of two Emperours ioining hands. So himselfe returning against the Ba∣tanians, left Carausius for Britaine, who gouerned the Prouince with an vpright and vnstained reputation, and with exceeding peaceablenesse, notwithstanding the incursions of the Barbarous. He reedified the wall (as Ninnius the disciple of Eluodugus writeth) between the moneths of Cluda and Carunus, fortifiing the same Ninius. with seuen Castles, and built a round house of polish∣ed stone vpon the banke of the Riuer Carun, which (some thinke) tooke name of him, erecting therewith a Triumphall Arch in remembrance of Victorie. How∣beit, Buchanan thinkes the same to bee the Temple of Terminus, and not the foundation of Carausius. But the date of his noble Gouernment was brought now to a period, by the Treason of Allectus his Familiar friend, one whom he had imploied in ma∣naging of the State, who thirsting after the Supreme A perfidious friend. Authoritie, betraied his trust, and treacherously mur∣dered him by a wile, putting on himselfe the Purple-Robe, stamping this his Image vpon the publike Coine as an absolute Soueraigne, and assuming the Title Impe∣riall, about the yeere of Christ 294. (9) Constantius who had leuied an Armie, and was come with great speed vnto Bulloigne in France, (a Towne that Carausius had sometime fortified and kept) hearing now of his death, determined the reco∣uery of Britaine; and after great preparations, at length passing the Seas in a darke fogge or mist, landed his men without impeachment: which done, hee fired his owne Ships, therby to frustrate all hopes of escape. Allectus, who had laien to intercept his comming, forsooke also the Seas, and meeting at vnawares with Asclepiodotus, great Seneschall of the Praetorium, as a de∣sperate man, hasted vpon his owne death: for encoun∣tring with him, hee neither ordered his Battle, nor marshalled his men, but fought at randome very vn∣fortunately: for hauing put off his Purple Garment, he was among many other slaine, when hee had held his estate the terme of three yeeres. Allectus slaine. The Frankners and others of the Barbarous Souldiers escaping the Battle, sought to sacke London, and so to be gone: but as good happe was, the Souldi∣ers of Constantius, which by reason of a mistie and fog∣gie aire were seuered from the rest, at vnawares came to London, where they rescued their Allies, and making great slaughter of the Enemie, slew Gallus their Leader, casting his body into a Brooke that the ran thorow the Citie, which thence after was called by the Bri∣taines Nant-gall, and by the English, Gallus his Brooke, where now a faire Street is built, called (vpon that Walbrooke in Lon∣don of Gallus. T eb. occasion) to this day Walbrooke. (10) The deaths of these two Vsurpers, with the re∣couerie of the Britaines vnto their wonted obedience, was accounted so great a benefit to the Romans, that it is most gloriously commended, and Rhetorically set downe in a Panegyricke Oration ascribed to Mamer∣tinus, in the praise of Dioclesian, Maximianus, and Con∣stantius: Mamertinus Pa∣negy . Orat. where (after hee had extolled the fertilitie of the British Soile, and the Riches that the Empire reaped thence) he set forth the strength of the Enemy, growne to so dangerous a head: and concluded with this Ac∣clamation; O what a manifold Victory was this, worthie vndoubtedly of innumerable Triumphs, by which Victorie The Emperours extolled for re∣coucting Britain. Britaine is restored to the Empire, their Confederates brought to obedience, and the Seas secured to a perpetuall quietnesse! Glory you therefore (inuincible Emperour) for that you haue as it were gotten another World, and in resto∣ring to the Romans puissance the glory of the Conquest by Mamertinus Pa∣neg. Grat. Sea, haue added to the Roman Empire an Element greater then all the compasse of the Earth, that is, the mightie maine Ocean it selfe: and afterwards now by your Victories (In∣uincible Constantius Caesar) whatsoeuer did lie vacant a∣bout Amiens, Beauois, Trois, and Langres, beginneth to flourish with Inhabitants of sundry Nations. Yea and moreouer, that your most obedient City Autum, for whose sake I haue a peculiar cause to reioice, by meanes of this Triumphant Victorie in Britaine, hath receiued many and sundry sorts of Artizans, of whom those Prouinces Many Artificers in Britaine. were full. And now by their workmanship the same Citie riseth vp, by repairing of Ancient Houses, and restoring of Publike Buildings and Temples: so that now it ac∣counteth that the old name of brotherly Incorporation to Rome is againe restored, when shee hath you eft-soones for her Founder. (11) But leauing Constantius to be further spoken of in his due place, let vs pursue the Raignes of these two Tyrants, who new began the Persecutions of Gods Saints in all the parts of the Empire, wherein the rage of Satan so preuailed, that seuenteene thousand men and G . Damas . Sabellicus. women were crowned with martyrdome, within the space of one moneth, besides infinite numbers of such as were otherwise punished. As in other Countries, so heere in Britaine the Christians Churches were demolished, their Bi∣bles Eusebius. Beda. Rad. de Dicet . and other godly writings burned, and themselues tormented with a more cruell and longer continu∣ance then formerly had beene vsed: for this endured the terme often whole yeeres together, leauing no The Christians torments for ten yeeres to∣gether. time of intermission, nor place free from the staine of Martyrs Bloud. And amongst others, it made Britaine to be honored with the glory of many holy Martyrs, which constantly stood and died in the Confession of the Faith; whereof the first is reported to bee Albane of the City Verolanium, who was beheaded at Holmehurst Beda hist. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 7. (since called Derswold) where now the Towne of S. Albans (bearing his name) is built, and in whose ho∣nour, Offa the great King of Mercia founded a most S. Albane put to death at Saint Albans. magnificent Monasterie. Of this Alban the ancient Fortunatus Priscus in his booke of the Praise of Virgini∣tie, Iob. Capgraue. maketh mention thus: Albanum egregium foecunda Britannia profert: Britaine fertill of all good, Washt with glorious Albans blood. (12) His Instructor Amphibolus afterwards appre∣hended, was brought to the same place, and whipped Amphibole a Bri∣taine put to death. about a stake, whereat his intrailes were tied: so win∣ding his bowels out of his body, was lastly stoned to death. Sundry others also in other places laid downe their liues for their Professions sake, as Iulius and Aaron Iulius and Aaron at Leicester. at Leicester, saith Beda, or rather at Caer-leon in Mon∣mouth∣shire, as our Grand-Antiquarie iudgeth: and in At Lichfeild gr multitudes in Cambden. Ioh. 19. 17. Ioh Ross W ∣wicens. in lib. de . pis. Beda hist. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 6. Leichfeild so many, that the place became another Gol∣gotha, A Field of dead Corps. For which cause the Citie doth beare an Escocheon or Field charged with many Martyrs, for their Seale of Armes euen vnto this day. (13) This last rage is by Orosius and Beda accoun∣ted the Tenth Persecution from Nero; and by others, the Tenth Horne of the Imperiall Beast, who had recei∣ued his Power from the Dragon (the diuel) and Forme from those foure Beasts deciphered by the Prophet Apoc. 13. Dan. 7. Daniel, whose mouth was as the Lyons mouth of As∣shur, his feete like the Beares feete of Persia, his spots as the Leopards of Greece; and these ten hornes taken from the Monster of the Grecians parted kingdome, the Seleucies and the Ptolemies, called in Ezekiel, Gog and Magog, and here alluded vnto by S. Iohn, that Ezek. 38. 2. thus made battel against the Saints. But as those foure Beasts perished and were crushed by the fall of The stone cut without hands, Emmanuel borne in our flesh: so this Beast compounded of them Foure, fell in the destructions of these most wicked Emperors, whereof all almost died so vntimely and vnusuall deaths, as the like is not read of elsewhere. (14) For some slew themselues, as Nero and Otho did; some were smothered to death, as was Tiberius; some poisoned by their wiues, as Claudius and Commo∣dus; The violent deaths of many Emperors. some tugged and torne in pieces by their own Sub∣iects and Souldiers, as Vitellius, Heliogabalus, Pupienus, and Balbinus; some stabbed by them whom they most trusted, as Caligula, Domitian, Didius, Gallienus, and ma∣ny others; some tumultuously murthered, as Pertinax Seuerus, Maximius, Aemilius, and Probus were; some slaine in battell and defence of their titles, as Macrinus and Gallus; some hanged themselues, as Gordianus and Maximianus did; some drowned and swallowed vp, as Decius and Maxentius were; some slaine by a thunder∣bolt from heauen, as Carus was; some died in most mi∣serable captiuitie, as Valerianus did, whose skinne was fleaed off, he yet aliue; some cut their owne veines and bled to death, as Quintilius and Florianus did; some dy∣ing mad, as did this our Dioclesian; some few, and them somewhat fauoring Christians, died in their beds, a thing most strange to see in these times, wherein the Wrath of God thus fought against them in his Iustice, and the power of his Gospell preached by his Apostles and Disciples, that as a Conqueror crowned, and riding vpon a White horse, bare a Bow in his hand, and shot the sharpe Arrowes of death into the hearts of these the Kings enemies, as in the opening of the First Seale is Psal. 45. 5. The first Seale. Apoc. 6. The second Seale. seene; and in the Second is described and made mani∣fest by a Red Horse prepared for Battell, whose Rider bare a Bright sword, and had commission To take peace from the earth; which most effectually wee haue seene performed in most of these preceding Emperours. And as Famine in great Warres is not greatly strange; so Scarsitie exceeding Plentie, was seene vnder the ope∣ning of the Third Seale; whence a Blacke horse sent from God, pased through the earth, whose Rider bare a Bal∣lance The third Seale. to weigh Corne, as it were Spice, for dearth: and in the raigne of this last Tyrant Dioclesian, they that had Eagles eies might see the threefold iudgements of God in the opening of the Fourth Seale, when Sword, Famine, & Death went all together as a pale-horse, sent The fourth Seale. from the presence of the Lamb, whose rider was Death and Hell, following as his Page. These were the times of calamities, wheas the Soules of the righteous in the opening of the Fifth Seale, cried for vengeance for the bloud of the Martyrs, whom these ten hornes had go∣red The fifth Seale. to death: and vnder the Sixth Seale, both then, and for euer the wicked are said to call for the Mountaines The sixth Seale. to fall vpon them, and for the rockes to hide them from the presence of Him that sate vpon the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lambe, before whom none could stand. But why doe I (weake man) thus open the Cur∣taines of Gods most sacred Tabernacle, to behold the Mercy-seate of his diuine Mysteries in the accomplish∣ments of these holy Oracles, when as they who haue worne the Ephod, and in whose hand Aarons Rod hath Exod. 9. Numb 17. Budded, with a religious reuerence haue feared to look into the same? Therefore with the charge of Ioshua I will not approach neere the Arke, and with Iobs hea∣rers Iosh. 3. 4. Iob 29 9. will Lay my hand on my mouth, and returne to the prosecution of my purpose. (15) It was the nineteenth yeere of his raigne, in the month of March, when this Tyrant sent forth his Euseb. eccles. lib. 8. cap. 1. 2. 3. wicked Edicts through all his Empire; That all chur∣ches should bee vtterly ouerthrowne; that the Scrip∣tures should be burnt; that all Christians for honour should bee held infamous, and all Christian seruants should bee vncapeable of freedome; that all Pastors should be enforced to offer to Idols, &c. (16) The fountaine & chiefe cause of these miseries lighting on the Church of Christ, did arise from the Christians themselues, as Eusebius in these words de∣clareth: After that our conuersation through too much li∣bertie and licentiousnesse was degenerated, and holy disci∣pline Euseb. hist eccles. lib. 8. cap. 1. corrupted, whiles euery one of vs did enuie, bite, and backbite each other, waging intestine warres within our selues, and piercing one anothers hearts with the sharpe speares of opprobriouswords; so that Bishops against Bi∣shops, and people against people were at bitter contention. Lastly, whiles nothing but hypocrisie was in the face, deceit in the heart, and guile in the tongue, whereby mischiefe was euen full at the brimme, then began the heauy hand of God to visit vs, &c. Where he proceedeth and sheweth that the greeuous sinnes of the Christians; was the cause of drawing downe these iudgements on their heads. (17) And so this wicked Tyrant accordingly was but as Gods Instrument and Iron-threshing-flaile, to bruise the precious wheat and seed of the Gospell, and Amos 1. 3. to crush that outward glory of the Christian profession, which then was flourishing in most parts of the world. (18) But long the Lord deferred not their release nor that Tyrants end. For after the First yeere of their Euseb. eccles. hist. lib. 8. cap. 2 . persecutions, and twentith of his Raigne, the thir∣teenth day of Aprill, in the yeere of Christs Natiuitie three hundred and three, hee with his Fellow Emperor (both of them by the reuenging hand of God, stric∣ken with a mad humor (saith Eusebius) renounced the Empire, and descending from the Tribunall put off their Purple and Imperiall robes, whereby they againe became Priuat men. (19) Dioclesian retired into Dalmatia, where in the Citie Salonia, hee poisoned himselfe; as Aurelius Victor affirmeth: and Eusebius saith, that no small disease Euseb. eccles. hist. lib. 8. cap. 14. ouertooke him, for that hee died mad. His consort Maximianus escaped not vnpunished, but died for at∣tempting the Murther of Constantius, and as Eusebius Fox Act. pag. 119. & 123. Euseb. eccles hist. lib. 8. cap. 19. auoucheth, hee hanged himselfe in the citie Marsillis: such ignominious deaths followed these two persecu∣ting Tyrants, whereof Dioclesian had formerly made himselfe a God, and by an Edict commanded his Foote Dioclesians practise. The Pope an imitator of him, and not of Christ. to bee kissed: a practise pretily since imitated by his Successors, who haue reuiued the wounded Head of the Beast, and haue trod his steppes in wounding and persecuting the true members of Christ. FLAV. VALER. CONSTANTIVS CHLORVS, C. GALERIVS VALERIVS MAXIMIANVS. CHAPTER XLV. Constantius, Chlorus, Emp. G. Val. Maxi∣mianus, Emp. D Ioclesian and Maximianus resigning vp their Soue∣raignties Dioclesian and Maximianus re∣signed vp the Empire the 9. Cal. of May, in the yeere of Christ 304. (as is said) at the Citie Nicomedia in Bithynia, cōmitted the charge there∣of, and the defence of the Common-weale vnto Galle∣rius and Constantius, who Galerius and Con∣stantius Empe∣rors. had been their Caesars: vp∣on which occasion, great peace followed in the Church of Christ, and most espe∣cially The Christians inioy peace. vnto these Westerne Prouinces. For those Empe∣rors confirmed by the Senate, presently diuided the Empire betwixt them, as two Seuerall Estates, and not subiect to one Gouernment, as formerly had been exer∣cised; which (as Eusebius hath noted) was the fatall end of the Imperiall Glory. (2) Vnto Gallerius fell the gouernment of Sclauo∣nia, Macedonia, Thracia, Egypt, and the Prouinces in Asia, who tooke for case of that burden these two, whose Coines we haue here expressed. Maximinus and Seuerus made Caesars. (2) C. Galerius, Valer. Maximinus, and Aurel. Valer. Seuerus his sisters sonnes, whom in the yeere of Christ three hundred and six, hee elected Caesars, and after Augusti; which honours the last enioied not long, for he was slaine at Rome by the treachery of Maxentius, after one yeere. And the other, when he had foure yeeres gouerned as Caesar, and three as Augustus in the East, died at Tharsis in Cilicia. (3) And to the lot of Constantius, who much at one time with his Copartner, elected his sonne Con∣stantine, (so famous in christian historie) Caesar, fell Constantine the Great elected Caesar. Italy, France, Britannie, Spaine, Germany, and most of the Prouinces in Africke: which seeming to him (who ra∣ther chose to gouerne well then much) too spatious, gaue vp to Gallerius all that in Africke, as too remote from the Seat of his residence, and eie of his direction. (4) This good Emperor was for his Palenesse sur∣named Chlorus, by birth a Roman, his Father named Eu∣tropius, his Mother Claudia, Neece to the Emperor Clau∣dius. Himselfe had attained the dignitie of a Senator, and was both Wise, Valiant, Noble, and Vertuous; whose parts Eusebius doth thus commend. Constantius was a man of singular clemencie towards men, and pietie towards God. He did not partake with him Euseb. eccles. hist. lib. . cap. 16. in crueltie, whose partaker he was in Soueraigntie: neither staining his Raigne with the bloud of the Saints, nor de∣stroying our Churches and places of Praier, as Maximianus furiously did; but rather he reuerenced and highly honoured those who truly honoured God. For which God so blessed him, that this godly Father left a more godly Sonne Con∣stantine, the Heire of his well-gotten Empire. (5) To which his vertues, other Authors adde, that he was of great affabilitie, louing, and gentle, little Pomp. Lat . regarding his Priuate Profit, but altogether raigning to inrich his Subiects, and to that end would often say; That it was more be h full for the Weale publike, that the wealth of the Land should bee dispersed into the commons hands, then to lie locked vp in Princes coffers. In which kind, so auerse he was from all superfluities, that hee may be adiudged faulty the other way: for vpon Fea∣stinall daies, and in his Entertainments of Strangers, he was faine to borrow Plate of his friends (for such ma∣ny times are richer then their Soueraignes) to furnish his Table and Cupbords. (6) But aboue all other vertues, was his louing countenance and protection to the late persecuted Christians, making his Court their Sanctuarie, and his Chapell their Oratorie. And to winnow the Chaffe from the Wheat, he vsed the like policie as Iehu King of Israel 2. Kin. 10. 20. sometime had done against the Priests of Baal. For he commanded all his Officers to offer sacrifice to the Constantius poli∣cie to trie who were true Chri∣stians. Idoll-Gods, pretending to dis-court all such as refused: but contrariwise those that obeied hee put from him, with this reproofe, that hee who is disloyall to his God, will neuer be true nor trustie to his Prince. (7) When he was first made Caesar, he was forced Constantius his wiues. to forsake his first wife Helena, by whom hee had his vertuous sonne Constantine, and to take Theodora daughter in Law to Maximianus, for a further confir∣mation of friendship. (8) Helena by birth was a Britaine, the daughter of Eutropius. Coelus a British Prince, as saith Eutropius, though Nice∣phorus make her of Bithynia, and Beda tearmes her his Contubine, some an Inne-holder, and others for her per∣son Nicephor. lib. 7. cap. 18. Beda hist. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 8. Holinsh. Chron. lib. 4. cap 26. Cambd. Brit. pa. 74 and parentage stand very doubtfull: to meet with whom, let vs heare the censure of Times Chiefe Secre∣tarie, the learned Cambden in his Britannia: Constantius (saith hee) what time hee serued in Britaine vnder Aure∣lian, tooke to wife Helena daughter of Coelus or Coelius a British Prince, on whom he begat that noble Constantine the Great in Britaine; for so (together with that great Historiographer Baronius) the common opinion of all o∣ther Baronius. Writers with one consent beare witnesse, vnlesse it bee one or two petty Greeke Authors of late time, and those dis∣senting one from the other; and a very learned man, groun∣ding vpon a corrupt place of Iul. Firmicus. Howbeit, com∣pelled he was by Maximianus to put her away; for to mary Theodora his daughter. This is that Helena which in Antique Inscriptions is called VENERABILIS and PIISSIMA AVGVSTA, and for Christian Pietie, for cleansing Ierusalem of Idols, for building a goodly A Church buil∣ded by Helena in the place where our Sa∣uiour suffred. Church in the place where our Lord suffred, and for finding the sauing Crosse, is so highly commended of Ecclesiasticall Writers. And yet both Iewes and Gentiles termed her by way of ignominie and reproch, Stabularia, because shee (a most godly Princesse) sought out the Cribbe or Man∣ger where Christ was borne: and in that place where Helena buildeth another Church where the Inne stood in which our Sauiour was laid in a Cratch. stood that Hostelry, founded a Church; for which cause she was by the Enemies of Christian Religion cal∣led an Hostesse, and (because such are commonly kind to their Guests) a Concubine also. For whose defense, let the Funerall Oration of Ambrose, made vpon the death of Theodosius, answer, wherein hee doth rather commend her humilitie, then affirme any such base Offices in contempt of her person. They say that this Lady was at first an Inne-holder or Hostesse, &c. Well (saith he) this good Hostesse Helena Ambrose his Ora∣tion vpon Theo∣dosius. hasted to Ierusalem, and sought out the place of our Lords Passion, and made diligent search for the Lords Cribbe. This good Hostesse was not ignorant of that Guest which cured the way-faring mans hurts, that was wounded by Theeues. This good Hostesse chose to be reputed a Stable-sweeper, that she might thereby gaine Christ. And verily she was the moouer and only worker of her husbands conuersion, who casting off all supersti∣tious worships, willingly acknowledged the onely all∣ruling God, suffering the Christians that had beene hidde in Caues and Dennes, now to exercise their De∣uotions publikely, and both to reedifie the old rui∣nate Churches, and to erect new. (9) Of the like Pietie wee reade in a Queene of the like name, Helena, Queene of Adiabena (commen∣ded Ioseph. Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 2. Helena Queene of Ad ab na a vertuous wo∣man also. by Iosephus) that was a Conuert to the Iewish Re∣ligion, who comming to Ierusalem to visit the Temple in time of a greeuous Famine, which happened in the daies of Claudius, sent to Alexandria for great quantity of Corne, and for Dried Figges from Cyprus, which shee very charitably bestowed vpon the poore. And about three stades or furlongs off from Ierusalem, built a Se∣pulcher with three Pyramides, wherein her selfe and her two sonnes (both Kings) were afterwards interred. But to proceed. (10) Constantius being heere in Britaine, and lately returned from his Expedition made against the Caledo∣nians and Picts, fell sicke in the City of Yorke, where the Imperiall Throne of his residence was set. At which very time, Constantine his sonne escaping the hands of Gallerius, (with whom hee had beene left hostage) ha∣sted Constantine esca∣peth Galerius. from Rome, hauing belaid all the way with Post∣horses for the purpose, and left them houghed for His preuenting pursuit. He commeth safe to Yorke to his father. feare of pursuit, came with all speed to Yorke, and to his fathers presence; who so much ioied at his sight, that he sate himselfe vpright vpon his Bed, and in the presence of his Counsellors spake as followeth: (11) It now sufficeth, and death is not fear∣full, seeing I shall leaue my vnaccomplished actions Constantius his speech to his sonne. to be performed in thee my Sonne, in whose person I doubt not but that my Memoriall shalbe retained, as in a Monument of succeeding fame. What I had intended, but by this my fatall period left vndone, see thou performe: let those fruits bee ripened in thee the Branch, that I thy Stocke from a vertuous intent haue had ingraffed alwaies in me: that is, go∣uerne thy Empire with an vpright Iustice; protect the Innocent from the Tyrannie of Oppressours; and wipe away all teares from the eies of the Christians; for therein, aboue all other things, I haue accoun∣ted my selfe the most happy. To thee therefore I leaue my Diademe, and their Defense; taking my Faults with mee to my Graue, there to be buried in euerlasting obliuion.: but leauing my Vertues (if e∣uer I had any) to reuiue and liue in thee. With con∣clusion of which vertuous counsell, hee tooke his last farewell of his sonne, his friends, and his life, after he had sate Caesar sixteene yeeres, and Emperour two, as Constantius his raigne & death. Pomp. Laetus. Socrates Eccl. lib. 1. cap. 2. Eusebius accounteth, and died the fiue and twentieth day of Iuly, the yeere of our Sauiour three hundred and six, and of his owne age fifty six. FLA. VALERIVS CON∣STANTINVS MAXIMVS. CA. VALERIVS LICI∣NIVS LICINIANVS. CHAPTER XLVI. Val. Constant. Emp. Li in. anus Emp. T HE Father thus depar∣ting both gloriously and An. Do. 306. peaceably, in the presence of his Son and sage coun∣sellers, Euseb. Eccl. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 14. the griefe in the losse of the Sire was no greater then was the ioy conceiued that they had gained the sonne for his Successour, all men reioi∣cing at the good fortune of that iourney, wherein hee came to close the eies of his dying father, and to com∣fort the sorrow of his mournefull Countrey-men. For forthwith heere in Britaine by acclamation of the Socrat. Eccl. lib. 1. cap. . people, assistance of the Souldiers, and aduice of Ero∣cus King of the Almans (who by the way had accom∣panied him hither in his flight from Rome) they pro∣claimed him at all hands Emperour, and Successour to all that part of the world which his father held. This election was ioifully ratified by the Senate, and of all other Prouinces so gladly accepted, that they ac∣counted this Iland most happie of all other, whose chance was first to see him their Caesar, as in these words of the Panegyrist is seene: O fortunate Britaine, and more happie then all other Lands, that hast the first Panegyricke O∣ration vnto Constantine the great. Eutropius. Constantines descent. sight of Constantine Caesar. (2) His birth (as is said) was in Britaine, and ho∣nourably descended, his father a Roman Senatour, Cae∣sar, and Emperor; his mother a Britaine, (daughter to Coelus) a Princesse vertuous, wise, chaste, and religious: himselfe in true Pietie degenerating from neither. At his first entrance he pursued the reliques of the Warre which his father had begunne against the Caledonians, and other Picts, subduing the Britains that were more remote, and Inhabitants of those Ilands that are wit∣nesses Euseb. in vita Con∣stantini. (saith one) of the Sunnes set or going downe (3) Maxentius the sonne of Maximianus Herculi∣us, who at the death of Constantius was proclaimed Augustus by the tumultuous Praetorian Souldiers at Rome, and Romulus his sonne (whose face wee haue heere with his fathers from both their monies ex∣pressed) was created his Caesar (the way to that Seat of Maiestie whereunto hee had too hastily and most vn∣duly climed) for now this Vsurper by his Necroman∣cies, Adulteries, Persecutions, and Murders, was growne Sabel icus. so vntolerable and odious, that the Senate sent to Con∣stantine, crauing his aid and redresse; who sore lamen∣ting the sores of the Empire, and the case of the Chri∣stians, first wrote: but that taking no effect, prepa∣red his forces against Maxentius. Maximianus the father, either in true zeale or fai∣ned pretence, (which by the sequell is more proba∣ble) tooke great offense at his sonne Maxentius vnsuf∣ferable outragiousnesse; and vnder colour of dislikes and redresse, repaired to his sonne in Law Constantine, whose daughter Fausta hee had maried, and notwith∣standing his faire pretences before the face of Con∣stantine, yet secretly he tampered with Fausta to make away her husband. But the good Lady well knowing that the bond of a childe is great, but greater the loue of a wife, reuealed his treacherie to Constantine, who caused him therupon to be put to death, a fit end for Maximianus put to death by Constantine. so bloudy a Tyrant. And ripe was the like destiny for his no-way-degenerating sonne, against whom hee prepared his forces: and drawing Licinius Gouer∣nour of Sclauonia, who was made Caesar, to his side, by giuing him his sister Constantia to wife, (a man but of an ordinarie descent, though Gallienus Maximinus had made him in Illyrica his Copartner in the East) hasted towards Rome with an Host of ninety thou∣sand foot, and eight thousand horse; leuied out of Bri∣taine, France, and Germanie. (4) But knowing well that successe in warre de∣pendeth more in diuine assistance then humane strength, yet doubtfull what God h should in this blessed enterprise inuocate for aid, (for as yet he was not fully setled in the Christian Faith, though the Gods of the Gentiles he obserued altogether deceitfull) cast vp in this his holy meditation his eies Eastward to heauen, and had by diuine ordinance presented to Niceph. li. 7. c. 2 . Eutropius lib. 11. Zoso . lib. 1. ca. 5. Socrat. lib. 1. ca. 2. V spurgens. Chron. Paul. Diac. li. 11. him in obiect the signe of a Crosse, wherein were Starres (as letters) so placed, that visiblie might bee read this sentence in Greeke, IN HOC VINCE, as diuers Authors report. Yet are there some frō the testimony of Eu∣sebius himselfe, vnto whom this blessed man Eusebius. did declare his Vision, that affirme this forme The forme of the Crosse. being the first Greeke Characters of the name of Christ, (to which the reuerse of Decentius hereafter expres∣sed, Tetu . against Marcion, li. 3. Hieron. in Ezec . cap 9. Raynolds confe∣rence with Hart, cap. . Martial. of the Crosse. , D ∣logue 4. Lip de Cruce. as of many others, may adde much probabilitie) rather then either of these, although Tertullian and S. Ierome affirme, that the latter was the very figure of the Crosse whereon our Sauiour died: but this as a question beyond my iudgement or intention, I leaue to those learned Di∣uines and others, who haue laboured in that subiect with curious search. (5) This miraculous signe promising Victory, and that (saith Eusebius) not in an Inscription only, but Euseb. ecles. hist. lib. 9. cap. 9. Sabellicus. by voice of Angels, was so comfortable to Constan∣tine, that with great courage he went forward, bearing before him and his victorious Army, in place of the Imperiall Standard, the forme of this vision imbro∣dered with gold and stones of greatest price. And as one armed from heauen, proceeded against his hellish Constantines re∣pose. aduersarie. Maxentius as much depending vpon his Sorcerers, was no lesse assured of the victory. In furtherance Pomp. Laetus. Maxentius tru∣steth to Sorce∣rers. Sabellicus. whereof, as a stratagem of warre; hee framed a deceit∣full Bridge ouer the riuer Tyber, neere to Pons Miluius, to intrap Constantine: but ioyning battell, and ouer-laid with strokes, retired and fled, and (whether for haste, or through forgetfulnesse) tooke ouer the same Bridge, which suddenly failing vnder him, hee was with many more drowned, and Constantine remai∣ned Victor. In memory whereof, hee caused a trium∣phall Arch to be erected in the midst of Rome, where∣in his Statue was imbossed, holding in his Right hand a Crosse; according to the fashion of that which hee had seene in the heauens: and vpon ancient inscrip∣tion in memory of this Victory, this we finde engra∣uen: INSTINCTV DIVINITATIS, MENTIS MAGNITVDINE CVM EXERCITV SVO, An inscription made on memory of Maxentius ouerthrow. TAM DE TYRANNO QVAM DE OMNI EIVS FACTIONE, VNO TEMPORE IVS∣TIS REMP. VLTVS EST ARMIS. Thus: By instinct of the diuine power, with great magnanimitie and helpe of his armie in a lawfull warre, he reuenged the cause of the common wealth, as well on the Tyrant himselfe, as on his whole faction all at once. With the like successe had he warred against the Frankners in Batauia, whose Vi∣ctorie was likewise stamped in gold, wherein is a Wo∣man The memoriall of his victorie ouer the Frank∣ners. Cambd. Brit. sitting vnder a Trophey, and leaning her head vp∣on a Crosse-bowe, with this inscription, FRANCIA. (6) But as his fame increased in the mindes of most, so was it as much maligned by Licinius his fel∣low Emperour and Brother in L ; who in his heart neuer fauoured the Christians, howsoeuer for a time outwardly hee suffered their Religion: but at last, see∣king occasions against Constantine, hee raised a cruell Persecution in the East, where he raigned with Marti∣nianus, whom at Byzantium, and Iulius Licinius Licini∣anus at Arlas, he had before made Caesars: permitting thē to stampe these monies as marks of Soueraigntie. (7) By this affliction of Gods Church, he infor∣ced this Champion of God for their defence to pre∣pare his forces, with which hee met Licinius in Hun∣garie, where he gaue him a great ouerthrow. But hee Licinius put to death at Nico∣media, and his sonne after, Anno 326. escaping to Byzantium in Asia, the lesse, ioyned againe battell, and was there taken Prisoner: yet by the me∣diation of his wife Constantia, had his life spared, and was confined within the citie Nicomedia; where for his treasons afterwards, he and his sonne Licinianus, that somewhat suruiued him, were put to death. And now the peace of Gods Saints manifestlie appeared, and the progresse of the Gospell passed vntroubled. (8) For now (saith our Gyldas) no sooner was the bla∣sting tempest and storme of Persecution blowne ouer, but the faithfull Christians, who in time of trouble and dan∣ger, had hidden themselues in woods and deserts, and in se∣cret caues, being come abroad to open sight, reedified the Churches ruinated to the very ground. The Temples of ho∣lie Martyrs they founded, and erected (as it were) the Ban∣ners of victory in euery place, celebrating festiuall holy daies, and with pure hearts and mouthes performing the sa∣cred ceremonies: for the which blessednesse, he euer af∣ter had the Attributes ascribed vnto him of most bles∣sed Emperour, most pious, happy Redeemer of Romes Citie, Founder of Peace, Restorer of Rome, and of the whole World, most great, inuincible Augustus, S cred, Diuine, and of sacred memory, &c. Howbeit, for admitting these praises, as it should seeme, he is taxed by Eutropius and Victor of pride; as also crueltie for putting to death Crispus his sonne (by Mineruina his concubine, whom hee had made Caesar, and permitted to stampe these monies here vnder inserted) as likewise his wife Fau∣sta, sister to Maxentius: but others affirme that the Sigonius. causes of their deaths were iust, though (as Paulus Oro∣sius saith) the reason thereof was kept secret, and Zosi∣mus doth therein excuse him as Cassiodore relateth, In hist. tripart. and so doth Rufinus and Eusebius. (9) Touching Constantius affaires in this Iland, it appeareth by the last Author, that after his Fathers death, and his owne departure out of this Country, some aspiring mind taking aduantage of his absence, in other warres, perswaded the people here to with∣draw their obedience. Whereupon once againe he ad∣dressed himselfe with his Armie to the reestablishing of the Ilands subiection: and passing (saith Eusebius) ouer into Britaine, inclosed on euery side within the banks of the Ocean, he conquered the same. The ioy∣full memory of this expedition is registred to poste∣ritie vpon his Coine set in the entrance of this Chap∣ter, inscribed Aduentus Augusti, and by these Letters, P. L. N. the place of the Mint to be at London. (10) After this (saith the same Author) he began to Eusebius. compasse in his mind other parts of the World, to the end hee might come in time to succour those that wanted helpe: and when he had furnished his Armie with milde and mo∣dest instructions of Pietie, hee inuaded Britaine, that hee might likewise instruct those that dwell inuironed round about with the waues of the Ocean: bounding the Suns set∣ting as it were with those coasts. And of the Politicall gouernment therein by him altered, let it not seeme offensiue that I, who know and professe mine owne weake sight in most of these matters, doe light my dimme candle, at the Bright-shining Lampe of that Cambden in his Britannia. Illustrious Antiquarie, who saith: (11) About this time (saith he) as euidently appea∣reth by the Code of Theodosius, Pacatianus was the Vice∣gerent of Britaine: for by this time the Prouince had no more Propretors, nor Lieutenants, but in stead thereof, was a Vicegerent substituted. And againe, Seeing that Con∣stantius altered the forme of the Roman Gouernment, it shall not be impertinent to note summarily in what sort Bri∣taine was ruled vnder him; and in the next succeeding ages. He ordained foure Praefects of the Pretorian, to wit, of the East, of Illyricum, of Italy, and of Gaule: two Leaders or Commandere of the forces, the one of footemen, the other of horsemen in the West, whom they tearmed Praesentales. For ciuill gouernment there ruled Britaine, the Praefect of the Praetorium or Grand Seneschall in Gaule, and vnder him the Vicar Generall of Britaine, who was his Vicege∣rent, and honoured with the title, Spectabilis; that is, nota∣ble or remarkable: him obeied respectiuely to the number of the Prouinces two Consular deputies, and three Presidents; who had the hearing of ciuill and criminall causes. For military affaires, there ruled the Leader or Com∣mander of the footemen in the West, at whose disposition were the Earles or Lieutenants of Britaine, the Earle, Count, or Lieutenant of the Saxon coast along Britaine; and he Duke of Britaine, stiled euery one Spectabilis. The Earle Lieutenant of Britaine seemeth to haue ruled the Inland parts of the Iland, who had with him seuen companies of footmen, and nine coronets or troopes of horse. The Earle Lieutenant of the Saxon coast, who defended the Maritime parts against the Saxons, and is named by Amianus Lieutenant of the Maritime tract, for defence of Amianus Marcill. the Sea coast, had seuen companies of footmen, two Guidons of horsemen, the second legion, and one cohert. The Duke or Generall of Britaine, who defended the Marches against the Barbarians, had the command of thirty and eight garrison forts, wherein their Stations kept, consisting of fourteen thousand foot, & nine hundred horse. So that in those daies (by Pancirolus account) Britaine maintained nineteene thousand, two hundred sootmen, and Nineteene thou∣sand foote and seuenteene hun∣dred horsemen maintained in ordinary in Bri∣taine. seuenteene hundred horsemen, or thereabout in ordinary. Besides all these, the receiuer of the Emperors Finances or publike reuenewes: the Prouost of the Emperors Trea∣sures in Britaine, and the Procurator of the Draperie in Britaine; in the which the clothes of the Prince and Souldi∣ers were Wouen: and the Count also of priuate reuenewes had his Rationall or Auditor of priuat State in Britaine: to say nothing of the sword-fence-schoole Procurator in Bri∣taine (whereof an old inscription maketh mention) and of other officers of inferior degrees. (12) After the setling of these affaires, to the end that he might with the more facilitie bridle the vnta∣med Persians that seldome were in quiet, he remoued the Imperiall seat of his Residence into the East, for now Gallerius and Licinius both dead, the rent and di∣uided state of the Roman Empire was in him vnited: and purposing to build there a Citie, as an eternall Monument of his name, he chose the plot at Chalcedon in Asia: but whiles they were measuring out the cir∣cuit, an Eagle scouping at the Line, fled with it ouer the Sea towards Byzantium in Thracia, to which place (the thing seeming ominous) he transferred his new foundation, and there built a most Magnificent Citie, naming it New Rome) as appeareth by an inscription Sabellicus. of his Statue). In imitation whereof, he circulated Se∣uen hils with a Wall for Height, Thicknesse, and Beauty, A Iewish Doctor thus described this Citie, in an epistle which himselfe deliue∣red to our Eng∣lish Ambassador, remaining in Constantinople in Anno 1594. the fairest in the world: and not only erected Temples, Towers, and most stately Palaces himselfe, but by his publike Edicts, cōmanded all the Princes of the Empire to raise therein some Monuments & memorable Edi∣fices, beseeming the Maiesty of so glorious a foundatiō. (13) Hither also from Rome hee caused to bee brought many renowned Monuments of Antiquities, as the famous Goddesse Pallas of old Troy, the Image of Apollo in brasse of an vnmeasurable bignesse; the Sta∣tues of Iuno, Minerua, Venus, and the like: whereupon Hierome saith; That Constantine to inrich this one Citie, impouerished all others in the Empire: and o∣ther Hier. in his ad∣ditions to Euse∣bius. Writers which saw it in the perfectiō of beauty, re∣port it to be rather an habitation for the Gods, thē the dwelling place for Earthly men. Herein also (so studi∣ous was he of good Arts) was built the Proud Palace of that Publike Library, wherein were contained one hundred twenty thousand of the chiefest Written Bookes, and in the midst thereof were the Guts of a Dra∣gon, in length one hundred twenty Foote, on which was admirably written in Letters of Gold, the Iliads of Homer. The New Name of this new Citie lasted not long; for the affection of all men to the Founder, af∣forded it rather the name of Constantinople. As a tro∣phey Constantinople built by Con∣stantine. then of this Emperours renowne, though now a brand of infamie to another of that name, who lost it in the yeere 1452. to Mahomet the Turke: and as New Rome was reared and ruined in one name, so had Old Rome in Augustus her pitch of height, and in Au∣gustulus her period. (14) He drew likewise hither those Legions that lay for defence of the Prouinces, as well in Germany and Gallia, as in Britaine: from whence hee brought (saith Malmesbury) a great power of British Souldiers, through whose industry and forward seruice, hauing obtained Tri∣umphant Wil. Malmsbury. Victories to his hearts desire, and Empire: such of them as were past seruice and for∣med the painefull parts of Souldiers their fulltime, he plan∣ted in a certain part of Gaule Westward, vpon the very of the Ocean: where at this day their posterity , are wonderfully growen euen to a mightie people; in man∣ners & language somewhat degenerate from our . In which his doings, he laid open the Prouinces to the irruptions of their Enemies; and is therefore by Z i∣mus hardly censured, as being the onely man that by this meanes first subuerted the flourishing estate of the Empire. And indeed, by withdrawing his Forces out of Britaine, the Picts and other their wonted Ene∣mies had the bolder and easier entrance into the more ciuill parts of this Iland; where by ere long, being alto∣gether abandoned of the Romans, it became a pray of Conquest to the Saxons, as shall be shewed in due place. (15) But howsoeuer his policie failed (carried (as it seemeth) by a Diuine inspiration to leaue Rome) yet is this good Emperour much commended by all Writers for his many vertues, especially for that hee so laid the foundation of the Christians securi∣tie, that the same hath stood vnder the protection Constantine the establisher of Christianity. of Princes euer since, euen vnto this day. And albeit that many Caesars his successors, haue often attemp∣ted to shake it by their authorities, and the sharpe in∣struments Ambrose vpon the death of Theo. of heretikes dangerously haue vndermi∣ned it, yet hath it borne out the Stormes of all their boisterous assaies, and stood in the strength that this Emperor first laid it. (16) And vpon this foundation, that a glorious building might be raised, hee congregated three hun∣dred and eighteene Christian Bishops in the Citie Nice in Thracia, where himself was present, and also President Ruf . Cassiod. Eusebius eccles. hist. of the same Councel (though now his Beadsmen (the Popes) put him & his Successors from that right) and as another Moses, he then pacified the contentions of the brethren, and reestablished the authorities of the Bishops for the godly gouernment of the Church in that Primitiue age. (17) But as the cleerest Sunne hath his set, and the fairest day his night, so Constantines glorious life drew to an end, though his liuing-glory shall be endlesse: for intending a voyage against the Persians, hee fell grie∣uously sicke, and counselled by his Physitions to be car∣ried Hierom . vnto Nicomedia, a Citie in Bythinia, to the Hot Bathes that naturally there sprang (which caused some erroneously to write that he became a Leaper) he died on the way neere to the place, and in great deuotion commended his departing Soule to his Crucified Re∣deemer, Maij 22. the yeere of Christ Iesus three hun∣dred Eusebius. Sigonius. Constantine bu∣ried at Constan∣tinople. Socrates, lib. 1. cap. 26. thirty seuen, and of his happy victorious raigne thirty one, and of his age sixty fiue; whose body was interred at Constantinople, in the Church of the Apo∣stles that himselfe had therein founded. (18) Eusebius writing this good Emperors life, saith, that he deferred his Baptisme vntill his old age, in de∣sire Eusebius in vi Const. lib. 4. that he might receiue it in Iordayne, where our Sa∣uiour himselfe was baptised. Yet others thinke that he was baptised with his Son Crispus, what time he crea∣ted him his Caesar: for the Celebration whereof, hee caused a most sumptuous Font to be made in Rome; which Platina & Sabellicus affirme to haue continued to their times. And the ingenuity of the same Sabelli∣cus Sabellicus. is much to be approued, in that speaking of Con∣stantines Donation, which some so much vaunt of (though the vanity of that forgery is now laid open to the view of all by sundry learned men) he acknow∣ledgeth (himselfe being a Romanist) that he findeth no mention of any such matter, in any of the ancient Records which he followed, and so leaueth it to the Patronage of those Crafts-men, out of whose forges it first was formed. He left to succeed him in the Em∣pire as Augusti, (with distaste of the eldest) his three Sonnes, Constantine, Constantius, and Constance, whom before he had made Caesars, & designed by Testamēt, Constantines suc∣cessors. Delmatius, the son of Anniballinus, (his brother) Caesar: and therefore we haue inserted his mony in ranke of those that succeeded this great & glorious Emperor. FLA. VAL. CONSTANTINVS IVNIOR, Emp. FLA. VAL. CONSTANS,— FLA. IVLIVS CONSTANTIVS, FLA. DELMATIVS ANNIBALLIANVS, CHAPTER XLVII. Constantinus Iunior Emp. Val. Constans Emp. Iul. Constanti∣us Emp. Delmatius Annibalianus Emp. F OR the Empire being di∣uided among these Bre∣thren, An. Do. 337. Constantinus the el∣dest, whose portion was Britaine, France, Spaine, and part of Germanie, tooke Constantinus his part of the Em∣pire. himselfe wronged in this partition; whereas Con∣stans his second brother had Italie, Africa, Sclauo∣nia, Dalmatia, and Greece; and Constantius the youn∣gest Constans his part of the Em∣pire. Constantius his part of the Em∣pire. possessed Thracia, Syria, Mesopotamia, and Egypt, Prouinces much greater in his sight, then his owne seemed to bee; and therefore at last ambitiously hee attempted to inlarge his vpon the Frontiers of his brother Constans, at that time in Dacia, and in warres against the Gothes, who there also inuaded his territo∣ries, but was met with and slaine by a Captaine of his Constantinus slaine. Socrates lib. 2. c. 3. brothers, neere to the Citie Aquileia in Italie, when he had held his Seigniories the terme of three yeeres. (2) Hereupon Constans grew exceedingly proud, and seising his deceased brothers Prouinces, ioined them vnto his owne Possessions, and with his brother Constantius came into this Iland. This Battle, and their arriuall heere, by the words of Iulius Firmius, Cassiod. trip. Hist. chanced in the winter season: for (saith hee, speaking to these Emperours) you haue subdued vnder your Oares the swelling and raging waues of the British Ocean, euen in the deepe of Winter; a thing hitherto neuer seene before. And the Britaines were sore afraid to behold the vn∣expected face of their Emperour. This Constans was he that called a Councell to Sardica against the Arri∣ans, A Councell a∣gainst the Arri∣ans called by Constans. whither were assembled three hundred Bishops, and among them, some of the British, as formerly we haue mentioned. But this Prince being youthfull, cast a∣way all care of the Empire; and drowned in his owne pleasures, followed ill counsell, (the vsuall way to Princes ruines.) Thus growne greeuous to the Pro∣uinces, and nothing acceptable to the Souldiers, was by Magnentius a Captaine of his owne slaine, as hee was hunting neere the Castle of S. Helens, situate amongst Constans slaine. the Tapori, a Spanish people vnder the Pyren Moun∣taines. And as hence this Murderer of his Soueraigne Lord and Master, was branded with the name of Ta∣porus, so in this Emperour there murdered was fulfil∣led a Prophecie that hee should die in his Grandmo∣thers Amianus. l. 20. c. 1 Lappe. Olympias the Widow of this Constans was giuen to Arsaces King of Armenia, by Constantius his brother, to be a bond and purchase of his surer friendship, of which his need was much, as the times required: for after the death of Constance, Vetranio was proclaimed Emperour by the Pannonian Armie, though shortly disrobed, and sent to end his decrepit age in a priuate fortune. Nepohanus the nephew of Constans by his Fl. pop. Nepohanus p. F. Aug. sister Eutropia, was at Rome by the abiect Rout saluted Augustus, which he enioied not much aboue twentie daies, being suppressed by Magnentius, who had now made the truncke of Maiestie, his Soueraignes bodie, the Basse, whereby he meant with Decentius and Desi∣derius, his two brethren, to ascend the Throne. (3) Simon Dunelmensis saith, that Great Constan∣tine Simon Dunelm. I. Stow. at his departure from Britaine, left one Octauius to gouerne the Land, who shortly rebelled, and after diuers conflicts was slaine by Traherne, Commander of a Roman Legion. Galfridus makes the said Octauian a Galfridus Monm. Britaine, and will haue him to raigne with great Victo∣ries ouer this Iland the space of fifty foure yeeres, which (as Fabian hath accounted) doth extend to the Rob. Fabian. time of Valentinians Rule in Rome: so farre doe our British Historians differ from the Romans. But from them most certaine it is, that Magnentius before men∣tioned, a Britaine by his father, though borne among the Laeti in France, inuested himselfe into the Imperiall Dignitie, vsurping France, Spaine, and Britaine, thus stamping the face of himselfe and his brother Decen∣tius, by him made Caesar at Millan, vpon the currant Monies of such reuolted Prouinces as he vsurped. And did for three yeeres bandy against Constantius, though with some vnequall successe: but lastly despai∣ring to vphold his owne greatnesse, murdered him∣selfe Magnentius mur∣dereth himselfe. at Lyons in Gallia, as his brother vpon newes ther∣of, did with a halter in the same Countrey. For this euent (no other occasion moouing) Constantius both shut the Temple of Ianus in Rome, as a token of an Socra. li. 2. cap. 27. Vniuersall Peace; and gloriously triumphed with more then a vsuall aspect. Amian. li. 16. c. 5. (4) At this time the Generall of the Armie in Bri∣taine was one Gracianus; the father of Valentinian the Emperour, by birth an Hungarian, and so strong of Gracianus of ad∣mirable strength. limme, that no fiue men could pull a rope out of his hand with all their force; whereof hee was surnamed Funarius, the Roper. This man giuing entertainment to Magnentius, was condemned in confiscation of all his goods by Constantius that now ruled sole Empe∣rour, vnto whom also the Britaines submitted them∣selues, and whose Deputie after Gratianus was aged Martin Deputie in Britaine. Martin, a man (no doubt) vertuous and vpright, as he witnessed by his death: for Constantius, whose base and distrustfull heart feared the wagging of euery leafe, by the slaughter of many guiltlesse, sought to make himselfe secure: and egged on by his Flatterers, (to serue their purposes) sent one Paulus a Notarie Amianus Marcel. lib. 14. cap. 4. into Britaine, to apprehend them that had aided Mag∣nentius. (5) The said Notarie was a Spaniard of a pestilent Paulus a Spaniard his subtiltie. wit and subtiltie, especially in finding out all quirkes and deuices to endanger mens estates: whose busi∣nesse being now to apprehend and bring away such Martiall men as had entred action in the foresaid conspiracies, he vnder that pretence drew into dan∣ger many that were guiltlesse, and the Emperours true Subiects: some of which hee imprisoned, others he tormented, and many with Manacles and Chaines Amianus lib. 25. cap. 2. Paulus called Ca∣tena for his cruel∣tie. so bruised, that therefore he was called Catena. Old Martine the Deputie, much lamenting their mise∣ries, besought the Spaniard to surcease, and not with the Offenders thus to punish the Innocent; wherat the proud Catch-pole so much disdained, that hee threat∣ned and sought to bring Martin before the Counsell, and that in bands in manner of a Traitor; which so much incensed the aged man, that with his dagger he assailed him; but perceiuing the wound he gaue was not deadly, he stabd the same into his owne side, and Martine kild. thereof presently died: vnfortunate in this fact, but otherwise a most righteous man (saith Amianus) that thus attempted to ease the wrongs of these oppressed Britaines. (6) But besides these their distresses, the out∣rodes Amianus Mar. li. 20. cap. 1. of the Scots and Picts breaking into the Marches of the Britaines, sore molested their peace: for redresse whereof, Iulian the Caesar wintring at Paris, and distra∣cted into sundry thoughts, was afraid in person to passe those Seas himselfe, and to leaue Gaule without a Ruler, especially at such a time, when the Almans had stirred vp a most cruell warre: wherefore hee sent Lu∣picinus at that time Colonell of the Infanterie, and Ma∣ster Lupicinus sent Deputie into Bri∣tain. of the Armorie, to withstand their furie; a warlike man certes, and skilfull in feats of Armes, but with∣all proud of heart and countenance, looking high, and speaking bigge, and in gesture demeaning him∣selfe in his charge as an Actor vpon a Stage, and other∣wise so qualified, that men doubted a long time whe∣ther he were more Couetous or Cruell. He from . Bo∣nonia imbarked all his men, and with a good gale arri∣ued in the Hauen Richburrow or Rip bester. Rutupi, marching in all haste to London. Lundinium, that from thence, after aduice taken, ac∣cording to the qualitie of the businesse, hee might make more haste to come into the field, and giue bat∣tle. But with what successe his affaires afterwards proceeded, I finde not recorded: and therefore I re∣turne againe to the Emperour Constantius. (7) Flauius Claudius Constantius Gallus his cosen∣german Gallus chosed Caesar. hee elected Caesar, permitted him to stampe this money, and linckt him in mariage with his sister Constantia. But he, designed to gouerne the East, and make good those Frontiers against the Persians, forgot the duty of his charge, and gaue himselfe vp at Anti∣och to all licentious lusts and cruelties: of which when Constantius (infected afore with some iealousie of his ambition) was informed, he so plotted, that this lost man, drowned in his owne vicious securitie, was sur∣prised, and with his hands bound backward (like a Fel n) giuen vp to the common Headsman for execu∣tion. Gallus executed. His brother Iulianus was then made Caesar, and this Emperours other sister Helena bestowed vpon Iulian made Caesar. him, whose Victories against the Germans and Gaules gained him such applause, that he was against his will Iuliani Epist . by the Souldiers elected Augustus, and made Consort with Constantius in Power Imperiall. (8) Whose fortunes thus sticking in a tumultu∣ous State (for, with others, Nigrinianus (whose conse∣crated memorie is left to posteritie vpon this money) attempted the disquiet of this Emperour, by an am∣bitious affection of rule, that was both short and fa∣tall to him) did plainely foreshew, that neither his Raigne nor life would last long. For besides the affections of the time that then fol∣lowed that new risen Starre Iulian, his nightly visions and imagined apparitions did both terrifie and appal his mind; for as he thought, his fathers Ghost presen∣ted vnto him, a Babe of an ingenious countenance, Constan appa∣rition. which strooke the Ball (that the Romans call Tufa, a Globe borne only by a Monarch) out of his right hand, betokening nought else but a change of State. Which howsoeuer his diuiners interpreted for pleasing things, yet himselfe thought his owne Genius still fol∣lowed him, in a forlorne, poore, and mournfull habit. (9) These dumpes notwithstanding, this new Election he meant to disauow: and Iulian for his part resolued in point of honor to maintaine and vphold. He leadeth an Army against Iulianus, and dy∣eth by the way. Socrates lib. 2. cap. 37. Whereupon warres prepared, Constantius set forward to encounter him, and comming to Tharsus, from An∣tioch in Syria, fell there sicke of a feuer, which still in∣creased as he further trauelled, and in the borders of Cilicia, at the place called Mopsus Wels, situated at the Amianus Mar. lib 21. cap. 13. foote of MountTaurus, died the third day of Nouem∣ber, the yeere of Christ by Ieromes account, three hun∣dred sixtie foure: by others, three hundred sixtie one; when hee had ruled twenty foure yeeres, and liued fortie and a few moneths, as Amianus Marcellinus, and Pomp. Laetus affirme. But Socrates and Zosimus The time of his raigning. say, that he liued forty fiue yeeres, and raigned thirtie eight, that is, thirteen a Caesar, in the life of his Father, seuen a Competitor in the liues of his brethren, and seuenteene yeeres Emperor alone. Hee is neither accounted with the best, nor worst Emperors, his Vertues seeming to hold scoale with his Amianus lib. 26. cap. 9. Vices: temperate, courteous, liberall, and affable; not elequent, yet desirous to speake well; blunt witted, yet Constantius perfe∣ctions and de∣fects. His wife was Faustina. Constantius a great exacter of tribute. Sulpitius Seuerus. a great fauorer of learning; a most skilfull Archer, and apt to take paines; but withall very suspitious; led by Flatterers, and most cruell to the accused, and in exa∣cting importable Tributes, drew more hatred vpon his head then mony into his coffers. But especially is he stained with the heresie of the Arrians, for whose sake he banished many of the Christians, and amongst them Athanasius, that excellent light of the Catholike A Councell in fauour of the Ar∣rians assembled by Constantius. Church. In fauour of those Heretikes, he caused to be summoned foure hundred westerne Bishops vnto the Councell of Ariminum, whereof three are reported to come out of Britaine. And he is by Amianus his Life-writer, Hilarie calleth them the Bishops of the Prouinces of Britain in an Epistle vnto the Bishops. condemned for mingling foolish doting superstiti∣ons, with the sincere doctrine of the Christian Religion, gi∣uen rather to a more intricate search therein, then to settle his opinions vpon grauitie: and stirring vp schismes and discords in maintaining of words and contentious disputa∣tions, which as they spread more and more, gat wing euen vnto this Iland of Britaine, as by the words of our lamenting Historian Gyldas is seene. When (saith he) the sweete concent of Christ the head, and his members Gyldas. the body, had continued vntill such time, as that deadly and perfidious Arrianisme, like to a pestiferous Serpent from the other side of the Sea, casting vp her venome vpon vs, caused brethren dwelling together, to be disioyned piteously one from another. And thus the way as it were being made ouer the Ocean, all other cruell and fell Beasts wheresoeuer, shaking out of their horrible mouthes the deadly poison of euery heresie, inflicted the deadly stings and wounds of their teeth vpon this our Country, desirous euermore to heare some noueltie. (11) For personage, this Emperor was indifferent∣ly Amianus Marc. lib. 11. cap. 15. tall, his complexion browne, the cast of his eies lof∣tie, his sight quicke, his haire soft, his cheekes alwaies shauen; from the graffing of his necke to the groine very long, but from thence somewhat short and bow∣legged withall. His body after death was embalmed, and in Constantinople enterred neere vnto his Father, at Constantius his portraiture; Constantius buri∣ed at Constanti∣nople. the commandement of Iulian, whom by his testa∣ment (for all his former displeasure) hee declared his Heire and Successor. FLAVIVS CLAVDIVS IV∣LIANVS EMPEROR APOSTATA. CHAPTER XLVIII. I Vlian succeeded, whose birth had as much of No∣bilitie as either the great∣nesse of place; (for it was Iulien his Paren∣tage. New Rome); or the high bloud of parentage could Amian. Marcell. lib. 15. cap. 7. adde vnto him; for his Fa∣ther Constantius, was the brother of great Constan∣tine, and not much his mo∣ther Basilina was lower in her birth, though most vn∣fortunate in bearing him, her owne destruction. An Orphant he was left together with Gallus his brother, long tossed betweene the sourges of his owne im∣perfect constitution, and the bloudy iealousie of his ruling-kinsmen (not long before the fatall ruing of his Father) for being too neere allied to their Crownes. Meane he was of stature, yet carrying from head to foote a iust proportion and vniforme knitting of His proportion and feature. Amian. Marcel. lib. 25. his lineaments, whereby he had agilitie and strength: big and broad his shoulders, his necke fat, bearing his head forward; louely and gracefull was the cast of his quicke and cleere eye, straight his nose, and no feature of his face amisse, but the greatnes of his mouth, and the parting of his nether lippe; the soft haire of his head he wore in a decent length, and his rough beard he cut in a pointed fashion. (2) His education was vnder many masters, of which Mardonius a Scythian Eunuch was the first. His education. Misopo. Iul. Imp. From him he was sent to the publike Schoole at Con∣stantinople, where of Nicocles of Lacedemon, he learned his Grammar, and of Ecebolius the Sophister his Rhe∣toricke; and of both of them (as of Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia) the Christian Religion, in which his de∣light was such, that he betooke him to the function of a Deacon, reading in publike to the people the sa∣cred Bookes; and aimed at no further marke of great∣nesse then the reputation of a holy man: led on with Socrates lib. 3. cap. 1. the loue of knowledge, hee went to the Schooles of Nicomedia, where, of Iamblicus, who succeeded Por∣phyry in the Chaire; he learned the Philosophie of Ari∣stotle and Plato. There bewitched at length with the fame of Libanius Eloquence, though detesting his re∣ligion; from reading in priuate studie his prophane labours, hee grew a publike hearer of his inuectiue Lectures: and imitating at first in exercise of wit only this Rhetoricians forme of declaiming, hee grew in the end the profanest Railer, and deadliest Enemy of all other himselfe against the Church. And to fill vp this vessel of iniquitie, Maximus, the only Impostor and Magician then of the world, (worthily after for his impious doctrine put by Valentinian to the sword) must come to Nicomedia. From him did Iulian learne such Astrologie as setteth Natiuities, and such Ma∣gicke as inuoketh Spirits. And here was the schoole of this mans Error, and Mistris of his impietie. The seedes of whose Nature and Education hauing thus obserued, let vs search with an impartial Eye into his manners and condition, and see what vertue was in fruit. (3) His temperance is commended to vs with ad∣miration. He slept little, and could awake at pleasure: His temperance. his bed was euer with the hardest, and his diet of the Marcel. lib. 16. In Misopo. Iulian. Imp. meanest meat, and the moderatest measure, whereby he neuer but once, and that by accident, disburdened his stomacke by vomit; and would often say, that it was the safetie of his life, that he neuer had any war with his belly. Such was his chastitie, that hauing lost Marcel. lib. 25. & 24. at once in France, Helena his beloued wife, and her in∣fant, his only Sonne, he neuer so much as in suspect, had an incontinent desire. And therefore of all the Persian beauties taken in those warres, as the richest spoiles, Nec contrectare aliquam voluit nec videre: Nei∣ther suffer in his Army either Cookes or Barbers, as Marcel. l. 22. being deliciarum at{que} intemperantia ministros. Arceo meipsum à Theatris: I force my selfe (saith he) from the view of Stage-plaies, and neuer but once a In Mesopo. Iulian. Imp. yeere permit my Eye that delight in Court; wherein the distaste of my mind is, tanquam pauper agricola tri∣butum aliquod pendens iniquo Domino. And when the action was performing; similior sum detestanti eos lu∣dos quàm spectanti. Yet doth Marcellinus tax him of much verbositie and affectation of vaine glory. And Marcellinus, l. 22. Gregory Nazianzen charging him with intemperate Gregor. Nazian∣zen in lib. contra Iulianum. passion as vnconstability, saith; That by his ranging and furious aspect, his vnsteady and halting pace, his fleering looke, and immoderate laughter, Tale ante opera vidi qualem in operibus cognoui. (4) The loue of Iustice in this Prince is remem∣bred to vs in his rules of DIRECTION: for he so His Iustice. Marcellinus, l. 22. amended the Lawes Ambagibus circumcisis, that the Iudges might cleerly see, Quid iuberent fieri quid veta∣rent: and in his EXAMPLE for imitation. For when to an innocent deniall before him, Delphidius the Ora∣tor inueighed saying; Nocens esse poterit vsquam si ne∣gare suffecerit: himselfe replied, Et quis innocens esse po∣terit si accusâsse sufficit? and so discharged the party. As for his clemency and charity, which ought to at∣tend the sword and Scepter of a Soueraigne, since the one is Magnum timor is remedium, and the other will be, post cineres tributum; Nebridius and Lucillianus are Mart. Epig. Registers of the one, whom notwithstanding their conspiracies in fauour of Constantius, hee not onely pardoned, but defended wiih perill of his owne per∣son from the furies of his owne followers. And for the other, those his letters to Arsacius is a sure record. Let there bee in the Cities of your charge, many Hospitals erected, that the want of the way faring may be releeued by Ex Iulian. Epist. ad Ar a. pont. Ga∣latia. our benignitie: and not of them only of our Religion, but of all the rest: for it sutes not well with the goodnes of our Go∣uernment, that when the Iewes permit none of theirs to beg, and the wicked Galileans releeue not onely theirs, but ours, that ours should be disconsolate of other helpe. Some haue blemished his bounty with the brand of vaineglory: thus did the Antiochians for depressing In Misopogon, Iu∣lian, Imp. so much the reasonable price of Graine in their Mar∣kets, by a profuse expence of his owne Treasure, gai∣ning thereby at first onely the applause of the light multitude, after which he hunted, and drawing on in the end a miserable dearth, through the licentious excesse of their improuidence: which often hap∣peneth. And as the banishment of Palladias into Britaine vpon a weake suspition, Taurus to Vircillum, in whom the eye of Iustice could finde no skarre; and to death Vrsulus, with Pigmeus (the first his Treasurer, that had spent with him and on him his owne meanes, when being Caesar, he had little of his owne: the other the guide of his youth, and to whom he truly ought the greatest part of his goodnesse) may iustly staine him with lawlesse seuerity, and vngratefull cruelty; so may his malicious spirit against the Christians, howsoeuer masking in more Art then many that went before him, set him vp in the ranke and top of the greatest Persecutors. And although there be some passages in his Gouernment more easie then in some others that may imply a gentle disposition toward them, (sometimes taking the Gods to witnesse, that the Ga∣lileans (for so he named the Christians) should not vn∣dergoe the least of iniury, neither be led to Pagan sa∣crifice, Ex Epist. Iulian. Imp. ad Artab . Ex Edicto Iulian. in Edissenet. ad Alexandrian. or forced to any thing beyond the compasse of their owne contents: and that he not onely reuo∣ked the Edict of Constantine the Arrian Emperour, whereby those holy men stood long exiled: but ta∣king the aduantage of an vproare begun by the Ar∣rians, Ex Epist. Iulian, Imp. (their Enemies) at Edissa seised vpō their goods, swolne too great in number and fortune by the graci∣ous aspect of his Predecessors, to whom hee dissem∣bled himselfe a Christian): yet did he whiles he had in his owne hands the reine of Gouernment, by all his actions and ends, declare himselfe an heauy op∣posite vnto them. Sometimes by allurements to assay to corrupt them; sometimes by a subtill siding with Hieron Russi . one faction of the Church, as he did with the Catho∣like against the Arrians, to counterpeise their power, vt securius regnaret, that by such licence of sedition, Non timeret vnanimantem plebem, he need not feare the power of their vnitie, as himselfe professed. From this vnfortunate plot of earthly policie (but with worse successe) he incited the Iewes to reedifie the Temple at Ierusalem, and renew their Sacrifice, re∣mitting to them their debt of Tribute, and vowing that at his returne from Persia he would visit that ho∣ly Citie, and (as he saith to them) vt vnà vobiscum in ea Deo optimo gratias agam; well beleeuing that by rai∣sing such an opposite to the Christians, he should sup∣presse their increase, and annihilate their Prophecie of Ierusalems desolation. To repaire these cursed walles against the prouidence of Diuine Iustice, Alipius of Antioch, that had beene Gouernour of Britaine, was sent: but his indeuour, and the worke of all his Ministers, was interrupted by fearefull flaming balles of fire, which issued from the Earth neere vnto those foundations, consuming very many of the Iewes and workemen; by reason whereof, this Element still gi∣uing fresh assault on them, the place became vnacces∣sible, and the enterprise giuen ouer: so vaine it is for Man to striue against the decreed purpose of God. And it is by others affirmed, that at the same time an Earth∣quake so shooke those Foundations which were left by Titus vntouched, that one stone thereby was not left stan∣ding Secr tes lib. 3. cap. 17. vpon another, but were all laid leuell with the ground: by which miraculous sights many Iewes were Sabelli turned to the embracing of the Christian Faith, vpon whose garments fell formes of Crosses, which shined as the beames of the Sunne, neither could they by any meanes be washed or wiped away. Alipius that had beene chiefe in this businesse, was afterward confined , lib. 2 . cap 4. into Banishment, with the losse of his goods, by Valens vpon suspition of Treason. And thus farre of Iulians vailed hatred: now of his open actions of despight against the Christians. Constantius no sooner dead (vnder whom as before is said hee dissembled his Religion) but that he ope∣ned the Temples of the Pagans Gods, repaired their Altars; declaring to future ages, the memorie of this his detestable act, by minting a Bull prepared for sa∣crifice, vpon the Currant money of the State, with this inscription; Securitas reipublicae; as if Romes Empire should lose her securitie, and the fatall destinie of Command, when the Genius of that Citie and the Gods of her foundation should bee forsaken. And where there remained any antique Monument of the Infant Christian Church, or any new erected badge of Religious deuotion, those hee caused to bee defa∣ced. Thus did he in Caesarea Philippi, with that Bra∣sen figure of our Sauiour arraied in a short vesture, Eusebius, lib. 7. ca. 17. and the Woman cured of her blodie issue, kneeling and eleuating her hands to him; and at whose feet in the said Pillar grew a certaine Hearb, in heighth vnto the Hem of his Garment, which cured all kind of mala∣dies; placing his owne figure, to the intent that it shold be worshipped: but suddenly it was with Light∣ning from Heauen destroied, breaking with violent force the Brest thereof asunder, and striking the Head fast into the earth; whose Reliques, as Zosimus saith, re∣mained Zosimus Eccl. lib. 5. cap. 20. Iulianus picture destroyed by lightning. there to be seene a long time after, a witnesse of mans presumptuous error and Gods iust displea∣sure. Manie lawes he made against them, and manie rights of Subiects hee took from them. By Edict he forbad the Christians the publick Schooles & study Ex Edicto contra Christian. of the Arts and Tongues; Iesting away the reason of this iniustice with scoffes, as hee did the rest; saying, that Aristotle, Isocrates, and Plato, who must be their guides in such liberall learnings, adoring Mercurie and the other Gods, he held it absurd that they should read and learne of their Bookes, that loath and raile at their Religion. The equitie of this extended power may appeare by Marcellinus censure, a man of his owne Religion, who of it saith, Inclemens obruendum perenni silen∣tio; Let the Edict be dambd to eternall silence. When hee seized vpon the goods of the Christians, which was of∣ten, and vpon weake pretences, he vsed to inuert the Letter of their owne Doctrine, in warrant of his foule act, saying that he did it, vt facilius in Regnum Coelorum veniant. When hee had disabled the Christians of all Ex Epist. Iulian. ad Ecebolum. command, either in the Field or Common-wealth, (as he did Iouinian, Valentinian & Valens, after Empe∣rours) he would say, he did it because their Gospell ta∣keth Hieron. Cassiodorus. Socrates. from them Potestatem Gladij. And wheresoeuer any poore Christian implored the hand of Iustice a∣gainst wrong and violence, they returned with no better redresse, then that it was the rule of their Reli∣gion, perferre iniurias, it was the dutie of their Profes∣sion to beare all iniuries. And although most Authors agree that hee stained not his gouernment with the bloud of any Catholikes, well knowing that gore of Persecution is the seed of the Gospell; yet some affirme that when Apolloes Oracle, neere Antioch, had lost his power of answer by the holy presence of Babillaes bo∣die Sabellicus. Socrates. lib. 3. ca. 11. (there martyred and intombed) and that the Chri∣stians in remoouing it away, sung solemnly the Psalm, Let all them be confounded which worship grauen Images: this Emperour (although the Act was his direction, though not the order) grew so inraged, that hee put then many Christians to the sword. Of the prudence and learning of this man there be His prudence. many notable monuments remaining: for in all the courses of his life he did rather labour to content the parts of his vnderstanding, then of his sensualitie, of∣ten being heard to say, Turpe esset sapienti, cùm habeat animum, captare laudes ex corpore: and therefore wri∣ting to Ecdicius, Prefect of Aegypt, to helpe him to the Epist. Iulian. ad Ecdicium praef. Aegypt. Bookes of George Bishop of Alexandria, hee saith, Where others delighted in Horse and Hawkes, I haue beene from my infancie inflamed with the loue of Books. Many works there were of his owne pen, though now raked vp in the ruines of the time. As his Oration to Iamblicus, and other Volumes of various learning, remembred by Suidas: yet is there Suidas. extant that wittie Satyre of his, of all the Caesars. The Register of his Epistle, full of worthy obserua∣tions. Iulian. Imp. Caesa∣res. His discourse De Regno, wherein hee deciphereth Iul. Imp. Epist. Lib. Iul. de prae∣claris actionibus. Hymnus Iulian. in Solem. much of his Persian Actions. His Hymne to the Sunne, a song of a high straine, and of a matchlesse delicacie, if the subiect had not beene too prophane. As for his Misopogon, (where playing with his own Misopogon vel Antiochensis. person and beard, he sharply reprehendeth the Anti∣ochians of their intemperance in frequenting Stage-Plaies; of their impietie, in changing Iupiter and Apollo (Gods of their Forefathers) into the Christ of the Ga∣lileans; and of couetousnesse in their Magistrates, in selling Iustice) it is one of the wittiest Inuectiues ex∣tant of those middle times. In the course of his Religion hee is by the Writers His Religion. of his owne affection and time rather reported super∣stitious then deuout; and his fancies therein rather to them accounted ridiculous then religious. Such was Marcel. lib. 25. the excesse and waste of Oxen in his sacrifices, that it is beleeued if his returne had beene from the Persicke Expedition, there would haue beene want of them to supply his Rites, and therefore they might happily say as the white Oxen did of the Emperour Marcus, Si tu viceris, nos perimus. Yet were his rules of order to the Priests of his superstitious zeale, such as may well become the most religious Church-man of our age to imitate: for he prohibited those Priests from gaze of Stage-Playes, frequenting Tauernes, or exercising Ex Iulian Epist. ad Pon. Galatiae. any foule or illiberall profession, perswading them to imitate the Christians, whose bounty to strangers in distresse, charity in burying the dead, and whose hum∣ble manners and sanctitie of life (though but dissem∣bled) had so much increased their Profession. (6) His fortitude appeareth in the processe of his His Fortitude. Martiall Actions. At three and twenty yeeres hee was made by Constantine his nephew Caesar, matched to Marcel. lib. 15. his sister Helena, and sent in person to restraine those barbarous Nations that had forced in vpon the Ro∣man Limits. But whether this imploiment was groun∣ded vpon the Emperours owne feare to aduenture his person against these Sauages, a desire to nurture this mere Scholar his brother in law in more princely manners, who then was rude; or to expose him (in respect of some iealousy in State) to an assured perill: it remaineth doubtfull. Only himselfe saith, that he that bestowed his Title of Caesar, libenter dabat; & qui Ex Epist. Iulian Maximo Phyloso∣pho. accepit, omninò recusabat: for in it hee gained nothing but vt occupatior interiret, taking this his Expedition against those Inrodes, as a banishment into the Herci∣nian Desert, vt tanquam venator cum feris bellaret: and beleeuing himselfe rather thereby called out to an ex∣pected death, then intended honour. But this man then neither of opinion or hope, and who should haue seemed to haue effected a point of excellent ser∣uice, if hee had no more but defended the frontiers, and repelled the Enemies, did by his valour performe no lesse then deeds of admiration. Hee recouered the reuolted Cities of Gallia, ouer∣throwing seuen of the mightiest German Princes in one set Battle. Hee sent to Rome Chonodomarius and Badonearius, two of their greatest Kings, as spoiles to adorne the Amian. lib. 16. Trophey, and attend the triumph of Constantius. Hee forced on euery side those to feare his power, that had so long beene fearefull to the Roman Empire. And had he returned home, borne vp only with the merit of this his seruice, and opinion of the world, and not beene blowne beyond the bounds of his old mode∣ration by a new desire, hee had escaped the imputa∣tion of ambition and treacherie, and beene esteemed a iust successour, against whom he is deemed now an vniust vsurper. But it may be said that it was a diuine power that inspired it, and a strong hand that infor∣ced him to it: for from aboue the Porch of his en∣trance, into one of the regained Cities, the Wreath of Laurell (reserued an ornament of that place) fell in wonder vpon his head. The Genius of Rome in many apparitions chiding & reprehending his slow desire to affect the Empire, and restore the State. As tou∣ching his election, he calleth the Gods to witnesse his vn∣willingnesse, and the publike protestation he made against it at Paris, when he was there by the tumultuous Armie sa∣luted Augustus. And although by the great prouision made by him of Corne from Britannie, to hold a foot the Armie against the plots of Constantius (that grew now enuious of his fortune, hee may seeme to haue intended the ruine of his Soueraigntie) yet doth hee by the Gods of his greatest confidence, Iupiter and the Sunne, protest, Quod Constantium occidere nunquam op∣tauit, imò ne id accideret exoptauit. (7) But Constantius ending this quarrell and com∣petition by his death, Iulian, whom a Pithonist had de∣luded with the hope of Persia, telling him that his fortunes should be as his feature, like Great Alexan∣der, bred in him a thirstie desire after the surname Per∣sicus: whereupon hee prepared an Armie for this ex∣pedition, and seeking the fauor of his Gods the Moone, Fortune, and Mars, embrued their Altars with the Sabellicus lib. 22. cap. 2. Iulian his sacri∣fices. Blood of an hundred Buls at once; though manie omi∣nous signes, as they were interpreted by his Philoso∣phers and Southsaiers, forbad the same. Such was the great Earthquake happening in Bithynie, that swallow∣ed vp the Citie of Nicomedia. Riuers likewise are saide An Earthquake. to stand drie, euen in the heart of winter; and Springs forgetting their vsuall boilings, yeelded not foorth their wonted waters: yea and if wee will beleeue the reporters; his successe was foreshewed by the depar∣ture of an Angell, and by a Meteor gliding in the Aire. All which hee sought to preuent, by pacifying Sabell. lib. 25. ca. 2. his Heathenish Gods with multitudes of Sacrifices: and with an Armie extended ten miles in length, entred An Army rea∣ching ten mile. Persia, cutting asunder the Bridges by which hee pas∣sed ouer his men, to adde to them more of resoluti∣on, as their meanes were lesse of returne, refusing all humble submission and composition offred him by their King; and at the place then called Phrygia, ioi∣ned Battle against Surena, a great Commander among the Persians, and Merenes, Generall of their Horse, ac∣companied with two of the Kings sonnes, whose powers not able to resist the Romans, gaue backe and fledde. Iulian either vpon a vaine confidence, or sudden Alarum, had forgot to arme himselfe with his Corslet or Brigandine; and in following the disarraied flight of the Persians, lift vp his hands in signe of victorie: at which very instant a Iauelin strucke thorow his left Iulian strucke in∣to the body with a Dart. Arme into the short Ribbes, and stucke in the nether lappet of his Liuer; which whilest he endeuoured to plucke out, did cut the sinewes of his fingers: wherat altogether distracted, hee fell forwards vpon his hor∣ses maine, and thence was carried vnto his Pa . From whose hand this Iauclin came (faith Amianus) Amianus. lib. 25. . 3. God only knoweth. Some report the Caster to haue beene a fugitiue Persian: others say that from the hand of one of his owne Souldiers it proceeded: and Cali∣stus one of his owne Guard, that wrote this Battle in Heroicall Verse, affirmeth, that by some wicked Fiend S es lib 3. cap 18. or Diuell, this Iauelin run him thorow. Howsoeuer, there are that report that in pulling out this Launce, lib. 6. c. . T d. lib. 3. c. 25. Sabell. us. and casting it into the aire with his bloud, hee should vtter this blasphemous speech, and say, Thou hast ouer∣come me, O Galilean. At his setting foorth he vowed to his Gods a Sacrifice of Christians bloud, if hee returned Conquerour, but he performed it with his owne. His slaine Corpes was carried to Tarsus a City in Cilicia, where with small pompe of Funerall Obsequies it was interred neere to the Cities side; which place himselfe to that purpose had formerly assigned: although Nazianzen affirmeth the earth to haue opened, and in a flame of Sulphur to haue sucked vp his body into her Wombe. (8) Thus ended this Emperour, the twenty sixth of Iune, in the two and thirtieth yeere of his age, and three hundred sixty and three of Christs Natiuitie, when he had raigned Augustus neere three, and Caesar full seuen yeeres. Whose wit and eloquence needs no further testimonie then the Monuments of his owne Pen; nor his religious zeale more then the Function his youth so worthily performed in the Christian Church. His Imperiall Vertues we see match him in storie with Titus, in moderation with Aurelius, and for successe in warre, with Traian; three of the most excellent Princes: and his fortune was to see boun∣ded within his sole greatnesse, what the hand of right and sword of tyrannie had so late dispersed. But now one Errour, his Apostasie, disroabing him of all his Morall Vertues, leaues him an obiect naked to the vul∣gar eie, but as a Monster of men, and marke of infa∣mie. I hold it therefore fitting no lesse the vse, then the iustice of a Storie, to doe him (as I haue done) all his right: since in him we learne that all those admi∣rable endowments of Nature, embelished with all the morall and internall graces that Art could adde, are not the base of holinesse, without diuine grace; nor dalliance of Fortune, and fulnesse of Empire (that made this man wanton and forgetfull) is the center of secu∣ritie and happinesse, without heauenly protection: since from the sense of Sacred Pietie hee fell to Pagan Superstition: for many are called, but few are chosen; Matth. 20. 16. and in the seat of Presumptuous Maiestie he felt the rod of Diuine Reuenge. Discite Iustitiam moniti, & non temnere Diuos. FLAVIVS IOVIANVS. CHAPTER XLIX. Fla. Iouianus. Emp. T He mindes of the whole Army being much distra∣cted An. Do. 364. by the death of Iu∣lian; the next day, being Iune twenty seuen, they met, and consulted vpon a new Emperour: where for a while two factions were maintained, & with equall deserts argued, till lastly in one accord they both agreee vpon Marcellinus, saith Eutrop. Salustus, a man very honourable and wise, but withall aged and weake, and therefore hee absolutely refused the election. Iouianus by them then was nominated, in regard of his fathers deserts indifferently commen∣ded, saith Amianus: but Rufinus, Theodoret, and Socra∣tes attribute great worths vnto himselfe, and confi∣dently Rufi . Hist. lib. 10. affirme his vnwillingnesse to accept of that dignitie, for that the whole Armie had yeelded to Iu∣lians Idolatrous Edicts, openly professing himselfe to be a Christian, and withall protesting that he would not be a Soueraigne ouer an Ethnicke Empire, vntill by the instance of the Souldiers, which declared them∣selues likewise; to be Christians, he did accept of the same. (2) His Father was Varonianus, by birth an Hun∣garian, a Captaine of good note, who not long before Iouianus his Pa∣rentage. had laid downe his charge of warre, and retired into his Country, to a more quiet course of life. Himselfe serued Iulian the Apostata in his Campe; from whence he departed by vertue of his Edict, commanding all Christians out of his pay, among whō Iouianus, his pietie. Iouinianus (as wee haue said) chose rather to cast from him his Sword and Girdle, (marks of honour to Military Pro∣fessors) then to forsake the Ensigne of his Heauen∣lie Chieftaine, and the Badge of his Christian Pro∣fession. (3) No sooner was he clad in the Purple Robe, but one Iouianus (a Roman Ensigne-bearer, lately at vari∣ance with this new Elected Emperor, then a priuate man) fearing the danger of so powerfull an Enemie stepped now aboue the degree of the common sort, reuolted to the Persians; and hauing good accesse, in∣formed King Sapores of the death of Iulian, (to them till then vnknowne) and disabling Iouianus for an Vn∣skilfull and Effeminate Captaine, both incouraged the Enemie; and gaue directions how to take the aduan∣tage. The Persian as ready to execute as ioyous to heare, set forward his forces, his Elephants leading the way, whose terrible brayings and fearesull ap∣proach much affrighted the Roman Souldiers. A sore battell was fought, and fountaines of bloud drawne from the sides of both parts: wherein, with an infi∣nite number of Persians, Iulianus, Macrobius, and Maxi∣mus, three Roman Tribunes, of those Legions that then were the Principall of the whole Army, were slaine: in regard whereof, and especially for want of Victuall, (whose scarsitie then was such, that for one Pecke of Meale, ten peeces of Gold were giuen) Iouianus made Peace with the Persians for thirty yeeres, giuing them fiue Prouinces beyond Tigris, some Cities and Forts in Mesopotamia, whereof Nisibis is named for one that Amian. Marcell. lib. 25. cap. 13. Cassiod. Tripar. hist. lib. 7. had been the very sinewes and strength of the Con∣fines, euer since the Warres of Mithridates: for which his doings, he is taxed by Eutropius and Amianus (who both liued in his daies) and of most the deed is held very dishonourable to the greatnesse of the Roman Empire: howbeit diuers others excuse him very iustly, considering the extreame misery and famine wherein Paulus Orosius. Sabellicus. Iulianus left the Army, which was in apparant hazard to be giuen ouer for a pray to the Enemy, to the in∣dangering of the whole Empire, had it not been thus preuented: and therefore they highly commend him heerein, as the onely Preseruer of the Roman Army. (4) Howsoeuer, he is highly commended by So∣crates, Socrates Scl . lib. 3. cap. 20. (the continuer of Eusebius his History) who flourished aboue Twelue hundred yeeres since; for his constant faith grounded vpon the Nicen Creed, and for his Louing Reuerence to the Christian Bishops, recal∣ling Bishops recalled from banish∣ment. from banishment those that Constantius and Iu∣lian had exiled; among whom, Athanasius of Alexan∣dria was one: putting downe the Idolatrous Temples of the Gentiles, and restoring to their Offices both in Court and Campe, those who for their Conscience had been expulsed. (5) At his departure from Persia, hee visited the Citie Tarsus, where he caused the Sepulchre of Iulian Iouianus ador∣neth Iulians tombe. (though otherwise he had found him auerse both in Affection, and Religion, yet for that hee was his prece∣ding Emperor) to be richly adorned: and taking An∣tioch in his way for many daies together was troub∣led with some accidents, which that age did take for Ominous signes. For the Statue of Maximianus Caesar, standing at the entrance into the Kings Palace, let fall the Ball or Globe out of his hand, no force mouing it: horrible sounds and noises were heard within the Consistory: and Blazing-starres appeared at Noone∣day. A Blazing starre seene at Noone∣day. Thence therefore in greatt haste he marched, and at Ancyra, declared his sonne Varronianus his Caesar, a ve∣rie Infant, whose Wrawlings and vnwillingnesse to ride in the Imperiall Chariot, portended (saith Amianus) that which after happened. For hasting still towards Constantinople, he came to Dadastana, a place that di∣uideth Bithynia and Galatia asunder, and there died suddenly of the obstructions and stopping of the Lungs, caused by the dampe of a new mortered Cham∣ber Sabellicus. wherein he lay; or (as others write) by coales there set to dry the new seeling, whose vapors hauing no issue, stifled him to death, the seuenteenth day of Fe∣bruary, Iouianus death. His raigne. Amianus Mare. lib. 25. cap. 14. Socrates eccles. hist. lib. 3. cap. 22. the yeere of the worlds redemption, three hundred sixtie foure; after hee had raigned seuen moneths, and twenty two daies, aged thirty three yeeres. (6) For his personage, he was of goodly presence, Iouianus shape and disposition. both tall and big, his gesture graue, his eyes gray, and countenance pleasant: an affectionate louer & profes∣sor he was of the Christian religion, of indifferēt lear∣ning himselfe, but a most honorable imbracer thereof in others; very precise and considerate in choosing of Iudges and Magistrates; facile and familiar to his ser∣uitors about him. His Blemishes were these, that hee was a great feeder, and giuen to wine; and somewhat to that other Vice which vsually accompanieth such intemperancies. FLAVIVS VALENTINIANVS, Emp. FLAVIVS VALENS,— CHAPTER L. Flauius Va∣lentinianus, Emp. Flauius Va∣lens, Emp. P Resently vpon the death of Iouianus, by a secret An. Do. 364 whispering and running ru∣mor, Equitius, Tribune of the Scutarij was nomina∣ted Amianus Mar. lib. 26. cap. 5. Emperor, a man na∣turally rigorous, and rude; and therefore disliked of the better aduised, and no further followed. But frō him, their voices turned to Ianuarius, a kinsman to the last deceased Iouianus, at that present Gouernor of Illyricum. But he also reiected, Valentinianus, then ab∣sent, was Elected at Nice, as a fit and meet person for the managing of their Warres, and good of the Weale∣publike. Socrates in eccles. hist. lib. 4. cap. 1. (2) His birth was of Pannonia, in the Citie Ciba∣las, of meane and poore parentage; the sonne of Gra∣cian spoken of before, who by trade was a Rope-seller, but of great strength; and therefore by seruice prefer∣red Chap. 47. sect. 4. to places of account, and had been made Ruler of Britaine. His owne life likewise was spent in seruice of Warre, and was ere-while a Captaine ouer the Targa∣tiers: but Iulian requiring him either to Sacrifice to his Gods, or to leaue his place; he chose rather to lay aside his Belt then his Faith and Christianitie, as likewise Io∣uianus Valentinianus a Christian. had done; and so for neglecting a little honour then, he had now a farre greater bestowed on him by the disposer of all Earthly Kingdomes. The Estate so vrging it, he made Valens (his Brother) Partner in the Empire, the trumpets euery where sounding Warres throughout the Roman World. For the Almans inua∣ded Gaul and Rhaetia, the Sarmatians and Quadi made spoile of Pannonia: the Picts, Saxons, Scots, and Atta∣cots infested the Britaines: the Austorians made roades into Africa: the Gothes ransacked Thracia, and the Per∣sians entred Armenia. For which cause, Valens remai∣ned to defend the East, and Valentinianus tooke his Theodoret. progresse into the West, where in three Battels vnder the conduct of Iouinus, hee discomfited the Almans: and Valens likewise ouercame and beheaded Proco∣pius; whose feature we haue here expressed, a dange∣rous Vsurper in the East. (3) But in Britaine things prospered not so well: Amian. Marcel. l b. 17. cap. 7. for by the generall bandings of the foresaid Nations, their old Enemies, the Prouince was sore distressed and brought to extreame misery. For Nectaridius, Ad∣mirall of the British Fleet they slew, and Balchobaudes Lord Warden of the Marches, by a traine of these bar∣barous Nectaridius slaine. people, was forelaid & assailed on euery side. The intelligence of which occurrences, when it was brought to Rome with great horror, the Emperor first sent hither Seuerus, Steward of his House, if fortune would happily speed his hand, to redresse whatsoeuer had happened amisse. But he in short time being cal∣led away, had not the hap to see the wished successe. Then Iouinus, famous for his Warres in Germany, came into the same parts; and seeing the puissance of the Enemy, meant to craue aid of the Auxiliarie Forces, the vrgent necessitie requiring so much: at last, in regard of many (and those fearefull) accidents, which rumor continually reported, touching the state of this Iland, hither was designed Theodosius, a man esteemed most happy, and approued for his Martiall prowesse, who with a bold resolution and select power both of Horse and Foote, set forward for Britaine. (4) The Picts at that time were diuided into two Nations, to wit, Deucalidones and Westerne Picts. Vesturiones. The Attacots likewise a warlike kinde of people, and the Easterne Picts. Scots ranging in diuers parts, wasted all where they went. As for the Tracts of Gaule, the Frankners and Saxons their neere confined neighbours, wheresoeuer they could breake foorth, and make Roades by Sea or Land, made hauocke heere by seizing of Booties, firing of Townes, in killing of men and women, and leading away Captiues. To stay these wofull miseries, if the Heauens had beene so benigne, this valiant Captaine intended a voyage to this Britaine so called. our end of the World: and comming to Bolog . Bononia, which lieth diuided from the opposite tract of Land by a narrow Channell ebbing and flowing with terrible Tides, where the waters are seene sometimes to match the highest Mountaine, and againe to settle with the Ieuell of the Plaines, without any harme of Sailers or Passage: this Sleue with a gentle course hee crossed, and arriued at Ribchester. Rutupie, a quiet Roade and Harbour ouer against it: from whence after that the Bactauians, the Heruli, Iouij, and Victores (Companies bold and confident in their strengths) were come, he marched towards Lundinium, an anci∣ent Citie, which posterities afterwards named Augu∣sta: London called Augusta. and hauing seuered his Troopes into sundry parts, he charged vpon those companies of rouing and rob∣bing enemies, euen when they were heauie laden with Booties and spoiles, and were driuing away before them both Men and Women bound for their Captiues, be∣sides much Cattle, and a great Prey. These hee soone discomfited, and restored to the poore distressed Tri∣butaries their Liberties and Losses, bestowing some small parcels thereof among his weary and well-de∣seruing Souldiers: and entred the City with exceeding Theodosius ioiful∣lie receiued into London. great ioy, in manner of a Petty-triumph, which ere∣while was ouer-whelmed with Calamities, but now on the sudden refreshed and set in perfect safety. (5) Vpon this prosperous successe encouraged to greater attempts, hee abode yet doubtfull of the fu∣ture, casting with himselfe many proiects, which poi∣sed Fortunes Scales alike: but lastly by certaine Captiues and Fugitiues hee learned that those Companies of sun∣dry fierce Nations, spread so farre and diffusedly vpon the face of the Prouince, could not be vanquished, vn∣lesse it were by sleights and stratagemes. By Edicts therefore he first proclaimed impunitie to such as had forsaken their Colours, if they would returne; wherby many which had run to the Enemie, or at their owne pleasures had beene dispersed into diuers parts, came in, and by their countenance declared their resoluti∣ons in his behalfe. Notwithstanding, mistrusting the euent, and pensiue still with cares, hee thought good to call to his assistance Ciuilis, a man of great vnder∣standing, quicke spirit, and withall an vpright Iusticer, who was to rule Britaine as Deputie, and likewise Dul∣citius a Captaine, renowned for his skill and deedes of Armes. (6) After Consultation with them, hauing gotten Amianus Marcel. lib. 28. cap. 7. courage, and departing from Augusta with a power of Souldiers, which in his politike industrie he had leui∣ed and trained to his hand, hee brought exceeding great succour euery where vnto the troubled and confused state of the Britaines, gaining before hand such places in each part, as might giue aduantage to annoy the barbarous Enemie; and enioined the Com∣mon Souldiers no seruice, whereof himselfe tooke not the Assay with a cheerefull heart: in this sort perfor∣ming as well the Offices of an Actiue and hardy Soul∣dier, as the carefull charge of a right-noble Generall, he discomfited & put to flight diuers Nations, whom insolent Pride (fed with security) had incited and set on fire, to inuade the Romans Territories; and so resto∣red wholly vnto their former state the Cities and Ca∣stles which had sustained many losses, and established a sure peace for a long time following. (7) Now there happened whiles he atchieued these exploits, a dangerous matter likely to haue bro∣ken out into great mischiefe, had it not beene quen∣ched in the very beginning of the enterprise: for one Valentinus of Valeria Pannonia, a man of a proud spirit, first Deputy Leiutenant and after president, for some notable offense banished into Britaine, as Frontinus immediately before had beene, as one impatient of rest, like some noisome wilde Beast, vpon a certaine swelling pride, rose vp in commotion against Theodo∣sius, whom hee perceiued to be the only man able to withstand his wicked designes. Howbeit, casting about many waies, both closely and apparantly, as the gale of his vnmeasurable desire rose higher, he so∣licited as well the banished persons as Souldiers, pro∣mising (as the time would affoord) rewards to allure and draw them on to some actuall attempt. Yet when the day came wherein it should haue beene ef∣fected, Theodosius hauing intelligence thereof, surpri∣zed Valentinus with some few of inward complices, and deliuered them vnto Dulcitius, to be put to death Valentinus a Re∣bell put to death. accordingly. But in his militarie skill and policie, (wherein hee was reputed to haue exceeded all men liuing in those daies) gessing at future dangers, hee Theodosius an ex∣pert Warriour. inhibited all Inquisitions to be made touching the rest of the Conspirators, lest so generall a feare surprising at once, and spread abroad among many those tempe∣stuous troubles of the Prouinces, which were now well allaied, should reuiue againe. (8) Therefore turning himselfe from this busi∣nesse to the reforming of such enormities as were of most consequence, now that all dangers were quite ouer-blowne, he reedified the Cities, repaired the Ga∣rison Castles, and fortified the Frontiers with standing Watches, and strong Fore-fenses. And thus hauing re∣couered the Prouince againe which had yeelded sub∣iection to the Enemies, he reduced it vnto the pristine Estate, so as by his meanes and motion it had againe a lawfull Gouernour appointed, and also named it VA∣LENTIA, in honour of Valentinianus the Emperor. Britaine called Valentia. (9) The Areans, a kinde of men (as witnesseth Amianus) instituted by those of ancient times for po∣liticke Amian Marcel. lib. 28. cap. 7. imploiments, who by little and little were fal∣len into disorders and vices, he remooued from their Areans remoued from their Sta∣tions. Siations, as being manifestly conuicted, for that (in∣duced with the greatnesse of rewards receiued or pro∣mised) they had diuers times discouered vnto the Barbarous whatsoeuer was done or debated betwixt the President and his Counsell: for indeed their charge was to runne to and fro by long iournies, to intimate and make knowne vnto the Romans Captaines vpon the Marches, what doings and stirres were among the Neighbour-Nations; whereby they had great oppor∣tunities both to know and reueale the secrets of the State. (10) And thus Theodosius hauing managed most excellently these affaires, was sent for to the Empe∣rours Court; who leauing the Prouince ouer-ioied for their Peace, was no lesse famous for his many impor∣tant Victories, then was either Furius Camillus, or Pa∣pinius Theodosius com∣parable to Ca∣millus. Cursor. And being honourably accompanied and attended vnto the Narrow Seas, with the heartie loue and fauour of all men, departed, and with a gen∣tle gale of winde passed ouer, and came to the Princes Campe, where (being receiued with ioy and praise) he succeeded in the roome of Valens Iouinus, who had the conduct of the Horsemen. For these his Martiall deeds so happily atchieued, in honour of him there was a Statue erected, resembling a Man of Armes on Horsebacke, as by Symmachus may be vnderstood, thus speaking to his sonne Theodosius: The Author of your Symmachus. kindred and stocke, Captaine Generall both in Africke and Britaine, was (among other ancient Titles) consecrated by the most honourable Order with Statues of Knighthood. And in his commendations, Claudian with full note thus poetically sang: Ille Caledonijs posuit qui Castra pruinis, Qui medios Libyae sub Casside pertulit aestus. Claudian in praise of Theodosius. Terribilis Mauro, debellator{que} Britanni Littoris, ac pariter Boreae vastator & Austri. Quid rigor aeternus? Coeli quid sydera prosunt? Ignotum{que} fretum? Maduerunt Saxone fuso Orcades, incaluit Pictorum sanguine Thule, Scotorum cumulos fleuit glacialis Hiberne. In Caledonian frosts his Tents he pight, And Lybiaes scorching heat endur'd in Field: The Coleblacke Moores, and Britaines faire, in fight He queld, and forc'd both South and North to yeeld. What then auaild cold Clime, strange Seas, or Starres, When Orkney Iles he drencht with Saxons gore; When Thule did reake with Picts bloud spilt in warres, And Ireland did huge heapes of Scots deplore? (11) Strange and dreadfull were the signes that in the third yeere of this Emperour chanced; as Earth∣quakes, Dreadfull sights, and fearefull Earthquakes. Amian. Marcell. lib. 26. cap. 14. Inundations, and the like; whereof Marcellinus thus reporteth: A little after the Sunne-rising (saith he) the waighty and steddy masse of the whole Earthly Globe shooke, flashes of lightning very thicke and fierce going be∣fore: the Sea also driuen aside, and the waues and billowes so preposterously tumbling and retiring back, that the deepe Gulfes being discouered and laid empty, a man might haue seene sundry sorts of swimming creatures sticking in the Gulfes of the Sea laid bare, and many Cities drowned. mudde: Also the vast Vallies and Rockes, which Nature had set farre away vnder the huge Waters, did now behold the Beames of the Sunne; insomuch that many Ships were bedded fast in the drie ground, and flockes of people stragled at their pleasure in the small remaines of water, to take vp Fishes as the Sea-spoile; when on the sudden the waues dis∣daining to be thus dispossessed, returned with such violent beating vpon the Ilands and Promontories, which lay farre into the Sea, as that they ouer-slowed, and laid leuell an in∣finite number of buildings and Cities. And therefore in this furious discord of the Elements, the surface of the world being couered, represented strange and wonderfull sights. Among which S. Ierome reporteth, that there Paulus Orosius. S. Ierome. Wooll rained from Heauen. rained Wooll from Heauen so perfect and good, that no bet∣ter grew vpon the Sheepe, the naturall Producer. But to returne. (12) Fraomarius, whom Valentinianus had ordai∣ned to be King of the Bucinobantes in Germanie, was Amian. Marcell. lib. 29. cap. 9. Fraomarius made King of the Buci∣nobantes. made Tribune and Colonell ouer a Regiment of Almains in Britaine, which for number and valour in those daies were renowned; where (no doubt) matter e∣nough was ministred for him to worke vpon, but the death of the Emperour presently following, admits no mention of further discourse: which happened in this manner: The Quadi after many molestations done to the Roman Legions and their Confederates, sent their Ambassadours vnto him, desiring pardon for their for∣mer faults committed, and an abolishment of all re∣membrances thereof: conference, suddenly the bloud mouth; and being laid vpon his ¦ed of an Apoplexie, or rath r of the Plague, Markes appearing vpon his dead body gaue ∣cture: Nouember the seuenth, of his age fiftie fiue yeeres, hauing raigned eleuen yeeres, eight moneths, and two daies, in the yeere of our Christ three hun∣dred seuenty fiue. (13) For presence, he was Maiesticall, of bodie fat, his complexion faire, his eies gray, and hauing therwith somwhat a scue cast, his haire shining bright, his ioints strong and well knit: he was a Prince merci∣full and louing, and mitigated many Tributes for∣merly imposed on the Prouinces: a wise Warriour, sterne in countenance, hastie of speech, and chast body, a good Iusticer, and impatient of all delaies. But these his Vertues with some Vices were accompanied: for he is taxed with enuie and partialitie, in punishing seuerely the poore Souldier for small offenses, but re∣missiue to the faults of their Captaines and Leaders, and that was the cause (by Amianus his report) of the troubles in Britaine, the losses in Africke, and the wa∣sting in Illyricum. (14) His Arian brother Valens suruiuing him, Ualens Emperor in the Last. raigned Emperour in the East; by whose sufferance the Barbarous Gothes entred Thracia, which presently pro∣ued to be the bane of the Roman World, for that these Gothes (a strange and vnknowne People till then) be∣ing forced out of a secret Nooke in Scythia, by the Hog-Backt Hunnes, rushing as an vnresistable Whirle-Winde from those High Mountaines, infested the Coasts Amian. Marcell. lib. 31. cap. 34. about Danubius, and obtained licence from Valens to passe the Riuer Donaw into Thracia, where long in quiet they staied not, but like a violent Floud running with a full currant, they ouer-whelmed all before them, ouercomming the Romans in many Battles, and Gothes ouercome the Romans. Ualens slaine. in one slew the Emperour Valens, with most of his ap∣prooued Captaines, and twenty fiue Tribunes that had charge of Regiments, the third part of his Armie hardly escaping vnslaine. Some report that Valens flying the Field, tooke into a house neere Adrianople, whither being pursued by the Enemie, and his Hold fi∣red vpon his head, was therein burned to ashes, after he had sate Emperour fourteene yeeres. FLAVIVS GRACIANVS— Emp. FLA. VALENTINIANVS IVNIOR, CHAPTER LI. Gracianus & Valentinia∣nus Emp. G Racianus, the Eldest Sonne of Valentinianus, by his Empresse Seuera, was made An. Do. 376. his fathers Collegue in the Empire in the fourth yeere Amianus Mar. lib. 27. cap. 5. Gracian and Va∣lentinian Emp. of his Raigne: notwith∣standing six daies after his death, his second Sonne Valentinian, a Childe of Foure yeeres old, by the ad∣uice of the Counsell and generall consent of the Camp, was also stiled and proclaimed Emperor. These Bre∣thren Lib. 30. cap. 13. liued in much loue, and ruled in the West, as their vncle Valens did in the East, of whom wee last spake. And albeit Gracian had cause of displeasure, that this his Younger Brother was thus aduanced without his al∣lowance; yet he as a Prince kind and naturall, regar∣ded his Brother exceedingly, and brought him vp in Gracian louing to Valentinian. all tender affection, forgetting the wrong offered vn∣to himselfe and his owne Mother for Valentinians mo∣thers sake. (2) The Mother of this Valentinian was Iustina, a damsell of an admirable feature and exceeding beau∣tie, Iustina mother of young Valen∣tinian. surpassing all other women so farre, that the Em∣presse her selfe fell in loue with her, and vsually con∣uersed with her familiarly as her equall, imparting her most priuate secrets vnto her as her trustie Coun∣seller, and often bathing together in the same Bath. Neither was her ardent affection contained within the measure of Womanish modestie, insomuch as she re∣frained Sorates eccles. hist. lib. 4. cap. 25. not in the hearing of the Emperour (her Hus∣band) to extoll her incomparable▪ beautie, prefer∣ring her far aboue any creature in the World. Where∣upon Valentinianus so farre affected this Lady, as that Ualentinianus marrieth Iustina, by whom be had young Valen∣tinian. he tooke her to his Wife; by whom he had this young Valentinian, and also three Daughters, notwithstanding Seuera was yet liuing. (3) The stormes of the Gothes as a violent tem∣pest beating still against the Shoares of the Roman Prouinces, caused Gracian to beare Sayle toward the safest Harbour, and to commit the guidance of his shippe to the most assured Pilot: their forces being so great, and their outrages so terrible, that hee thought it best not to aduenture his owne person, but to imploy some other approoued Cap∣taine. For which exploit, none was held more suf∣ficient then Theodosius, the Sonne of that Theodosius who was so famous for his British Warres, and whose life was taken away by Valens the Easterne Emperour. Him he made first Captaine Generall of the Roman Em∣pire, and immediatly vpon his first seruice against the Theodosius, Cap∣taine generall of the Roman Em∣pire, and fellow Emperor. Gothes, his Fellow Emperor and Augustus, allotting him those parts in the East, that his vncle Valens lately had enioyed. (4) In many Battels, fought to the last drop of bloud, this worthy Generall ouercame the Gothes, so Theodosius ouer∣commeth the Gothes. that their King Athanarius was lastly inforced to sue for his Peace, which vpon honourable compositions was graunted, and himselfe in most princely manner entertained by Theodosius in the Imperiall Citie Con∣stantinople; where falling sicke after three moneths, he Aurelius Victor. Pauls Orosius. died, and was both much lamented, and sumptuously buried by the Emperor. These reports caused Sapor, the most puissant King of Persia, to submit himselfe vnto Theodosius, and by his Ambassadors, attending his Sapor King of Persia. Court, obtained his Amitie. Thus gloriously raigning and perfect peace established, he ordained his young sonne Arcadius his Fellow Emperor in the East. (5) But the affaires in the Westerne Empire procee∣ded nothing so fortunately: for Gracian a meeke and soft spirited man, ballanced with Theodosius, was held without regard; and Valentinian by his Prefect Probus, held both Rome and Italy at his deuotion; onely Gallia obeyed Gracian. For Clemens Maximus borne in Spaine, but descended lineally from Constantine the Clemens Maxi∣mus rebelleth. Cambden. Great, by his affability and liberal carriage, had wonne the affections of the Britaines to side with him; a man, no doubt, both Valiant and Wise, had he held his al∣leagiance to his Soueraigne Lord. But the time fitting his purposes, when the Scots and Picts with their won∣ted Ann. Do. 381. inroads, sore indamaged the Prouince, he set him∣selfe for their deliuerance, and therein sped so well, that the Souldiers by constraint (as Oresius saith) forced him to assume the Imperiall Stile and Purple Robe. And Zosimus. Paulus Orosius. so hasting into Gallia, with all the flower and strength well neer of the Britaines forces, arriued in the mouth Clemens Maxi∣mus ssumeth the Imperiall Stile. of Rhene, vnto whom also the Germans Army ioyned, and now accounting himselfe an absolute Monarch, admitted Victor his sonne, then Caesar, to be partner of his Empire, whose Stampe therefore with his fa∣ther we haue here annexed. (6) Thus Maximus establishing his throne at Tri∣ers, Spread his wings (saith Gyldas) the one into Spaine, the other into Italy, and with the terror of his Name, leuied Tributes and Pensions for Souldiers pay, of the most fell and sauage Germans. Against him Gracianus made his power, but after fiue daies skirmishings was forsaken of his own Soul∣diers, and so put to flight. And now deiected and de∣stitute of meanes to maintaine his quarrell, hee sent Ambrose (a great Doctor of the Church) his Ambassa∣dor vnto Maximus, to intreat for Peace, which in out∣ward shew was granted, but was farre otherwise inten∣ded, as the sequell proued. For seeking his death, he did shortly after effect it in this wise: He caused Let∣ters, and reports to be giuen vnto Gracian, that his Clemens Maxi∣mus, his strata∣gem against Gracian. Empresse was in iourny to visit him, and withall sent forth a Carroche stuffed with Souldiers, and with them a desperate Captaine named Andragathius. Gracian Andragathius a murtherer. greatly reioycing for his Wifes approach, prepared himselfe to meet Her accordingly, and opening the Litter, thinking to imbrace his Empresse, was by these Ruffins treacherously murthered neere vnto Lyons, Gracian, his death & raigne. when he had raigned fifteene yeeres, and liued twen∣tie nine. Valentinian with his Mother Iustina, fearing the like conspiracies, became supplicants vnto Theo∣dosius in the East against Maximus. (7) He therefore preparing his forces, marched as farre as Aquileta in Lombardie, where Maximus re∣mained both confident and secure. For hauing for∣tified the straits of the Mountaines with sufficient Garrisons, and dammed the Hauens with strength of Ships, himselfe and assisters with great boldnesse pro∣ceeded against Theodosius, and gaue him a battell be∣fore the Citie Syscia in Pannonia, and againe most va∣liantly receiued him in another, vnder the leading of his brother Marcellus; but in both of them was ouer-come. From this last, he secretly retired vnto Aquileia, where of his owne Souldiers he was betraied, and deli∣uered to Theodosius his pursuer; and by him to the Ex∣ecutioner to be beheaded: of which his vnfortunate, but deserued end, the famous Bishop Martinus Turo∣nensis being in Britaine, did foretell him long before. Andragathius also, the Murtherer of Gracian, whose state was now desperate, cast himselfe headlong into the Sea, and made an end of his wicked life. Vector the sonne of Maximus, made his Caesar in France, as we haue said, was defeated, taken Prisoner & slaine. This Victory was held so worthy and memorable, that the Romans from thence forward solemnized that day euery yeere as festiuall, saith Procopius. (8) But these Britaines that had assisted Maximus, as by Writers is recorded, did foribly inuade Armo∣rica, and there planted themselues: From whence saith Beda, the Britaines first arriued into this Iland. But sure∣ly himselfe is either greatly mistaken, or else we mis∣take him altogether, and that rather, for that by Cae∣sar those Coasts that lie vpon the Sea shoares, are cal∣led Armorica, and there the Celtes seated, being the Originall of our Inhabitants, as is holden, and so from thēce they might spread themselues further in∣to these British Ilands, long before it receiued the name of Little Britaine. The like troubles fell to other Pro∣uinces at the same time, by the intestine Warres of the Empire: for the Gaules were molested by the Frankes; Spaine by the Sueuians; and Africk by the Vandals: the East parts by the Heruli, Ostroges, and Hunnes; Italy by the Lombards, and shortly after by the Gothes. (9) These troubles in the Prouinces, caused the Em∣perors to call home their Armies, with Aides of their Allies, & all too little to support their own declining Estates, which now beganne to end of it selfe, and these Emperors raignes to be cut off by their vntimely deaths. But to returne into the path of our History, from whence (by the intangled occasions of these foure Emperours raigning together) we haue wandred; let vs remember what occurrents happened vpon the death of Maximus the Tyrant, and hasten to end the greatnesse of the Empire, which in most Prouinces began to end of it selfe. For Valentinian being rid of his feares, vnto which he had beene subiect; and The∣odosius of his Collegue, vnto whom hee was enforced; great hope was conceiued of a flourishing Estate, but it brought foorth onely the remaines of their downe∣fall: for the one returning to Constantinople in great Triumph, liued not long after; and the other left peace∣ably in the Westerne World, was (as you shall heare) soone made away by Conspiracie. (10) Valentinian remaining at Vienna in France, free from Hostile Enemies, retained in his Court those that sought his life, whereof Arbogastes, a Captaine of a haughty stomacke, politicke, aduenturous, and of Arbogastes a conspitator. great power, but withall of a base Parentage, a stran∣ger and an Infidell, was one; Eugenius a Grammarian, Eugenius a Gram∣marian, another. but now bearing Armes, and of great account, was a∣nother. These corrupting his Chamberlaines, com∣pounded for his death, which they as wickedly per∣formed, by strangling him in his bedde, giuing it forth Valentinian strangled. that the Emperour had hanged himselfe; which was so confidently auouched, that Prosperus in his Addi∣tion to Eusebius writing his death, saith, that it was Prosper . acted by himselfe, after hee had liued twenty six, and Valentinian his raigne. raigned sixteene yeeres, being strangled in the yeere of Grace three hundred eighty foure. FLAVIVS THEODOSIVS. CHAPTER LII. Flau. Theodo∣sius Emp. W E haue declared in the life of the last preceding Em∣perour, An. Do. 392. the Birth and For∣tunes, Warres and Victories of this most worthie The∣odosius, vntill the death of Maximus the Britaine, (for so most writers terme him) and now onely re∣maine his latter Acts in Warre and Peace to bee further related. (2) This Emperour returning from Aquileia in Lombardie vnto Constantinople in the East, long time there staied not, but was drawne againe into the West both to reuenge the death of Valentinian his Fellow-Emperour Theodosius goeth against Arboga∣stes and Eugenius. so trecherously strangled, and also to op∣pose the proceedings of Eugenius, whose Coine wee haue heere expressed, being one of the Murderers then vsurping that portion of the Empire, sided by Arbogastes the other. Eugenius vsurper. (3) Theodosius marching with his forces towards the Confines of Italie found the passages stopped at the foot of the Alps, and his Enemies powers farre sur∣mounting his: Therefore a while to deliberate on these businesses, hee pitched his Tents, and there stai∣ed. In the meane time Eugenius and Arbogastes his as∣sociate had forelaid the Countrey, and hemmed him about in such a strait, that no victuals could bee brought vnto his Campe. (4) No meanes being now left, but either to cleere the passages, or bee ouerthrowne, hee first be∣came supplicant with Fastings and Teares vnto his God, whom he knew to be the God of Hosts, and whom Theodosius prai∣eth to God for victorie. euer he had serued, and whose aid had hitherto neuer failed him: whereupon boldly incouraging his men, he accepted of the Field. But the Battle furiously be∣gunne, fell so sore against him, that ten thousand of his Souldiers were presently slaine; and the rest despai∣ring ready to flie, himselfe at that instant had beene surprized, had not God turned the heart of Arbitio, a Sabellic. Ennead. 7 lib. 9. Captaine of his Enemies, suddenly to come to his side, and to rescue him. Theodosius much daunted by these vnfortunate beginnings, yet conceiued better hopes of the following successe, trusting to the vprightnesse of his Cause, and the helpe of his God, which still he im∣plored, till the Heauens were propitious to his earnest desires. (5) For suddenly a violent tempest arose, and a ra∣ging winde rushed so extreamly on the faces of his Theodosius obtai∣neth victorie. Enemies, that they were in no wise able to withstand it, the power thereof beating backe againe their darts into their owne sides; whereas the arrowes shot from the Emperors part, were thereby forced with double strength to pierce through the Rebels Iron plates, Secrat. Eccl. hist. lib. 5. cap. 24. whereby a most glorious victory was obtained; and Eugenius taken, who lay grouelling at the Emperors feete, deploring his estate, and crauing his pardon; but euen as hee kneeled with cries and teares, the Souldiers standing by strucke off his Head. And Ar∣bogastes the Author of these euils by flight escaping, Eugenius be∣headed. two daies after ran himselfe vpon his Sword, and so reuenged on himselfe his owne wicked actions. This Arbogastes killeth himselfe. victory was atchieued the sixth of September, in the yeere of grace three hundred ninety six, by Socrates account: and was so famous, that besides the Re∣cords of Christian Historians, Claudius a Heathen Poet thus eternizeth the same in his Heroick Poeme. Gods darling deare, the heauens thy souldiers were in arms, And windes conspired to aid and follow thy allarms. (6) Theodosius thus deliuered, repaired vnto Mil∣lan, Theodosius dieth. where worne with yeeres and trauels, shortly af∣ter he sickened vnto death. And sending for his Son Honorius and Ar∣cadius made Em∣perours. Honorius, made him Emperor of the West, and to Ar∣cadius gaue the East, wherein hee had before made him his Caesar. The Prouince of Africa he assigned to Gildus Gouernor of Africa. the gouernment by one Gyldus in his Sonnes behalfe, and in the Non-age of Arcadius appointed Rufinus for Rufinus Gouer∣nour of Constan∣tinople. Stilicho Gouer∣nour of Italia. Constantinople, and Stilicho Tutor to young Honorius in Italie, three most worthy men vndoubtedly, had the greatnesse of their spirits beene contained within the lists of their trust and places. (7) This last named Flauius Stilicho, famous for a long time, and an inward companion with Theodo∣sius, had beene imploied in the Britaines warres against Stilicho somtimes imploied in the British Warres. the inroades of the Scots, Vandals, and Picts, and there∣in had borne himselfe with fortunate successe, as the Poet Claudian implieth, where he bringeth in Britaine thus speaking: Me quo{que} vicinis pereuntem Gentibus, inquit, Stilicho commen∣ded by Claudian for his seruice in Britaine. Muniuit Stilicho, totam quum Scotus Hibernem Mouit, & infesto spumanit remige Thetis. Illius effectum curis, ne bella timerem Scotica, nec Pictum tremerem, ne littore toto Prospicerem dubijs venientem Saxona ventis. And I, saith she, that ready was by bordering foes to perish, When Scots did cause the Irish stirres, then Stilicho did me cherish. When Seas did foame with strokes of Oares, that beat the bellowes backe, His force effecting with his cares, preuented still my wracke: He bad me feare no forraine powers, that Scots or Picts could make, Nor of the Saxons that on Seas, vncertaine courses take. So that being by him freed from those many dan∣gers, and all her enemies ouerthrowne, shee singeth her security by the same Poet. —Domito quod Saxone Thetis Mitior aut fracto secura Britannia Picte. My Seas, though rough are calm'd, sith Saxons conquer'd are, And I securely rest, now Picts are queld in warre. But this her ioy through the Treasons of these three Gouernours, was soone turned into laments and teares, and the whole Empires glory brought to a fatall period, as presently it will appeare. (8) This Theodosius for his Princely parts by all writers is ranked among the very best of all the Em∣perours: Theodosius his vertues. And as he is likened to Traian for his feature and personage, so may he be compared in wisedome to Marcus Aurelius: In temperance with Antoni∣nus Pius: For his Christian profession and deuotion, with Constantine the Great: and for his meeknes, e∣quall to any: Wherof among many other, we haue one example very remarkeable, vpon an offence cō∣mitted by the Inhabitants of Thessalonica, hee com∣manded most seuere punishment to bee inflicted, which was so vnaduisedly executed, that as well the innocent, as the offenders were inuolued therein. He then comming to Millan, would haue entred the Church to haue communicated with other Christi∣ans in their sacred deuotions, which Ambrose, the great Doctor, and Bishop of that Sea (though other∣wise a man of admirable mildnesse) resisted and for∣bad, in which estate the Emperour stood for eight mo∣neths continuance: and then with great humility & Theodosius vpon his submission, absolued by the Church. submission, acknowledgeing his offence was absol∣ued, and againe receiued into the congregation: For preuenting of the like rash offences by him commit∣ted, he then enacted a Lawe, that thirty daies should passe betwixt the sentence of death, and the executi∣on of the Malefactor: And to suppresse his hasty choller (whereunto he was much subiect) his vsuall Theodosius, his Art to suppress anger. manner was to recite the Greeke Alphabet, before hee vttred any speech sauering of that humour. (9) He died Ianuary the seuenteenth, the yeere Socrates eccles. hist. lib. 5. cap. 25. of the worlds happines three hundred ninety fiue: when he had raigned seuenteene yeares, and liued six∣ty, Theodosius his death and pro∣geny. as Aurelius Victor writeth, with whom he ends his History. His first wife was Flacilia, a religious Lady, the Mother of Arcadius and Honorius, by his second wife hee had a daughter named Placidia Galla, first married vnto Athaulpus King of the Gothes, and after his death vnto Constantine, whom Honorius her bro∣ther made Augustus and his fellow Emperour. ARCADIVS Emperours. HONORIVS CHAPTER LIII. Arcadius Emp. East. Honorius Emp. West. F Atall was the Act of The∣odosius, in his Election of the three foresaid Prote∣ctors, Anno 395. whose greatnes car∣ried with a glutted pros∣perity, grew to a surfet af∣ter his death in their am∣bitious thoughts, and was the downefall of the now aged and drooping Em∣pire: first Gildus in Africa, not contented with the title of Comes or Earle, cast off all subiection, and as an Gildus rebelleth. absolute Lord, acknowledged neither Arcadius, nor Paulus Diaconus. Honorius for his Soueraigne. (2) Against these proceedings, his owne brother Mastelzerius opposed himselfe, and both in words Mastelzerius ouer commeth his brother Gildus. and acts assayed to set him in his wonted place of o∣bedience, which by no other means could be brought to passe, but by assistance sent him from Honorius, with which, though much too weake, he marched a∣gainst the Emperours Enemy, and as Paulus Orosius Paulus Orosius. writeth more by force of praiers to God, then power of men, in his encounter preuailed, and beheaded Gild s behea∣ded. Gildus for his Treason: But himselfe becomming mightie, and forgetting that which in others hee re∣membred, himselfe vsurped the command of Africa against Honorius, casting off all subiectiue obedience, and as a free Prince ruled the Prouince: The Souldi∣ours that had lately assisted the Emperours cause, now well perceiuing his aime, leuelled at the Crowne, thought best to cut the string before he loosed the Mastelzerius beheaded. shaft, and made him shorter by the head. (3) Ruffinus in Constantinople as boldly bare him∣selfe, Ruffi ambi∣tion. thinking Arcadius both too weake and yong to sound the depth of his designes, whose thoughts did also worke vpon conceited Soueraignety: he there∣fore secretly sollicited the Gothes to warre vpon the Empire, that so Arcadius might either be slaine or in∣trapped, or else himselfe in those dangers, set vp as the more sufficient. But these things thus dangerously complotted by Ruffinus, were as politically preuen∣ted by the Emperor, although a Child: for before the Seed of this Treason could bring forth either Bud or Blade it was discouered, and the Author slaine by an Italian Band, his Head (which as some affirme, first Ruffinus slaine. tooke breath in Britaine) was aduanced ouer a Gate in Constantinople. (4) Thus Peace obtained by the Deaths of these two Traitors, the Third stood vp with more danger in Stilicho set at ha∣zard the whole Empire. the West. For Stilicho, Tutor to yong Honorius, thought it not sufficient honour for him to haue his Daughter an Empresse by the Marriage of his Ward; but set at ha∣zard (for himselfe and sonne) his own Conscience, both their Liues, and the fatall ruine of the N w-declining Empire. For first, sowing seditions amongst the Lieute∣nants of the Prouinces, picked also quarrels in the Em∣perors Court, Casshiering with disgraces those Gothes that had serued with good proofe of their fidelitie a∣boue twenty yeeres, since their entertainment by Theodosius. These to reuenge their Wrongs, chose for their Cheiftaine a valiant Gothe named Alaricus, which shortly proued the Scourge of Rome: with whom ioy∣ned Alaricus the scourge of Rome. the Vandals, Alanes, and Sueuians, who ioyntly with great fury beganne to warre in Austria and Hun∣garie, increasing their Powers with such Multitudes, that as Paulus Orosius, an Author of that time saith; Paulus Orosius. The World was amazed and stood in feare. For vnto these Colonies resorted two hundred thousand Gothes, more, vnder the leading of Radagasius their King, who Radag sius with two hundred thousand Gothes. together with vnited forces, subdued all Thrasia, Hun∣gary, Austrich, Sclauonia, and Dalmatia, and spoiled all in such manner, that it seemed Diuels and not Men had passed that way, as Saint Ierome (who liued at that time) expresseth: These brute Beasts (saith he) suffered by the wrath of God in this warre, haue laid Cities waste, Hieron. in epist. ad Paul. Eust. slaine the People, and left the very Fields bare and desolate, whereof the Prouinces of Thracia, and Sclauonia, with the Country wherein my selfe was borne, beare too true, but la∣mentable Records. (5) The Roman Empire thus daily declining, and these fierce Nations making hauock where they came, the Armies in Britaine were put in great feare, lest the Flames of their Neighbours fire might Flash out, and take hold of them also. Therefore prouidently to preuent that danger, they elected one Marcus their Marcus chosen Emperor. Marcus murthe∣red. Sabellicus . 7. lib. 9. Lieutenant for Emperor, yeelding him their obedience some short time, and then finding his defects, imme∣diatly murthered him. In whose stead they Inthr ed one Gracian a Bri∣taine: whose carriage not answering their expecta∣tions, Gracian chosen Emperor. Gracian mur∣thered. they Murthered also, within Foure Moneths after his Royall solemnity. The features and Imperiall Titles stamped on the Romish Mony of these two Vsurpers, (according to the vsuall manner of the like in Estate) we finde not, neither stands it with credit of our History to faine them at pleasure: therefore till time bring them forth, from the Caues of obscurity wee haue allowed them place onlie by these Circles inserted, that others may supply what presentlie wee want, and accomplish by pencile what we cannot by Presse. (6) Yet time to Constantine hath bin more fauora∣ble in preseruing his remēbrance by his minted Mo∣neys, Constantine of a common Soul∣dier made Em∣peror. Ann. Do. 410. which here with his Story we present to sight. At the fall of these former, no better at all then a Common Souldier, but vpon confidence onely con∣ceiued of his Name, was made Emperor, who with more respect of honour, and listing of his aduancers, bare himselfe better then the others had done. For putting to Sea, and landing at B logne, he easily indu∣ced the Romans forces as farre as the Alps to side with him: Valentia in France hee manfully defended: the Rhine, which long had been neglected, hee fortified with Garrisons: vpon the Alps as well as vpon the Ma∣ritime Coasts, where passages were frequented, he built Fortresses: Spaine likewise he held vnder the hand of Constans his Sonne, whom of a Monke hee had made Constans the of Constantine made Augustus. Sabellicus. Augustus, & by whose valour subdued all from the Py∣rènean Mountaines to the Ocean. Whose Moneys wan∣ting to expresse his Image and Stile, we haue also sup∣plied with another Blanke. (7) Constantine prospering as wee haue said, sent Letters of excuse vnto Honorius, affirming constantly Honorius allow∣eth Constantine Emperor. that he was compelled by the Souldiers to doe what he did: whereby he so pleased the Emperor, that com∣mending his Valor, & holding him fit, he sent him of free gift a Purple Robe. Whereupon this new-growne blade began to ire, and at Arles planted his Im∣periall Seat, Co ding the Citie to be called Con∣stantina from him, and ordained that the Assemblies of the affaires of Seuen Prouinces should bee therein held. But this his Sunshine of prosperitie was soone ouercast with the Clouds of aduerse fortunes, and his Crowne & Life laid together in the dust. For in Spaine against him was arreared Maximus a Vassall, whose Ge∣nerall Gerentius intercepting Constans, (his Sonne and Caesar) at Vienna in France slew him: and Constantine Constans slaine. himself within the Walles of Arles, besieged for Foure Moneths, after the Raigne of Foure Yeeres, laid aside his Purple Robe, and entred the Church in Order of Priesthood; surrendering the Citie with his Stile Imperiall, was lastly led into Italy, and there be∣headed. Constantine be∣headed. (8) From that time Britaine renewed her obedi∣ence to Honorius, and the Prouince a while was refre∣shed by the Wisdome and Prowesse of Victorinus her Victorinus Lieu∣tenant in Bri∣taine. Lieutenant, who often repressed the incursions of the Scots and Picts: whereupon in his praise Rutillius Clau∣dius thus wrote: Conscius Oceanus virtutum conscia Thule, Rutilius Claudius. Paul. Oros. lib. 7. August. de Ciuit. Dei. Hieron. in Epist. ad Princip. Et quaecunque ferox arua Britannus arat. The Ocean wide and Thule, his vertues witnesse will; And all the Champian Fields, which Britaines fierce doe till. (9) But Rome at this time being sore afflicted, and by Alaricus with his Gothes and Vandals presently Iornandes in hist. Goth. sacked, Honorius sent for Victorinus with his Army out of Britaine, to the rescue of the Citie, as Claudian Victorinus lea∣ueth Britaine. signifieth, when he reckoneth vp among other Aides, the British Legion sent thither: whereof the Scots and Picts had soone notice, and (according to their won∣ted manner) with fire and sword molested their neigh∣bours. (10) The Britains therfore resolutely engaging them∣selues into dangers, tooke Armes, and freed their Ci∣ties and States from those Barbarous People: by whose example, the rest of their Nation in Armorica, with the Prouinces of Gaulois, deliuered themselues al∣so from their oppressions, and all of them cast out the Roman Presidents, settling a forme of Common-wealth Zosimus. to their owne liking. But these our Britaines growing too weake to withstand the continuall in∣roades of their Northerne Enemies, humbly besought Honorius for succour; whose returne of comforts con∣sisted Britaines write to Honorius for succour. only in words, exhorting them by Letters, to stand vpon their owne Guard. But they knowing it was not words which must helpe them, againe deplo∣red their miseries, & so obtained of him the assistance of one Legion, which in their aid droue backe those Assailants into their owne Marches, and fortified a∣gaine the Wall betwixt the Frith of Edeburgh vnto Clutd: so then departing, left the Britaines to defend themselues; who now, besides the Common Enemies so often mentioned, were much molested, and their Faith corrupted by one Pelagius, by birth a Britaine, Pelagius an He∣reticke corrup∣teth the Britains. Beda hist. Angl. lib. . cap. 10. by profession a Monke, by leaud doctrine an Heretike, who was brought vp in the famous Monastery of Ban∣gor in Wales, had also trauelled Italie, Sicilia, & Aegypt, for the studie of learning, and grew into great fauour with Paulinus Bishop of Nola, and with S. Augustine Gennadius. also, till his Hereticall Assertions, which had beene by him and his disciple Coelestius (a Scot secretly taught, and by Saint Ierome discouered) were afterwards con∣demned by Innocentiue the first, Bishop of Rome. But Innocentiue con∣demneth Pela∣gian Heresie. the Arch-heretike returning into Britaine, began againe obstinately to maintaine the same, together with Agricola, one who spread the venome of that Heresie into Forraine parts: whose doctrines were, 1. That August. de Haeres. Pelagius his opi∣nions. Man, without the grace of God, was able to fulfill all the Commandements. 2. That Man in himselfe had Freewill. 3. That the Grace of God was giuen vnto vs according to our merits. 4. That the Iust haue no sinne. 5. That Children are free from Originall sinne. 6. That Adam should haue died, though he had not sinned. And therein also one Timothie most impious∣lie disputed against the Diuine and Humane Natures Timothie his Heresie. of Christ. Notwithstanding, at the same time flourish∣ed Fastidius, a most learned British Bishop, and Chrysan∣thus also the Deputie or Vicegerent of Britaine, who with great honor gouerned the affaires of the Church and Common-wealth, and was afterwards (as elswhere we haue shewed) made Bishop at Constantinople of the Nouatians against his will. Lib. . cap. 9. (11) Thus were the affaires of this Land managed vnder these Brethren Emperours; the elder of which, Arcadius his death and raigne. Arcadius, died in peace at Constantinople, leauing his sonne Theodosius, a childe of eight yeeres, to the suc∣cession of the Empire, and to the tuition of Hisdiger∣dus Theodosius his successour. King of Persia; a matter which seemed at first ve∣ry dangerous, but prooued at the last very profitable. Hisdigerdus his Tutor. He raigned thirteene yeeres, and died the first of May, the one and thirtieth of his age, the yeere of Christs birth foure hundred and ten. At which time one Io∣uinus, of an obscure beginning, had raised some Tu∣mults in Gallia, stiled himselfe Emperour, vsurped the Purple Robe, and stamped his Coines with the Title of Victorie, as is seene in one which we heere present. (12) Against him Honorius made his power, and with his little losse slew the Vpstart in the Field: wher∣by his fame was more spread in the West, though not so fortunate as his brothers was in the East, after whom hee liued fifteene yeeres, and with whom hee had raigned other thirteene; and he died, saith Paulus Diaconus, of an infirmitie at Rome, in the yeere of grace Honorius his death and raigne Paul. Diacon. foure hundred twenty foure, leauing no issue of his body to succeed him in the Empire. THEODOSIVS 2. Emp. VALENTINIAN 3. CHAPTER LIIII. Theodosius 2. Emp. East. Valentinian 3. Emp. West. G Reat haue been the Wars and strange the Altera∣tions An. Do. 408. which both here at home, and through the World abroad haue chan∣ced vnto States since the first attempts of Iulius Caesar vnto these present Theodosius & Va∣lentinian the last Roman Monarks in Britains. Emperors, Theodosius the second, and Valentinian the third, his Associate; whose Liues and Raignes did conclude the Successions of the Romish Monarchs with∣in this Iland of Great Britaine, and threw downe their Triumphall Arches in many other Prouinces, which for long time had been obsequious to Romes Soueraigne Command. So vncertaine is the Glory of this World, and her Seeming Strength so liable to Mutabilitie, that the Powers and Periods thereof held in His hand that holdeth the Vniuersall Ball, are suddenly turned from their high-mounted site and beauty of the Sun vnto the Downe-fall and darke side of the Globe; and either fall againe into the small Circuit of their first compasse, after they haue expired their Number, Waeight, and Measure: or else with Daniels Image are vt∣terly Dan. 2. 35. extinct and blowne away, as the chaffe from the Summer flower. (2) The continuance of whose Estates, seeme they neuer so Great and Durable in Power, Circuit, Defence, The Roman Mo∣narchies cond∣nuance. and Multitude, hath seldome extended much the li∣mit of Fiue hundred yeeres, but that their high and mounted Flames, fall in the ashes of their owne con∣suming decaies, or else hath receiued some other alte∣ration of Empires encrease, as many learned Writers haue obsered in most Common-wealths. So was it in the State established by God himselfe among his Peculiar People. As from the Promise to Abraham, made of Abraham the time betweene the Promise made to him, and the giuing of the Law. Cal. 3. 17. Christ the Blessed Seed and Life of Man (where ceased the Worlds formerly-vsed computation from the Ages of Men) vnto the Law deliuered vpon Mount Sinai, de∣claring condemnation and death, were foure hundred thirty yeeres: from Israels departure out of Egypt, when their Common-wealth beganne to be ruled by Iudges, and Gods seruice celebrated in the Taber∣nacle vnder Curtaines vnto the Building of their Glori∣ous 1. King. 6 1. Israel, the time between their departing out of Egypt, and the building of the Temple of Salo∣mon. Dauid, the time betweene his Annointing and the death of Ze∣dechiah. Temple erect by King Salomon, were yeeres foure hundred and eighty. From the Annointing of Dauid, the first King, set vpon Iudahs Throne, vnto the death of Zedechiah the last King thereof, slaine by Nebuchad∣nezer, and that Holy Temple consumed by fire, were yeeres foure hundred & seuentie. And other Politike Estates haue stood much vpon the like Space of time. For the Kingdome of Athens set vp by Cecrops the first King thereof, vnto Codrus the last, when they chan∣ged their Monarchie to a Democracie, is said to haue The time be∣tween Cecrops his setting vp, and Codrus the last. Lycurgus, the time betweene him and Alex∣ander the Great. Taerquinius, the time betweene him and Iulius Caesar. Caesar, the time betweene his in∣uasion of Bri∣taine, and Valen∣tinian the third. Saxons, the time betweene their intrusions and King Egbert. Egbert, the time betweene him and Edward Confessor. Normans, the time betweene their Conquest, and the entrance of our gracious Soueraigne King Iames. continued foure hundred and ninetie yeeres. The Lacedemonians State from Lycurgus their Law-giuer, vnto Alexander the Great, that ouerthrew it, flou∣rished the space of foure hundred ninety one yeeres. From the expulsion of Romes Kings vnder Tarquinius, vnto the affected Empire in Iulius Caesar, were foure hundred ninety and nine yeeres. And omitting many others, to come to our selues; from Caesars first Inua∣sion of Britaine, vnto the daies of this Valentinian the third, wherein the Romans did quite abandon it, were fiue hundred yeeres. From the Saxons intrusions and diuision of this Realme into an Heptarchie vnder their Gouernment, vntill the vnited Monarchie made by King Egbert in the yeere eight hundred and nine∣teene, were yeeres foure hundred sixty nine. But from thence, vntill their issue failed in King Edward Confessor, were yeeres only two hundred forty seuen. And from the Normans Conquest, vnto the death of that most sacred Soueraigne of eternall memoric, Queene Elizabeth, when began againe the name of GREAT BRITAINE, and the Vnion of the whole Iland to be brought into one intire Monarchie, by the rightfull Succession and thrice-happie entrance of our most graci∣ous King IAMES, are yeeres fiue hundred thirtie six. But of these three last, we are to speake hereafter; and now returne to finish vp the falling Estate of the Romans Greatnesse. (3) Theodosius the sonne of Arcadius beganne his Empire in the yeere of the worlds saluation foure Theodosius 2. vn∣der the Persian King. hundred and eight, and was gouerned with a spe∣ciall protection by the Persian King during his Mino∣ritie, Antigonus his Tutor. vnder the charge of Antigonus an excellent man. But now growne to yeeres, and some variance happe∣ning betwixt him and his Tutor, he was left to the dis∣pose of himselfe: and his vncle Honorius leauing at his death great troubles vnquenched in the West, the mightiest Potentates assaied to make themselues Em∣perours ouer seuerall Dominions, and from the richnesse The di ipation of the Romane Empire. of the Imperiall Diademe, each one sought to plucke a Iewell to beautifie his owne Crowne. So the Barba∣rous Nations out of this one Monarchie began the foun∣dations of many succeeding Kingdomes. For in Spaine the Vandals, , and Alanes, not contented with their portion therein assigned, betooke themselues to Armes. The Frankes and Burgundians, which had been driuen out of France, resolued againe to returne. The Gothes, that were Lords of Barcelona, Narbona, and To∣losa, did as the rest. The Hunnes entred Hungarie. Iohn the Tyrant held Rome: and in Africa, Boniface be∣came a Neuter: These stirres mooued Theodosius to nominate Valentinian his kinsman Emperour in the Valentinian ele∣cted Emperour in the West. West; whose raigne and affaires (so farre as they touch Britaine) we will follow, being the last of the Romane Emperours that held out the succession of our British Monarkes. (4) This Valentinian was the sonne of Constantine, His descent. In Chap. 52. sect. 8. made Augustus, as is said, and of Placidia Galla daugh∣ter to the first Theodosius Emperour: which Lady in the sacking of Rome by Alaricus the Gothe, was taken Pri∣soner, and by him giuen in mariage to his neere kins∣man Athaulphus, who afterwards was King of that Nation; and by her sweet demeanour, and prudent meanes, a Peace was concluded betwixt her Husband and her Brother, but with such dislikes to the Gothes, that they presently killed him, and raised one Wallia for their King; who likewise comming to composi∣tion with Honorius, deliuered Placidia according to Couenants, whom the Emperour her Brother bestowed in Mariage vpon Constantine his Generall, in regard of his good seruice and Victories by him atchieued. (5) Shee, with young Valentinian New-made Em∣perour, Placidia Galla her care of Va∣lentinian her sonne. Aspar and Actius chosen by her. being sent into Italie, selected the best appro∣ued Captaines to secure her sonnes Estate; whereof Aspar was one, that in Rome slew Iohn the Vsurper, who had there made himselfe Emperour, stamping this his face and stile vpon the currant Money of the State, and by his Tyrannies held his fortunes for fiue yeeres continuance. Iohn Vsur∣per. Aetius likewise, that had beene Gouernour of Spaine, was imploied into Gallia; where the Frankes and Bur∣gundians (vnder the conduct of Clodius their second King) sought to establish (as shortly they did) their Kingdome in that Countrey, giuing it the name of France, according to their owne, by which name they were neuer knowne to Caesar, Strabo, Pliny, Tacitus, France not knowne to Caesar by that name. Mela, nor Ptolemie; whereby the great blast of their Antiquitie is shewed to be but a puffe of winde. (6) At this time the Britaines were againe sore op∣pressed Britaines sore op∣pressed with the Scots and Picts. by the Scots and Picts, who hauing notice that the Aides sent by Honorius were returned, passed ouer the Water in their Boats at both the ends of the Wall, and inuaded the Prouince with such force, that they bare downe all before them. The Britaines in this la∣mentable plight, sent their Ambássadours to Rome, Britaines sorrow∣full Ambassage to Valentinian. with their Garments rent, and dust vpon their heads, vnto Valentinian the Third, bewailing their most mi∣serable Estates, and crauing his helpe. The Emperour mooued to remorse, sent a Regiment of Souldiers into Britaines obtaine some small suc∣cour. Gallia sent to aid them. Britaine; vnder the Command of Gallio of Rauenna, a most valiant man, who hauing put backe the Enemie with the assistance of the Ilanders, gaue some small comforts to the distressed Britaines. But the Burgun∣dians passing the Rhene, and threatning to waste Italy, Burgundians threaten Italie. Gallio recalled, and the Britaines quite forsaken of the Romans. Aetius was compelled to recall Gallio with his Legion, to secure the Countrey about Paris, whilest himselfe with his, followed the dangerous Enemie. (7) He now ready to depart for France, told the Britains that it was not for the Romans to take so long and painefull Iournies, neither at that time especially when their own Empire was in danger to be ouer-run. Therefore he willed them thenceforth to stand vpon their Guard, and to prouide for their owne safeties: and to that end, in regard of their good seruices done to the Romans, he taught them the vse of their Armour The Romans kindnesse at their departing from Britaine. Beda hist. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 12. and Weapons, as also to strengthen their Fortification, and Wall of Turfe, which now they began to build with firme Stone, laid eight foot in thicknesse, and Gildas. twelue foot in height. This Wall (saith Gildas) they drew in a straight line (at the publike charges of the State) from East to West, and from Sea to Sea, planting Bul∣warkes, and raising Turrets, with conuenient spaces distant one from another; which gaue a faire and farre prospect into the Sea. And so the Romans gaue a finall Farewell, meaning neuer to returne againe; and burying part of their Treasures heere in the Earth, whereof much hath The time of the Romans finall for∣saking of their tēporal iurisdicti∣on in Britaine. beene found, and more is still sought, left Britaine about the yeere of Christ fiue hundred, after the first inuasion thereof made vnder the conduct of Iulius Caesar. (8) This vnfortunate Emperour Valentinian lost Nicephorus. not only Britaine, but suffred also Africa, France, and Spaine to be plucked from his Empire: and the weak∣nesse Prosperus Aquitanus. of the Romans power (whose strength consisted most in Forraine Aides, (as Tacitus saith) was left vna∣ble Romans vnable to desend their owne Countrey. to defend it selfe; when they had bereft this Pro∣uince of all the Flower and Choice of Men, as Gildas in that age complained, saying, Britaine is despoiled of all Gildas. her armed men, with her militarie forces: her Rulers (cru∣ell though they were) are wasted, her Garrisons withdrawn, and defense laid open, and an exceeding great number of her stout couragious Souldiers taken from her, to serue the Romans in their warres. With which his sayings the Roman Writers themselues agree, and record the Mu∣sters and great multitudes of Britaines that haue beene transported by them out of this Iland: as when Tre∣bellius Maximus with his British Forces made strong Tacit. hist. l. 1. . 9. the Faction against Otho in Germanie: and then also Ho∣norius Flaccus brought thence eight thousand chosen Souldiers to vphold Vitellius in his cause. Clodius Al∣binus. Clodius Albinus banding against Seuerus the Empe∣rour, assuming the Title, and stamping the Moneyes of the Imperiall Estate (as by this here inserted is to be seene; which comming to our hands since his Storie was written, we hold it more acceptable to set heere, though out of place, then to giue it no place at all in this Worke, being so worthy an Antiquitie, and so much concerning the Britaines) vnder whose Banner the Flower of their Cheualrie perished in Battle, when in the Fields of France, and neere vnto Lyons, they spent their bloud in his cause; whereby the sinewes of their owne Countries defense was sore weakened, and laid open to Forraine I aders. Constantine the Constantine trans∣ported a great power of Bri∣taines. Great also (as Malmesbury noteth) carried hence a great power of British Souldiers with him in his warres, by whose puissance (as he saith) he obtained Triumphant Victories, and the Empire of the whole World: and af∣ter assigned them that part of Gallia to inhabit, which was called Armorica, lying westward vpon the Sea Armorica a part of Gallia giuen to the British Souldiers. Coasts, where they seating themselues, their posteritie was increased, and continueth a Mightie People euen vnto this day. (9) This Countrey afterwards (being conque∣red by Maximus, and his reconciled Enemie Conan Armorica con∣quered. Meriadoc, Lord of Denbigh-land, by the prowesse of those British Souldiers whom hence hee, carried in his quarrell against Valentinian the Emperour) was recei∣ued in free gift of Conan, after the slaughter of Iubates the King, and the name thereof changed to Little Bri∣taine, as being a Colonie or Daughter of this our Iland. Armorica chan∣ged to the name of Little Britaines. The Pronince is large, pleasant, and fruitfull, and con∣taineth in her Circuit nine Bishops Seas, whereof three are called Cor aille vnto this day, which are Le ∣sss, S. Paul, and Treg rs: the other six are D le, Rhenet, S. Malo, Nanetensis, Vannes, and Brien, whose language differeth from their Neighbours the French, and retai∣neth It containeth nine Bishops Seas. Keepeth as yet the British Dia∣lect. Great numbers of Britaines sent to Conan. A great multi∣tude of Virgins sent out of Britain to Armorica. as yet the British Dialect. I omit to speak of those other Numbers of men sent for out of this Kingdome by the said Conan, whereof our British Historians make mention; besides the sending of Vrsula with Eleuen thousand Virgins to be matched in mariage with these their Country-men, all of them perishing by Sea or by Sword, but none of them returning hither againe; whereby the bane of the Land presently followed, her hopes being cut off, and depriued of wonted Poste∣rities. (10) This Conquest and Plantation in Armo∣rica, Matthew of Westminster accounteth to haue hap∣pened Matthew Westm. Henry Hunt. Ninius. in the yeer of Christ three hundred ninety two. And these Souldiers thus withdrawne, are so recorded by Henry of Huntington his ancient; and Ninius also Maximus gaue many Countries to the Britaines his Souldiers. long before both, reporteth that Maximus gaue ma∣nie Countries to these his Britaines, euen frō the Poole which is on the Top of Iupiters Hill, to a Citie called Cantguic, and vnto the Western Mountaines. These (sayeth hee) are the Britaines in Armorica, who neuer returned to this day, in regard whereof Britaine was Conquered by Strange Nations. With whom agreeth Geruasius a Monke of Canturburie, Iohn Anglicus, Ra∣nulphus Geruasius. Iob. Anglicus. of Chester, and others. Thither also in the downefall and desperat Estate of the Britaines, many of them fled from the rage of their Enemies, as hee that was borne in Armorica, and liued neerest to that age, euen the Writer of the Life of S. Wingualof the Confes∣sor, doth sufficiently proue. An of-spring (saith he) of the Britaines embarked in Flotes, arriued in this Land, on this Britaines fled in∣to Armorica in the time of the Saxons. side the British Sea: what time as the Barbarous Nation of the Saxons, fierce in Armes, and vnciuill in manners, pos∣sessed their Natiue and Mother Soyle, &c. (11) And lastly, in the cause of that other Constan∣tine, who was elected only for his Name, most of the Constantine who was elected for his name, trans∣porteth great multitudes of Britaines. Flower and Strength of the Britaines were transported into Gallia and Spaine, where in his variable fortunes many of them perished. And Malmesbury writing of these Times, saith, that the Romans had emptied Bri∣taine of all her Flower and Chiualry of Warre, leauing now in her Countries but Halfe-barbarous men, and in her Cities only Epicures, vnfit for seruice. In confirma∣tion whereof, the most learned Cambden out of Antike Cambden. Inscriptions, and the Booke named Notitia Prouincia∣rum, hath obserued, that these Companies vnder writ∣ten serued the Romans in their Warres, and were disper∣sed here and there in their Prouinces, which also were from time to time euermore supplied out of Bri∣taine. Ala Britannica Milliaria. Ala IIII. Britonum in Aegypto. Cohors prima Aelia Britonum. Cohors III. Britonum. Cohors VII. Britonum. Cohors XXVI. Britonum in Armenia. Britanniciani sub Magistro Peditum. inter Auxilia Palatina. Inuicti Iuniores Britanniciani Exculcatores Iun. Britan. Britones cum Magistro Equitum Galliarum. Inuicti Iuniores Britones inter Hispanias. Britones Seniores in Illyrico. (12) No maruell is it then if Britaine lay weake, being thus continually exhausted of her strengths, which these approued Records made so apparant, as we need not alleage the doubtfull Story of Irpus of S. Iobn Pays. Irpus of Norway transporteth an incredible num∣ber of Britaines. Norway, for the depopulation of the Iland, who is said by subtilty vnder pretence of Kindred, and Ho∣nour to be atchieued, to haue gotten an infinite num∣ber of Britaines to follow him in his enterprise, which neuer returned againe: or the Booke Triades mentio∣ned by the Author of the Reformed History of Great Britaine, that bringeth an Army hence, consisting in number of one and twenty thousand men, into Aqui∣taine Britaines one & twenty thousand transported into Aquitaine against Caesar. and Gaul: which, as he saith, was the Aid mentio∣ned by Caesar, that out of Britaine assisted the Gaules a∣gainst him. Which may partly seeme to be gathered from Caesar himselfe, as hath been said: where he affir∣meth, that the Britaines and Gaules were gouerned vn∣der the same King: and is further confirmed by the fashion and Inscriptions of Antique Coines, which wee haue seene stamped in Gold, the Forme round, and Shield-like: Imbossed outward in the Face, and Hollow in the Reuerse; a Forme vnfallible to be of the Britaines Coines, and yet the word Comes is inscribed vpon the Imbossed side, whom we imagine to be the same Gouer∣nor Attrebatij in Gal∣lia and Britaine. of Artoye in Gallia, whom Caesar mentioneth. (13) Thus then was Britaine first made Weake by the Romans exhaustings, and then quite abandoned of their helpe, and left as a tree in the Wildernesse, to lose her faire leaues by the continuall blasts of these sharp Northerne windes, whose beauty before had bin as the Cedars of Libanon, or like vnto those in the Garden of God. And whose Riches had drawne the Worlds then-Monarchs to such liking and loue, that no meanes was omitted to attaine the same, nor care neglected to keepe it in their Subiection: which, while it stood a Britaine accoun∣ted the fairest plume of the Ro∣mane Diademe. Prouince in their obedience, was held and accounted to be the fairest flower in their Triumphant Garlands, and of some of their Emperors thought worthy the Residencie of their Imperiall Throne. THE ORIGINALL, INVA∣SIONS, AND HEPTARCHIE OF THE SAXONS; VVITH A SVCCESSION OF THEIR MONARCHS IN THIS ILAND OF GREAT BRITAINE, THEIR RAIGNES, MARRIAGES, ACTS, AND ISSVES, VNTIL THEIR LAST SVB∣VERSION BY THE DANES AND NORMANS. But first of the Downe-fall of BRITAINE. BOOKE VII. CHAPTER I. B RITAINE thus aban∣doned of all the Romane Garrisons, and emptied of Britaine abando∣ned of the Roman Garrisons. strengths that should haue supported her now down-falling-estate, lay prostrate to confusion and misera∣ble calamities; no lesse burdened with the tu∣multuous vproares of her owne great men, who stroue for the supreme Gouern∣ment, then of the Barbarous Nations which with conti∣nuall incursions made spoile where they came. These times (saith Ninius) were full of feares, and were prolon∣ged Ninius. with forty yeeres afflictions: wherein Vortigern then King was troubled with the violence of the Romans, Great troubles in the raigne of Vortigern. the dreads of the Picts and Scots, and the oppositions of Aurelius Ambrosius, who suruiuing his slaine Pa∣rents, that had worne the Imperiall Purple Robe, sought their reuenge vpon their wicked Murderer: besides the Intrusions of the Germane Saxons, called in for Friends, but prooued indeed the greatest Enemies. Du∣ring the conflict of these tempestuous stormes, some small comforts were ministred vnto the Britaines by Bishop German his presence, who from France assisted Bishop German an assister against the Pelagians. them against the Pelagian Heresies, and the perillous assaults of the Scots and Picts, who in diuers skirmish∣es ouercame them. (2) These dolorous times of Britaines destruction, Gildas the mournfull Historian, who liued not long af∣ter, Gildas. doth declare. As soone as the Romans (saith hee) had left Britaine, and were returning vnto their home, foorthwith hideous multitudes of Scots and Picts came swarming out of their Carroghes, (wherewith they passed the The Irish Sea. Scitick Vale) like whole Armies of duskish vermine, which at high noone, when the Sunne is in his greatest heat, began to crawle foorth of their narrow holes an infinite number of hidcous Scots and Picts; which two kindes of People, though in conditions somewhat different, yet they consorted too well in greedie desire of bloud-shed: and ha∣uing intelligence, the associates of Britaine were now retur∣ned with vtter disclaime of further assistance, with more Scots and Picts (the Romans de∣parted) seize all the Northerne parts. confident boldnesse then euer before, they seize all the Nor∣therne and vttermost part of the Iland, as if it had beene their own inheritance, euen as farre as to the Wall. Against these attempts there were ranged in the high Forts along the Wall, Garrisons of Souldiers, but such as were both slothfull, and also vnseruiceable for Martiall Affaires: which white-liuered Lozels with quaking hearts sate still warding day and night, till their ioints were as benummed and stupid as the stones whereon they sate: insomuch as the naked Enemies did with long hooked Engines plucke from Scoti and Picts catch the Bri∣taines with long hookes. off the wall those miserable Warders, dashing their bodies against the ground. This good yet they got by this their vn∣timely deaths, that being thus suddenly dispatched out of the world, they escaped the imminent lamentable calamities that their brethren and children shortly felt. To bee short, hauing abandoned their Cities and this high defensiue Wall, once more they betooke themselues to flight, and were dis∣persed in a more desperate manner then euer before. For the enemie was more hot in pursuit, and more cruell in the slaughter, the wofull Inhabitants being by their Enemies massacred, and rent in peeces like Lambes in the hands of bloudy Butchers, or in the iawes of cruell and sauage Beasts. In these most miserable times, (necessitie so compelling) the poore distressed people forbare not to rob each other of that sustenance, which could helpe them but for a very small sea∣son: and so their hostile oppressions were increased by their domesticke vexations, for that the whole Countrey by these continuall direptions, was vtterly depriued of the staffe of foode, hauing nothing left to prolong their life, but that only what they get in hunting. Whereupon, about the thirtie nine yeere of Theodosius, and of Christ foure hundred fortie six, the distressed Remaines of the down-cast Britaines addressed their missiue Letters to Actius, whom Gildas calleth Agitius, President of Gallia, in Britaines send for helpe to Actius President of Gallia. most lamentable manner, and thus inscribed. To AETIVS Thrice Consul, the groanes of the BRITAINES. The Barbariaus driue vs backe to the Sea; the Sea a∣gaine Beda Hist. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 13. putteth vs backe vpon the Barbarians: thus be∣tweene two kindes of deaths, we are either slaughtered or drewned. And the more to intimate their miseries, and to mooue his assistance, thus they further vrge: Wee (say they) are the Remnant that suruiue of the Bri∣taines, and are your Subiects, who besides the Enemie, are afflicted by famine and mortalitie, which at this present ex∣treamly rageth in our Land. And putting him in mind that it much importeth the Maiesty of the Roman Em∣pire to protect and succour their Prouince, seeing it had now stood vpon the point of fiue hundred yeers vnder their obedience, whose strength of Souldiers ta∣ken from thence to serue their Emperors in their Wars else-where, was now decaied, and their wealths wa∣sted by maintaining their many Legions in their own Land and abroad: All this notwithstanding the Ro∣mans either would not, or could not relieue, hauing enough to doe to vphold their owne; but returned them againe with heauy hearts into the hands of their most cruell Enemies, who now knowing them∣selues free from the Romans interceptions, as a violent floud brake thorow the Prouince, and bare downe all before them; the Inhabitants flying like chased Deere, some taking ouer Seas into Britany in France; some to Britaines flie into France, South-wales, North-wales, Cornwall, Demonshire. South-wales, North-wales, Cornwall, and parts of Deuon∣shire, leauing the best of the Land to the will of their Persecutors, and much of their Treasures hid in the ground, which neuer after they inioyed. (4) But the greeuous Famine still increasing, A great Famine. Gildas, ibid. though it had this woful issue with some, that it made them yeeld themselues into the Enemies bloudy hands (onely in hope to gaine a little sustenance of food for the present) and for many yeeres after left lamentable tokens (saith Beda) of great desolations Beda, lib. 1. c. 14. wrought by that dearth: yet with those other which were of more noble and resolute spirits it produced a better effect; insomuch as frō out of the Mountains, Caues, and thicke woods, they assailed their enemies, reposing their trust not in Man, but in God, whose help Britaines trusting in God, ouer∣come their ene∣mies. is then most at hand, when mans helpe faileth. These in many skirmishes gaue them the ouerthrow with much slaughter, and that for many yeeres together, when they made their incursions for booties and spoile; which caused these Rauening Irish to returne home; and the Picts a while rested from further mole∣station. Notwithstanding the Britaines returned not from their owne wickednesse, growing strong now daily in repressing the Enemie, but stronger in their owne sinnes and ciuill dissensions. By meanes where∣of, though a surcease of Hostile Warres was imbra∣ced, and the skarres of famine cleerly skinned vp, yet another sore as dangerous as either, secretly bred, and shortly brake forth. For the Land being free from the Enemies wastes, yeelded such plenty and abundance of all things, as the like before no age had seene; and Beda hist. Aug. lib. 1. cap. 14. therewithall such riot and excesse, that the peoples sins grew to a plentiful haruest, as by the words of Gyl∣das is apparant. (5) Certainly it is heard (saith he) that there is such Great sins among the Britaines. fornication, as the like is not among the Gentiles. Truth with the maintainers thereof is hated: Lies with the For∣gers thereof highly esteemed. Euill is entertained for good, leaudnesse respected more then vprightnesse, darknesse de∣sired before the bright Sunne, and Satan accepted for an Gildas. Angell of light: Kings then were anointed, not according to Gods liking, but such as excelled others in crueltie; and as cruelly againe by their anointers were they murdered, not for any demerit, but that they might aduance others more sauage then the former. If hee were milde, or inclining to truth, the darts of hatred were on euery side leuelled against him, as the onely Subuerter of the Britaines Estate. What was pleasing or displeasing to God, was all one with them, sauing that the better things commonly wrought most dis∣content: so that rightly the saying of the Prophet, which was denounced vnto the people in old time, might bee applied to our Countrey: Yee lawlesse and corrupt children haue for∣saken Esay 1. the Lord, and prouoked vnto wrath the holy one of Is∣rael. Why should ye be smitten any more, still multiplying iniquitie? Euery head is sicke, and euery heart is heauy: from the sole of the foot vnto the crowne of the head, there is nothing sound therein. Thus did they all things that were contrary to their safetie, as if that medicine which Britaines did all things contrary to their safetie. was bestowed by that truest Physitian of all, was needlesse for the world. And not onely the prophaner sort did this, but also the selected flocke of the Lord, and the Shepheards thereof, who ought to haue giuen example to the whole peo∣ple. To speake of drunkennesse, numbers of them lay sense∣lesse and weltring in wine, swelling with pride, contention, and griping enuie, putting no difference in iudgement be∣tweene good and euill: insomuch that it seemeth contempt was powred forth both vpon Princes and people: and all of them seduced by vanities, wandred in errors and by-paths, Psal. 106. 40. not lead in the right way. When God therefore was minded to purge his Familie, and to recure them thus infected with the corruptions of sinnes, by heare-say only of Tribulation, the winged flight of an often-tried rumour pierced the at∣tentiue Britaines heare of an inuasion, yet not reclai∣med. eares of all men, giuing notice of their ancient Ene∣mies, ready to arriue, and fully minded to destroy them vt∣terly, and to inhabit (as earst they did) the whole Countrey from one end to another. Yet all this could not reclaime them, but like vnto mad horses, which taking the bit fast betwixt their teeth, runne away with their Riders, so these leauing the way which leadeth (narrow though it bee) vnto saluation, ranne at randome in the wide way of all wicked∣nesse, which leadeth directly to death. Whiles therefore (as Salomon saith) the stubborne seruant will not bee amended Prou. 29. 19. with words, he is scourged for a foole, and feeleth not the whip: for loe, a pestilent contagion fell heauily vpon this foolish people, which (though the enemies sword was gone) in short space destroied such multitudes of them, that the li∣uing were not able to bury the dead. Neither yet also were they thereby bettered, that the saying of the Prophet Esay in them might be fulfilled: God called them to mourning, to baldnesse, and sacke-cloth: but behold, they fell to killing of Esay 22. 13. calues, and to staying of Rammes; loe, they went to eating and drinking, and said withall, Let vs eat and drinke, for tomorrow wee shall die. And indeed the time now drew neere, wherein their iniquities (like as those in times past of Britaines ini∣quitie. the Amorites) should come to the fulnesse. And euen at that instant the like measure beganne to bee heaped vpon the Britaines. (6) For the common enemie now inuading the The Enemie in∣uadeth the Sou∣therne parts. Southerne parts, was entred as farre as Stamford vp∣on the Riuer Welland; whom to resist, the Britaines assembled together, and hauing experience what ci∣uilliarres had formerly done, they iointly vnite their meanes and powers, and with one consent elect a Britaines vnite their powers. King to manage these affaires, which was Vortigerne, by birth extracted from the British Line, nobly de∣scended, Vortigern of the British line. had not his many vices blemished the same. The British Historie saith, that hee was Earle of Corn∣wall, and of great command in the daies of Constantine Earle of Cornwall. their King, whose simplicitie hee much abused, and whom lastly hee caused to be murdered by the Guard The Scots and Picts set to mur∣ther Constantius. of his Person, the Scots and Picts by him so placed, and to that end instigated: whom neuerthelesse with death hee seuerely punished, to auoid further suspiti∣on. In whose reuenge, these fierce Nations so assaul∣ted his Dominions with rape and spoile, that hee was forced for further assistance to send for these Saxons Wil. Malms. The Saxons for. to his aid. Whether thus, or otherwise, most true it is, the Saxons were sent for, and of hoped Friends, be∣came the tried Enemies to the Britaines and their E∣states, as out of Gildas their Historian wee shall anon declare. (7) The occasion and maner of this their inuiting and comming, is set downe by a Countryman of their owne Witichindus, a Writer of good antiquity, who thus relateth the circumstance thereof. Britaine (saith Witichindus. he) by Vespasian the Emperour, long since being reduced a∣mong the Roman Prouinces, and held in their subiection, stood them in no small stead: but their Legions abandoned, and destinie (as it seemeth) determining the downfall, be∣came soone assaulted by their neighbour Nations the Nor∣therne Borderers. For the people of Rome after that the Em∣peror * Martiall was slaine by his Souldiers, being tired out Martian he mea∣neth. with forraine wars, were not able to assist their friends with supply of accustomed aides. And yet had they built a mighty peece of worke for the defence of the Country, reaching be∣tweene The Romans worke for the Britaines defence, raced by the Northerne Bor∣derers. the confines from Sea to Sea, where it was thought that the Enemies would assaile the Inhabitants left in the Land. But no difficulty it was for them so fiercely bent, and euer ready to make war (especially where they dealt with a Nation feebled and left vnable to make resistance) to destroy the said worke. Therefore hearing of the worthy and for∣tunate exploits atchieued by the Saxons, they sent an hum∣ble Embassage to require their aid; and these hauing audi∣ence, Saxons great Warriours and fortunate. spake as followeth. Most noble Saxons, the poore and distressed Britaines. The Britaines Ambassage and speech to the Saxons. Brets, outworne and tired by the many incursions of their enemies, hearing the fame of those victories which you haue most valiantly obtained, haue sent vs. Suppliants vnto you, crauing that you would not deny them your helpe and succour. ☉A large and spacious Land they haue, plentifull and abun∣dant in all things, which wee yeeld wholly to bee at your deuotion and command. Hitherto wee haue liued freely vnder the patronage and protection of the Romans, next vnto whom wee know not any more powerfull then your selues; and therefore we seeke for refuge vnder the wings of your valour. So that we may by your puissance be superiour of our enemies, whatsoeuer seruice you shall impose vpon vs, that will we willingly abide. To this petition the Peeres and Nobles of the Saxons briefly made answer in this wise. The Saxons an∣swere to the Pe∣tition of the Britaines. Know yee that the Saxons will bee fast friends vnto the Brets, and ready at all times both to assist them in their necessitie, and also to procure their wealth: with ioy therefore returne yee Am∣bassadors, and with this wished-for tidings make your Countrey-men glad. Heereupon (according to promise) an Armie sent into Britaine, and ioifully receiued, Saxons good ser∣uice at their first comming. which in short time freed the Land frō the spoiling enemies, & recouered the country vnto the behoof of the Inhabitants. (8) But how true this last clause is, may appeare out of the ancient Gildas, who thus recordeth it: To represse (saith hee) many Inuasions of those their ancient Gildas. enemies, which with cruell slaughters and booties continu∣ally afflicted them, the Britaines fell to consult vpon some conuenient course therein to be taken. Lastly, all the Coun∣sellers, together with the proud Tyrant, being blinded in iudgement, deuised such a protection, as in the end prooued their Countries destruction; namely, that those rce Sa∣xons, a people sauage and of hatefull name, odious both to God and man, should be let into this Iland, as it were wolues into sheepe-folds, to repulse (for sooth) the Northerne Na∣tions; then which proiect doubtlesse nothing was euer more pernicious and vnhappie vnto this Land. O senses senslesse and plunged into deepest mists of errour! O desperate dul∣nesse, and blinde blockishnesse of minde! Those whom in ab∣sence were feared more then death, now of their owne ac∣cord are inuited by these Princes of Aegypt (if I may so say, thus sottishly counselling their Pharao) to come and rest with them vnder one roofe. Presently out of the Denne of that barbarous Lionesse rushed foorth a kennell of her whelpes, in three long Vessels, called in their Language * Cy∣ula, carried vnder full saile, and with ominous presages Keeles. fore-prophecying that for 300. yeeres they should possesse that Land vnto which they then directed their course, and Saxons prophecie to possesse Bri∣taine for 300. yeeres. for halfe of that space, (viz. one hundred and fiftie yeeres) they should waste and depopulate the same. These being put on shore first in the East part of the Iland, and that by The Saxons first arriuall on the East part of this Iland. Commandement of this vnfortunate Tyrant, there set fast their terrible pawes, pretending to the Ilanders, defense of their Countrey, but more truly intending the destruction of them. The foresaid Lionesse finding that her first troupe of whelpes sped so well, sends againe a greater Rabble of the same Litter, which heere arriued in Fl es, bringing with them some other Associates of bastardly and vnnoble brood. And these beginnings, the slips of iniquitie, and the roots of bitternesse, (an accursed plantation well befitting our de∣merits) haue sprung vp, and put foorth in our soile their haughtie boughes and spreading branches. This barbarous Nation thus admitted, professing themselues our Souldiers, and such as would endure all hazards (so they fained) in defense for their good Hosts, first they craued supplie of vi∣ctuals only; which being giuen them, for some time stopped (as we may say) the Dogs mouth: howbeit, afterward they complaine that their wages was not bountifully enough Saxons inuent oc∣casions of quar∣rell. paid, deuising of purpose colourable occasions of quarrell, and threatning that vnlesse they might haue more munifi∣cent entertainment, they would with the breach of couenant spoile and waste the whole Iland. And without further delay, they second these threats with deeds (for our Sinnes, the cause of deserued reuenge, were still nourished) and the fire kindled Eastward, was set a flaming by these sacrilegi∣ous men from Sea to Sea, ceasing not to consume all the Ci∣ties and Countries bordering there about, vntill such time as burning welneere all the Inland Soile of the Iland, it lic∣ked (as it were) with the red tongue of the flame the very Westerne Ocean it selfe. In this violent inuasion, compara∣ble to that of the Assyrians against the Land of Israel in old Saxons spoiles comparable to the Assyrians vp∣on the Israelites. Psal. 74. 8. times, is historically fulfilled also in vs that which the Pro∣phet by way of sorrowfull lamentation vttereth: They haue set fire vpon thy holy places, and haue burned the dwelling place of thy name, euen vnto the ground. And againe: O God the Heathen are come into thine heritage, thy holy Tem∣ple Psal. 79. 1. haue they defiled: for all the Fortifications demolished with their Engines, and the Inhabitants together with the Bishops of the Church, and also the Priests and people, with glistering swords and crackling flames, were all at once laid along vpon the ground, yea and (which was a most lamen-table spectacle) the stately Turrets, high mounted Walles, and the sacred Altars, lay all tumbling together (all purpled with the broken and bloudy Quarters and goared Carcases mixed as in a horrible wine-presse. Neither were there any other Sepulchers abroad, saue the of buildings, and the bowels of wilde beasts and birds. (9) During this most wofull, desperate, and tem∣pestuous season (saith the mournfull Historian) some Britaines in the Moun∣taines. poore Remaines of Britaines being found in the Mountains, were slaine by whole heapes: others pined by famine, came and yeelded themselues vnto their enemies, vpon compositi∣on to serue them as Bond-slaues for euer, so they might not bee slaughtered out of hand: which granted, was reputed a most high and especiall grace. Others went ouer Seas into Strange Lands, singing vnder their spread Sailes with a lamentable and mourning note, that of the Psalmist: Thou hast giuen vs, O Lord, as Sheepe to bee deuoured, and hast scattered vs among the Heathen. Yet others remained still Psal. 44. 11. in their owne Countrey (albeit in fearefull estate, and con∣tinually suspecting hazard) committing their liues and safetie to the high steepe Hilles, to craggie Mountaines na∣turally intrenched, to thick growne Woods and Forrests, yea and to the Rockes of the Sea. (10) Thus was Britaine brought to the period of her glory, and the people miserably subiected to a forraine Nation, about the yeere from Christs Nati∣uitie 473. and after the Romans last farewell 28. In which time you see they were most cruelly pursued pursued with all calami∣ties of Warre. with all calamities of warre, and lastly betraied by them in whom so much trust was reposed, as mourn∣full Gildas hath ruefully declared. THE SAXONS ORIGINALL. CHAPTER II. A S times decaied Ruines haue stopped the Passage of those small Springs issu∣ed from the first fountaine of Nations beginnings, and haue diuerted their streames far from any sure Course, or certaine known Heads; so the originall pa∣rent, place, and name of our English-Saxons, haue bin writtē with a pen of slight touch vpon the leaues of obliuion, or else recorded in those obscure Roules, that as yet lie bound vp in the Office of Times forgetfulnesse: whereby it rests doubtfull from what root these branches first sprang; some bringing them from Asia, some from Africa, Saxons, the vn∣certainetie from whence they came. some from Macedon, some from Denmarke, and some without all likelihood from Britaine it selfe. Occa Scarlensis a Frislander borne, affirmeth these Saxons to come of Saxo a Prince of India, who with Occa Scarlensis. Saxons from Saxo a Prince of India. his two brethren were banished by lot to seeke their destinies abroad, their owne Countries being peste∣red with ouer many people at home. These (saith he) following Alexander the Great into Greece, became Progenitors to their Countries, that from them recei∣ued their of-springs and names: as that from Friso the eldest, his Frislanders descended; from Saxo the second, the Saxons vpon the Riuer Albis; and from Bruno the yongest, the Inhabitants of the Dukedome of Bruns∣wic. And of this opinion also Sufridus Petri seemeth to be. Crantzius doth deriue them from the Catti in Sufridus Petri Crantzius. Germany, and the Phrygians a Region in Asia; to omit others, who would bring them from Saxo the bro∣ther Saxons of the Catti in Germany. of Vandale. (2) F. Albinus a learned Author, doth thinke the Saxons to bee descended from Sacae, a people in Asia, Saxons from Sacae a people in Asia. and that afterward in processe of time they came to be called Saxons; as if it were written Sax-sones, as much to say as The sonnes of the Sacae. To this opinion F. Albinus in Progy . Mr. Henry Fer∣rers in his proge∣ny of English Monarchs. Master Henry Ferrers, a Gentleman of ancient descent, great reading, and a iudicious Antiquary agreeth; whose iudgement for my particular, I haue alwaies honoured, and from the Progeny of his English Mo∣narchs haue taken my principall proceeding in these Saxon Successors. (3) As touching the ancient place of their aboad, Ptolomie the Alexandrian placeth the people Sasones in the Inner Scythia, betwixt the Mountaines Alani & Ta∣purt; and Amianus Marcellinus siteth the Sacae (no doubt Ptolemy Geogra. in description of Asia. Amian. Marcel. li. 23. cap. 10. the very same) a fierce and sauage Nation, to inhabit ouer-growne places, commodious onely for cattell, at the foote of the Mountaines Ascanimia and Comedus, neere vnto which the Citie Alexandria, Tribatra and Drepsa were adioy∣ning, and are so set by Ptolemie. Neither is it lesse proba∣ble that our Saxons descended from these Sacae in Asia, Michael Nean∣der. then the Germans from those Germans in Persia, of whom Herodotus writeth. And Ioseph Scaliger, a re∣nowned Herodotus. Ioseph Scaliger. Author, sheweth, that these words fader, mo∣der, brader, tutcher, band, and such like, are at this day Persian & Saxon tongue agree in many words. found in the Persian tongue in the same sense, as we vse Father, Mother, Brother, Daughter, and Bound, &c. a great inducement (as some thinke) for the Saxons originall from those parts; though in my opinion the Latine, Pater, Mater, Frater, haue no lesse affinitie of sound, and in all likelihood were the Primitiues to these of ours. Of these Sacae, Strabo writeth that they made inuasions into Countries lying farre off, as Strabo. namely Armenia, where they left the memory of their successe in a part of that Country, by calling it Saca∣cena, after their owne name. (4) From these parts of Asia, as Seythia and the rest, one Band of them, consisting chiefly of their Youth, Saxons comming into Europe. proceeded by degrees into Europe, and possessed the Nesse, or Forland, which the Romans called Cimbrica Chersonesus, being at this day the continent part of the kingdome of Denmarke. In which place they were first knowne by the name of the Saxons. And here al∣so they among themselues beganne first to be distin∣guished into other Tribes, as Holt-Saxons (for so Ver∣stegan, out of their old Chronicle, saith they were cal∣led) Verstegan. cap. 1. Holt-Saxons. Saxons Angles & Saxons Iutes. for their keeping in the Woods: but more pro∣perly (wee may say) into Saxons, Angles, and Iutes. From hence afterwards they departed, and passing ouer the Riuer Elbe, diuided themselues into two Companies; whereof the one taking into the vpper parts of Germany, by little and little intruded them∣selues into the ancient Seat of the Sueuians, which now of them is called Westphalia and Saxome: and the Sebastian Mun∣ster. lib. 3. other incroched vpon Friseland and Holland (then cal∣led Batania) with the rest of those Countries that lie along the German Seas. (5) The time wherein these Saxons should thus infest Germany, by Occa Scarlensis verdict, is as an∣cient The time of the Saxons entrance into Germanie. as great Alexander: others account it long after, in the raigne of Tiberius. But before Ptolomie we finde them not mentioned by any Author, who flourished in the daies of Antoninus Pius, about the yeere from Christs Natiuity 140. And most certaine it is by Eu∣tropius and Beda, that before the yeere three hundred, Eutropius. Beda. Saxons fearefull to the Romans themselues. when Dioclesian swaied the Roman Scepter, the Saxons out of Cimbrica Chersonesus sore offended the coasts of Britaine and France, with their many piracies, and were fearfull euen to the Romans themselues. These multiplying in number and strength, seated in the Maritime tract of Iutland, Sleswick, Holsatia, Ditmarse, Breme, Oldenburgh, all Frisland and Holland: and in∣deed, according to the Testimonie of Fabius Quaestor, Wholly all the Sea coasts from the riuer Rhene vnto the Ci∣tie Donia, which now is commonly called the Denmarc; and with him Henry of Erfurd affirmeth Saxon-land to stretch from the Riuer Albis vntothe Rhene; the bounds of no one people of all the Germans extending any way so far, saith he. (6) But these spreading Boughes, are brought by others from a neerer Roote, planted not in Asia or Scy∣thia, but rather in Europe and in Germanie it selfe; The names of these Saxons Tribes. grounding their opinion from Cornelius Tacitus, who maketh them to be bred in the same Countrey, though distinguished by Name from the rest, as others more beside then were. Which Saxons (say they) though they were not mentioned by Tacitus in his Descripti∣on Tacit. Descr. Germ. cap. 1. of Germanie, yet in Ptolemy, that wrote not much a∣boue fortie yeeres after him, they are named; as also the Gutae, and the Angli, Copartners of their Con∣quest, Tacitus placeth among these Germanes that worshipped Herthum the Mother-earth for their A∣uowrie Tacit. Descr. Germ: cap. 6. Goddesse; at first but one People, but after∣wards diuided into three seuerall Tribes; that is, the Saxons, Angles and Iutes, who left the remembrance Saxons. Angles. Iutes. of their Names stamped (as it were) in the soile from whence they departed, and also coined new vnto o∣thers, wherof they became possessors. (7) Ptolomy, among the Sueuians in Germanie pla∣ceth Ptolem. Geogr. in de r. Ger. The place of the Holt-Saxons in∣habiting. Beda Hist. Angliae. lib. 1. cap. 15. the Saxons, neere to the mouth of the Riuer Albis, in the continent of Cimbrica Chersonesus. And in this Iland of Britaine, Beda telles vs, that the Kingdomes of the East and West Saxons were of them peopled: Whose originall Name, besides the Indian Saxo or the Seythian Sacae, some wil haue Etymologed from Saxum a Stone, because forsooth these people were hard or Stonie-hearted; and some againe from the Axones in Gallia, of whom Lucan maketh mention in this his verse: Longis{que} leues Axones in armis, And nimble Axones in their Armour light. (8) Iustus Lipsius coniectureth, and Engelhusius Iustus Lipsius and Engelhusius deri∣uation of the Name Saxon. affirmeth (as Verstegan saith) that the name Saxon, tooke the appellation from the Fashion of the Weapon that vsuallie they wore; which was a Crooked Bowing Sword, somewhat like vnto a Sithe, with the edge on the contrarie side, called by the Netherlanders, a Sai∣sen, and by themselues Seaxen, and the shorter of like Saxons weapons called Saisen, Se∣axen and Seaxes. fashion for hand-weapons, Seaxes; such as were those that were hid vnder their Garments in the Massacre of the British Nobilitie vpon Salisbury Plaine, when Hen∣gist British Nobilitie massacred. gaue the watch-word, Nem eour Seaxes, that is, Take you Swords: three of which Kniues Argent, in a Field Gules, were borne by Erkenwyne King of the East-Saxons, vpon his shield of Armes, as some of our He∣ralds haue imblazed. And that their Name was so gi∣uen them from their Weapons, some allege their accu∣stomed manner in wearing thereof, which vsually was to trusse the same ouerthwart their backes when they went foorth to battle; whereby notice was taken, and that name attributed vnto them, as the like hath been vpon like occasion vnto others: for so in Asia the Scy∣thians were named for their skill in shooting; in France Scythians so na∣med of Scyttan to shoote. Picards for their long Pikes. Galloglasses for their Pollax. the Picards for their long Pikes vsed in fight; and in Ireland the Galloglasses, which bare the Pollax as their principall weapon: and of latter times, vpon lesse oc∣casions haue Surnames growne both to particular men, as also to whole Societies; which may appeare in such as hauing vowed their voiage and seruice for Ierusalem, wore continually vpon their backes a red Such as had vow∣ed their voiage to Ierusalem, na∣med Crosse-backe. Crouch-backe. Crosse, whereby the name Crosse-backe, or in old En∣glish, Crouch-backe, was to them attributed: in which ranke, Edmund Earle of Lancaster (second sonne to King Henry the third) was a principall, and thereby got that name, which he could not claw off from his backe euer since. So likewise those men who entred that Religion of Monasticall life, wore vsually vpon the outside of their Garments the signe of a Crosse, whereby that Order was distinguished and noted from others by the name of Crouched or Crossed-Fri∣ers. But whence or howsoeuer the name arose, among all the Germans there were none in reputation for mi∣litarie Arianus. Zosimus. deeds comparable vnto these Saxons: neither had any aduentured by Sea and Land so farre to pur∣chase Seneca in lib. de Ira. renowne and praise, or perhaps (and that more likely) to supply their owne wants; ranging often Egin ardus. from place to place, as men alwaies ready to enter any action: and in Germanie to this day a great Dukedome retaineth from them the name of Saxonie. (9) The Gutae (no doubt the Iutae) Ptolomie like∣wise The place of the Iute Saxons in∣habiting. placeth in the Iland Scandia, lying very neere the Coasts of Germanie, vpon whose vttermost Promonto∣rie (as saith an ancient Manuscript) the Iutes did for certaine inhabite, which vnto this day of the Danes is cal∣led Iutland. These Iutes, Gutes, Getes, or Gothes (or as Iutes called Gutes, Gothes, or Uues. Beda calles them) Vites, gaue names to those parts of Britaine which they inhabited, as to this day the Ile of Wight beareth their impression. This variety of names Ile of Wight how so named. we will no further inforce, then that these Gothes were not the same that had passed Ister by Pontus Euxinus, and ouer-ranne Europe, who were also called the Getae Iohn Maior. Verstegan Restit. cap. 5. Sebastian Munst. lib. 3. by Iohn Maior. Their name, as Verstegan will haue it, was taken from their agilitie, or swiftnesse of foot: and some of them (as Sebastian Munster declareth) went and inhabited among the Mountaines that diuide Germanie from Italie, whereupon their name grew to be called the Hill-Vites, which are now the Hel ans. (10) The Angles (by Fabius Quaestor Ethelwardus, an ancient Writer, and a Noble Person of the Saxons The Anglia Sax∣on-place o n∣ha . uld-Anglis. Royall Bloud) are brought from Ould-Anglia, a Por∣tion lying betwixt the Countries of the Saxons and the Gi∣ots, as he writeth them, whose chiefe Towne was by them called Sleswic, and of the Danes, Haathby: but (more particularly) it lay betwixt the Citie Flemburge and the Riuer Sly, which Country by Albertus Crant∣zius is called Anglia. From hence (saith He ricus Crantzius. Rantzouius) the Saxons, who were also called the Angle-Saxons, Henr. Rantzoui∣us. went to aid the Britaines. And at this day there is a little Prouince in the Kingdome of Dania, named Angell, beneath the Citie Flemburge, which Lindeber∣gus calleth Little Anglia. Their site notwithstanding Lindebergus. is placed by most Authours in Westphalia, where the A Prouince in Dan cal ed lit∣tle England. Citie Engern standeth, and where Tacitus and Ptolomy rangeth them among the Sueutans; which in their times might very well be. Others would haue them in Pomerania, where the Towne Engloen doth some∣what sound their name: so doe Engelheim, Engleburg, Words of affinity with the name Angles. and Englerute, places in Germanie, beare witnesse, and are prints of their footing among the Longobards and Sueuians. But the most glorious remembrance of that their name hath beene for these many ages in this Kingdome of England: though Saxo Grammaticus (as erst we touched, Lib. 5. Cap. 2) will needs haue Anglia Saxo Gramma∣ticus. named from Angul the sonne of Humblus, and Giant-like brother of Danus the first King of Denmarke. But Albertus Crantzius being offended at his folly, telles him that England had the name of Britaine many hundred Albertus Crant∣zius. yeeres after that Angul was dead. Others there are that deriue the name England from the manner of this Verstegan. Ilands situation, being narrow in the West and North, for that Eng in the ancient Teutonik Tongue, as well as in the moderne, doth signifie Narrow, Strait, or a Eng signifieth narrow. Nooke; and to that purpose doe produce this verse of a Portugals allusion: Anglia terra ferax et fertilis Angulus Orbis, Insula praedines, quae toto vix eget orbe: A fruitfull Angle, England thou, another world art said: An Iland rich, and hast no need of other countries aid. (11) Callepine without proofe deriueth the Name frō Queene Angela: but on as weake a ground as those Callepine. Beda hist. Eccl. lib. 2. cap. 1. who will fetch it from their Angel-like faces, alluded vnto by Pope Gregory the Great. Or that of Goropius, from the Angle or Fishing-hooke, because, saith he, Geropius Becca-Angles so called of a Fishing∣hooke. they hooked all things to themselues, and might ve∣rie well therefore be called Good Anglers: a very meane conceit in sooth. But howsoeuer, most certaine it is that these Angles stole the name of this blessed Angles stole their name. Gen. 27. Iland from their elder brethren the Saxons (as Iacob did the birth-right from Esau) and called it after their owne; as wee shall further shew when our Historie hath gotten to the age of the Saxons Monarchie. (12) These all claime their descents from Prince Saxons both An∣gles and Iutes de∣scend from Woden. Woden, called by the ancient Latines Othinus; and who is deduced by our Antiquaries, as hath beene said, from the eldest Sonne of the Patriarke Noah, and is accounted the most noble of all the Progeni∣tors of the Saxon Kings, insomuch as they, and espe∣cially the Angle-Saxons, our Ancestors, haue (in their superstitious conceit of such wodden gods) imagined Woden to be their principall God of Battell; whose Woden esteemed a God. Frea the wife of Woden. Wife named Frea, was by the like fancie held a God∣desse, of whom more hereafter. (13) These had issue between them sundry Sons, Wodens fiue sons their names and Seignioties. and from fiue of them, all the Monarchs of the Eng∣lish-men haue claimed to haue been descended. Wech∣ta the first being reported to be the Progenitor to the Kings of the Kentishmen: Caser the second, to the Kings of the East-Angles: Wethelgeat the third, to the Kings of the Mercians: Wegdeg the fourth, to the Kings of the Dierians: and Beldeg the fifth, to the Kings of the South-Saxons, to the Kings of the Bernicians, after∣wards Kings of Northumberland, and also the Kings of the West-Saxons: only the Kings of the East-Saxons, claiming to descend of the same race, deriue not their descents from any of the Sonnes of the same men. This may suffice for the Originals of these three peo∣ple; who, as Cisner affirmeth, retained still the same manners after they were seated in Europe, as they had Cisner. formerly done in Asia. And what those were, let vs heare the reports of Tacitus, and other ancient Au∣thors, who together with the Germans (among whom they dwelled) doe thus describe them. THE MANNERS AND CVS∣TOMES OF THE ANCI∣ENT SAXONS. CHAPTER III. T Hese Germans, and among them the Catti and Sue∣uians, (our Ancestors ac∣cording to Albertus Crant∣zius) were a people (saith Crantzius. Tacitus) well set, sterne of Tacit. in descript. of Germanie. countenance, tall of stature, gray eied, and of a firie a∣spect, and their haire yellow. Vnto whom, Witichindus the Monke addeth and saith, that They were faire of Witichindus, lib. 9. cap. . Sauous described. complexion, cheerfull of countenance, very comely of sta∣ture, and their limbes to their bodies well proportioned; bold of courage, hardy in fight, and very ambitious of glory: for which parts (saith he) the Franks had them in great admi∣ration, and wondered at their new and strange attire, their armour and their bushie lockes of haire, that from their heads ouer-spread their shoulders, but aboue all, at their con∣stant resolution and valiant courage. Their heads and beards they suffer (saith Tacitus) to grow at length, and ne∣uer put off that vowed ornament and bond of valour, vn∣till Tacit. descript. of Germanie. they haue slaine an Enemie: but then vpon blood and spoile, they vncouer their forehead, and say they haue paied backe the price of their birth, and thinke themselues wor∣thy of their Country and parents. Their curled locks (saith he) they binde vp in knots, and standing on end, tie it in the crowne only, that is the harmlesse care they haue of beautie, to seeme more terrible to the Enemy. And by Sidonius Apollinaris his testimony, they vsed to shaue off the Sidonius Apollin. haire of their heads, reseruing onely a tuft in the crowne, about which they wore a hoope or plate of copper, which caused the haire to stand vpright, as by these his verses appeareth. Istic Saxona carulum vide us, Adsuetum antè Salo, solum timere: Cuius verticis extimas per or as, Noncontenta suos tenere morsus, Altat lamina marginem comarum: Et sic crinibus ad cutem recisis Decrescit caput, additur{que} vultus. In English thus: There doe we see the Saxosclad in blew, Bold on the Sea, but fearefull now on land: Their heighted tops vpon their crownes that shew, Are not content to hold their wonted band, But raisd in tufts, where all the rest, doth stand Bare naked shau'd, and hath no haire at all, Which makes full fac'd, but heads seeme passing small. (2) And that they were indeede bold vpon the Seas, Aegysippus witnesseth. The Saxons (saith hee) a Aegysippus. most valorous kinde of men, excell all others in Piracies. In imitation of whom, Isidore affirmeth, that for their Isidore. valour and nimblenes in seruice they had their name. A people (saith he) stout, hardie, and most valiant, and farre out-stripping all others in Piracies, seemed more fear∣full Saxons excelling all other in Pira∣cies. to liue on Land then at Sea. Whose intrusions and sudden violence both France and Britaine with great dammages felt: for in Gallia they seized into their pos∣session the Country of Baie . Gregorius Turo∣nensis. Baiocasses, as is to be seene in Gregorius Turonensis, who thence termeth them Saxo∣nes * Baiocassions: and in Britaine an Office of Charge was instituted to defend the Coasts from their irrup∣tions, the Captaine whereof was commonly called the Count or Earle of the Saxon Shoare: of whose Piracies and sauage Cruelties, let vs heare Sidonius in his Epistle to Numantius complaine: So many Rowers as you see Sidonius, lib. 8. (saith he) so many Arch-Pirates thinke you behold, they all of them together so command, obey, teach and learne, to rob and steale. There is no enemie so cruell as this, that setteth vpon others at vnawares, and as occasion serùes, as warily slips himselfe away. Hee setteth at nought such as encounter him: hee bringeth to nought those that take no heed of him: whom he courseth, he surely ouertaketh: when he flieth, he is sure to escape. To this seruice, Shipwrackes inure him, they terrifie him not. Be there a Tempest vp, the same serueth them, and to assaile others. They neuer weigh Ancour vpon the enemies Coasts, but with a resolution a∣gaine to returne: and their manner is to kill euery tenth Captiue with a lingring and dolorous torment: for to such Saxons kill euery tenth Captiue. Vowes they binde themselues, and with such Sacrifices they discharge their Vowes againe, being indeed not so much pu∣rified by such Sacrifices, as polluted with Sacrilege: and the bloudy and abominable Murderers thinke it a religious thing, rather to torment a Prisoner vnto death, then to Saxons accept no ransome. set him free for a Ransome. But when wee shall heare these vnhumane and bar∣barous reports either of the old Britaines or these sa∣uage Saxons our ancient Progenitours, let vs neither be offended at Gildas, or at the reports of these other forrain Writers, who spake thus of them as they were then Heathens, and knew not God: the time of whose ignorance seeing God regarded not, as the Apostle tea∣cheth, let vs acknowledge with due thankes the good∣nesse Act. 17. 30. of a most gracious God, who hath brought vs to An admonition to the Read . a holier conuersation, and hath made vs Iudges of those sinnes in them, that we might flie them in our selues. (3) Their Apparell was much different from o∣thers, and seemed strange to the Gaules, as Witichindus Witichindus, lib. 9. cap. 2. Tacit. Descript. German. The Saxons vesture. hath told vs: and Tacitus declareth the maner there∣of; which (saith he) was a kinde of Cassocke, called Sa∣gum, clasped, or (for want of a claspe) fastned with a thorn, hauing otherwise no garments at all, but going starke na∣ked. Neuerthelesse, the richer sort were distinguished from others, by their garments; which were neither large nor wide, as the Sarmates and Parthians vse to weare them; but straite and shewing the proportion of euerie part of their bodie: besides they wore Pelts made of beasts skins. The Man and Womans attire differd in nothing, saith he, The homely fa∣shion of the an∣cient Saxon wo∣men in their attire. Paul. Diacon. sauing that the women vse linnen Garments trimmed and interlaced with purple, and without sleeues, their armes bare, and bosomes naked and vncouered. Yet Paulus Di∣aconus speaking of the Longobards, comparing them to the Saxons, saith that their Cassockes were large and worne loose, most of linnen, trimmed and set out with very broad Gards or welts purfleet, and embrodered with sundry colours, and the richer sort with Pearles: their haire bound vp in a copper hoope, stood in tufts vpon the crowne, the rest curled and falling downe vpon their shoulders: their beards they kept still vncut, till they had killed an enemie; and for another note of ignominie, they wore an Iron Ring, as a signe of bondage, till they had cast it from them by the Con∣quest of a Man. Great Kniues, or rather broad bending Swords, they trussed vpon little Shields thwart their Witichindus. backes, from which (as we shewed) Engelhusius auou∣cheth Engelhusius. they had their appellation. Hee that abandoned or lost this shield in battle (saith Tacitus) was debarred Tacit. in descript. Germ. from their publike Sacrifices and Assemblies, the greatest disgrace that could be; for very shame and griefe whereof, many, many times hanged themselues. And vpon these Shields their manner was to lift vp their new elected Generall, and with acclamations so to carrie him tho∣row Tacit. bist. 4. cap. 6. their Campe. (4) For Warres, the Germans by Tacitus are repu∣ted the best, who for two hundred and ten yeeres held tack with the Romans. Not the Samnites (saith he) not the Tacit. descript. Germ. cap. 5. Carthagenians, not the Spaniards, or the Gallois, no not the Parthians haue so much troubled vs: for what can the East obiect against vs, sauing the death of Crassus, when he had defeated Pacorus, before trodden downe by Ventidius? But the Germans hauing either slaine or taken Carbo, and Cassi∣us, and Scaurus Aurelius, and Seruilius Cepio, and M. Manlius, haue defeated also fiue Consularie Armies, and Varus with three Legions in Caesars time. Nei∣ther haue C. Marius in Italie, or Iulius in Gallia, Dru∣sus or Nero, and Germanicus molested them at home in their Country, but to their more smart. And yet these Saxons among those valiant Germans were accounted Saxons of all the Germans the va∣liantest. Zosimu . the best for courage of minde, strength of body, and enduring of trauell, as Zosimus saith. Terrible also they were, and full of agilitie, by the report of Orosius: and for their sudden inuasions, most feared of the Romans, saith Marcellinus. Marcel. li. 28. c. 7. (5) Their fashion was to goe foorth singing to the Warres, (or rather they especially are said to march to battle, Tacitus. The Saxons goe singing to the warres. The Saxons vse first to trie by single combat. whereas others are said to goe) carrying before them cer∣taine Images taken out of their consecrated Woods. Their manner was before they ioined Battle, to trie by sin∣gle Combat (therein arming one of their own against some captiued enemie) what successe was to be expe∣cted: and this they kept as a Law vnuiolate, that none might presume to beare Armes before hee was solemnly ad∣mitted, The custome of admitting their souldiers. where in a frequent Assemblie a Shield was giuen him by his Parents or Kindred: and this was the pledge (as it were) of his first honour, he being till then reputed but a particular of a Familie, but thence-forward a member of the Common-wealth. They are very sensible; wise; and con∣siderate in their seruice, in preferring choice Captaines, in The Saxons wise∣dome in warre. following their Leaders, in obseruing their rankes, in taking the aduantage and benefit of the day, and intrenching in the night, holding Fortune euer doubtfull, but valour alwaies certaine. Their weapons, as testifieth Ioannes Po∣marius, Ioannes Pomarius. The Saxons wea∣pons. were long Speares, broad Swords, and the Cros∣bow: these they held in such esteeme, that with a horse furnished, Shield, Sword, and Launce, their Virgins were receiued in mariage, accounting them for the greatest bonds, and the very Patron-Gods of Matrimony: which Their Ceremo∣nies in marying. Tacitus. custome might well bee taken from their neighbours the ancient Saracens, whose Maidens vsually presented to their husbands a Tent and a Speare, in way of Dow∣rie at the entrance of their Nuptials. And among these Germans those Martiall habiliaments were in such vse, that they did meet neither at Feasts nor in Councell, but in their Armour. A People (saith Tacitus) whom thou canst not so easily Amian. Marcell. lib. 14. cap. 3. perswade to manure the ground, as to prouoke the Enemie, and aduenture wounds; holding small esteeme of that which is gotten by the sweat of their browes, when it might been obtained by the expence of their bloud. A strange di∣uersitie (saith he) that the same men should so much loue sloth, and hate quietnesse. It is with them a great shame for their Prince to be ouercome in Valour; but for any one to returne aliue from that Battell wherein the Prince is slaine, a perpetuall infamie and reproach. And that their resolutions were euer noble, and their Saxons their reso∣lute courage. corage not daunted in distresse or bondage, it well ap∣peared by a whole band of them taken by Symachus, and designed for the Romans pastime of Sword-plaiers, who the same morning that this spectacle was expe∣cted, strangled themselues rather then they would in∣eurre such infamie and basenesse, as to make others pastime with the ignominious vsage of their owne persons. (6) Their Lawes were seuere, and vices not laugh∣ed at, and good Customes of greater authority among them, Tacit. descr. Germ. then elsewhere were good Lawes; no temporising for fauor, nor vsury for gaine; but bounteous in hospitality, and libe∣rall in gifts, accounting both due to bee giuen and receiued, yea and that without thanks: no Nation freer from adul∣terie, or punishing that sinne more seuerely. For the woman Saxons great pu∣nishers of adul∣terie. offending, hauing first her haire cut off, was turned starke naked out of her Husbands house, and that in presence of her owne kindred; thence she was scourged with whips tho∣row the Towne, without regard of birth, beauty, age or wealth, and neuer after could finde another Husband. Those that were vnnaturally leaud of their bodies, their manner was to drowne them in filthy mud, and to couer them with hurdles. Yea and greater punishments then these the Pagan-Saxons executed vpon such offenders, as by the Epistle of Boniface an English-man, Arch-bishop of Magunce, which he wrote vnto Ethelbald King of the Chron. of Hol∣land. Mercians, in reproouing his adulterous life, is mani∣fest. For (saith hee) in the ancient Country of the Saxons (where there was no knowledge of God) if either a Maid in her fathers house, or one hauing a husband, became a whore, shee should bee strangled with her owne hands closed to her mouth, and the Corrupter should bee hanged vpon the Pit wherein she was buried. If shee were not so vsed, then her Garments being cut away downe from the Girdle-steed, the chaste Matrons did scourge and whip her, and did pricke her with kniues, and so was she sent from Towne to Towne, where other fresh and new scourges did meet and torment her vnto death. And their seuere Lawes a long time remaining in the daies of Christianitie, doe declare with what rigor (without regard of person) they both examined and punished this offense: whereof that of Queene Emma, Ran. Higd. in Po∣lyer. l b. 6. cap. 23. the mother of King Edward the Confessor, is a suffici∣ent example, who being accused for incontinencie of body with Alwyn Bishop of Winchester, was inioined to passe ouer nine Plough-share Irons glowing red hot, Queene Emma her punishment. she being blind-fold and bare-footed; by which triall shee is said to haue acquitted her selfe, insomuch that hauing passed them all before shee knew it, cried and said; O good Lord, when shall I come to the place of my purgation? This punishment beginning in these Pa∣gans, and continuing vnto the yeere 750. Stephen the Second, and most pontificall Pope of Rome, did vtter∣lie Stephen 2. Bishop of Rome. abolish, as too seuere and ouer-rigorous for Christians to vndergoe. The Virgins of these Saxons were neuer to bee The Saxons Vir∣gins maried b once. married but once, that they might haue no other thoghts, nor further desire but in case of matrimony: neither had the men pluralitie, excepting great Per∣sonages, and they sued vnto in regard of procreation, for to be without Children, was to be without reputation. The Saxons did highly esteeme of hauing children. So that the testimony of Saluianus, which liued a∣mong them, fitteth well our purpose, saying; Though the Saxons are outragious in cruelty, yet for chastity they are to be honoured. Saluia . (7) But as in these vertues they out-stripped most Pagans; so in the Zeale of their heathenish superstiti∣ons and Idolatrous seruice, they equalized any of them: for besides Herthus, the Mother-Earth, whom the Angli our auncestors accounted for a Goddesse of Aide: they worshipped Mercurie vnder the name of Tacit. descr. Ge cap. 6. Woden for their principall God of Battell: after whose victories they vsually sacrificed to him their Prisoners Mercury wor∣shipped of the Saxons for Woden. taken in warres, and of him named one of the weeke daies An old Manu∣script. Wodensday dedi∣cated to King Woden. Friday dedicated t Queene Frea▪ Isis a Goddesse of the Saxons. Wodensday, whereon hee was chieflie worship∣ped: whose wife named Frea, was by the like foolerie held to bee Venus a Goddesse, vnto whom another of their weeke daies was assigned for name and seruice; which of vs is called Fridaie. Isis likewise with them was a Goddesse of great ac∣count, so was Eoster, vnto whom they sacrificed in the moneth of Aprill; whence it commeth (saith Beda) that they called Aprill Eoster-Moneth: and we still name Eoster a Saxon Goddesse. Beda de tempori∣bus. the feast of the Resurrection, Easter. The Images of all these they still bare before them in battle, reputing no small confidence in their aides: and yet (saith Taci∣tus) they thought it vnbeseeming to paint their Gods in the shape of men; hauing euen by Nature doubtlesse writ∣ten in their hearts, a regard to that demaund of the Lord: To whom will ye liken me that I should be like him, saith the holie one Iehoua? They gaue great heede also Esay 40. 25. to the neighing of their Horses, and to the flight and singing of Birds, as ominous fore-shewers of future euents. (8) These Superstitions, Ethelward euen in his daies complained of: That they had infected the Danes, Normans and Sueuians, with the worship of this God wooden; vnto whom those barbarous Nations offered sa∣crifices, that they might be victorious where they fought. And as Crantz. recordeth, Herald the first of that name, and Norwaies King, was so farre ouergone, that he sacri∣ficed Crantzius Nor. Hist li. 3. ca. 3. two of his Sonnes vnto his Idols, that he might obtaine a tempest to disperse, and put backe the Armado, which Herald King of Norway his wic∣ked sacrifice. Herald King of Denmarke had prepared against him. This generall defection of Gods true worship, Adam Bremensis maketh mention of in this manner: In a Adam Bremensis. Temple, saith he, called in their vulgar and natiue speech Vbsola, which is made altogether of Gold, the people wor∣ship Vbsola a Temple of the Saxons all of gold. the Statues of three Gods, in such manner, as that Thor the mightiest of them hath only a Throne or Bed: on either hand of him Woodan and Frisco hold their places. And thus The Saxone Gods in their Temple Ubsola, and their properties. much they signifie: Hence Thurs∣day seemeth to be named. Thor, say they, beareth rule in the Aire, and gouerneth the Thunder and Lightning, Windes, Showres, Faire weather, Corne, and Fruits of the Earth. The second, which is Woodan, that is, stronger, maketh Warres; and ministreth manly valour against Enemies. The third is Frisco, bestowing largely vpon mortallmen, peace and pleasure, whose Image they deuise and pourtray with a great virtle member. Woodan they engraue armed, like as we vse to cut and expresse Mars. (9) Their controuersies and doubtfull matters were decided by drawing of Lots, which they euer made of some fruit-bearing tree, and was performed after this manner: If there were publike cause, the Priest; if priuate, the Goodman of the house, or worthtest in the Tacit. in descript, Germ. company, tooke those slitted slips, distinguished with certaine markes that had beene scattered at hap hazzard vpon a white garment: and after praiers and inuocation on their God, with eies fixed vpon heauen, and three times lifting the same lots aloft, gaue their interpretations thereof accor∣ding to the markes therein inscribed; which was receiued and beleeued for a most sure Oracle: as the like was obser∣ued vpon other occasions, both by the inspections of Beasts intrals, and singings of Birds, after the accusto∣med maner of other Gentiles, that doted vpon the au∣guration for things of future successe. (10) For the generall gouernment of their Coun∣trey The gouernment of the Saxons. they ordayned twelue Noblemen chosen from among others, for their worthines and sufficiency: These in the time of peace rode their seuerall circuits to see iustice and good customes obserued, and they often of course at appointed times met together, to Ioannes Pomarius. consult and giue order in publike affaires: but euer in time of warre one of these twelue was chosen to be King, and so to remaine so long onely as the warres Chron. Sax. lasted: and that being ended, his name and dignitie of King also ceased, becomming againe as before. And this custome continued among them, vntill their wars with the Emperour Charles the Great: at which time Wittekind, one of the twelue aforesaid, a Nobleman of Angria in Westphalia, bore ouer the rest the name and Verstegam Restit. cap. 3. authoritie of King; and he being afterward, by means of the said Emperour, conuerted to the faith of Christ, had by him his mutable Title of King turned into the endu∣ring stile and honour of Duke: and the eleuen others were in like manner by the said Emperour aduanced to the honourable Titles of Earles and Lords, with e∣stablishment for the continuall remaining of these Titles and Dignities vnto them and their heires. Of whose descents are since issued the greatest Princes at this present in Germanie. But though they obser∣ued this said forme of gouernment elsewhere, yet heere in Britaine it was otherwise, as heereafter will appeare. (11) And thus much out of my poore readings, I haue obserued of the originall beginnings, the names, maners, and customes, of our ancient Progeni∣tors, the worthy Saxons, without either amplyfying or impayring their glory: who being of all the Ger∣mans so much deuouted to warre, as that their only fame therein was many times sufficient to daunt the Enemy, were thought vpon by the downe-cast Bri∣taines as the fittest to support their ruiued Estate, of whose Entrance Conquests, and Kingdomes, wee are now next addressed to speake. THE SAXONS ARRIVALL INTO BRITAINE VNDER THE CONDVCT OF HENGIST AND HORSA. CHAPTER IIII. W Hen the state of Britaine was miserablie torne by An. Do. 450. the calamities of ciuill Dissensions, Famine, Death, and Robberies, the Romans returned, their owne Strength decaied, and their Afflictions daily augmen∣ted by their wonted Ene∣mies the Scots and Picts, no hope was left to their despairing hearts, that of themselues they were able to defend themselues: and therefore (as wee haue shewed) they called to their aid the Saxons, a Nation fierce and valorous, who to the number of nine thousand, vnder the Conduct of Hengist and Horsa, two brethren, entred Britaine at The Saxons enter Britaine vnder Hengist & Horsa. W. Malmesbury. Ebsfleet in the Ile of Thanet, in the raigne of Theodosius the second, and of Valentintan the third, Emperors of the East and West, about the yeere of Grace 450. Re∣ceiued they were with great ioy as Angels from Hea∣uen, Beda 1. 15. and saluted with songs after the accustomed manner of the Britaines, who appointed them the Iland Thanet for their habitation. (2) These Saxons in short time made proofe of Saxons ouercome the Enemie, and free the Britains. their Manhood. For ouercomming the Enemie euen in Scotland it selfe, seated themselues in some part thereof; so that their Conquest seemed absolute, and the Britaines freed from their former assaults. Peace thus setled, and the Inhabitants freed, a friendly Com∣position was made betwixt these Nations, wherein the A composition betwixt Saxon and Britaine. Saxons vndertook to maintaine the Field, and the Britaines to sustaine the Charge. In which league they aboad some certaine time, faith Witichindus, making vse in a ciuill sort of the Britaines. Brets friendship: but so soone as they per∣ceiued the Country large, the soile fertile, and the hands of the Inhabitants slow to practise feats of Armes: and fur∣ther considering with themselues, that themselues and the greatest part of the Saxons had no certaine place of aboad, they found fault with their pay and want of victuals, ma∣king that their quarrell, as both too meane, and too little for their high deserts, threatning withall, as vnkind Ghests, that shortly they would reckon without their Hosts: and Witichindas. thereupon sending ouer for more of their Nation, entred peace with the Scots & Picts, who all together rose against the poore Brets. (3) And Hengist, that by the gift of Vortigern Hengist had the whole possession of Kent. had got the whole possession of Kent, sent for more supply of Saxons vnto his ayde, pretending imploy∣ments of their seruice in other parts, but indeede to make strong his owne designes: and these swarming daylie ouer into Britaine got the strength of munition Fabian. and command of military affaires without impeach: For the King holding himselfe now sure from all in∣terceptions, gaue his immoderate senses scope to nourish more freely their sensuall pleasures, and com∣mitted more audaciously those vices, vnto which his The King giueth himselfe to secu∣ritie. owne corrupt nature was naturally addicted. This Hengist soone perceiued, and to adde more matter fit for flame, fed still the humors of this vicious King, outwardly shewing his care and readinesse for the Lands defence, his counsell and loue to the Nobles in estate, and his courteous carriage to the Commons in generall; but to the King an ouerseeming dilligence, and seruile obedience: by all which, ere it was long, he gaue fire to the traine, that blew vp the foundations of the British policie. (4) For feasting the King in the Castell of Tonnge, Io Stow. Hengist seasteth the King. commanded his daughter, a Lady of passing beautie, to attend the banquet, whose excellent feature and seemely behauiour, blew the sparkes of desire so right into Vortigerns wanton eie, that they presently kind∣led a flame in his lasciuious heart: for in the midst of his cups, Rowena (so was the damosell called) with a low reuerence and pleasing grace, saluted the King The King in loue with Rowena. with a cup of gold full of sweet wine, incharming it with these words in her language; Waes heal hla po Cyning, which is in our English, Be of health Lord King: he demāding the meaning, would be taught to answer to her owne vnderstanding, and said, D c heal, that is, Drinke health; whereof when hee had pledged her (as we speake) this bowle infected his senses with no lesse sottishnesse, then that of Belus is said to doe Dido, In the Fictious of Virg. . 1. when Cupid plaid the childe Ascanius betwixt Aeneas and her. And brought more bale to the Land, then af∣terwards did that which was presented to King Iohn at Swinsted Abbey by Simon the poisoning Monke: for Caxton . notwithstanding that hee had a Queene then liuing, (himselfe not young, hauing sonnes at mans estate, in profession a Christian, whose Religion alloweth nei∣ther polygamie nor adulterie) did importunate Hen∣gist that Rowena might be his wife: which at first with Mark. 10. Vortigern would needs haue Ro∣wena to wife. Will. Malmesb. de Regibus. some shew of excuse and vnworthinesse of person, was denied, but lastly consented vnto, and the Nupti∣als performed. And now Fortune casting occasion daily into Hengists lap, hee gaue his aspiring thoughts no rest, till hee had got the Crowne from Vortigerns head, and seized all vnder the Saxons power. (5) Hengist and Horsa in their Language, as also Verstegan Restit. cap. . in the ancient Teutonic Tongue, doe both of them sig∣nifie a Horse, vnto which beast the Saxons had great regard, and whose neighings (saith Tacitus) were their Tacit. destri. Cer. cap. 2. presages, and being white, were imploied in their sacrilegi∣ous ceremonies. Virgil also maketh the Horse to bee a luckie Osse or foretokened successe in Battle, as in this his verse he doth intimate and write: Bello armantur equi, bella has armenta minantur. And Crantzius telles vs, that it was a vsuall thing with Crantzius. the Pagan Germans, especially of their Noble-men, to take the names of Beasts, some from the Lion, some Pagan Germans account of tyran∣no s beasta. from the Beare, some from the Woolfe, and some from the Horse, as heere Hengist and Horsa are said to sig∣nifie. (6) Which beast they bare in their shields of Armes at their entrance of Britaine, and was blazed, saith Hengist and Horse their At . Verstegan, in this manner: A Horse Argent Rampant, in a Field Gules: which was the ancient Armes, as hee affir∣meth, of the Princes and Dukes of Saxonie. And albeit those Dukes haue of latter yeeres changed that Coat, yet doth Henry Iulius, now Duke of Brunswicke, a most ancient Saxon Prince, who sometimes bore the White Horse in a Red Field, beare the White Horse for his The of Ar . Creast, hauing for his chiefe Coat of Armies, the two Leopards, which by Richard Cordelion King of England was giuen vnto his ancestor Henry the Lion, Duke of Saxony, who had maried Mathilda the said Kings si∣ster, and by the Emperour Frederic Barbarossa had been bereft of his Armes, and Titles of honor. Moreouer, Charles Emmanuel the now Duke of Sauoy, who is line∣ally descended from the ancient Princes of the chiefe The Duke of Sauoy, his Armes. house of Saxony, by Prince Beral, who came out of Sa∣xonie into Sauoy in the yeere of our Lord 998. and was the third sonne of Hugh Duke of Saxonie, which Hugh was brother vnto the Emperour Otho the Third, doth yet beare for one of his Coats the said Leaping Horse. (7) This Hengist was doubtlesse a Prince of the chiefest bloud and Nobilitie of the Saxons, and by Chron. Sax. Hengist, his Country and parentage. birth, of Angria in Westphalia, wherein vnto this day a place retaineth the name of Hengster-holt. Hee with his brother were the sonnes of one Wihtgisil, whose fa∣ther Floren. Wigoru. Beda hist. Ang. li. 2. ca. 15. was Witta, and his father Vecta the eldest sonne of Voden, as Beda writes him, of whose issue many Kings of sundry Prouinces (saith he) had their originall. Hee growne now into high fauour with the King, by the mariage of Rowena, and feared of the Nobility Hengist, his first rising. for his strength and policie, bare himselfe great a∣mong all, and his supplies daily arriuing, pestred (if it not plagued) most parts of this Iland. For saith Ni∣nius and Beda, the riches of Britaine, and the fertilitie of Ninius. the soile, were such motiues to their couetous and aspiring mindes, that where they got footing, there they kept stand∣ing, and picked occasions where they were too strong. A∣mong thē that were sent for, by the aduice of Hengist, two principall Captaines, Octa and Ebissa were chiefe, Octa and Ebissa a tettor to the Britaines. who being embarked in forty Pinnaces, sailed about the Picts Coasts, wasting the Iles that were called the Orcades, and got many Countries from them beyond the Frith, whereby a further terrour was stricken in∣to the Britaines hearts. (8) The Nobilitie perceiuing what was in work∣ing, and the marke whereat Hengist set his eie to aime, The Nobilities complaint. complained to the King of their dangerous estate, shewing themselues agreeued to bee dispossessed of Offices and Charge, (as Guorong the Earle or Lieute∣nant of Kent, by Hengist had beene) the Land pestred with strangers, that sought their subuersion; reproo∣uing him much for his match with that Infidel Kowe∣na, his owne carelesse gouernment and adulterous life, and in such manner, that Vodine Archbishop of London, a man of great sanctitie, feared not to tell him that therby he had indangered both his soule and Crowne; Vortigern repro∣ued by the Bi∣shop of London. which words by Vortigern were so digested, that short∣lie it cost the good Archbishop his life. But hee still continuing in his lasciuious and carelesse idlenesse, was lastly taught by wofull experience, what miserie wilfull rashnesse and neglected gouernment do bring: He continueth in his folly. for the Britaines his subiects no longer would be thus abused, to see themselues wouen into greater danger by shew of defense, then they formerly had beene by the hostilitie of the enemie; but forthwith disclaimed His subiects dis∣claime their obe∣dience. their obedience to the King, when he had raigned the space of six yeeres, and chose for their Gouernour his They chuse Vortimer. sonne young Vortimer. (9) His Sonne he was indeed by nature, but not his in conditions, who (besides the quarrell of his Queene mother for Rowenas sake reiected) bare an in∣ward loue to his natiue Country, and an outward hate to the strangers that daily sought the subuersion thereof, and presently encountred with them in a pitched Battell neere vnto Ailsford in Kent, wherein Catigern and Horsa, brethren to Vortimer and Hengist, in single fight hand to hand slew each other. Catigern and Horsa their sin∣gle fight. In which place Catigern was buried, and a Monu∣ment in memory of him erected: the stones whereof to this day appeare, and stand vpon a great plaine Iohn Stowe, Cits-Cotihouse, Catigern his Mo∣nument. in the Parish of Ailsford, and from Catigern as yet is corruptly called Cits-Cotihouse. The like Monument the Saxons built for Horsa, which time hath now defa∣ced, and whereof Beda maketh mention, who saith, that a tombe bearing his name was in his daies to bee seene in the East part of Kent. The credit whereof is conti∣nued Beda hist. Aug. lib 1 cap. 15. to this day, where the Village Horsted is repor∣ted Horsted the place of Horsa his Mo∣nument. to haue receiued that name from him, which stan∣deth in the very same place where that Battle was fought, as the Inhabitants report. (10) Three other Battles after this with variable successe were fought betwixt the Britaines and the Sa∣xons, The Battels be∣tweene Britaines and Saxons. one at Craford, another at Weppeds-fleet, and the third vpon Colmore; in which last the Britaines bare themselues so valiantly, that the Saxons were driuen into the Isle of Tanet (if not ouer the seas) so that small The Saxons dri∣uen ouer Seas. hope rested for them so long as this valiant Vortimer liued, who had dispossessed them of all their footing in the Continent, and often assailed them in Tanet, as Fabian saith. After this Victorie long hee liued not, but was made away by poison through the meanes of Vortimer poiso∣ned by Rowena. Rowena the mother of all this mischiefe, when he had sate King the space of foure yeeres; and the father a∣gaine reestablished. (11) Vortigern now was no sooner restored, but that Hengist had notice thereof, who was then in buil∣ding Leiden Castle in Holland, begunne by Hengist. a Castle at Leiden in Holland, as their Annales doe witnesse, and Iohn Dousa in his verses specifie: where leauing all (as it were) at randome, returned to follow Iohn Dousa. his fortunes further in Britaine, and with a mighty Hengists landing resisted by the Britaines. Armie of his Saxons thought to land without im∣peachment: but the Britaines growne bold by their former victories, and their bloud not cooled since it was heat in fight, admonished their reestablished King, Matth. Westm. who with them went to withstand his ariuage. When Hengist therefore perceiued their courage, and knew their hatreds to him and his Saxons, hee sought by smooth words to gaine the shoare; and by some stra∣tageme, Hengist vseth treacherie. his wished desire: therefore pretending only to visit his daughter, yea and to rid the Land of her, if so he might haue leaue of the King and them; and therefore desired a conference in friendly manner: after which, his Saxons should depart the Land, and rest the like friends to the Britaines as they were when first they came in. (12) This motion seemed reasonable to the No∣bilitie, At Salisbury-Plain the Britaines and Saxons treat of agreement. Will. Malmesb. de regibus. and the place and time appointed, which was the first of May, and vpon the Plaine of Ambrij, now called Salisbury: whither vpon equall tearmes (as was thought) each partie repaired, and a while conferred with friendly semblances; but in the end the Saxons vrging their wrongs, fel from words vnto blowes, the watch-word first giuen by Hengist their Leader. The Britaines meant simply, and ware no weapons, accor∣ding The Saxons sud∣denly murder the Britaines. to couenāts: but the Saxons vnder their long Cas∣socks had short Skeines hid, with which, no sooner the words, Nem eowr Seaxes, were pronounced, but that each slew him with whom he conferred, by which treason the Britaines lost three hundred of their disar∣med Nobilitie, onely Eldol Duke of Glocester, as Ran∣dulph Higden declareth, with a Stake gotten from the Randulp. Higden. Polychr. li. 5. cap. 1. hedge, slew seuenteene Saxons. The King they tooke prisoner; for whose ransome, the Countries of Kent, Sussex, Suffolke, and Northfolke, were deliuered vnto these Infidels, who shortly defiled the beauty of Chri∣stianitie Diuers countries deliuered to the Infidels. with their Paganisme and heathenish cruel∣ties. Then (saith Beda) the fire of Gods vengeance was kind∣led by these wicked Conquerors, and raged first vpon those Beda hist. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 15. Countries next adioyning, and afterwards from the East Sea vnto the West, without resistance made to quench the Great spoile and desolation ouer all the Land. same, publike and priuate houses were ouerthrowne and laied leuell with the ground, Priests were slaine standing at the Altars, and Bishops with their flocks were murthered; neither was there any to bury the dead. And these are the times whereof wespake, and wherein the miserable Britaines abandoned the Land or hid themselues in caues, where in they either perished for hunger, or re∣deemed The Britaines abandoned the Land. their liues with perpetuall slauery. (13) Neither were their calamities greater in out∣ward afflictions then their soules, polluted with the Beda hist. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 17. Pelagianisme brought into Britaine by Agricola. heresie of the Pelagians, brought by Agricola, the Son of Seuerianus a Pelagian Bishop, that did foulely cor∣rupt the faith of the Britaines: to redresse which, Ger∣manus Altifiodorensis, and Lupus Bishop of Trecassa in France, were by the brethren desired, and sent vnto their thus troubled and declining estate. These pil∣lars of Gods truth, after they had powred forth prai∣ers, and conuicted the Heretikes, lead an Armie of The Heritikes conuicted. Britaines against the Picts and Saxons, and gained the victorie; after which (like vnto people that drew on Gods vengeance and their owne destructions) they fell to robberies and rapine, one Citie banding against another, and all laid waste by the Saxons and them∣selues. These miseries doth Gildas impute to haue hapned to his Britaines, because they tooke no care to preach the Gospell of Christ vnto those Infidels the English-Saxons, The principall cause of the Bri∣taines miseries. that in their heathenish cruelties sought the Lands destruction. (14) Vortigern thus dispossessed, for his further Vortigern flieth into Wales. securitie betooke himselfe into Wales, where among those vast Mountaines hee built a strong Castle; of whose foundation, Merlin the Welsh Wizard, with the Merlin the Welsh Wizard. He builded a Ca∣stle there. future successe that should afterward follow the Bri∣taines, haue by way of prophecie vainly spoken. This Castle most of our Writers haue said to bee in South-Wales, vpon a rockie and solitarie mountaine called The differing o∣pinions where this Castle was built. Breigh, or after others Cloarie, in the West of that Pro∣uince, not farre from Radnor, and neere vnto the Ri∣uer Gnaua: but the inhabitants of North-Wales report (by the reports of their ancestors) that in old Bethke∣lert was that Castle, which Vortigern built, and is yet called Embris, from Merlin Embris, as they affirme. And surely (besides the craggie and solitarinesse of the place, which seemed to mee rather an entrance in∣to the shadow of death, then to be the Palace or Court of a King) the Riuer Llynterrenny mooueth much, by which Faustus his sonne, begotten of his own daugh∣ter Rowena, is said to spend his life in continuall Faustus spent his life in continuall praier. praiers. (15) But whilest Vortigern was busied in building this Castle, and the Saxons making spoiles whereso∣euer they came, the Britaines vnder the conduct of Aurelius Ambrosius, began to receiue some breath of hopes, and to shew themselues out of their Caues. Aurelius Ambro∣sius Captaine of the Britaines. Beda hist. Eccles. Angl. lib. 1. ca. 16. This Ambrosius (saith Beda) was a gentle natured man, which only of all the bloud of the Romans remained then a∣liue, his parents being slaine, which had borne the name of the King of the Countrey. Hee with his brother Vter, commonly called Pendragon, returning out of Britain Aurelius Ambrosi∣us and Vter Pen∣dragon returne out of Britaine Armorica. Armorica, where they had remained from the Tyran∣nie of Vortigerne, landed at Totnesse in the West of this Iland; vnto whom resorted great Troopes of Britaines. His first Expedition was against Vortigern the scourge of his Country, and murderer of his King: whose Castle straightwaies hee besieged, and by the iust reuenging hand of God, with wilde fire consumed, wherin those adulterous and incestuous persons were burned to ashes. (16) Next, following the common Enemie, hee gaue battle to the Saxons on the North of Humber, at a place called Maesbell, wherein Hengist was discomfi∣ted, A Battle at Maesbell. Hengist discom∣fited. Geffry ap Arthur. Matth. Westminst. and in flight taken by Earle Edol of Glocester, and beheaded at Conningsborrow, saith he of Monmouth. Howbeit, Matthew of Westminster maketh him fight another battle vpon the Riuer Dun, in Anno 489. wherein, saith he, Hengist was taken. And Polydore Polydore. saith, that in the same battle Hengist at the first onset was slaine, with many of his Germans: the fame of whose victorie (saith he) is had in memorie with the Inhabitants of those parts euen vnto this day. Yet Gildas, Beda, and Ethelward, Writers of those ancient times, and two of them Saxons, mention not the death of Hengist, nei∣ther this great victorie of the Britaines. And Marianus the Scotish Monke seemeth to affirme the contrarie, where he saith, that Hengist raigned thirty foure yeeres in Hengist raigne. great glorie, and died peaceably, leauing his sonne Eske to succeed him in the Kingdome of Kent. With whom al∣so Florentius the Monke of Worcester agreeth. How∣soeuer, sure it is, had not the diuine power of God o∣therwise determined, the waning estate of Britaine doubtlesse had recouered her former strength, both by the praiers of Bishop German, the prowesse of this last spoken of Ambrosius, the valorous attempts of Vter Pendragon, and the worthy industries of the Christian King Arthur. The famous resistances of this last mentioned Arthur, the Monke of Monmouth Geffry ap Arthur, Arthurs acts aug∣mented with fables. with such fables hath augmented, that his Acts and Trauels may bee compared to those of Hercules, or with the Conquests of Caesar himselfe; insomuch that he hath beene accounted and ranged in the Catalogue of the worlds nine Worthies. And surely (by the te∣stimonie of Malmesbury) hee was a Prince of great worth, and did often aduenture with his small power to meet the Saxons in the face and in Field. But the Britaines strength daily decreasing, and new supplies of these Saxons daily arriuing, brought the one in despaire to enioy their owne right, and the o∣ther to triumph in their intrusions of wrongs. For continually incroaching forward, and inlarging their limits wheresoeuer they came, droue the inhabitauts before them from their wonted possessions, & seated themselues in the southern and best part of the Land, laying the stones (as it were) of those foundations, whereupon in short time they raised their most glo∣rious buildings. (17) For euery seuerall Captaine or Commander accounting that part his owne, wherein he first entred or made conquest of, with full resolution determined to keepe what he had got, and (as an absolute King) commanded his Prouince, whereby the Land became burdened with seuen of them at the first: as Hengist of Kent; Ella, of those parts now called Sussex and Sur∣rey; Cherdik, of the West; Erchenwin, of the East; Ida of the North; Crida, of the Middle-land; Vffa, the parts now Middlesex and Essex: which Kingdomes thus be∣gunne and erected, stood not long vnshaken by ciuill The Saxons often at dissension a∣mong them∣selues. dissensions among themselues, each King enuying his equals greatnesse, and seeking to inlarge his owne Dominions vpon the next. In which combustions, few or none of them came to the graue in due time, but were either slaine in warres, or treacherously murdered in peace, or else inforced to sheare himselfe a Monke, and resigne his Crowne to another. To speake of all these together, I hold would bring too great a confusion to our Historie, and a needlesse sur∣charge to the Readers memorie: To auoid which, I will briefly set downe the Conquests, Circuits, Acts, and Descents, that in euery seuerall Kingdome hap∣pened while they stood in their Heptarchie, before they were vnited to an absolute Monarchie; and then (according to my prefixed purpose) continue the suc∣cession of GREAT BRITAINES Monarchs. (18) For albeit the Land was diuided into 7. seuerall Kingdomes, and each of them carrying a soueraigne command within his owne limits, yet one of them euer seemed to be supreme of the rest; and that Prince who had the greatest power or successe in his warres, was euer accounted and called The King of the English-men, The mightiest of the Saxon Kings alwaies King of the Englishmen. as Venerable Beda in the fifth Chapter of his se∣cond Booke, and Historie of England, euer termeth them. (19) Such therfore as held the rest vnder, either by Armes or alliance, in amitie or subiection, swaied the whole Monarchy, and were acknowledged as Supremes in power ouer the rest, which succeeded not euer in the same Familie, neither continued in one and the same Kingdome without reuersement, but were car∣ried vpon the Flouds and Ebbes of variable successe, or as destinie pleased to alter the chance: wherof each of them (sauing the East-Saxons only) did attaine to Onely the East-Saxons intruded not on their neighbours do∣minions. the height of that gouernment, as to the hauen of their wished desires. See therefore (if you please) a generall view of the whole, and afterwards the seue∣rall Histories of euery Kingdome apart, before wee enter into the Succession of the English-Saxons Mo∣narchs. Heptarchy. Kingdomes. Counties. Kings Successions. Kingdomes Continuance. Kings first Christians. The Saxons Heptarchy. The Kingdome of Kent contai∣ned Counties, Kent. Kings raig∣ning, 1. Hengist, 31. 2. Eske, 24. 3. Octa, 20. 4. Ymerick, 29. 5. Ethelbert, 56. 6. Eabald, 24. 7. Ercombert, 24. 8. Egbert, 9. 9. Lother, 11. 10. Edrik, 6. 11. Withred, 33. 12. Edbert, 23. 13. Edelbert, 11. 14. Alrik, 34. 15. Ethilbert, 3. 16. Cuthred, 8. 17. Baldred, 18. Beganne in An. 455. Continued yeers 372. Ended in Anno 827. Ethelbert. The Kingdome of Souh-Saxons contained Counties, Sussex. Surrey. Kings raig∣ning, 1. Ella, 32. 2. Cissa, 75. 3. Edilwach, alias Ethelwolf 25. 4. Berthum. 5. Authum. Beganne in An. 488. Continued yeers 113. Ended in Anno 601. Ethelwolse. The Kingdome of West-Saxons contained Counties, Cornwall. Deuon-shire. Dorset-shire. Somerset-sh. Wilt-shire. Hant-shire. Bark-shire. Kings raig∣ning, 1. Cherdik, 33. 2. Kenrike, 26. 3. Cheulin, 33. 4. Ceaclik, 5. 5. Chelwold, 12. 6. Kingils, 32. Quithelin, 1. 7. Kenwald, 30. 8. Eskwyn, 2. 9. Kentwin, 9. 10. Ceadwald, 7. 11. Inas, 37. 12. Ethellard, 14. 13. Cuthred, 16. 14. Sigebert, 2. 15. Kenwolfe, 29. 16. Brightrik, 16. 17. Egbert, 19. Beganne in An. 519. Continued yeers 561. Ended in An. 1066. Kingils. The Kingdome of East-Saxons contained Counties, Essex. Middlesex. Kings raig∣ning, 1. Erchenwin, 34. 2. Sledda, 10. 3. Sebert, 21. 4. Sexred, Seward, Sigbert, 7. 5. Sigebert, 23. 6. Sigibert, 13. 7. Swithelme, 14. 8. Sighere. 9. Sebba, 30. 10. Sigherd, 8. 11. Seofrid, 12. Offa, 4. 13. Selred, 30. 14. Suthred, 38. Beganne in An. 527. Continued yeers 281. Ended in Anno 827. Sebert. The Kingdome of Northumber∣land contained Counties, York-shire. Durham. Lanca-shire. Westmorland. Cumberland. Northumber. Kings raig∣ning, 1. Ella, Ida, 2. Adda, 7. Elappea, 5. 3. Theodwald, 1. 4. Frethulfe, 7. 5. Theodrik, 7. 6. Ethelrik, 5. 7. Ethelfrid, 23. 8. Edwine, 17. 9. Oswald, 9. 10. Oswy, 28. 11. Egfrid, 15. 12. Alkfryd, 20. 13. Osred, 11. 14. Kenred, 2. 15. Oswike, 11. 16. Ceolnuphe, 8. 17. Egbert, 20. 18. Oswulph, 1. 19. Edilwald, 11. 20. Alured. 21. Ethelred, 5/7. 22. Alfwald, 11. 23. Osred, 1. Beganne in An. 547. Continuedyeers 379. Ended in Anno 926. Edwin. The Kingdome of Mercia con∣tained Coun∣ties, Huntington. Rutland. Lincolne. Northampton. Leicester. Darby-shire. Nottingham. Oxford-shire. Chesse-shire. Shrop-shire. Glocester-shire. Worcester-shire. Stafford-shire. Warwick-shire. Buckingham-sh. Bedford-shire. Hartford-shire. Kings raig∣ning, 1. Creda, 6. 2. Wibba, 3. 3. Cheorl, 34. 4. Penda, 30. 5. Peada, 4. 6. Wolfere, 17. 7. Ethelred, 30. 8. Kenred, 4. 9. Chelred, 7. 10. Ethelbald, 42. 11. Offa, 40. 12. Egfrid 4 monet. 13. Kenwolfe, 22. 14. Kenelme, 5. mon. 15. Chelwolfe, 1. 16. Bernulfe, 3. 17. Ludecan, 2. 18. Whitlafe, 13. 19. Bertwolfe, 13. 20. Burdred, 22. Beganne in An. 582. Continued yeers 202. Ended in Anno 886. Peada. The Kingdome of East-Angles contained Counties, Suffolke. Norfolke. Cambridge-sh. Ely-Iland. Kings raig∣ning, 1. Vffa, 7. 2. Titullus, 10. 3, Redwald, 44. 4. Erpenwald, 12. 5. Sigebert, 6. Egrik, 7. Anna, 13. 8. Ethelbert, 9. Ethwald, 9. 10. Aldwolfe, 19. 11. Afwald, 7. 12. Beorn, 24. 13. Ethelred, 52. 14. Ethelbert, 5. 15. Edmund, 16. Beganne in An. 575. Continued yeers 353. Ended in Anno 914. Redwald. THE KINGDOME OF KENT BEGVN BY HENGIST THE SAXON, WITH THE SVC∣CESSION OF THEIR KINGS, THEIR ISSVES AND RAIGNES. CHAPTER V. K Ent, the first Dominion of the Saxons Heptarchie, was formerly in the daies 1. An. Do. 455. of Iulius Caesar, the Seat of foure seueral petty Kings, yet neuer called a King∣dome, Kent in the daies of Iulius Caesar the Seat of foure Kings. before that Hen∣gist, the first Saxon Cap∣taine, in fauour of his Daughter Rowena, got it by the gift of King Vortigern, about the yeere of Grace 455. and in the seuenth yeere after his first ar∣riuage, heere he first laid the foundation of those for∣tunes which the Saxons his Nation in this Land after∣wards attained vnto: for hauing possessed the same with Victorie and Wealth the space of thirty one Hengist his raign and death. yeeres, (some adde three more) he left it in peace to his sonne Eske; and the rest of the Iland so weakened by his meanes, that others of his Nation were shortly planted in other parts thereof. It contained the Con∣tinent that lieth betwixt our East-Ocean and the Ri∣uer Of Hengist see more in the suc∣cession of the English Mo∣narchy, cap. 12. Thames, being bounded vpon the West with Sus∣sex and Surrey. ESke, the second King of Kent, is reported to bee the second sonne of King Hengist, who accompa∣nying 2. An. Do. 488. Petrus Albinus. Eske the second King of Kent. Retained priso∣ner in Yorke. his father into this Iland, made proofe of his great valour in all his Battles fought against the Bri∣taines, and in one of them (as Geffrey of Monmouth re∣reporteth) being taken prisoner, was for a time re∣tained in Yorke, but thence escaping, hee aided his fa∣ther in the Battle of Crekynford; and after his decease, succeeded him in the Kingdome of Kent, from whom His raigne and death. Beda hist. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 5. those Inhabitants (saith Beda) were called Eskings, amongst whom he peaceably raigned about twentie yeeres, and died in the yeere of our Lord 512. OCta the sonne of Eske began his raigne ouer his Fathers Dominions, the yeere of Christs Incar∣nation 3. An. Do. 512. Octa his raigne. 512. and raigned twenty two yeeres, without mention of any memorable Act. IMerik, the sonne of Eske, and the fourth King of Kent, raigned twenty fiue yeeres, saith Stowe; twen∣tie 4. An. Do. 532. nine, saith Sauil in his Table collected from our English Writers. He had issue, Ethelbert the first Chri∣stian Florent Wig . I erik the sonne of Eske. I erik his chil∣dren. King of Kent, and a daughter named Rikell, ma∣ried to Shedda the second King of the East-Saxons, the mother of Sebert and Segebald. EThelbert, the sonne of Imerik, in the yeere of grace 561. succeeded him in the Kingdome of Kent, 5. An. Do. 561. Ethelbert the sonne of I erik. who by reason of his young yeeres, was sore molested by his neighbour Princes, that sought to inlarge their Prouinces vpon his: for now the Saxons hauing made full Conquest of the Britaines, fell at variance among thēselues, taking all occasions to supplane each other, as Conquerours commonly can endure no equals, and prosperitie euer is looked at with an enuious eie; whereupon Cheulin King of the West-saxons, proud of his victorious successes ouer the Britaines, beganne to Cheulin in adeth his Territors, disdaine all amitie with his owne neighbour Saxons, inuaded the Territories of this young Prince, and in a set Battle slew Oslaue and Cnebban, two of his Dukes, discomfited the King, and wonne the day. This field was fought at Wiphandun, in the yeere of our Re∣demption 567. and is noted to bee the first Battle be∣twixt the Saxons themselues since their first entrance into Britaine. But young Ethelbert growne vnto yeeres, repaired his losses with the inlargement of his Kingdome to the banks of Humber, and was the fifth Monarch of Ethelbert the fifth Monarch of the Englishmen. His first wife, and children by her. In the life of Saint We rg His second wife. the Englishmen, as after we shall heare. His first Wife was Berta, the daughter of Chilperik, King of France, by whom he had Edbald, Ethelburg, and Edburg: a se∣cond Wife he had vnworthy of name, for her ince∣stuous and abominable act, in matching her selfe in marriage with her Husbands Sonne, A sinne (saith the Apostle) not to be named among the Gentiles. Of this King, as also of all the rest that attained vnto the glo∣rie, 1. Cor. 5. 1. to bee enstiled (per excellentiam) the Soueraigne Kings of the Englishmen, I purpose to bee sparing in their particular Kingdomes, and to reserue the larger relation of their Acts, Matches, Issues, and continu∣ance, to the times of their seuerall Monarchies, where∣by a more historicall course may be carried, through the successions of the English-Saxon Monarches, and a needlesse repetition of the same things auoided, which otherwise of necessitie would follow. Hee Repetition auoi∣ded in this Hi∣storie. raigned in great glory fiftie six yee s, and was the First Saxon King that receiued and established the Gospell. He died the foure and twentieth day of Febru∣arie, the yeere of Christ 616. after he had raigned 56. Beda Hist. Eccles Angl. lib 2. cap. 5. He r. . yeeres, and was buried at Canterbury, with this inscrip∣tion vpon his Tombe: Rex Ethelbertus hîc clanditur in Poliandro, Fana pians Christo, ad Christum meat abs{que} Meandro. EDbald, the sonne of King Ethelbert, in the yeere of Christ 617. assumed the Gouernment of Kent, 6. An. Do. 617. who no sooner, saith Beda, had gotten from vnder the awe of his father, but he refused to entertaine the Do∣ctrine Beda hist. ccles. Aug. lib. . cap. 5. Edbald, his s . ther dead, refu∣sed the doctrine of Christ. He married his Mother in Law. of Christ, and so polluted himselfe with the foule sinne of fornication, as that hee married his Mother in Law, the late Wife to his owne Father: which two hainous faults gaue his subiects both oc∣casion and impunity to returne to their former ido∣latry, who vnder his Father, for fauour, or for feare, had yeelded to the Lawes of the Christian Faith. But the scourge of God & vengeance from Heauen wan∣ted not to the punishment of this vnfaithfull King: for he was plagued for a season with often phrensie of Edbald often plagued. minde, and raging fury of an vncleane Spirit; but by Laurence Archbishop of Canturbury, he was at length Reclaimed from Idolatry by the Archbishop. conuerted from his Idolatry and incestuous Matri∣mony, and being baptized, indeuoured to maintaine the state of the Gospell. He married Emme, the daugh∣ter His Wife. of Theodebert, King of Austrasie, now Lorrayne, by whom he had issue a Daughter named Enswith, who died a Virgin at Fulkestone, a Religious House in Kent His Daughter. of her Fathers foundation; and two Sonnes, where∣of Ermenred the elder died before his Father, and left issue Dompnena, who was married to a Mercian Prince; His Sonnes, and their issue. Ermenberg that died a vailed Virgin, Ermengith a men∣tion; Ethelred and Ethelbert, both murthered by their Cosin-german, King Egbert. His younger Sonne was Ercombert that succeeded him in the Kingdome. This Edbald, his libe∣ralitie to the Church. Beda hist. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 6. His raigne and buriall. Edbald built a Chapell within the Monasterie of Saint Peter and Paul at Canturbury, in honour of Mary the blessed Mother of God, endowing that Church with sufficient maintenance; wherein, after the continuance of twentyfoure yeeres raigne, he was buried neere to King Ethelbert his Father, Anno 640. ERrcombert, the Son of Edbald by Emme his Wife, 7. An. Do. 641. succeeded his Father in the Kingdome of Kent, in the yeere of grace 641. He was a vertuous, religi∣ous, and Christian King: for the Temples of the Hea∣then His care of Gods worship. Beda hist. lib. 2. c. His Wife and issue. Idols he suppressed, and commanded the fast of Lent to bee obserued. His Wife was Sexburg, the daughter of Anna King of the East-Angles, by whom he had issue Egbert and Lothair, both Kings of Kent after him; Ermenhild, Wife to Wolfere King of Mercia, and Erkengode a professed Nunne in the Monastery of Saint Brigets in France; where she died, and was inter∣red in the Church of Saint Stephen. In his daies the state of the Church growing to a well setled forme of gouernment, the Prouince of Kent was diuided into Parishes by Honorius the Archbishop, as testifie the Kent diuided into Parishes. Records of Christ-Church in Canturbury. This King hauing raigned twenty foure yeeres and odde mo∣neths, His raigne and death. died in the yeere of our Lord 664. EEgbert, the elder Sonne of King Ercombert, in the nonage of his yong Nephewes, Ethelred and Ethel∣bert, 8. An. Do. 665. (the sonnes of his Vncle Ermenred) obtained the Rule of Kent, and had not their murther much ble∣mished Egbert his mur∣ther. his peaceable Gouernment, hee might well haue held place with the worthiest of those Kings: but thirsting after an absolute soueraigntie, and fea∣ring lest his owne power should diminish by their growths and rightfull successions, he set his mind on that bloudy, traiterous, and vnnaturall attempt, and with the assistance of one Thurne, found fit place and opportunitie to worke that diuellish designe, casting their bodies into a Riuer, that so their Murthers The fact re∣uealed. Wil. Malmesbury de gesti rerum Anglorum. might not be knowne. But God (saith Malmesbury) that searcheth the heart, reueiled the act, by casting vp their bodies on the shore, and to the open view of the next Inhabitants, who with great reuerence there buried them, and built a small Chapel ouer their Mo∣nument, whose bones afterwards were remoued, and new interred in the Abby of Ramsey in Hantshire. The Lady Dompnena their Sister, and next Heire to the Their bodies so∣lemnly buried. Dopnena their sister. Crowne, that was married to Merwald, a Prince of West-Mercia, and borne him foure Children, founded the Abbey of Minster in Kent: Wherein, saith Stowe, she became the first Abbesse her selfe, and Mildrith Her religiousnes. her daughter succeeded her therein, saith Capgraue. This King in great quietnesse raigned nine yeeres, and died in the yeere of grace 673. in the moneth of Egbert his raigne and death. Beda hist. eccles. Ang. lib. 4. cap. 5. Iuly: leauing issue Edrik and Wigtred, both Kings of Kent, succeeding after Lothaire. LOthaire the brother of Egbert, by strong handob∣tained the gouernment of Kent. For notwithstan∣ding 9. An. Do. 673. Lothaire intru∣deth into the Kingdome. Egbert left issue Edrik and Wigtred, (as is said) yet Lothaire taking the aduantage of their minori∣ties, and the example of his brothers intrusions, made himselfe King against his, as he had done against the Sonnes of Ermenred, but did not inioy the same with the like peace as he had done. For not onely Ethelred the Mercian warred strongly against him, but also Edrik, by the assistance of the South-Saxons cōtinually sought to recouer his right, whereby the peace of the Matt. Westminst. Kentish was much molested: and lastly, in a bloudy battell was Lothaire shot thorow with a dart, whereof he died vnder his Chirurgeons hand, the sixth day of Lothaire slaine. February, in the yeere of Christ 685. after hee had Beda hist. Eccles. Angl lib. 4. ca. 5. & 26. His raigne. raigned eleuen yeeres and seuen moneths. The pu∣nishment of the Murther committed by his brother Egbert, was on him repaied, saith Malmsbury, who de∣rided and made iests at the laments for young Ethel∣red Lothaire maketh but a est of murder. and Ethelbert, that were by the people held and ac∣counted Martyrs. His body was buried with his Pre∣decessors, Kings of Kent, in the Monastery of S. Peter and Paul in Canturbury, Anno 685. His buriall. EDrik, the Sonne of King Egbert, hauing slaine his 10. An. Do. 686. Beda hist. Angl. lib. 4 cap. 26. Edrik his raigne. His death. Vncle Lothaire in battell, succeeded him in the Kingdome of Kent, wherein he sate onely two yeeres, and those in continuall warres with his subiects; in which ciuill broiles lastly hee was slaine, leauing the Kentish Kingdome so torne with dissensions, that it became a pray to many Vsurpers, and gaue occasion to Ceadwalla the West-Saxon, to seeke the annexion thereof to his owne Kingdome; who with his brother Ceadwalla and Mollo inuade Kent. Mollo entred Kent, and with fire and sword made waste where they came. To meet these, the Kentish as∣sembled, and getting the aduantage, burned Mollo to death: in whose reuenge Ceadwalla persisted, and wa∣sted Mollo burned to death. the most part of that Prouince before he depar∣ted: so that after for six yeeres continuance no King raigned in Kent, but the Country lay exposed to the tyrannies of oppressors. WIgtred or Withred, seuen yeeres after the death 11. An Do. 693. Wigtred his meanes of at∣taining the Kingdome. of his Brother, tooke vpon him the gouern∣ment of Kent, which hee purchased with the good opinion that his subiects conceiued, and with a great summe of money paid to King Inas for his peace. He entred his Kingdome the yeere of Mans Redemp∣tion 693. the eleuenth of Nouember, and two hundred and fiue yeeres, after the death of Hengist the first Saxon. With him raigned one Swebharde, as Beda de∣clareth: but without mention from whom, or vpon what occasion. He founded the Priorie of S. Martin at Douer, and behaued himselfe worthily both in Warre His bounty to the Church. Beda Hist. Eccles. Angl. lib. 4. c. 26. & lib. 5. cap. 9. His raigne and death. and Peace: his raigne was thirty yeeres; thirty three, saith Beda; and death in Anno 725. leauing issue Ed∣bert, Ethelbert, and Alrick, all three succeeding succes∣siuely in the Kingdome. EGbert, the first Sonne of Withred, succeeded his Father in his Kingdome, vertues, & valours, where∣by 12. An. Do. 726. a peaceable gouernment is allotted him by all Wri∣ters of these affaires, for the continuance of twentie Edbert a vertuous prince. His raigne. three yeeres, without relation of any notable acci∣dent peculiar to himselfe and Kingdome: besides the appearances of two fearfull Comets, in Anno 729. Two blazing Starres. and fourth of his raigne; the one arising immediately before the Sunne in the morning, and the other shew∣ing his fierie beames presently vpon the Sunnes set, both of them striking their gleames into the North, and by West, foreshewing (it may be) the scourge and desolation that the Pagans intended, who were at that instant entred into France and Spaine. His Buriall. EThelbert, the second Sonne of King Withred, and Brother to the last King Edbert, began his Raigne 13. An. Do. 749. Ethelbert his raigne. ouer the Kingdome of Kent, the yeere of Mans Salua∣tion 749. and raigned without any memorable act either of his, or of his Kingdomes affaires, the space of eleuen yeeres, leauing this life in Anno 759. and His death. was buried, say some, in the Monastery of Peter and Paul in Canturbury, without issue of his body to suc∣ceed His buriall. him: howbeit the Annales of Canturbury affirms him to bee buried at Reculuers, in the Ile of Tanet, whose Monument is shewed at the vpper end of the South Ile in the Church, and is mounted with two Spires, if there be not a mistaking of him for Ethilbert his Successor. ALrick, the third Sonne of King Withred, by the 14. death of his brother Ethelbert, obtained the kingdome of Kent, the yeere of Christs Incarnation 760. no o∣ther Alrik the last of lincall succes∣sion. glory attending his affaires (saith Malmesbury) besides his vnfortunate fight at Otteford against Offa King of the Mercians, wherein it seemed some honor (though with his ouerthrow) to withstand so puis∣sant and impugnable an enemie. Hee is the last King of Kent that held the scepter in a lineall succession: the All the Kings of Kent after Alrik vsurpers. rest that followed, both got and enioied it by tyranny and vsurpation. This King is said to raigne thirtie foure yeeres, and to die in the yeere of grace, seuen hundred ninety three. EThilbert, surnamed Pren; vsurped the Title and Authoritie ouer the Kentish Dominions, when that 15. An. Do. 794. Prouince was sore oppressed with the inuasion of the Mercian Kenulfe, whose warres against Kent, by suc∣cession from Offa, were continued with such rigour and valour, that the Countrey lay desolate where hee had beene, and the people distressed whither he came. This Pren, Kenulse tooke prisoner, and lead away with His imprison∣ment. him into Mercia: but at the dedicatiō of a Church that he had then founded at Winchcombe, in presence of ten Dukes and thirteene Bishops, he released him at the High Altar, without either intreatie or ransome of re∣demption. The King returning againe into Kent, His releasement. could not there bee receiued, his place either being supplied by another, or himselfe so disliked, as not worthy any longer to raigne: and hauing had experi∣ēce of the worlds mutabilities, is left againe to his pri∣uate fortunes, from whence hee had stepped, hauing held his estate but for three yeeres continuance. His raigne. CVthred, saith Malmesbury, was made King of Kent by Kenulfe King of Mercia, when hee had ouer-come 16. An. Do. 797. and captiuated Ethelbert: notwithstanding hee is accounted for an Vsurper, and bare the title of King His raigne. the tearme of eight yeeres, without any other act wor∣thy of remembrance, inheriting his predecessors euill happe and calamitie, through factions and ciuill dis∣cords. BAldred, after the death of this Cuthred, tooke vp∣on him the princely dignitie of Kent, about the 17. An. Do. 805. Baldred tooke vpon him the kingdome of Kent. yeere of Christs Natiuitie 805. But now the heauen∣lie prouidence determining to bring againe together that which the Saxons had diuided, raised from exile little Egbert, to make him the Great Monarch of the English-men. His first wars were against Bernulfe King Egbert, Monarch of the English-men. of Mercia, and his second against this Baldred, King of Kent, whom in Battle he vanquished, and forced him out of his Kingdome, after he had sate on that prince∣lie Throne the space of eighteene yeeres. This Bal∣dred is said to haue fled ouer Thames, and to leaue Kent to the will of his Conquerour, whither againe he neuer returned, neither yet was heard of after his This kingdomes beginning, con∣tinuance, and end. ouerthrow. This Kingdome then that was erected by Hengist, the yeere of mans happinesse 455. conti∣nued her gouernment 372. and ended her glorie in the yeere 827. being made a Prouince vnto the West-Saxons. SOVTH SAXONS KINGDOME, THE CIRCVIT AND CONTINV∣ANCE, THEIR KINGS, SVCCESSI∣ONS, ISSVES AND RAIGNES. CHAPTER VI. T HE Kingdome of the South-Saxons, containing the Countries of Sussex The limits of this kingdome. and Surrey, had on the East side Kent; on the South, the Sea and Ile of Wight; vpon the West, Hant-shire, and the North de inuerged with the ri∣uer Thames. This King∣dome was erected by Ella a Saxon-Captaine, that in the second yeere of Hengists entrance, as some say, brought a supply of his Saxons into Britaine, with whom came An. D. 488. his three sonnes, Kymen, Plenching, and Cissa, these lan∣ding at a place which from Kymen was afterwards called Kymenishore, and discomfiting the Inhabitants, The Inhabitants chased into a wood. that made resistance, became himselfe King of those Southerne parts. But doubtlesse there are many opi∣nions of this mans first entrance and new erected e∣state: for some (as M. Sauile in his Table) set it in the The diuers opi∣nions of Ellas first entrance. second yeere of Hengists first arriuall, Anno 452. Others in the second of Aurelius, and no lesse then thirty yeeres after that, Anno 482. Harrison will haue it forty three yeeres after the Saxons first en∣trance, and fourth yeere after King Hengist his death, Anno 492. And M. Ferrers in his Succession of the English Monarkes, placeth it in the three and twentieth yeere of King Hengists Kingdome, and in the fifth af∣ter his owne arriuall, the yeere of our Redemption 488. Of such vncertaintie is the beginning of this South-Saxons Kingdome, whose Continuance and Suc∣cessions are nothing cleerer; insomuch that Malmesbu∣rie making seueral Chapters vpon the other six, omit∣teth Ma omitteth this Kingdome. only this of the South-Saxons: and therefore as wee finde them, let vs haue leaue to relate them, and for the present to leaue Ella as hee was King; till wee come to a fit place where more shall be spoken of him as he was Monarch; whose raigne is set by Stow to bee Ella his raigne and death. thirty six yeeres; by Sir Henry Sauile, twenty foure; and by M. Henry Ferrers, thirty two, and to hau ed in the yeere 514. CIssa the third and youngest sonne of King Ella, 2. then onely liuing at his fathers death, succeeded him An. Do. 514. Cissa Succeeded. in the kingdoome of the South-Saxons, (leauing the Monarchie to Cherdike king of the West-Saxons, who had planted his kingdome betweene him and the Britaines, hauing taken the charge of warre against them, for maintenance whereof, Cissa yeelded him a yeerely contribution) and liuing himselfe in long rest and peace, founded Chichester and Chisbury, the one a Chichester and Chisburis founded by Cissa. Citie for resort of his people, the other a place of re∣pose for himselfe; which last he fortified about with a strong Trench, for a further defense against all dan∣gers. Of any other his actions, little is recorded by Writers: onely in this they concurre, that hee was a Stow. man of great age and small acts, some affirming that hee raigned the space of seuenty six yeeres. Cissaes Raigne. EDilwach (by some called Ethelwolf and Athelwold) succeeded King Cissa in the kingdome of the 3. South-Saxons, and was the first Christian of that Nati∣on, conuerted by Bishop Wilfride, as some conceiue out of Beda: yet Beda saith expresly, that the King was baptized before Wilfrides comming. And the History of S. Swithune saith, it was done by S. Berinus, Bishop of Liber Historialis S. Swithune VV ion. Dorchester, who vsually preaching the Gospell in the king∣dome of the Mercians, in the Citie of Oxenford, and pre∣sence of Wulpherus King of Mercia, it hapned that King Athelwold, then a Pagan, was present, who by the indea∣uour of Vulpherus, and instruction of Berinus, receiued the Beda. lib. 4. ca. 13. lauer of Baptisme, whom also Wulpherus receiued at the Font for his God-sonne, and in signe of that adoption gaue Edil∣b es Godfa∣ther. vnto him two Prouinces, to be annexed to his former king∣dome, that is to say, the Ile of Wight, and the Prouince of Manures in the West of England; at which time also Beri∣nus by King Athelwolds permission, baptized the chiefe Dukes and Nobles of that Prouince. His Queene Ebba Ebba the wife of VVolfere. was baptized in her owne Ile, the Prouince of the Vie∣cians, being the daughter of Eanfride, who was bro∣ther to Eanheres, and both of them Christians. But it is generally held, that King Edilwach gaue vnto Wil∣fride the Peninsula (as the Latines speake) of Seoleseu, Beda lo o ci ato. Selsee in Sussex. now Selsee in the West, with the demaynes of eightie seuen Tenements, wherein he built the Monasterie that bare the same name, and was his owne Episcopall Sea. Against this Edilwach, Ceadwald a valiant young Prince, of the Bloud-royall of the West-Saxons, being Cap. 15. banished his Countrey, making head with the assi∣stance of friends and followers, entred his Territories with an impetuous incursion, and slew the King as he made resistance, when hee had raigned twentie fiue His raigne and death. yeeres: in whose raigne and Countrey raged such an extreme Famine, that both men and women in great Beda hist. l. 4. c. 13. flockes and companies cast themselues from the Rockes into the Sea. (4) Berthun and Authun, two Dukes of the South-Saxons, maintained the Warres and defence of their Country against Ceadwald, and by manly valour for∣ced him to retire. These Captaines betwixt them Ceadwald driuen backe. held the dominion of that Prouince, vntill such time as Ceadwald had gotten the Kingdome of the West-Saxons; who bearing in mind the remembrance of his former proceedings, and thinking to inlarge his owne Kingdome with the subiection of the South-Sa∣xons, entred againe that Prouince, and in Battell slew Beda Hist. Eccles. Angl. lib. 4. cap. 15. Duke Berthun, harrying the Country miserably be∣fore him. Which State, vnable to withstand the West-Saxons puissance, was by Iue, the next King succee∣ding, made a subiected Prouince, their Gouernment thence forward resting vnder his Successors, after it had stood one hundred and thirteene yeeres: and en∣ded The continuance and end of this Kingdome. in the yeere of Christ 601. by ordinary compu∣tation. But whosoeuer shall compare the times of the foresaid Kings, Wulpherus and Athelwold together, will easily finde, that it is not easie to finde the certaine concurrence of times, in affaires so clouded in obscu∣ritie, and so farre remote from our preseut times. THE KINGDOME OF THE VVEST-SAXONS, THE CIRCVIT THEREOF, AND SVCCESSION OF THEIR KINGS VNTO EGBERT; WITH THEIR ISSVES AND RAIGNES. CHAPTER VII. T He Kingdome of the West-Saxons, though in time la∣ter The VVest Sax∣ons the first that brought the Heptarchy to a Monarchy. then the two former, yet in circuit and fame surmounted them both; whose Monarch was the Maull that first brake the Scepters of the other six Kingdoms in sunder, and made one Crowne of these their seuerall Diadems, more glorious then they all, and that first worne vpon Egbert the West-Saxons heads, and the Scepter swaied in his Imperiall hand; vntill whose time and person wee will continue the succession of their Kings, beginning with Cherdik that first made it a Kingdome, and briefly shew their Acts, Florent. W . whilest it so stood in the Saxons Heptarchie. THis Cherdik is said to haue brought a second sup∣ply 2. An. Do. 495. The time when Cherdik entred into Britaine. of Sax s forces into Britaine, in the yeere of our Lord 495. and fifth of the Monarchy of King Ella: his landing being at a place on that occasion cal∣led Chederik-shore, who with his sonne Kenrik, was en∣countred by the Britaines, vnder the conduct of Na∣tanleod a British Prince, whose Country was then cal∣led An. Do. 508. after his name; whom he slew in Battell, with fiue thousand more of his Britaines: the fortune of which field gaue resolutions and hopes of better successe; it was fought neere vnto a Brooke vpon that euent called Cherdiks-ford, now by contraction Chard-ford. Heereupon establishing his new erected Kingdome, (which contained Cornwal, Deuonshire, Dorsetshire, So∣mersetshire, The circuit of this kingdome. Wiltshire, Hantshire, and Barkshire,) he in∣larged the same with the conquest of the Ile of Wight, the gouernment whereof was by him giuen to Stuffe and Withgar his Nephewes, which later slew the Bri∣taines there inhabiting, and named the place of his victory Withgarbirg, assuming the name of King, and was buried at his Citie Withgar, in the same Ile. About seuen yeeres after Cherdiks entrance, Porth a Saxon, with his two Sonnes, Megla and Beda, landed in the West, at the place from him called Portesmouth, whose aid with Kent and Sussex, assisted Cherdik in his Con∣quests. His raigne is set to be thirty three yeeres; and The first Kings raigne, issue, and death. his death in the yeere of grace fiue hundred thirtie fiue: hauing had two sonnes, Kenrik and Chelwolf, the one of which died before his Father; and the other succeeded him in his Kingdome. Chelwolf had issue Cuthgils, whose sonne was Kenfridd, and his sonne Kensy, the Father of King Eskwin, who was the Suc∣cessor of King Kenwalk, and predecessor of King Kent∣win, in the Kingdome of the West-Saxons. KEnrik, the eldest Sonne of King Cherdik, hauing formerly made proofe of his prowesse in the as∣sistance 3. An. Do. 535. Kenrik his battels. of his Father, was after his death also verie fortunate in obtaining two victories ouer the Bri∣taines; the one at Searesberige, and the other at Beran∣brig; whose raigne beginning Anno 534. continued anbery in Ox∣sordshire. twenty six yeers; ending in the yeere of our Redemp∣tion, fiue hundred sixty. He had issue three Sonnes, of His issue, Cheau∣lin, Cuthwolfe, and Cu . which Cheaulin the eldest succeeded him in his king∣dome; Cuthwolfe the second assisted his Brother in his Warres, and was partaker with him of his victories, who died Anno 672. leauing issue one onely Sonne, named Chell, or Cearlike, who proued nothing so ver∣tuous and dutifull a subiect as his Father had beene: for he rose in rebellion against his Vncle, and by Cearlike the son of Cuthwolfe, re∣belleth against his Vncle. strong hand expelled him his kingdome. The third Sonne of King Kenrik was Cuth, famous in his issue, though mentionlesse for action in him∣selfe: for hee had three sonnes, of which Chelwolf the eldest, was King of the West Saxons (as shalbe declared) Chell the second, was father to Kingils the sixt (and first Christian) King of the West Saxons, and Grandfa∣ther to Kenwall and Kenwin the seuenth and ninth Kings of that Kingdome: and Ched the yongest, was father of Kenbert, Grandfather to Chedwall the most re∣nowned King of the West Saxons; of whom we are pre∣sentlie Chedwall, the most renowned King of the West-Saxons. to speake, and of them all in the succession of th English Saxons Monarchs: and now to returne a∣gaine to the issue of King Kenrik. CHeaulin his first sonne, entred vpon the gouerne∣ment ouer the West-Saxons Anno 561. and euen 4. An. Do. 561. Cheaulin the time when he began to raigne. An vnquiet and ambitious neigh∣bour. at the first began to disturbe the quiet peace of his neighbour Prouinces, taking aduantage at the young yeeres of Ethelbert, who was made King of Kent in the same yeere that Cheaulin was, whom he discomfi∣ted, and slew his two Captaines, Duke Oslaue and Duke Cnebba, at * Wibbandune, as we haue said. Other Wimbledon. cap. 5. Sect. 5. Victories he obtained ouer the Britaines, both at Bed∣ford, Deorham, Glocester, Cirencester, and Bathancester. Stowe. But the fortunes of warres being alwaies variable, at length his successe altered, and at VVannes ditche in Ouerthrowne by Cealrik. VViltshire he was ouerthrowne, and dispossessed of his kingdome by Cealrik his brother Cuthwolfs sonne, when he had raigned thirty three yeeres. Hee had is∣sue, His raigne. His issue, Cuth and Cuthwin. Cuth a va nt vvarrior. Cuth and Cuthwin: the former serued valiantly in the warres vnder his father at Wimbledon in Surrey, where King Ethelbert of Kent was chased, and his soul∣diers slaine: and with the like valour and victorie hee fought at Fethanleygh against the Britaines, notwith∣standing that therein he lost his life, the yeere of our Slaine Fe∣thanleygh. Lord 585. and the fiue and twentieth of his fathers raigne. Cuthwin his younger brother suruiued his father, but succeeded not in his Kingdome, being then (by reason of his young yeeres) vnable to reco∣uer his right. He had two sonnes, Kenbald and Cuth, the latter of which was father to Chelwald, whose son Kenred had issue, Ine the eleuenth King of the West-Saxons, and Ingils his brother, whose sonne was Eoppa the father of Easa, whose sonne was Alkenmud, the father of Egbert the eighteenth King of the West-Sax∣ons, who reduced the Saxons diuided Heptarchie into an absolute Monarchie. CEarlik the sonne of Cuthwolfe, who was brother to 5. An. Do. 592. Cearlik the King of the West-Saxons. this last King, succeeded in the kingdome by the eiection of his Vncle, and was the fourth King of the West-Saxons. He began his raigne in the yeere of our Redemption 592. and continued it the terme of six yeeres, without any memorable act by him atchieued His raignes con∣tinuance. besides his Treason spoken of before. CHelwolfe the sonne of Cuth, the sonne of Kenrik, 6 Chelwolfe when he began to raigne. and Cosen-german to Cearlik the preceding King, began his raigne ouer the West-Saxons, the yeere 598. on whose first entrance, this prouince of the West-Saxons was inuaded both by the Britaines, and also by VVest-Saxons in∣usded by three sundry Enemies. Hen Huntingd. His death. the Scots and Picts: and the East-Angles likewise mo∣lested his peace, vnder the conduct of Redwald at that time Monarch of the Englishmen. But hee wading thorow these troubles, harried the Prouince of the South-Saxons with inuasions and calamities, in the prosecution whereof he died, leauing the pursuit of his warres and possession of his kingdome to Kingils his Nephew, that immediately succeeded him, after he had raigned the space of fourteene yeeres. KIngils the Sonne of Chel, who was Brother to King Chelwolfe, succeeding his Vncle in the kingdome 7. An. Do. 611. Kingils his com∣ming to the Kingdome. Quinchelinus his associate. Wil. Malmsbury. Marianus. Florent. Wigorn. Their victorie ouer the Bri∣taines. of the VVest-Saxons, in the yeere six hundred and twelue, in his third yeere associated vnto him in his Gouernment Quinchelme his Sonne, who ioyntly managed the West-Saxons affaires both of warre and peace. And fighting with victorie against the Bri∣taines at Beandune, they there slew of them one thou∣sand forty six persons, and after that against Penda King of Mercia, neere vnto Cirencester, about the fift yeere of his raigne, where lastly they came to a con∣clusion of peace. This King at the preaching of Be∣rinus (an Italian Diuine, afterward reputed for a Saint) Kingils conuer∣ted to Christia∣nitie, the first of all the VVest-Saxons Kings. Beda hist. Angl. lib. 3 cap. 7. Oswald a witnes at his baptizing. His gift to Kingils. and by the perswasions of Oswald the most Christian King of Northumberland, (who was a suiter to become his Son in Law, by the mariage of Kineburg his daugh∣ter, and was made his Godfather by receiuing him at the Font) receiued the Word of Life, and became the first Christian King of all the West-Saxons; in witnesse whereof, he gaue the City Dorchester, neere vnto Ox∣ford, to his Conuerter, who therein erected his Epis∣copall Sea. He raigned the space of thirty one yeeres, some say but seuen and twenty, and had issue (besides Quinchelinus, who raigned with him, and died before him) Kenwin and Kenwald, that succeeded him; and Kineburg his Daughter married to Oswald, as is said. Quinchelinus had a Sonne named Cuthred, that was baptized with his Father at Dorchester, and is said by Stowe, to haue raigned after the death of Kingils: but I take it rather to be Kenwen, whom some suppose to be his Fathers Associate the terme of foure yeeres, but neuer sole King himselfe. KEnwald, whom Beda calleth Senwalch, succeded his 8. An. Do. 643. Beda hist. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 7. Kenwald re th the Christian faith. Father Kingils in the kingdome of the West-Sax∣ons. His beginnings by Matthew of VVestminster are compared to be with the worst, and his endings with the best of those Kings. At his first entrance he fought with victorie against the Britaines at , whereof he became most insolent, and refused not onely to re∣ceiue the Christian Faith, but also put from him his lawfull wife Sexburg, the sister of Penda King of Mer∣cia, whereby hee became hatefull to his owne Sub∣iects, and sore assaulted by the Mercian King, who followed the reuenge so farre, that he forced Kenwald He out of his Kingdome. out of his kingdome, who being driuen to extremity, sought succour at the mercie of Anna the Christian King of the East-Angles, where he was both courteous∣lie entertained, and at last (wonne to the Christian Ro ald wonne to the faith of Ch ist. Faith) was baptized by Bishop Foelix, whereupon hee did recall his wife, according to prescript of Christia∣nitie, and recouered againe his former Maiestie, which he much aduanced by his pious workes. He founded His vvorks of de∣uotion. . Malmsbury. His raigne and death. Vita Alel. His Wife gouer∣neth the king∣dome. the Cathedrall of Winchester, and the Abby of Malmes∣burie, and when he had raigned thirty one yeeres, gaue place vnto nature in the yeere 673. leauing no issue of his body to succeede him: whereupon Segburg his wife tooke vpon her the gouernment of the West-Sa∣xons, the same yeere that Lothair was made King of Kent, shee being a woman of great spirit and vnder∣standing, An. Do. 674. and sufficiently worthy to haue managed the Kingdome, had she not beene preuented by death, or rather (as some write) by a religious deuotion, that the affaires of this present life might not hinder her zealous meditations of the future, in desire whereof, she abandoned her Regencie, and built a house of de∣uotion in the Ile of Shepey, wherein her selfe became She becomes a Nunne, and is elected Abbesse of Ely. a Vowesse, and afterward was elected the Abbesse of Elie. ESkwin after the departure of Queene Segburg, suc∣ceeded in the kingdome of the West-Saxons. Hee 8. An. Do. 675. was the sonne of Kensy, the sonne of Kenfrid, the sonne of Cuthgils, the sonne of Chelwolfe, the sonne of Cher∣dik, the first King of that Prouince: his raigne lasted Eskwin his raigne not long. Hear. Huntington. His battell with VVulfere. but two yeeres, in which time he fought a great Bat∣tle with Wulfere King of the Mercians, at the place then called Bidanheaford, and wherein many of the Saxons on both sides perished, leauing neither issue to He died without issue. succeede him, nor other matters to be spoken of him, though (as it seemeth) hee had dispossessed Kenwin, who had more right to the Crowne then himselfe; or (as Beda and Malmesbury auerre) he raigned with him the space of two yeeres, and Kenwin alone for seuen yeeres more. KEnwin the brother of Kenwald, and sonne to King Kingils, in the yeere 677. became the ninth King 9. An. Do. 677. Kenwin, when he began to raigne. of the West-Saxons, and raigned the space of nine yeeres. Hee was a great scourge vnto the weake and ouer-borne Britaines, making Conquests of their pos∣sessions, and forcing them euen to the Sea-shoare, be∣ing A great scourge to the ouer-born Britaine a people allotted vnto miserie, and by these stran∣gers pursued so vehemently, that lastly they were dri∣uen into the West-Angle of this Iland, and their liues defended and maintained among those waste Moun∣taines and hard Rockes, which therein were more propitious and gentle then the stonie hearts of their Oppressors. CEadwalla a valiant young man, and of the bloud-Royall of the Genisses, saith Beda, being banished 10. An. Do. 686. Beda hist. Eccles. Angl. lib. 4. ca. 15. from his Country through the enuie of others, who maligned him only for his vertues and worthinesse, succeeded Kenwin his kinsman in the kingdome of the West-Saxons, and with greater glory raigned then any other in that Prouince before him had done. He Ceadwall raigned with greater glo∣rie then any other. was the Sonne of Kenbert, whose Father was Ched, the second Sonne of Cuth; and Cuth was the third Sonne of Kenrik, who was the eldest Sonne of Cherdik, that laid the first stone of this kingdomes foundation. His first brunt of furie was against Edilwach, King of the His descent. South-Saxons, whom in field he slew: and in another battell Berthun, that had made himselfe King of that His warres a∣gainst the South-Saxons. State. The Ile of Wight also he almost quite wasted: and though he were vnbaptized, yet did hee binde him∣selfe by vow to giue the fourth part of the spoile vnto Gods vse, and performed it accordingly vnto Bishop His vow to God. Wilfrid, who with Bernewine and Hildila conuerted the people from their Idolatrous superstition, vnto The last of the Saxons that were conuerted to Christ. the true seruice of Christ, it beeing the last part of the Saxons possessions that was turned from their Pagan manners. Of which his specious deuotion, Malmesburie giueth this censure: although wee praise his affestion, (saith hee) yet allow wee not the example; for it is written, that who so offereth vnto God the goods of the An vnpleasing fice to God. poore, dooth as it were sacrifice the sonne in the sight of the Father. Kent also with greeuous warres hee twice af∣flicted, and therein spilt so much Christian blood, that His great bloud∣then in Kent. nature her selfe was therein offended, and hee at last as much lamented: in repentance whereof, after hee His repentance. had raigned in great stoutnes the space of two yeeres, in a zealous deuotion went to Rome, where of Pope Sergius he was baptized vpon Easter Euen (saith Beda, His baptizing. the yeere of our Redemption 689.) by the name of Peter, and wearing as yet the white Robes of inno∣cencie, put (as the rite then was) vpon him at his la∣uer of Baptisme, fell sicke, and the twentieth day of His death. April following died, hauing had neither wife nor childe that we read of. He was buried in Saint Peters Church in Rome, vnder a faire Monument, with this His buriall. inscription thereon engrauen: Heere Cedwall, other∣wise Beda hist. Eccles. Angl. lib. 5. ca. 7. named Peter, King of the West-Saxons, is buried, who died the twentieth of Aprill, in the second Indiction, and liued thirty yeeres or thereabouts, when that noble and mighty Prince Iustinian was Emperour of Rome, and had raigned foure yeeres in the Empire, and Sergius a true pa∣terne of the Apostles, had sate two yeeres in Peters Seat. What hath beene written of this Ceadwall, King of the West-Saxons, by Beda the Saxon and his followers, The history of Ceadwall attri∣buted to Cadwel∣lader by Geffrey. hath beene attributed to Cadwalader King of the Bri∣taines, by Geffrey of Monmouth the Britaine, Iohn Castor, and More, affirming him to be the same man, and that vpon the admonition of an Angell hee went to Rome, tooke penance of Pope Sergius, there died in the twelfth Kalends of May, and was there buried with Booke of S. Al∣bans, part. 5. cap. 61. D. Powel History Ca b. pag. 9. the same Epitaph, and after the same manner. But the Writer of the Historie of Cambria, of Cadwaladers go∣ing to Rome, and the other appendances, seemeth to be doubtfull, and saith that it differed from the asser∣tion of Bernardus Guidonius, the neerenesse of the names being the very cause of the like relations, and confidently affirmeth that it was Edwall the sonne of Cadwalader, who in such deuotion went to Rome, and there made such a religious end, about the yeere of our Lord 720. INe, whom Beda calles Hun, others Ina (the sonne of Kenred, the sonne of Cuth, the sonne of Cuthwin, the 11. An. Do. 688. Floren. UU gorn. j e his descent. sonne of Chelwin the third King of the West-Saxons, the sonne of Kenrik the second, and hee the sonne of Cherdik the first King in that Prouince) after Cead∣wals departure to Rome, tooke vpon him the gouern∣ment of that Kingdome, which hee managed with continuall Victories the terme of thirty eight yeeres. His first attempts were against the Kentish-Saxons, in reuenge of his cosen Molloes death, whose wrath Wi∣thred Ine his first ts. pacified by the paiment of thirty thousand Markes, saith William of Malmesbury. In the yeere of Grace seuen hundred and eight, and twenty one of Wil. Malmsbury. his owne raigne (as Matthew of Westminster hath ob∣serued) he fought with the Britaines vnder their Cap∣taine Matth. Westminst. His battle with the Britaines. Gerent, whom he victoriously subdued: and in his twenty sixth yeere, against Cheolred King of Mer∣cia, with doubtfull victorie, at the place then called Wodenesbury: and in his thirty sixth, inuaded the South-Saxons with such successe, that hee reduced the same His conquest of the South-Saxons. Kingdome into a Prouince, and annexed it in subiection to the West-Saxons: and manifesting his good desires both to the administration of Iustice, and the aduance∣ment of Diuine Pietie, he ordained many good Lawes His loue of Iu∣stice. for the amendment of manners in his people, which are yet extant written in the Saxon Tongue, and trans∣lated into Latine by the learned M. William Lambert. He built at Wels a Colledge dedicated vnto God, and His zeale to pietie. bearing the name of S. Andrewes: which afterwards Kenulph, King of the West-Saxons made an Episcopall Sea. The renowned Abbey of Glastenburie most state∣lie hee built to the honour of Christ, Peter and Paul (whereof Malmesburie maketh mention in his booke of Glastenburies Antiquities) in a fennie place seque∣stred frō the road way, where formerly had stood the old Cell of Ioseph of Aremathea, and that being decaied Deuy Bishop of S. Dauids had thereon erected a new; which time also hauing ruinated, twelue men well affected in the North parts of Britaine had repaired, but now by this Ina was quite pulled downe, and af∣ter a most sumptuous manner new built; the Cha∣pell whereof hee garnished with gold and siluer, and gaue rich ornaments thereto; as Altar, Chalice, Censor, Candlestickes, Bason and holie water, Bucket, Images, and Pale for the Altar, of an incredible value: for the gold thereupon bestowed, amounted to three hundred thirtie three pound waight, and the siluer to two∣thousand eight hundred thirty fiue pound, beside precious Gemmes, embrouched in the Celebrating Ve∣stures. Hee instituted also a certaine yeerely paiment to the See of Rome, enioining euery one of his subiects that possessed in his house of one kinde of goods to the value of twenty pence, that he should pay a penny to the Pope yeerely vpon Lammas day: which at first was contributed vnder the name of The Kings Almes, but afterwards was called and challenged by the name of Peter-pence. At length, by the instigation and ear∣nest perswasion of Ethelburga his Queene, hee renoun∣ced the glittering glorie of his present and princely estate, wherein hee had in great prosperitie raigned His last estate wherein he died. thirty seuen yeeres and odde moneths; and profes∣sing a voluntarie pouertie, (so great was the zeale, and so little the knowledge of that age) went to Rome, where in the habit of a Religious Man he ended his life in poore estate; and Ethelburga his wife became a vai∣led Nunne, and was made Abbesse of Barking neere London, wherein she ended her life. The brethren of this Inas, were Kenten, whose sonne was Aldelme Ab∣bat of Malmesbury and Bishop of Sherborne, and Ingils that was the progenitour of Egbert the first Saxon Mo∣narch of the whole Iland: and his sister Cuthburga, ma∣ried into Northumberland, sued a diuorce against Osrick her King and husband, and in the habit of a Nunne en∣ded His Wife. her daies at Winburne in the Countie of Dorset. 12. An. Do. 726. Matt. Westminst. Ethelard terrified by the appearing of two blazing starres. The continu∣ance of his raigne. EThelard the kinsman of King Ina (whom he ordai∣ned his successour at his departure to Rome) was the sonne of Oswald, and he of Ethelbald the sonne of Kenbald, the brother of Cuth, and both of them the sonnes of Cuthwin, the sonne of Cheaulin, the sonne of King Kenrik, the sonne of Cherdik, the first West-Saxon King. He began his raigne the same yeere that King Edbert did his ouer the Kingdome of Kent, and with him was terrified by the dreadfull appearance of two Blazing Starres: of whose Acts, no other mention is recorded, sauing that at his entrance into regall estate, Oswald a Norman of the West-Saxons bloud, emulated his glorie, and troubled the quiet peace of his prospe∣rous beginning: but not able to winne fortune to fa∣uour his proceedings, he quite abandoned his natiue Country, and so left Ethelard to rule the Kingdome in peace, who therein quietly raigned the space of foure∣teene yeeres, without any mention of wife or issue. CVthred, cosen to King Ethelard, succeeded him in his Dominions, and was much disquieted by Edil∣bald 13. An. Do. 740. Hen. Hunting. King of Mercia, both by open warre and priuie practises: but these two Kings comming to a conclu∣sion of peace, ioined both their Powers against the ouer-borne Britains, and in a bloudy battle gaue them a great ouerthrow. In this time, saith Beda, the bodies of the dead were permitted to bee buried within the walles of their Cities, which thing before was not lawfull, but their corps were interred without in the Fields; many of whose Tombes as yet are witnesses to vs, that daily finde them in the digging of the grounds adioining, and reserue them for sight, or o∣ther necessarie vse. The peace of this King was molested by his owne subiect, an Earle named Adelme, who boldly encoun∣tred his Soueraigne in Battle, and fought it out euen Adelme a rebell. to the point of victorie; but failing thereof, and for∣ced to flie, his life was pardoned. And hee made Gene∣rall Vanquished by Cuthred. against the Mercian Edilbald, Cuthreds ancient foe, wherein by his valiant prowesse, with the flight and discomfiture of the Enemie, hee made a worthie a∣mends for guerdon of his life, and was euer after held Restored againe to fauour. in great fauour and honour. This King raigned in great fame and victories the space of fourteene yeers, Cuthred his raigne & death. and died in the yeere of our Lords Passion 753. Hee had issue one onely son, whose name was Kenrik, a va∣liant Matt. West. Kent ik his sonne. young Prince, who in the ninth yeere of his Fa∣thers raigne was seditiously slaine in his Armie, for bearing himselfe (as it may seeme) ouer-rigorous to∣wards the Souldiers. SIgebert obtaining the Principalitie of the West-Sa∣xons, raigned therein no long time, and that with∣out 14. An. Do. 754. Sigebert, his raigne without honour. Wil. Malmsbury. Giuen to vicious∣nesse. all honour or fame. His parentage is obscure and vnknowne, but his vices are made apparant and ma∣nifest; for hee wallowing in all sensuall pleasures, ad∣ded exactions and cruelties vpon his Subiects, setting aside all lawes and rules of true pietie: from which vi∣cious life, when hee was louingly admonished by his most faithfull Counsellor a worthy Earle called Cum∣bra, so farre was his minde from abandoning his im∣pious courses, as that he caused this Noble Personage to be cruelly slaine; whereupon the rest of the Peeres seeing their State and liues were euery day in danger, and the common subiects, whose Lawes were thus vi∣olated, being incensed into furie, they rebelliously His subiects rise against him. rose vp in Armes against him, and would acknow∣ledge him no longer their Soueraigne. Sigebert, by na∣ture as fearefull as he was audacious vnto vice, fledde into the woods as his only safeguard, where like a for∣lorne person he wandred in the day, and in caues and dennes lodged in the night, till lastly he was met with by a Swine-heard that was seruant to Cumbra, and of him knowne to be Sigebert, was presently slaine in re∣uenge of his masters death, in the wood that was then His death. called Andreads Wald, when hee had raigned not fully two yeeres. His raigne. KEnwulfe, sprung from the bloud-Royall of the West Saxons, after the death of wicked Sigebert was 15. An. Do. 755. Kenwulfe his de∣scent. Hen. Hunting. His victories against the Bri∣taines. made King of that Prouince; and appeasing some tu∣mults that were stirred for Sigebert, obtained many victories against the ouermastred Britaines: but had not the like successe against Offa King of the Merci∣ans, who at Bensington gaue him a great ouerthrow. He founded the Cathedrall Church of S. Andrewes at Wels, which afterwards was an Episcopall See, and He founded a Cathedrall Church. in great honour raigned for the space of twenty foure yeeres; but then Fourtune turning her face away from him, the rest of his raigne did not sute to that which was spent: for he giuing himselfe to pleasure and se∣curitie, banished Kineard, the brother of his Predeces∣sor Sigebert; who dissembling his wrong, gaue place vnto time, and occasion being offered, made his vse thereof. For Kenwulfe comming to Merton, to visit his Paramore, was there set vpon and slaine; and his body He is slaine. Buried at Win∣chester. Simon Dan. conueied and buried at Winchester, after hee had raig∣ned twenty nine yeeres, leauing no memoriall either of Wife or Children. 61 An. Do. 784. Hen. Hunting. Matth. West. Simon D . Ran. C st. lib. 5. cap. 25. BRithie, lineally descended from Cherdik the first King of the West-Saxons, a man of a soft and quiet disposition, succeeded Kenwulfe in that Principalitie, in the yeere of Christs Incarnation 784. He married Ethelburga, the daughter of great Offa the Mercian King, by whose power he expelled Egbert that ruled a Lordship in his Prouince vnder him, whose fame in∣creasing through his feates of warres, draue many ica∣lousies into King Brithries head, and the more by the instigation of Ethelburga his Queene, who bearing her selfe great, because of her parentage, practised the downfall and destruction of them whom she hated, and by her suggestions this Egbert was banished on suspicion of conspiracie. It afterward chanced, that shee preparing poison to make an end of one of the Kings Minions, wrought thereby (though vnwitting∣ly) the Kings death: for he by tasting the confection, ended his life, after hee had raigned the space of six∣teene His raigne and death. yeeres. Wherein, she fearing the iust reuenge of his subiects, fled into France, & by Charles then King, was so courteously entertained, as that for her great beauty there was offered her the choice of him or his sonne. But she in her youthfull and lustfull humor, choosing the sonne, was debarred from both, and His Wife. thrust into a Monastery, in the habit (not the affecti∣on of a Nunne) where not long after she abused her body by committing of adultery, and was shortly ex∣pelled, Roger . and in beggerly misery ended her life, as by ma∣nie that so saw her, we haue heard it reported, saith Asse∣rius mine Author. For this her most hainous crime, whereby was procured the murther of her Husband, the West-Saxons ordained a Law, to the great preiu∣dice of all their Queenes succeeding; that none of them should haue either title, maiestie, or place of roi∣altie; A Law against the Saxon Queenes. which was seuerely executed for many yeeres after. In the daies of this Brithrik, many prodigies appea∣red, and more perhaps then will be beleeued. For it Asser. is reported, that in his third yeere a shower of bloud Will. Malmesb. The prodigies that happened in this Kings time. rained from heauen, and bloudy crosses fell vpon mens garments as they walked abroad. And in his tenth yeere were seene fiery Dragons flying in the ayre. Which wonders, some tooke to be presages of the miseries following, both by the Inuasions of the Matth. Westm. H r. Hunt. The Pagan Danes inuade this Iland in this Kings time. Pagan Danes, that in these times were first seene to ar∣riue in this Iland, and the extreme Famine that after∣wards happened: howsoeuer, sure it is that the Hep∣tarchy now beganne to set in the West, and the rising Monarchy to appeare in King Egbert, whose acts and issue shall be further rehearsed, when wee shall come to the time of his succession among the English Mo∣narchs. THE EAST-SAXONS KINGDOME, THE CIRCVIT, SVCCESSIONS OF THEIR KINGS, THEIR ISSVES, AND KING∣DOMES CONTINVANCE. CHAPTER VIII. T He site of the East-Saxons Kingdom, was the Coun∣try The site of this Kingdome. of Essex, Middlesex, and part of Hartfordshire, and the Circuit so far as the Diocesse of London now extendeth. It was bounded on the East with the Ocean; on the South with the Thames; on the West with the Colne; and on the North with the Riuer Stowre. The Kings thereof claime their descent from The descent of these Kings. Prince Woden, not as all the rest of the Saxon Kings, but onely by a collaterall line; and Erchenwine became the An. Do. 527. first King, which neuerthelesse he held as Feodarie to the Kings of Kent. For which cause, it seemeth that Malmsbury mentioneth him not in the Catalogue of Malmesb. de Gest. Angl. cap. 6. those Kings, but maketh his sonne Sledda the first, and tenth in descent from Woden. ERchenwine, is said to bee the Sonne of Offa, the sonne of Bedca, the sonne of Sigefuget, the son of 1. Erchenwine the first King of the East-Saxons. Sneppa, the sonne of Awpig, the sonne of Supig, the sonne of Seaxnod, from whom all these Kings fetch their originall: His Kingdome began about the yeere His descent. of grace 527. and in the fifteenth of Eske the second King of Kent; and his raigne long, but yet without any memorable acts; dying in the yeere 586. and leauing his sonne to succeede in his place. His death. SLedda the sonne of Erchenwine, succeeding in the East-Saxons Kingdome, raigned peaceablie with∣out 2. An. Do. 587. Sledda the second King. His mariage. mention of any warres; for hauing married Ricula the daughter of Imerik King of Kent, was thereby the more fauoured of them, and feared of others; and nothing left (besides his quiet raigne) to be recorded to posterities; neither are many yeeres of successions numbred, but as they are gathered from the Com∣putations of other princes, with whom they either li∣ued, or were linked in action. This Sledda died about the yeere of our Redemption 596. and left issue by His death. his wife Queene Ricula, Sebert, who succeeded him in the Kingdome, and Segebald his brother whose Sons His issue. afterward were Kings of that Prouince. SEbert the sonne of Sledda and of Queene Ricula, be∣ganne 3. An. Do. 596. Sebert the time when he beganne to raigne. his Raigne in the yere of Christs Incarnation 596. and in the thirtie six yeere of the raigne of King Ethelbert of Ke , his mothers brother, at that time Monarch of the English-men; who in Seberts chiefe ci∣tie London, a Princelie Mart Towne, (saith Beda) of ma∣ny Beda Hist. Eccles. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 3. people ariuing thither both by sea and land; new built a Church, making it the Cathedrall of Bishop Mi∣letus, and so wrought with King Sebert, that hee con∣uerted him to Christianitie; and assisted him in that Foundation, where formerlie (say some) had stood the Sebert conuerted to Christianity by Ethelbert. Temple of Diana. This Church these new Conuerts and Saxon Kings, either new reared or inlarged for the honour and seruice of God, and dedicated vnder the name of Saint Paul: which worke Ethelbert further S. Pauls Church built. confirmed with sufficient maintenance, as by this his Charter is seene, containing these words: Aethelbert Rex, Deo inspirante, pro animae suae remedio, dedit Episcop Mileto terram quae appellatur Tillingham, ad Monaste∣rium siue Solatium scilicet S. Pauli. Et ego Rex Aethelbert ita firmiter concedo tibi Praesuli Mileto potestatem eius ha∣bendi & possidendi, vt in perpetuum in Monasterij vtili∣tate permaneat, &c. And that this was the Temple of Diana, some haue further confirmed vnto vs by the incredible number of Oxe-heads there digged vp in the daies of King Edward the First, when the east-end S. Pauls Church aforetime the Temple of Diana. S. Peters Church in Cornhill built: a fore time the Temple of Apollo. Sulcardus. of that Church was enlarged; which were supposed to be of those Beasts that were there sacrificed to this Goddesse Diana. These Kings likewise founded the Church of S. Peter in the West of London, at a place called Thornye, where sometimes stood the Temple of Apollo, as Sulcardus affirmeth; which being ouer∣throwne by an Earth-quake, King Lucius new built for the celebration of Gods seruice; and that againe being decaied, those Kings restored it to a greater beautie, where Sebert, after thirteene yeeres raigne, (as some write) with Aethelgoda his Queene were bu∣ried: Stowe. whose bodies in the daies of Richard the Second (saith Walsingh.) were translated from the old Church The. Walsingham. to the new, and there interred. Hee had issue by the said Queene, Sered, Seward, and Sigebert, whose liues and deaths were as followeth. SEred, Seward, and Sigbert, the sonnes of King Sebert, raigned as it seemeth, together in the Kingdome of 4. Three Kings ioyntly sway the Kingdome. Enemies to Chri∣stianitie. Beda hist. eccles. Ang. lib. 2. cap. 5. They are put from the Com∣munion. Miletus fled into France. the East-Saxons; all three wicked irreligious men, and deadly enemies to the Christian Profession. These con∣tumeliously presuming to the Lords Table, and holy Sacrament of his Body and Bloud, were prohibited by Bishop Miletus, because they were Idolaters and vnbap∣tized: which repulse they tooke so offensiuely, that they expulsed Miletus, who therupon fled into France. But their impietie was not long vnrewarded: for figh∣ting against Kingils, and Qinchelinus his sonne, (Kings of the West-Saxons) were by them ouercome, and in Rand. Cest. The three Kings slaine. battle slaine about the yeere of Grace 623. as by the learned Sir Henry Sauile is calculated, whose account for these times I altogether follow. SIgebert the little, the sonne of Seward, the second 5. An. Do. 623. Segebert the Little. Matth. Westminst. The time when he began to raigne. His successor. sonne of King Sebert, entred his raigne ouer the kingdome of the East-Saxons, the yeere of Christ 623. of whose affaires, little matter is left for vs to relate, sauing that hee hauing both a Brother and a Sonne, yet his Kingdome was succeeded by neither, but by one Sigibert, his Cosen-German once remooued. SIgibert, the sonne of Segebald, the brother of Sebert, 6. Beda hist. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 22. Sigebert his des∣cent. He restored the Christian faith. the sonne of King Sledda, and of Ricula his Queene, succeeded his kinsman in the Kingdome of the East-Saxons. This Sigibert reduced againe his Prouince vn∣to the embracing of the Christian Faith, being daily instigated thereunto by Oswie King of Northumber∣land, and receiued Baptisme himselfe at the hands of Bishop Finnan, and at the place called The Wall, procu∣red He was baptized by Bishop Finnan. vertuous Cedda to be his assister for the plantation of the Gospell in his Kingdome. He was murdered by Rap o Cogshall. His death. two of his kinsmen, who, as Beda saith, were Bre∣thren, no other cause moouing them, but his ouer∣much lenitie and clemencie. He raigned by the fore∣said His raigne. account, sixteene yeeres, leauing issue a young sonne named Selred, that succeeded Seofrid in that His issue. Kingdome. SWithelme succeeded his brother in the Prouince of the East-Saxons, nothing being mentioned of his 7. An. Do. 661. Beda hist. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 22. Swithelme bap∣tized. life or raigne, besides his Baptisme by Bishop Cedda, and that his God-father at the Font-stone was Edelwald King of the East-Angles. SIghere, the sonne of Sigebert the little, entred his 8. An. Do. 664. When Sighere began to raigne. raigne ouer the Kingdome of the East-Saxons, the yeere of our Lord 664. and was the eighth King of that Prouince, in part whereof Sebba his nephew raig∣ned, with better commendations then Sigehere at his beginning had done; for Beda reporteth, that vpon a Beda hist. l. 3. c. 30 great mortalitie and plague, to appease the wrath of his Gods, Sighere became an Apostata, and forsooke the faith of Christ, wheras SEbba continued constant with those in that Prouince vnder his Iurisdiction: yet by the diligent care of Wulfere King of the Mercians, Sig∣here and his people were reclaimed, throwing downe Reclaimed by the King of Mercia. the Temples and Altars erected to Idolatrie, and ope∣ning againe the Christian Churches for the Saints as∣semblies, that so (saith hee) they might rather die in hope of the Resurrection, then wallow in sinne, and liue in Idolatrie. His wife was Oswith the daughter of Edelfrith, King of Northumberland, whom Capgraue His Wife. maketh a Saint, and Abbesse of Berking neere London, euen in the daies of her husband. SEbba, the Brother of Segebert the Little, and Sonne of Seward, (as we haue said) succeeded as sole King 9. An. Do. 664. W Mal s. in the Prouince of the East-Saxons, and with much equitie and administration of Iustice raigned therein thirty yeeres: towards the end whereof, the better . to prepare his mind for contemplation, he relinqui∣shed his Princely Robes, and put on the Habit of Religious Profession in the Monastery of S. in London; as Radulphus de Diceto, with others at tirme. Rad. de Diceto. Wherein this penitent King liuing a while in fasting and praiers, died the yeere of Christ 693. whose body His latter end. His death. was intombed in a Coffin of Gray Marble, the Couer copped, and as yet standing in the North wall of the Sebba his Coffi . Chancell of the same Church. A miracle thereof Beda reporteth, needlesse either Beda bid. Angl. lib. 4. cap. 11. A miracle. then to be wrought, or now of vs repeated, were it not to point at the blindnes wherein euen good men were then led; and thus it is: They hauing prepared a Tombe-stone, to lay his body in, found it too short by the quantitie of an hands bredth, and hewing it longer, yet would not serue: therefore they minding to bow vp the knees, laid the body therein, and sud∣denly it lengthned of it selfe with more then was suf∣ficient. But surely howsoeuer this tombe was then set on this Monkish tenter, it is now since shrunke againe in the standing, and exceeds not in measure fiue foot in length. His wife (but vnnamed) hee likewise His Wife. instigated to leaue the momentanie pleasures of An. 1 o. 694. princely State, for that which is permanent: which thing with much adoe he lastly obtained, leauing her to follow him in his vertuous deuotions, and his two sonnes to succeed him in his kingdome. SIgherd, the Sonne of King Sebba, whom Beda ma∣keth a Monke with his Father, followed him also in the succession of the East-Saxons Kingdome; the time of whose entrance is set in the yeere of Christs Incarnation 694. and his death in 701. no other men∣tion being made either of Acts, Wife, or Issue. SEofrid, the Sonne of King Sebba, and Brother to King Sigheard, either ioyntly raigned with him, or 11. Seof d the sonne of King Sebba. successiuely after him, of whom I finde nothing men∣tioned worthy inserting, hauing had neither Wife nor issue that are recorded. OFfa, the Sonne of Sighere, and of Queene Oswith 12. An Do. 701. Rich Ci st. Beda hist. eccles. Angl. lib. . c. 20. His latter end. His Wife. his Wife, a man noted for his comely feature and sweet countenance, succeeded King Seofrid in the Kingdome of the East-Saxons, the yeere of grace 701. He both enlarged with buildings, and enriched with lands the goodly and beautiful Church of Westminster, but after he had ruled eight yeeres, being moued with a supposed religious deuotion, hee abandoned Kines∣with his wife (the daughter of Penda the Mercian King) his lands, kinne, and Country, and with Kenred King of Mercia, and Edwine Bishop of Worcester, went to Rome, where he was shorne a Monke, and in that habit died, leauing his Cosen Selred to succeed in his king∣dome. His wife Kineswith after his departure, (with the like penancie) vowed her selfe a vailed Nunne in the Abbey of Kineburg, whereof his sister was Abbesse, who had been wife to Alfrith King of Northumberland. SElred, the Sonne of Sigebert the Good, who was mur∣thered for his ouermuch clemencie, attained to the 13. An. Do. 709. . Selred the sonne of Sigebert the Good. Kingdome of the East-Saxons, in the yeere of grace 709. His raigne was long, though his acts are little spoken of, either that others worther affaires fil∣led the pens of those Story-writers, or that his time was so peaceable and vnactiuely spent, that it mini∣stred not matter whereof to indite. Hee raigned 38. His raigne and death. He . Hunting. yeeres, and died Anno 746. without relation either of Wife or Children. SVthred, after the slaughter of Selred, was made 14. An. Do. 747. Suthred King of the East-Saxons. King of the East-Saxons, which title hee retained, vntill that Egbert King of the West-Saxons, taking Armes against him, expulsed him out of that King∣dome; as also the same yeere he did Baldred, King of Kent, which was in the yeere of Christs Incarnation 827. and made it a Prouince annexed vnto the West-Saxons, West-Saxons stood a King∣dome 281. yeers. after it had stood in state of a Kingdome 281. yeeres. THE KINGDOME OF NORTHVM∣BERLAND, CIRCVIT AND CONTI∣NVANCE, WITH THE SVCCESSIONS AND ISSVES OF THOSE KINGS, VNTO THE LAST SVBVERSION THEREOF BY KING EGBERT. CHAPTER IX. T His Kingdome of Nor∣thumberland consisted at Northumberland how diuided at first. first of two distinct Pro∣uinces; whereof the one was called Deira, and the other Bernicia, and were gouerned sometimes by their Kings seuerally, and sometimes vnder one, as successe of warre, or other casualties incident did afford. The royall descents of whose Kings are brought by Florentius both from the Fourth and Fifth Sonnes of Prince Woden, after this manner. Ella, vnder whom the Kingdome of Deira Florent. Wig rn. The pedegree of these Kings. beganne, was the sonne of Iffi, who was the sonne of Wuskfrea, the sonne of Wilgils, the sonne of Westor∣walchna, the sonne of Seomel, the sonne of Suearta, the sonne of Saepugell, the sonne of Seabald, the sonne of Siggeot, the sonne of Suebdeg, the sonne of Siggar, the sonne of Weadeg, the fourth sonne of Woden. And the descent of Ida, the raiser of the Bernicians kingdome, is brought from Bealdeag the fifth sonne of Woden; for Bealdeag was father to Brand, whose sonnes were Be∣orn and Freodegar, the latter of which twaine was the progenitour of Cherdik the first West-Saxon King: and his brother Beorn begat another Beorn also, and hee Wegbrand the father of Ingebrand, whose sonne was Alusa, the father of Angengeal, and this mans sonne Ingengeat, the father of Aethelbright, whose sonne Oesa begat Eoppa the father of this Ida, the first King of Bernicia. These Saxon Captaines Ella and Ida, about sixtie yeeres after the death of King Hengist, changed the The time when this Prouince be∣came a King∣dome. W . Malmsb. title of this Prouince from a Dukedome to a King∣dome. For Hengist hauing giuen the possession of those North parts vnto Otho his Brother, and to Ebu∣sain his sonne, their Successors held it, with many ho∣stile irruptions the space of 99. yeeres. But now the Britaines subiected, and no resistance made, those Captaines diuide the Prouince into two parts, intitu∣ling either by the name of a Kingdome; the first Deira, This Prouince diuided into two Kingdomes. was possessed by Ella, which stretched from Tyne, to the Riuer Humber; and the second Bernicia, enioyed by Ida, whose Continent lay betwixt the Tyne and Deira & Bernicia. the Frith of Edenborough. These together contained the Counties of Westmerland, Cumberland, Northum∣berland, Yorkeshire, Lancaster, and Durham, and was bounded on the West with the Irish Seas, on the North with the Wall of Scuerus, on the East with the German Ocean, and on the South with the Riuers Mersey and Humber. Ida, saith Malmsbury, raigned fourteene yeeres: and Ella by Matthew of Westmin∣ster, is said to succeed him for thirty yeeres. The issue Ida his raigne. Malmsbury. Ella his raigne. Ida his issue le∣gitimate and ille∣gitimate. of Ida legitimate, as Huntington recordeth, were Adda, Bealrik, Thedrik, Ethelrik, Osmer, and Thedred; illegiti∣mate, Oga, Ecca, Oswald, Ailrik, Sogoe, and Sogother. These (saith Matthew of Westminster) arriued at Flemis∣burke with forty Ships, and assisted their Father in ma∣nie They arriue at Flemisburke with forty ships. Ella his issue. of his enterprises. The issue of Ella, by Florentius his record, were Acca, Wife of Ethelfrid, King of Ber∣nicia, and mother to the most Christian Oswald, Mo∣narch of the Englishmen, and Edwine the Monarch and first Christian King of Northumberland. Ida is said to beginne his raigne Anno 547. And Ella in the yeere 559. No other particulars ascribed vnto either, be∣sides Bamburge Castell built by Ida and Ella. the building of Bamburge Castell. With Ella raigned the two sonnes of Ida, namely Adda and Thedrik, with three others, Elappea, Theod∣wald, and Frethulfe, sprung from Eoppae the father of Ida, all fiue his substitutes ouer the Bernicians: but be∣cause there is no other mention of them besides their names and raignes, I will leaue as I finde them, and proceed to the more worthy of recitall. 2. Adda raigned 7. yeeres King of Bernicia. 3. Elappea raigned 5. yeeres 4. Theodwald raigned 1. yeere 5. Frethulfe raigned 7. yeeres 6. Theodrik raigned 7. yeeres EThelrik the sonne of King Ida, hauing outrun his youth in pernicious obscuritie, attained in his old 6. An. Do. 589. Ethelriks youth obscurely spent. yeeres to the gouernment of both the Prouinces, and whole Kingdome of Northumberland, wherein his time was so spent (saith Malmesbury) that had not his sonne in the glasse of his owne worths shewed the face of his fathers remembrance, his acts and raigne might easily haue beene forgotten. His issue were Ethelfrid that succeeded him, and Theobald slaine in Battle against Beda hist. l. 1. c. 33. His raigne and death. the Scots. He raigned fiue yeeres, and died, An. 593. EThelfrid, a man very valiant, and thirstie for re∣nowne, succeeded his father in the Northumbrians Kingdome. Him Beda compares to King Saul in Israel, 7. An. Do. 593. Beda hist. eccles. Angl. lib. 1 cap. 33. Ethelfrid very thirstie of fame. excepting only in the knowledge of Gods true Reli∣gion: to whom (saith he) might be applied the say∣ing of Iacob touching Beniamin, that like a rauening Woolfe he deuoured his prey in the morning, and di∣uided the spoile thereof in the euening. For he made greater Conquests ouer. the daily afflicted Britaines, A greater Con∣queror then all the rest. then all the Kings of the Angles had done; and peo∣pling their possessions with his Saxons, held the right owners vnder subiection and tribute. This his pro∣speritie, Or, Ed . Marianus. Ed den enui∣eth Ethelfrid. Ed aden King of the Scots greatly enuied, and attempting to croppe it, and to plant himselfe vpon the root of like honour, hee assembled a great and strong Armie against him, and at the place called Deg∣siston strooke Battle with him, wherein notwithstan∣ding Edanade ouer∣throwne. he was ouerthrowne, and his Scots discomfited, yet with such losse to King Ethelfrid, that Theobald his brother, with the part of the Armie whereof he was Theobald slaine. Generall, were all vanquished and destroied. This bat∣tle went so sore against the Scotish Britaines, that (saith Beda) no King of that Nation durst attempt to meet the English in the Field for a long time after. And the for∣tune of the day did so much augment both his fame, and also his haughty spirit, that presently he reenfor∣ced Ethelfred proud of his victorie. his power against the Britaines, that were at West chester. Cair∣legion, where of them hee made a most lamentable slaughter, and that not only of the Souldiers prepa∣red for fight, but also of those religious and harmlesse Monks, there assembled for praier. These Monks were of the Monastery of Bangor in North-wales, famous for antiquity, forme of disci∣pline The description of Bangor Mona∣sterie. and spacious circuit. It was situated in the fruit∣full valley now called the English Mailor; and vpon the Banckes of the Riuer Dee, where it extended it selfe as in the circuit of a walled Citie, containing within it the quantitie of a mile and a halfe of ground: two of whose Gates may at this day easilie be discerned, the one of them called Port Hogen, lying by North; and the other Port Clais, situate on the South; the Riuer Dee hauing now changed his Channell, runneth tho∣row the middest betwixt both the Gates, which stand asunder fiue hundred paces. This Monaste∣rie, saith Clariualentius, was the Mother of all others in the World; who in memory of the * Seuen Churches Bernardus Clari∣ualentius. Bangor Monaste∣rie the first in the world. Beda hist. eccles. Angl. lib 2 cap. 2. Her Monkes di∣uided into seuen portions. Liued by the la∣bour of their hands. Their praier and fasting. Ethelfrid enqui∣reth the cause of their praying. of Asia, did distribute into seuen portions their Monks, euery one numbring three hundred soules, and all of them (as Beda saith) liuing by the labour of their own hands. Many of these assembling at Cair-legion, to as∣sist their Brethren Britaines with their supplications vnto God against this Ethelfrid, surnamed the Wilde, and his fierce Souldiers the Infidell Saxons; with three daies fasts spent their time in continuall praiers. But King Ethelfrid beholding their maner, demanded the cause; and vnderstanding that they called for assi∣stance of their God against him and his Army, set first vpon their Guarder Brockmal, a man of Armes, who to saue his own life, left all theirs to the sword, where∣in perished one thousand and two hundred Christian He slaieth a great number. Monks, besides the discomfiture of the Britaines Host. Many of these were interred in their owne Monasteries, whose bodies, saith Leyland, haue been found in the memory of man, in the rotten weedes wherein they were slaine. But as his fame increased daily abroad, so were his feares augmented continu∣ally Ethelfrid in feare of Edwine. at home. For Edwine the sonne of Ella, and third King of Deira, a gallant young Prince, and newly sea∣ted in his Fathers Kingdome, wrought many suspici∣ons in Ethelfrids head; and though he was brother to his Wife Acca, yet the neerenesse of that alliance, no whit diminished his iealous conceits, whom therefore by priuie conspiracies and apparant pursuits hee so daily molested, that he was forced to saue his life by auoiding the Country, and tossed in exile from place Edwine forced into exile. to place, was lastly receiued and succoured by Red∣wald, King of the East-Angles, who in his quarrel forth∣with Succoured by Redwald. assembled his forces, and meeting Ethelfrid in the field, slew him neere the Riuer Idle, after hee had raigned twenty three yeeres, in the yeere of Christ Henry Hunt. Ethelfrid slaine. His raigne. Florentius. His issue. Iob. Capgraue. his Incarnation 617. He had issue by his Wife Acca, (the daughter of Ella) Eanfrith King of Bernicia, Oslafe, and Oswald King of Northumberland, Oslake, and Offa, with two Daughters canonized for Saints, Oswith and Ebba the Nunne; as also by his Concubine, Oswy, the tenth Monarch of the Englishmen. EDwine thus raised by the helpe of King Redwald, 8. An Do. 617. Beda hist. Eccles. Ang. lib. . cap. 12. The storie of Ed∣wines banish∣ment. returned to his Country, and was of the Inhabi∣tants made King of Northumberland, and afterward Monarch of the Englishmen; as in their succession shall be declared. Beda (somewhat too much addicted to fabulous miracles) of him reporteth this storie: That whilest hee lay banished in King Redwalds Court, Ethelfrid instigated his receiuer, by promises to take away his life; or if he refused, threatned him warres: His life in dan∣ger. for feare whereof, Redwald, partly inclining to this wicked purpose, reuealed the same to the Queene his wife; which a friend of Edwins hearing, told him of his danger, and wished him to flie. Edwine thus perplex∣ed, with troubled thoughts in the dead of the night, Edwine in doubt what to doe. sate solitary vnder a tree in dumps, musing what was best to be done; to suspect and flie from Redwald, that had honoured him so much, he held it a wrong; and to thinke himselfe safe in other Prouinces against so powerfull pursuers, he thought it was vaine. Thus di∣stracted in casting what way might be safest, sudden∣ly One vnknowne came to him. de∣manding the cause of his sorrow. approched a man vnto him, vtterly vnknowne, who after salutation, demanded the cause why hee sate at so vnseasonable a time, in so vncouth a place, and pensiue manner? Edwine thinking him to be his Edwine his an∣ rrer. deaths-man, resolutely answered; It nothing concer∣ned him at all, either to aske, or to know his estate. Oh Edwine (said he) thinke not but that I know thy The man shew∣eth him his griefe vntold him. sorrow, and the cause of thy sitting thus vpon that stone; thy death is pretended, and euen at hand: but what wouldest thou giue to rid thee of that danger, and to make King Redwald thy assured preseruer? Any thing, quoth Edwine, which is in my power. But what shall be his reward (said the other) that shall set He demandeth what he would giue to be eased. thee vpon the throne of thy Kingdome, and that with such glory, as none of thy Progenitors euer at∣tained vnto? I would bee thankfull to that man, said Edwine, in all things, and at all times, as reason requi∣red, Edwine his answer. and of right I ought. But tell me Edwine, said he, what if the same man shew thee a more safe way to He promiseth to shew him how to saue his soule. preserue the life of thy soule, then either thou at this present knowest, or any of thy Parents euer heard of; wilt thou consent and imbrace his counsell? Yea, said Edwine, God forbid that I should not bee ruled by him, that thus should free me from this present dan∣ger, set me vpon the throne of a Kingdome, and after these great fauours, should also teach mee the way to an eternall life. Vpon this answere, laying his right hand on Edwines head, he said vnto him; When these things shall in order come to passe, then call to minde this time, and what thou hast promised, and so vani∣shed Hee suddenly va∣nisheth away. from his presence. The young Prince thus left betwixt hope and despaire, his friend that had fore∣warned him of his death, came hastily to him with a Edwines friend bringeth him good newes. more cheerfull countenance, Come in Edwine (quoth he) and surcease thy cares, for the Queene hath not onely changed Redwalds mind to saue thy life, but he also hath granted to maintaine thy right against Ethel∣frid thine enemy. Which shortly he did, and slew him, as we haue said. Edwine thus placed vpon the Princely Throne, his first Wife Queenburg being dead in his exile, receiued His wife a chaste Christian Lady. in marriage Ethelburga, surnamed Tace, (a fit name for a woman) the Daughter of King Ethelbert, and Sister to Edbald King of Kent, a most chaste and vertuous Christian Lady, whose teacher was Paulinus, and both of them Gods instruments for the Conuersion of the Northumbrians to the imbracement of Christian Re∣ligion. But because we shall haue occasion to speake of this Edwine as he was Monarch of the Englishmen, we will reserue his Acts, Issues, and Raigne, to bee fur∣ther related in the course of his Succession. Hee was slaine in battell against Cadwall King of the Britaines and Penda King of the Mercians, when he had prospe∣rously His death. raigned seuenteene yeeres, the twelfth of October, Anno 633. and was buried in Saint Peters His raigne. Church at Streanshall, after called Whitby. Vpon whose His place of buriall. death, the Kingdome of Northumberland was againe diuided. OSricke the Sonne of Alfrid (Edwines Vncle) suc∣ceeding 9. An. Do. 633. Osrike King of Deria. in the Prouince of Deira, and Fanfrith the Sonne of Ethelfrid the Wilde, in the Prouince of the Bernicians; these, with the rest of Ethelfrids Chil∣dren, for the continuance of Edwins Raigne, had Eanfrith King of the Bernicians. in banishment beene preserued among the Scots and Red-shanks, and there had receiued the Sacrament of Baptisme: but after the death of their Enemie, these Princes returned to their owne Country, and former superstitions, renouncing againe the profession of They renounce the profession of Christ. Beda bist. ce les. Angl. lib 3 cap. 1. Cadwald Gods instrument to punish them. Christ. Yet this their Apostasie (saith Beda) remained not long vnpunished: For Cadwallader King of the Bri∣taines, with wicked force, but with worthy vengeance, slew them both the next Sommer ensuing. Osrike vnprepared, and his whole Army penned in the Suburbs of their owne Citie, he miserably slew; and possessing the Prouince of the Northumbrians, not as a King or Conqueror, but rather like an outragious Tyrant, destroied and rent in tragicall manner, all things before him. Eanfrith vnaduisedly with twelue chosen persons comming to Cadwall. Cadwallader to intreat vpon peace, were cruelly put to death. This yeere (saith he) continueth vnhappy and hatefull euen vnto this day, as well for the Apostasie of these English Kings, as also for the Bri∣tain Kings furious tyranny. Wherefore the Historiogra∣phers The British Kings tyrannie. of that time haue thought it best, that the memory of these Apostate Kings being vtterly forgotten, the selfe∣same yeere should be assigned to the Raigne of the next fol∣lowing King, Oswald, a man dearely beloued of God. OSwald, the sonne of Wild Ethelfrid, and brother to King Eanfrith, beganne his raigne ouer the Nor∣thumbrians 9. An. Do. 634. Oswald. Anno 634. hauing first embraced Christi∣anitie, and receiued; Baptisme in Scotland, wherein hee was secured all the raigne of King Edwin, and had withall learned some experience in warre. Hee com∣ming vnlooked for with a small Armie, but fensed (saith Beda) with the Faith of Christ, obtained against Cedwald King of the Britaines a great victorie: the His conquest of the Britaines. manner whereof, with his other acts atchieued, wee will further declare in his succession among the Mo∣narkes Oswald the ninth from Hengist. of the English-men, whereof hee was the ninth from Hengist. He sent for Aidan, a Scotish Diuine, to teach his peo∣ple the Doctrine of Christ, inlarged his Kingdome, Hector B t. His care of his people for re∣ligion. His death. and reconciled the Deirians and Bernicians, who were at mortall enmitie. He was slaine, and cruelly rent in peeces by the vnmercifull Pagan Penda the Mercian, at Oswaldstree in Shrop-shire, quinto Augusti, the yeere of our Lord 642. when hee had raigned nine yeeres, Raigne. and was buried at Bradney in Lincolne-shire. His wife Buriall. Wife. was Kineburg, the daughter of Kingils King of the West-Saxons; and his sonne Ethelwald, young at his death, Issue. and therefore defeated of his Kingdome by Oswy his Vncle, the Naturall Sonne of King Ethelfrid the Wild. Notwithstanding when Oswin King of Deira was murdered by this Oswy of Bernitia, and he not past six∣teene yeeres of age, entred by force vpon Deira, and kept the same Prouince by strong hand so long as hee liued; and dying, left it to his cosen Alkfrid, the Na∣turall Sonne of the said King Oswy. OSwy the illegitimate sonne of Ethelfrid the Wild, at thirty yeeres of age succeeded King Oswald his 10. An. Do. 643. Oswy the illegiti∣mate of Ethelfrid. brother in the Kingdome of the Bernicians; at whose entrance, Oswyne the sonne of Osrik, that had denied the Faith, and was slaine of King Cedwall, raigned in Deira. This Oswyne was slaine by King Oswye: after Beda bist. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 1. whose death, seizing all Northumberland, he spread his terrour further into other parts, and was the tenth The tenth Mo∣narch of the English-men. Monarch of the Englishmen, as in his succession we will further speake: His wife was Eanfled, daughter to Ed∣wine King of Northumberland, by whom he had many His wife. Issue. Death. Beda lib. . ca. 5. children. His raigne was 28. yeeres, and death the fifteenth day of Februarie, in the yeere of grace 670. and of his age 58. EGfrid, the eldest sonne of King Oswy by Queene Eanfled, had beene Hostage in the Kingdome of 11. An. Do. 671. Beda bist. lib. 3. cap 24. Egfrid. Mercia, and after his father was made King of Nor∣thumberland, in the yeere of Christ 671. Hee warred, but with great losse, against Edilred King of Mercia, neere vnto the Riuer of Trent, wherein his younger brother Elswyne was vnfortunately slaine, to the great griefe of both the Kings, the one being his owne bro∣ther, Beda bist. l. 4. c. 21. and the other his brother in law by mariage: whereupon a peace and reconciliation was made. But Egfred being by nature of a disquiet disposition, inua∣ded the Irish, and destroied those harmelesse and silly people, which (as Beda saith) had beene great friends to the English. Their resistance consisted chiefly in cur∣ses Beda hist. Angl. lib. 4. cap. 26. and imprecations for reuenge, which though they could not open heauen, yet (saith hee) it is to be belee∣ued, that for their cause he was cut off the next yeere ensu∣ing by the Picts or Red-shankes, against whom he prepared, contrary to the aduice of his Counsell, and by them was slaine among the strait and waste mountaines, 20. Maij the yeere of mans felicitie 685. and of his age fortie, His death. after hee had raigned fifteene yeeres. His wife was Raigne. Etheldred the daughter of Anna King of the East-An∣gles: Wife, who was both a Widow and a Virgin. shee was both Widow and Virgin; first maried to Tonbert a Noble man that ruled the Giruij, a people inhabiting the Fenny Countries of Norfolke, Lincolne, Beda bist. l. 4. c. 19. Huntington, and Cambridge-shires; and after him also in virginitie continued twelue yeeres with her hus∣band King Egfrid, contrarie to his minde, and the Apo∣stles precept, that forbiddeth such defrauding either in man or woman, except it be with consent for a time, and to 1. Cor. 7. 5. the preparatiō of praier; affirming elswhere, that Ma∣riage is honourable, and the bed thereof vndefiled, wherein Heb. 13. 4. the woman doth redeeme her transgression, through faith, loue, holinesse, and modestie, by beating of 1. Tim. 2. 15. children. This notwithstanding, she obtained licence to depart his Court, and got her to Coldingham Abby, where shee was professed a Nunne vnder Ebba the daughter of King Ethelfrid. Then went shee to Ely, and new built a Monasterie, whereof shee was made Abbesse, and wherein with great reuerence shee was intombed: whose vertues and remembrance remai∣ned to posterities by the name of S. Andrie, she being canonized among the Catalogue of English Saints. Canonized for a Saint. ALkfryd, the illegitimate sonne of King Oswy, in the 12. An. Do. 686. Alkfrid. raigne of his halfe-brother King Egfrid, whether willingly, or by violence constrained, liued like a ba∣nished man in Ireland, where applying himselfe to studie, hee became an excellent Philosopher, and (as Matth. Westminst. A great Philo∣sopher. Beda saith) was very conuersant and learned in the Holy Scriptures, and therefore was made King ouer the Northumbrians: where with great wisdome, though Beda 4. 26. not with so large bounds as others had enioied, hee worthily did recouer the decaied estate of that Pro∣uince, ruling the same twenty yeeres and odde mo∣neths, and departed this life, Anno 705. His Wife His raigne. Wife. Issue. Beda bist. l. 3. c. 21. was Kenburg, the daughter of Penda King of the Mer∣cians, and by her he had issue only one sonne, that suc∣ceeded him in his Kingdome. OSred, a child of eight yeeres in age, for the hopes conceiued from the vertues of his father, was 13. An. Do. 705. Osred. Beda hist. l. 5. c. 19. Will. Malmes. made King ouer the Northumbrians; whose steps hee no wayes trod in, but rather in filthy abuse of his per∣son and place, wallowed in all voluptuous pleasures and sensuall delight, violating the bodies of vailed Nunnes, and other religious holy women: wherein His wickednesse. when he had spent eleuen yeeres more to his age, his kinsmen Kenred and Osrick conspired against him, and in battle by his slaughter made an end of his impious Raigne. life. His wife was Cuthburga, the sister of Inas King of the West-Saxons, as by the time may bee gathered, Wife, who be∣came a Nunne. from the computation of Marianus, and the Annales of the English-Saxons; who vpon a loathing wearinesse Marianus scotus. of wedlocke, sued out a diuorce from her husband, and built a Nunnery at Winburne in Dorset-shire, where in a religious habit shee ended her life, and hee by Kenred and Osricke, leauing his Kingdome to them that wrought his death. KEnred, the sonne of Cuthwyne, whose father was Leolwald the sonne of Egwald, and his father 14. An. Do. 716. Kenred. Adelm, the sonne of Oga, the naturall sonne of Ida, the first King of Deira, after the death of Osred raigned two yeeres, no other remembrance left of him, be∣sides His raigne. the murder of his Soueraigne Lord and King. OSrick, after the death of Kenred, obtained the Kingdome of Northumberland, and raigned ther∣in 15. An. Do. 718. Osrick. His raigne. the space of eleuen yeeres, leauing to the world his name stained with bloud in the murder of young Os∣red, no other mention of parentage, wife, or issue of him remaining; for want whereof, hee adopted Ceol∣nulph, His adopted sonne. His death. brother to his predecessor Kenred, and died vn∣lamented the yeere of Grace seuen hundred twentie nine. CEolnulph, the brother of Kenred, after the death of King Osrike, was made King of the Northumbrians; 16. An. Do. 729. Ceolnulph. which Prouince hee gouerned with great peace and victorie the space of eight yeeres: but then forsaking the Royall Estate and Robes of Maiestie, put on the His raigne. habit of a Monke in the Ile of Lindesferne or Holy Iland. A Monke. These were the daies (saith Beda) wherein the accepta∣ble time of peace and quietnesse was embraced among the Gladsome times. Northumbrians, who now laid their armour aside, and ap∣plied themselues to the reading of holy Scriptures, more de∣sirous to be professed in religious houses, then to exercise feats of warre, or of Armes. For not only Priests and Lay men vowed and performed Pilgrimages to Rome, but Kings, Queenes and Bishops also did the like: so great Matth. West. (so blinde I might say) a deuotion was in their hearts, and so holy a reuerence held they of the place. Vnto this King Ceolnulph, the said Venerable Beda (a Priest in Bedaes booke to K. Ceolnulph. the Monasterie of Peter and Paul at Werimouth neere vnto Durham) a great Clerke, and Writer of the En∣glish Historie, dedicated the same his Worke, which he continued till the yeere seuen hundred thirty one, and from the first entrance of the Saxons, containing 285. yeeres, according to his owne account. EGbert, the sonne of Eata, who was brother to King Kenred, succeeded his vncle Ceolnulph in the King∣dome 17. An. Do. 738. Egbert. of Northumberland, and ruled the same with the like peace and pietie, the time of twenty yeeres; and then following his example, also forsooke the world, His raigne. and shore himselfe a Monke, as diuers other Kings in those daies had done, whereof Simon Dunelmensis wri∣teth, Simon Dunelm. and noteth their number to bee eight: as Inas King of the West-Saxons, Ethelred and Kenred Kings of Diuers Kings that became Monkes. Mercia, Sigebert King of the East-Angles, Sebbi and Off a Kings of the East-Saxons, and Ceolnulph and this Egbert Kings of the Northumbrians. These forsaking the world (as they tooke it) left the Charge that God vpon them had imposed, whose authoritie in earth they swaied, and wherein they might much more haue aduanced Gods glory and Christs Gospel, then for a more easie and priuate life, not warranted by his word, but rather disliked, and perhaps foreshewed Will. Malmes. by those heauenly creatures the Sunne and Moone, Eclipses of the Sun and Moone. which in those daies were fearefully darkned, and for a time seemed to haue lost their light: for Anno 733. 18. Calend. Septemb. the Sunne suffred so great an Eclipse, that the earth seemed to bee ouer-shadowed as with sack-cloth. And Anno 756. 8. Calend. Decemb. the Moone being in her full, appeared both darke and bloudy; for a Starre (though there be none low∣er then the Moone) seemed to follow her, and to de∣priue her of light: but passing before her, shee againe recouered her former brightnesse. This King Egbert had a brother that bore the same name, and was in∣stalled Arch-bishop of Yorke, where he erected a beauti∣full Librarie (a worke well befitting a Noble Prelate) and plentifully stored it with an infinite number of learned bookes. His sonne was Oswulph, that succee∣ded in the Kingdome. His issue. OSwulph, when his father Egbert had put off the Robes of Maiestie, and clad himselfe with a 18. An. Do. 758. Oswulph. Simon Dunelm. Hear. Hunt. His raigne. Death. Monkes Cowle, ascended the Throne of Northumber∣land, and sa e therein only one yeere: for before hee had made attempt of any memorable act, he was trai∣terously murdered by his own seruants at Mikilwong∣ton, the ninth Kalends of August, leauing the Crown vndisposed of vntill the Nones of the same moneth in the next yeere. EDitwald or Mollo was then made King of Nor∣thumberland, and with great valiancie defended his 19. An. Do. 759. Editwald or Mollo. Wil. Malmes. His raigne. His death. Subiects. Some say, that at the end of six yeeres hee resigned his gouernment; yet others affirme his raign to be eleuen yeeres, and lastly that hee was slaine by Alured his Successour. ALured, the murderer of his Lord and Master, be∣ganne his raigne ouer the kingdome of Northum∣berland, 20. An. Do. 765. Alured. Simon Duncl . the yeere of Christs Incarnation seuen hun∣dred sixty fiue, and continued the same with such dis∣likes, that hee lastly was expelled out of the Prouince by his own subiects, & enforced to abandon the same. He was the son of Ta win, the son of Bie hom, the son Flor. igor. of Bofae, the son of Ailrick, the naturall son of Ida, the first King of Bernicia. And the sonnes of this Alured were Osred, afterwards King of Northumberland, and His issue. Alhnud, slaine by the Danes, and canonized a Saint. EThelred, the sonne of Mollo, was aduanced to the 21. An. Do. 774. Erhelred. Mat b. West. Regiment of Northumberland, and in the fifth yeere of his raigne, was driuen out of the same by Edelbald and Herebert, two Dukes that warred against him; who hauing discomfited and slaine his Generall and souldiers in a fierce battel, so weakened the hopes of King Ethelred, that he fled his Country, and left the Kingdome in a miserable estate, through the dissensi∣ons of those ambitious Princes. ALfwald the brother of the foresaid King Alered aspiring to the Soueraignty of the Northumbri∣ans, 22. An. Do. 778. Alfwald. ruled the same in great Iustice, to his worthy com∣mendations: notwithstanding the wickednes of his people was such, that without all guilt he was traite∣rously murthered by the conspiracie of Siga, 23. Sept. His death. the yeere of Christs Incarnation, seuen hundred eigh∣tie eight, after he had raigned eleuen yeeres, and his His raigne; body buried at Hexhaem. His sonnes were Alfus and Alfwin, both slaine by King Ethelred. His issue. OSred the sonne of King Alured, tooke vpon him 23. An. Do. 789. Osred. His raigne. the Rule of Northumberland, the yeere of grace seuen hundred eightie nine, and the same yeere fini∣shed his gouernment thereof, being expelled by his subiects, and depriued of all kingly authority. EThelred the sonne of Mollo, reuoked from exile An. Do. 794. Ethelred. wherein he had liued the space of twelue yeeres, was againe restored to the Crowne; but he minding the iniuries that his Lords had formerly done him, Will. Malmesb. Ma b. West . He y Hunt. Simon Dun. sought the reuenge by their deaths, as also to establish his Throne the surer, slew Alfus and Alfwin, the sons of Alfwald, as wee haue said, the right heires to the Crowne, and inticing Osred the former deposed King into his danger, commanded him to be put to death at Cu burge, the fourteenth of September, and yeere of Christ seuen hundred ninety two. And to strengthen himselfe the more against all his opposites, the same yeere he married Lady Elfled, the second Daughter to great Off a King of Mercia, forsaking his former Wife Randul. Higden in Polyc re. without any iust cause giuen on her part. These things sate so neere the hearts of his subiects, that after seuen yeeres from his second establishment, they rebelliously rose in Armes, and at Cobre misera∣bly His raigne. slew him the eighteenth day of Aprill, the yeere His death. of Christ Iesus 794. AFter whose death, the Northumbrians were sore molested with many intruders, or rather Tyrants, 24. that banded for the soueraignty the space of thirty yeeres. The first whereof was Oswald, that held the ti∣tle Oswald King . daies. The continuance of this kingdome. of King only twenty eight daies, & then was forced to saue his life by flight vnto the King of the Picts. Next, Ard lfe a Duke, reuoked from exile: then Alf∣wold, E red, Ethelred, Readulph, Osbert, and Elle, slaine by the Danes in Yorke at a place, frō Elle his slaughter called to this day Elle-Crofte, and the Kingdome yeel∣ded to the protection of Egbert King of the West-Sax∣ons, who was now become Englands first absolute Mo∣narch, (as holding all the rest of the Kings no lon∣ger for his Associates, but his subiects) in the yeere nine hundred twentie six, after it had stood in forme of a Kingdome three hundred seuenty nine yeeres, and was made a Prouince, and ioined with the rest vnto the English Monarchie. THE CIRCVIT AND SVCCESSORS OF THE MERCIAN KINGDOME, VN∣TILL IT WAS SVBIECTED TO THE WEST-SAXONS. CHAPTER X. T His Kingdome of Mercia contained more Coun∣ties, Mercia. and the skirts of that royall Tent were spread with a wider compasse then any of the rest in the Saxons Heptarchie: for in the middest of the Iland The limits of it. this Kingdome was seated, and from the verge of Northumberland touched some part of Middlesex, which was the possession of the East-Saxons: the North thereof was bounded with Humber and Mer∣sey; the East was inclosed with the German Ocean; the West extended to Seuerne and Dee; and the South part neerely touched the Riuer of Thames; containing the Counties now known by these names, of Cheshire, Darby-shire, Nottingham, Stafford, and Shrop-shire, Northampton, Leicester, Lincolne, Huntington, and Rut∣land-shires; Warwicke, Worcester, Oxford, and Glocester-shires; Buckingham, Bedford, and part of Hertford-shire. The first raiser of that Title and name of a Kingdome, was Crida, the sonne of Kenwald, who was the sonne An. Do. 582. Crida. of Cnebba, the sonne of Ichell, the sonne of Eomer, the sonne of Engengeate, the sonne of Offa, the sonne of Weremund, the sonne of Withleg, the sonne of Waga, Flor. Wigor. the sonne of Wethelgeate, the third of the fiue sonnes of Prince Woden. This man, without more fame of his further acts, is said to haue raigned the space of His raigne. ten yeeres, and to haue died Anno 594. His issue was Wibba that succeeded him in his Kingdome, and a His issue daughter named Quenburge, matched in mariage with Edwin afterwards King of Northumberland, with whom she liued in the Court of King Redwald in the time of his troubles, and died before him in that his banishment. She bore him two sonnes, Osfrid and Ed∣fride, as in the succession of Edwins Monarchy shall be shewed: notwithstanding Beda reporteth this Quen∣burge to be daughter of Ceorle the third King of Mer∣cia, and grand-child to this first Crida. VVIbba, the sonne of King Crida, not onely held what his Father had gotten, but also inlarged 2. An. Do. 593. Wibba. Mat b. West. His issue. his dominions by intrusion vpon the weake Britaines. His issue was Penda, Kenwalk, and Eoppa, all three Pro∣genitors of Kings afterwards in that kingdome, with a daughter named Sexburg, married to Kenwald, King of the West-Saxons, whom he without iust cause diuor∣ced from him; for which cause great troubles after∣wards ensued, as in the raignes of those Kings wee Cap. 9. Sect. 7. haue said. He in great honour raigned twenty yeeres, and giuing place vnto nature, left his kingdome to be inioied by another. His raigne. His death. CEorl, not the son, but the Nephew of King Wibba, succeeded in the dominions of the Mercians, a∣bout 3. An. Do. 614. Ceorl. the yeere of grace six hundreth and fourteenth. He was sonne to Kinemund, the brother of Wibba, the younger sonne of King Crida, who was the first King of that kingdome. His raigne is set to be ten yeeres, without mention either of Act or Issue. His raigne. PEnda, the sonne of Wibba, beganne his raigne ouer the Mercians the yeere of Christs Incarnation six 4. An. Do. 626. Penda. His raigne. hundred twenty six, & continued the same the space of thirty yeeres. He was a man violent in action, and mercilesse in condition, cruell and vnsatiate of blood: he shooke the Cities, and disturbed the borders of the Saxon-Kings, more then any other in that Heptarchy before him had done. Against Kingils and Quinche∣line, He r. Hunt. Kings together of the West-Saxons, he ioined bat∣tell neere vnto the Citie Cirenchester, where both the Matth. West . parties fought it out to the vtmost, with the effusion of much Saxons bloud: but those comming to con∣cord, he with Cadwallo King of the Britaines, slew in battell Edwine and O wald, Kings of Northumberland, Sigebert, Egfrid, and Anna, Kings of the East-Angles, and forced Kenwald King of the West-Saxons out of Beda bist. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 18. his Country, in quarrell of his Sister. Of these his pro∣sperities he became so proud, that hee thought no∣thing impossible for his atchieuement; and therefore threatning the destruction of the Northumbers, pre∣pared his Army for that expedition. Oswy then raig∣ning King of that Country, proffered great summes of mony, and most precious Iewels to purchase his peace: which being refused, and the battell ioined, more by the hand of God, then power of man, this Tyrant was slaine, and his whole Army discomfited. His death. His Wife was Kinswith, and issue by her Peada, who after him was King: Vulfere and Ethelred, both Mo∣narchs Wife. Issue. Ingulphus. of the English; Merkthel, a man famous for his great holinesse, and Merwald that gouerned some part of Mercia, whose Wife was Edburga, the foun∣dresse of Minster in Tanet, and daughter to Egbert King of Kent; by whom he had issue Meresin, a man of noted deuotion, Milbury, and Mildgith, both holy Virgins, and Mildrith also Abbesse of Tanet, all foure canonized for Saints. The daughters of King Penda, were Kineburg, the Wife of Alkfrid, King of Nor∣thumberland, afterward a Votaresse in Kinesburg Abby, and Kineswith, who maried Offa King of the East-Angles, and became also a Nunne with her sister Ki∣neburgh. PEada, the sonne of King Penda, in the daies of his 5. An. Do. 656. Peada. father, and with his permission, had gouerned the middle part of Mercia, and after his death, by the gift of Oswy of Northumberland, all the South of that kingdome from the Riuer Trent, vpon cōposition to marrie his daughter, and to imbrace Christianity; which thing this Peada performed, and was the first Beda hist. Angl. l. 3 c. 21. Christian King of the Mercians. His Baptisme recei∣ued, to witnesse the first fruits of his profession, hee laid the foundation of a faire Church at Medesham∣sled, Hugo de Peterbor. now called Peterborrow, but liued not to finish the same, for that he was slaine by the treason of Alkfled His wife. His death. his wife in the celebration of Easter, (as Beda saith) ha∣uing had no issue by her. But Robert de Swapham (an Beda hist. Angl. l. 3. c. 24. Author of good antiquity, who saw the stones of that foundation to be so huge, as that eight yoke of Oxen could hardly draw one of them) saith, that Peada was brought to his end by the practise of his Mother, and not of his Wife; as in these his words is manifest. Peada (saith he) laid the foundation of a Monastery at Medesham∣sted, in the Giruians or Fen-Country, which he could not finish, for that by the wicked practise of his Mother, hee was made away. Whereby this blot is taken from this Christian Lady, and brands the face of her that most deserueth it. This King raigning as substitute to King Oswy of Northumberland aforesaid, by some is not ac∣counted for a Mercian King, his regiment resting vn∣der the command of another. VVlfhere, the Brother of murthered Peada, set vp 6. An. Do. 659. Vulfhere. by the Mercians against King Oswy, prooued a Prince most valiant and fortunate. For hee expelled the Northumbrians Lieutenants forth of those domi∣nions; fought victoriously against Kenwald King of the West-Saxons; conquered the Ile of Wight, and attai∣ned to be sole Monarch of the Englishmen: whereof more shall be said when wee come to the times and successions of their raignes. This Vulfhere is said to raigne in great honour for seuenteene yeeres, and his body to bee buried in the His raigne. Monasterie of Peterborow, which he had founded. His Queene Ermenheld after his death, became a Nunne His vvife. at Ely, vnder her Mother Sexburg, and there died. His children were Kenred, Vulfald, and Rufin, with a daugh∣ter, His issue. named Wereburg, a Nunne in the Monastery of Ely. EThelred the third sonne of King Penda, in the no∣nage of yong Kenred the sonne of Vulfhere, (who 7. An. Do. 675. Ethelred. Simon Dunelm. in his tender yeeres rather desired a priuate life then any publike authority in the Common-weale) suc∣ceeded his brother both in the Kingdome of Mer∣cia, and Monarchy of the Englishmen. But when hee had raigned thirty yeeres, gaue ouer the Crowne to his Nephew the said Kenred, and became a Monke in His raigne. the Monastery of Bradney in Lincolne-shire, where hee died Anno 716. His Wife was Osfryde, Daughter to Oswyn King of Northumberland: and issue, Chelred, that His wife, His issue. succeeded Kenred in the Mercian kingdome. KEnred the sonne of Vulfhere, (his Vncle Ethelred changing his Princely Crown for a Monks Coule) 8. An. Do. 704. Kenred. beganne his Raigne ouer the Mercians, and his Mo∣narchy ouer the English, Anno 704. wherein he raig∣ned the space of foure yeeres, and then with like de∣uotion of those times, addicted to an easie and quiet His raigne. Religion, abandoned both Crowne and Country, Beda hist. Angl. lib. 5. ca. 20. and went to Rome, where of Pope Constantine hee re∣ceiued the tonsure and habit of a Monke at the Apo∣stles Tombes, and entring a Monastery, therein spent other foure yeeres of his life to the day of his death, His death. which was Anno 708. hauing had neither wife nor issue to reuiue his name, or to rule his kingdome. CHelred receiuing the resignation of Kenred his Co∣sin-german 9. An. Do. 709. Chelred. when he went to Rome, and of suffici∣ent yeeres and discretion to haue succeeded Ethelred his Father, what time the said Kenred was ordained King, raigned with great valour ouer the Mercians, and was likewise Monarch ouer the Englishmen. His Monarch of the English-men. peace was disquieted by Inas & his West-Saxons, who for seuen yeeres continuance inuaded his kingdome. His Wife was Wereburge, saith Marianus and Floren∣tius His vvife. the Monke, who ascribe to her a long life, and to die without Childten. This Chelred raigned the space of eight yeeres, and died the yeere of grace seuen hun∣dred His raigne. and fifteenth: whose body was buried in the Cathedrall Church of Lechfeild. Death. EThelbald, after the death of Chelred, was made King 1 . An. Do. 10. . of the Mercians, and Monarch of the English, the yeere of Christs Incarnation seuen hundred sixteene. He was a Prince giuen to peace, but withall a most lasciuious Adulterer: insomuch that Boniface Arch∣bishop of Mentz wrote his Epistle vnto him in repre∣hension of the same; which tooke such effect, that in repentance of his foule facts, hee founded the Mona∣sterie of Crowland, driuing in mighty Piles of Oake into that moorish ground, whereon hee laid a great and goodly building of stone. He was the son of A wr, the elder sonne of Eoppa, the second sonne of King Wibba, the brother of King Penda: and raigned fortie His raigne. two yeeres, in the end whereof he was slaine in a bat∣tell fought against Cuthred King of the West-Saxons, at Secondone, three miles from Tamworth, the yeere of Christ, seuen hundred fiftie fiue, and was buried at Repton in Darby-shire, hauing had neither Wife nor Children. OFfa slaying Bernred the murtherer of King Ethel∣bald, 11. An. Do. 758. Offa. entred vpon the gouernment of the Merci∣ans, and the Monarchy of the Saxons, An. 758. He in∣larged his dominion vpon the Britaines, ouercame the Kentish in a battell, put to flight the Northumbrians, and vanquished the West-Saxons: the East-Angles also he seised vpon, after he had murthered Ethelbert their King. He raigned thirty nine yeeres, and died at Ofley, the nine and twenty day of Iuly, the yeere of our Lord His raigne. seuen hundred ninetie foure, and was buried without the Town of Bedford, in a Chapell, now swallowed vp by the Riuer Owse. He was the son of Thingfryd, the sonne of Eanulfe, whose Father Osmund was the sonne of Eoppa, the brother of King Penda, and son of King Flor. Wigor. Wibba, whose Father was Crida, the first King of the Mercians. His Wife was Quendred, and children many; of whom, and of them we will further speake when His wife. His issue. we come to the time of his Monarchy. EGfryde, the sonne of great Offa, was by him made King at his returne from Rome, being the only ioy 12. An. Do. 796. Egfryde. Flacc . of his parents, and heire apparant to the Saxons Mo∣narchy, vpon which he entred the day after his fathers death, and liued himselfe but a hundred and fortie daies after, deceasing the seuenteenth of December, in the yeere of our Lord God seuen hundred ninety six, hauing had neither wife nor issue that wee reade of, and his body honourably interred in the Church of the Monasterie of Saint Albanes, founded by Offa. KEnwolfe, the cosen (a farre off) to King Egfrid de∣ceased, 13. An. Do. 797. Kenwolfe. and both of them remooued in bloud no lesse then six descents from Wibba the second Mercian King, was the sonne of Cuthbert, (as the Monke of Worcester deriues him) the sonne of Bassa, the sonne of Kenrowe, the sonne of Kentwin, the sonne of Kenwalk, the sonne of Wibba aforesaid, and succeeded King Eg∣fryd in his Dominions. But of this Mercian Monarch more shall be written in the succession and time of that his gouernment. Hee raigned two and twentie His raigne. yeeres, and deceased the yeere of our Lord eight hun∣dred and nineteene, and his bodie interred in the Mo∣nasterie of Winchcombe in the Countie of Glocester, be∣ing of his owne foundation. His wife was Queene El∣fryde, His wife. the daughter (as some suppose) of Offa, who had beene betrothed to Ethelbert King of the East-An∣gles, slaine by her father; by whom he had issue, Ke∣nelm, Quendred, and Burgemhild, of whom more fol∣loweth. His issue. KEnelm, the sonne of King Kenwolfe, a childe of se∣uen 14. An. Do. 819. Kenelm. yeeres old, succeeded in the Kingdome of Mer∣cia, but not in the Monarchie, as his fathers had done, Egbert the West-Saxon at that time being grown great in his fortunes. This young King Kenelm raigned only fiue moneths, and then by the ambitious desire of His raigne. Quendrid his sister, who seeking the gouernment by Roger Higden. the shedding of his guiltlesse bloud, instigated one Askbert his Instructor, by promises of great prefer∣ments and rich rewards, to make him away, who only stood (as she thought) in her way to the Crowne. This His death. wicked practise was foorth with as impiously perfor∣med: for hauing him foorth vnder pretence of hun∣ting, he slew the innocent King, whose vertuous in∣clination promised great hopes, and whose harmlesse yeeres had not attained to any worldly guile. His bo∣die hee secretly buried vnder a bush, and (if we will beleeue the Golden Legend, where his life is described) Legend... . sol. 175. was thus found out: A white Doue (which belike had seene the deed done) and had got it ingrossed in a scrole of parchment, posted therewith to S. Peter in Rome, and vpon the High Altar laid it to bee read, where in the Saxon characters thus it was found: In Clenc kon ba Kenelme Kinba ne lie : that is, At Clenc in a Cow pasture Ke∣nelme the Kings childe lieth beheaded vnder a thorne. But most true it is, that an obscure sepulcher the body had at the first, and howsoeuer found out, was afterwards with great honour and ceremonie translated to the Monasterie of Winchcombe, which his father had foun∣ded. The murderesse Quendrid, for griefe and shame of so wicked an act, ended her life, without the attai∣ning of her ambitious desire, and hath left her name indeleblie stained with his innocent bloud. CEolwulfe, the brother of Kenwolfe, and vncle to this murdered young King, as his neerest in bloud 15. An. Do. 820. Ceolwulfe. Matth. Westminst. was elected their Gouernour by the Mercians: but his glory was not great, nor his raigne long, being still dis∣quieted by Bernulfe, that sought his Crowne; and af∣ter one yeeres Regiment was expulsed by his people, His raigne. and left the same to his pursuer, abandoning the Countrie for the safety of his life. One daughter hee had, named Elfled, who was the wife of Wigmund, the sonne of Withlafe, the substitute King of Mercia, and His issue. himselfe the last that held the Mercian Kingdome in a lineall succession. BErnulfe obtaining what hee so long desired, made 16. An. Do. 821. Bernulfe. Simon Dunelm. Wil. Malmes. himselfe King when Ceolwulfe was gone, and was the more approoued for his valour in Armes, and the lesse resisted for his ancient descent, being sprung from Osher, a man reputed to be of the Mercian royall bloud. But Bernulfe perceiuing the fortunes of Egbert, accounted those his happie successes to bee his owne shame, and by defiance challenged the West-Saxons to the field: which Egbert accepted, and vpon Ellendon ioined Battle with the Mercians, which was fought to the much losse of both their blouds. Notwithstan∣ding at last the West-Saxons preuailed, Bernulfe being forced to flie with shame. The East-Angles that then had yeelded to Egbert, and but lately before had felt the fury of Bernulfe, thought the time fit to repay him againe, and therefore in warlike manner assaulted his Territories, where hee, in defending his Countrey a∣gainst His death. His raigne. Henr. Hunt. their attempts, was in a skirmish slaine, after he had raigned not fully three yeeres. LVdecan then was chosen King of the Mercians, whose bloud was not downe since their last losse, 17. An. Do. 824. Ludecan. neither reuenge forgotten against the East-Angles; and therefore the yeere following made strength (suf∣ficient to their seeming) to meet these their enemies. But the State of Heptarchie now drawne to the pe∣riod, and the supporters thereof weakened by their own diuisions, the Iland declined to a present altera∣tion, & gaue place to a more absolute kind of Monar∣chy, that in Egbert the West-Saxon was now begun; who aiding the East-Angles against the Mercians, Ludecan their King fought with no better successe then Bernulf before him had done; whose raigne lasted not fully 2. His raigne. yeers, nor his memoriall reuiued either in wife or issue. VVIthlafe, the sonne of Oswald, the sonne of Osber, 1 . An. Do. 26. Withlafe. of the Mercian bloud-royall, intruding him∣selfe (as it seemeth) into the gouernment of Mercia, was vnexpectedly vanquished by Egbert the Monarch that had assumed from Bernulfe that Kingdome be∣fore: him hee made his Substitute and Tributarie, who so continued to Egbert and his sonne the time of thirteene yeeres, leauing no other relation of his acts. His issue was Wigmund, the husband of Lady His issue. Iob. Capgraue. Elfled, the daughter of Ceolwulfe King of Mercia, the parents of Wystan the Martyr, and of Lady Ed∣burg, maried to one Etheland an Earle in the Prouince of Lincolne. BErthulf vpon the like composition of Tribute, 19. An. Do. 839. Berthulf. Will. Malmesb. Berefred the cau∣ser of S. Wystans martyrdome. and in the like termes of subiection to the West-Saxons soueraigntie, held the kingdome of Mercia as a Substitute, and without any notable reports of his Acts, so raigned the space of thirteene yeeres. At this time the Sea-rouers out of Denmarkc, that had often infested this Iland with their many Inuasions, got the head so strong, and wing so farre, euen to the middle part thereof, (as this of Mercia was) that they filled with terror the hearts of the Inhabitants, and stained the soile with the bloud of their sides, which in a most barbarous crueltie daily they shed; whose rage was so great, and mindes so vnsatiable, that Berthulf was enforced to forsake the Country, and in a more priuate estate to secure his owne life. He had a sonne named Berefred, who was the causer of Saint Wystans martyrdome. BVrdred, the last Mercian King, was thereunto de∣puted 20. An. Do. 852. Matth. West. The Danes depart the Prouince. They returne with 3. Kings. by Ethelwolfe the West-Saxon Monarch, as a shield of defence against the raging Danes, that made desolations where they came. In continuall imploi∣ments against them he spent his time, and that with such noble resolutions and manhood, that Ethelwolfe held him worthy of his alliance, and made him his sonne in law, by giuing him Lady Ethelswith his daughter to Wife, the marriage being solemnized at Chipnham in Wiltshire, with great estate. This Burdred with Ethelwolfe, warred against the Britaines with vi∣ctorie, and he with Alured compelled the Danes vnder the conduct of Hungar and Vbba, to dislodge from Nottingham, and depart the Prouince. Yet lastly, after twenty two yeeres raigne, hee was so ouerlaid with their daily supplies, that three of their Kings (as our Writers terme them) whose names were Godrun, Eske∣tell, and Ammond, wintred at Repton. Ripindon, and sore wa∣sted his Kingdome. King Burdred at that time distressed, and himselfe Burdred and his wife flie the land. not able to withstand their rage, with his wife Queene Ethelswith fled the Realme, and the same yeere in Rome ended his life, and was buried in the Church Hee buried at Rome. of our Lady belonging to the English College there ere∣cted. His Queene in the habit of a Nunne, fifteene yeeres after his death, died at Padua in Italie, and was there honourably buried, the yeere of our Lord eight His wife at Padua. hundred eightie nine. And now the fatall circle of this Kingdome drawne to the full compasse, staied the hand of all glorious motion from proceeding any further, and with the lot of the rest fell vnder the go∣uernment of the West-Saxons, after one yeeres vsurpa∣tion The kingdome of Mercia brought in subiection to the West-Saxons. of the Danes, when it had stood in state of a king∣dome the space of two hundred and two yeeres, and ended in title and regall authority, the yeere of Christs Incarnation eight hundred eighty six. THE KINGDOME OF THE EAST-ANGLE, THE CIRCVIT OF THAT PRO∣VINCE, WITH THE SVCCESSION AND ACTS OF THEIR KINGS, SO LONG AS IT STOOD IN THAT REGALL ESTATE, AND VNTILL IT WAS VNITED TO THE WEST-SAXONS. CHAPTER XI. T He Counties (as we now call them) that were sub∣iect The circuit af this Prouince. to this East-Angles Kingdome, were Suffolke, Norfolke, Cambridge-shire, and the Ile of Ely. The bounds whereof were li∣mitted in this manner: the East and North sides were confined by the Oce∣an; the West, with Saint Edmunds Ditch, and the South altogether with Essex, and some part of Hert∣fordshire. The first raiser of the title and State of this King∣dome, was a Saxon Captaine named Vffa, about the 1 An. Do. 575. The first King of the East-Angles. Beda hist. Angl. lib. 2. Cap. 15. yeere of Christs incarnation fiue hundred seuentie fiue, whose renowne was such, that he gaue name not onely to that his aspired Dominion, but also from him, the Subiects thereof were a long time after cal∣led Vffines: though lastly, it was reduced into the name and Kingdom of the East-Angles. This Vffa (as East. Angles cal∣led Vffines. Florentius the Monke of Worcester hath laid downe) was the sonne of Withelin, and he the sonne of Hrip∣pus, Vffa his genea∣logie. the sonne of Rothmund, the sonne of Trigils, the sonne of Titmon, the sonne of Caser, the second sonne of Prince Woden. His raigne is accounted only seuen yeeres, without any mention of further matter, wor∣thy the recording, and his death to haue hapned in the yeare fiue hundred eighty one. TItulus, the second King of the East-Angles, and on∣ly sonne of Vffa that is read of, beganne his raigne 2 An. Do. 383 The second King of the East-Angles. His raigne. the yeere of Christs Incarnation, fiue hundred eigh∣ty three, & continued the same for the space of twen∣ty yeeres. And although the Writers of these times haue made no further mention of his Acts, yet may we well suppose that his daies were not altogether so quietly spent, both in the infancy of that newly ere∣cted kingdom, and when such wars were commenced for the obtaining the whole Iland. His issue was Red∣wald, that immediatly succeeded him, & from whom other Kings of that kingdom were lineally descēded. Florent. Worcest. REdwald, the greatest of all the East-Angles Kings, succeeded his father Titulus in the Dominions of 3. An. Do. 593. Beda hist. l. 2. ca. 5. The third King of this Kingdom. the East-Angles. and Ethelbert of Kent in the Monar∣chie of the Saxons. He receiued and succoured in his Court Edwyne with his wife in their Exiles, and assi∣sted him against Ethelfrid King of Northumberland, that sought his life, as before wee haue shewed, and Cap. 9. Sect. 7. hereafter in the succession of his Monarchy wee shal haue further occasion. Hee raigned Monarch eight See more of him in Chap 18. His raigne. yeeres, and King of the East-Angles thirty one (by the account and computation of the Table annexed to Malmesbury, and others of our English Writers) and died the yeare of our Saluation six hundred twen∣ty-three. ERpenwald, the younger sonne of King Redwald, (Reynhere his elder brother being slaine in battle 4 An. Do. 624 The fourth King of this Kingdom. by Ethelfred, in the quarrell of distressed Edwine) suc∣ceeded his Father in the Kingdom of the East-Angles, the yeer of our Lord God six hundred twenty foure. He was the first King of that Prouince, that publikely The first of this Prouince that publikely . Matth West. Beda hist l. 2. c 15 The people re∣iect Christ. professed the Christian Faith, which hee receiued at the friendly motion and zealous exhortation of King Edwine of Northumberland; but so much to the discon∣tentment & grudge of the people, as thereupon they presently entred into conspiracy to practise his death, which a Pagā Ruffian named Richebert, not long after most traiterously executed. His raigne is placed in the The King slaine by a Traitor. His raigne. foresaid Table of our Writers, (as it is compared with the other Kings of those times) to extend twelue yeeres; after whose death, those people returned to their wonted Idolatrie, and for three yeeres continu∣ance embraced their former Gentility, from which Iohn S . they were reclaimed by Sigebert his brother in law, who succeeded him in his Throne, hee hauing no The Subiects re∣claimed by Sigebert. issue, to whom it might be left. SIgebert, the sonne of the second wife to Redwald, and by her born to a former husband, whose name 5 An. Do. 636 The fifth King. is vnknowne, was greatly mistrusted by his Father in law, King Redwald, that he went about to aspire his Crowne: the motiues of which suspition, notwith∣standing all the endeauours of innocent Sigebert, were still followed with an enuious eye, and his subiectiue Sigebert supected of treason a∣gainst Redwald. semblances, as notes of popularity, were euer concei∣ued to aime at the supreme authority: which blot of iealousie, when it could no otherwise bee wiped out, he abandoned the Court of the King, and Country of his birth, and in France as an exile, al the time of Red∣wald He goeth into exile. the Father, and likewise the raigne of Erpenwald the sonne, spent his time in study of good Literature, & contemplatiue exercises, where learning the truth of Christs Doctrine, and hauing receiued the lauer of Baptisme, after the death of this said Erpenwald his alli∣ed Brother, returned, and was made King of the East-Angles. This man (saith Beda) following the examples of Beda hist. Ang. l. 3. c. . France, brought the light of the Gospell into his Do∣minions, and by the assistance of Felix Bishop of Dun∣wich, Sigebert with the assistance of a Bishop doth pro∣mote religion and learning. for a more firme plantation thereof, built a Schoole for the education of children, appointing them Schoole-masters and Teachers after the maner of the Kentish-men; who are * supposed to haue at Will. mbert. in Peramb. of Kent. that time the Liberall Sciences professed among them, in their Metropolitane City Canterbury, which was the paterne (saith that Countries Perambulator) that this Sigebert followed in the erection of his; but whether at Cambridge or elsewhere, hee leaueth for Doctor Caius of Cambridge, and M. Key of Oxford, to M r . Caius, and M r . Key. be disputed of. And indeed Beda assigneth not the place for this foundation, nor once nameth Cam∣bridge, vnlesse you will say, that out of the ruines of Grantcester, an ancient Citie decaied in his daies, the same arose, and whereof hee maketh mention in his fourth Booke, vpon this occasion as followeth. Queene Etheldred (saith he) that had been a Virgin, wife to Egfrid King of Northumberland the tearme of Beda hist. Angl. lib. 4. cap. 19. twelue yeeres, and Abbesse of Ely for seuen more, for her reputed holinesse after her death and buriall, was thought worthy by Queene Sexburg her sister (who had beene wife to Ercombert King of Kent, and suc∣ceeded her Abbesse in the same Monasterie) to bee re∣mooued out of her wooden Tombe & meane place of buriall, into the Church and richer Monument: but for want of stone, which was scarce in those parts, certaine brethren were sent to find out some for that vse, who comming to , a little City lest desolate and vninhabited, found by the walles a Grantcester. Tomb of white marble verie faire, and couered with a like stone. This they thought to be found not with∣out miracle, and therefore most fit to intombe her corps, which accordingly they did. But that this had beene the place of Sigeberts Schoole, hee mentioneth not. But whether by him or no, wee know it now the Beda maketh mention of Grantcester, but not of Schoole there. other Vniuersity of England, a seed-plot of all diuine and humane Literature, and one of those springs whence issue the wholesome waters that doe bedewe both the Church & Common-wealth, both, famous The Vniuersities of England, a∣boue all other in Europe. for the Arts, for Buildings, and Reuenewes, as their like is not to be found in Europe (saith Peter Martyr) and that most truely. But to returne: Sigebert being weari∣ed with the waighty affairs of this world, laid the bur∣den thereof vpon Egricke his kinsman, and shore him∣selfe Sigebert resig∣neth to Egricke, and liueth in a Monasterie. a Monk in the Abby of Cumbreburge, which him∣selfe had built, & wherein he liued, vntill that wicked Penda, the Mercian King, with his heathenish cruelty molested the peace of the East-Angles; who after long resistance, finding themselues too weake, besought Si∣gebert, for the better incouragement of their souldi∣ers, He is constrai∣ned to resume it againe, and is slaine in battle. to shew himselfe in field; which when he refused, by constraint (saith Beda) they drew him forth, where in the midst of them hee was slaine in battle, vsing no other weapon for defence, sauing only a white wand; when hee had raigned onely three yeeres, and left no His raigne. issue to suruiue him, that is any where recorded. EGricke, cosin to King Sigebert, and by him made King, as wee haue said, was sore molested by the 6. An. Do. 638. The sixth King. Penda a cruell King of Mercia. Egrick and Sige∣bert both slaine by Penda. His raigne. continuall inuasions of Penda, the cruell King of Mer∣cia; who lastlie in a set battle slew him with Sigebert, about the yeere of Christ his incarnation sixe hūdred fifty two. And when himself had raigned 4. yeers, de∣ceased, without mentiō either of wife or child, that is read of, further to reuiue his memory to posterities. ANna succeeded King Egricke in the Kingdome of the East-Angles, the yeer of grace six hundred 7. An. D. 642. The seuenth King. Beda hist. Angl. li. 3. cap. 18. Malmesb. de gest is Regum Angl. fortie two, as the next in bloud to Erpinwald, beeing the sonne of Guido, saith Beda, the sonne of Eni, saith Malmsbury, who was brother to great Redwald; and both of them the sons of Titulus, the second King of that Prouince. This King, as the other two former had done, felt the fury of raging Penda, with his mer∣cilesse Mercians, that sore assaulted his Territories with rapine and spoile. To withstand whose further proceedings, King Anna drew the strength of his East-Angles against them, and encountred Penda in a great and mortall battle, wherein they were all discomfi∣ted and himselfe among them slaine, when hee had Anna slaine in battle by Penda. raigned in continuall trouble the space of thirteene yeeres. His issue were many, and those of great holi∣nesse Anna his issue. His raigne. Firminus he e apparant. or sanctity of life. Whereof Ferminus the el∣dest, and heire apparant, was slaine by Penda in the same battle with his Father, and was with him buri∣ed in Blidribrugh, now Blibrugh, but afterwards remo∣ued to S. Edmondsbury. His other sonne was Erken∣wald, Abbat of Chertside, and Bishoppe of London, that lieth buried in the South Ile, aboue the Quire in Erkenwald Abbat of Chertside, and Bishop of Lon∣don. S. Pauls Church, where to this day remaineth a me∣moriall of him. His daughters were these; Etheldrid the eldest, was first married vnto a Nobleman, whom Etheldrid Ab∣besse of Ely. Beda nameth Tonbert, Gouernor of the Fenny Coun∣tries of Nothfolke, Huntington, Lincolne, and Cam∣bridge-shires: and after his death remaining a virgin, she was remarried to Egfrid King of Northumberland, with whom likewise she liued in perfect virginity the space of twelue yeeres, notwithstanding his intreaty and allurements to the contrary. From whom, lastly, she was released, and had licence to depart his Court, vnto the Abbey of Coldinghā, where first she was vai∣led a Nunne vnder Abbesse Ehba, and thence depar∣ting, she liued at Ely, and became her selfe Abbesse thereof, wherein lastly she died, and was interred; re∣membred vnto posterities by the name of S. Audrte. His second daughter was Sexburg, who married Er∣combert, King of Kent, vnto whom she bare two sons, and two daughters, as we in that Kingdomes succes∣sion haue shewed: after whose death, shee tooke the habit of a Nunne, and succeeded her sister Etheldrid, Sexburge Ab∣besse of Ely after her sister. Withgith a Mēchi∣on in Ely Abbey. Abbesse of Ely, wherin she died and was interred: and their yongest sister Withgith, was likewise a Menchion with them in the same Monastery, and all of them ca∣nonized for Saints. Ethilburge his third daughter was made Abbesse of Berking, neere London, built by her Ethilburge Ab∣besse of Barking. Beda lib. 4. cap. 6. brother Bishop Erkinwald, wherein she liued, and last∣ly died. A naturall daughter likewise he had, whose name was Edelburg, that with Sedrido the daughter of Edelburge Ab∣besse of S. Brigges in France. Beda lib. 3. Cap. . his wife, were both of them professed Nunnes, and succeeded each other Abbesses in the Monastery of S. Brigges in France. Such a reputed holinesse was it held in those daies, not only to be separated from the accompanying with men, wherunto women by God were created, but also to abandon the Country of their natiuity, and as strangers in forraine Lands, to spend the continuance of their liues. EThelherd, the brother of Anna, the yere of Christs Incarnation six hundred fifty foure, was made 8 An. Do. 654 Ethelherd the eighth King. King of the East-Angles: the which it seemeth he had attempted in the raigne of his brother, for that hee had assisted Penda in his warres against him; and was the motiue (saith Beda) of the warres against Oswin Beda hist. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 24. King of Northumberland, wherin siding with the hea∣then Penda, he was worthily slaine, the fifteenth day of Nouember, when he had raigned onely two yeeres, His raigne. leauing his name to the blot of infamy, and his Crowne to be possessed by his younger brother. His wife was Hereswith sister of Hilda, the famous learned Abbesse of Streanshale, and great grand-childe to Ed∣wyne Hereswith the wife of Ethelhert King of Northumberland, who bare vnto him Aldulfe, Elswoolfe, and Beorne, all three succeeding E∣dilwald Their children. in the Kingdome of the East-Angles. EDelwald the brother of Ethelherd entred his go∣uernment 9 An. Do. 656. of the East-Angles the yere of our Lord six hundred fifty sixe, and continued the same the 10 An Do. 664 space of nine yeeres, without either mention of any other memorable act: from whom (as is supposed) issued Ethelred that succeeded King after Beorne. ALdulfe, the eldest sonne of Ethelherd and Queene Hereswith, after the death of his vncle King Edel∣wald, obtained the Kingdome of the East-Angles, and therein raigned without any honour or honourable action by him performed: onely his name and time of his raigne, which was nineteene yeres, is left of him by Writers: and affordeth no further relation of vs here to be inserted, besides his Coine here set. ELswolf the sonne of King Ethelherd, and bother to this last mentioned Aldulfe, began his raigne ouer 11 An. Do. 683 the Kingdome of the East-Angles, the yeere of Christ his Incarnation, six hundred eighty three, and conti∣nued His raigne. in the same, the time of seuen yeeres, without record of any memorable Act, Wife, or Issue, to re∣uiue his name. BEorne, the yongest sonne of King Ethelherd, suc∣ceeded his brother King Elswolfe in the Kingdom 12. An. Do. 714 Beorn the twelfth King. of the East-Angles; no further mention being made of him, his wife, nor Issue, which are altogether pe∣rished, and laid long since in their graues of obliuion. EThelred, after the death of his cosen Beorne, succee∣ded 13 An. D. 714. Ethelred the thir∣teenth King. him in the Kingdome of the East-Angles, issu∣ing (as is supposed) from King Ed lwald the brother of Ethelherd, and of Anna, both of them Kings in that Prouince. His raigne by writers is said to bee fiftie two yeeres, which notwithstanding was passed ouer He raigned two and fifty yeeres. without any memorable note: for albeit that his go∣uernment was long, and the declining Heptarchie not vnlikely to haue ministred matters of remembrance to posterities, yet is the same passed ouer by the si∣lence of our Wrirers, and no further mention made of him, besides the education of his yonger sonne Ethelbert, who proued a most worthy King. His wife, and the mother of this vertuous sonne, was Leo∣frun, His sonne Ethel∣bert. His wife Leofrun. Flores Wigor. Ioba Capgraue. saith the Writer of his life, without further men∣tion of her parentage, or other issue. This King de∣ceased the yeere after Christs natiuity, seuen hundred forty eight, the same yeere that Ethelbert entred his Kingdome of Kent. EThelbert, the sonne of King Ethelred, after his Fa∣thers death was ordained King of the East-Angles, 14. An. D. 749. Ethelbert the foureteenth King. whose daies of youth were spent in learning and deeds of charity, and the whole time of his gouerne∣ment in continuall tranquillity; for hee is recorded to be a Prince religious and charitable, sober, pro∣found and wise in counsell. This King being incited by Offa the Mercian (that still thirsted after great∣nesse) to marie Elfryd his daughter, a Lady of great Giral. Cambrensis beautie, came vpon that purpose to Offa his Court, then seated at Sutton Wallis in the County of Hereford Ethelbert murde∣red by Offa King of Mercia. and was by him there cruelly murdered at the insti∣gation of Quendrid his vnkind (intended) mother in law, no other occasion ministred, but the greatnes of his Port, that much in her eyes ouer-heighted her husbands. His Bride-bed the graue was first at Mer∣den, Buried at Mer∣den. north from Sutton vpon the Riuer Lug. But af∣terwards vpon repentance, Offa remoued it vnto He∣reford; After at Here∣ford, ouer whom was built a faire Church. Iohn Capgraue. ouer whom, Milfrid an vnder King of the Mercians built a most faire Church in memoriall of him, which yet beares his name, and is the Cathedral of that See. His Bride, Lady Elfrid, much lamenting Elfrid his espou∣sall vowed chasti∣ty. Os rt de Cl e. his contriued murther, withdrew her self to Crowland in the Fennes, and there vowed chastitie all the daies of her life; notwithstanding some affirme that shee was wife to King Kenwolfe, the successor of her bro∣ther Egfrid. This King raigned the space of forty fiue yeeres, as is set in the Table of our English Writers, and died the yeare of Christs incarnation seuen hun∣dred He raigned forty fiue yeeres. ninety three, the eighteenth day of May, and his Kingdome intruded vpon by the Mercians, hauing had neither wife nor children, that Historians make mention of: after whose death the Kingdom of the East-Angles was brought to decay, both by the Mer∣cians, West-Saxons, and them of Kent; so that by means of their violence, that Prouince was destitute of her owne Gouernours, the space of seuenty seuen yeeres, vntill lastly the assaults of the Danes, a new-come Guest and most dangerous Enemie, caused the other Kings to stand vpon their Guards, and rather to defend what they already had gotten, then to seeke inlarge∣ment, to the hazard of all: at which time, it is said one Offa, to whom the right of that Crowne belonged, vpon a religious deuotion, tooke his pilgrimage to Offa heire to the Crowne, adop∣teth Edmund the sonne of Alkmond. the Sepulchre of Christ, and visiting in his way a kinsman of his, whose name was Alkmund, at the Ci∣tie Norhenberge in Saxonie, there made his will, wher∣in hee adopted young Edmund his heire, the son of Alkmond: and accomplishing his voiage, in his return died at the Port Saint George, from whence hee sent young Edmund his Ring, and therwith ordained him King of the East-Angles. Alkmund a Prince of great power in those parts, maintained his sons rightfull election, and with a sufficient power sent him to claime the kingdome. These landing in the East of England, at a place called Maydenboure, built a roiall Tower, which hee named, and to this day is called, Hunstantone, situated vpon the North-west point of Norfolke, that beareth likewise his owne name. EDmund thus arriued, was as willingly receiued and 15 An. Do. 870. Edmund the fif teenth King The Danes inua∣sion. Polydor. Virg. by the East-Angles made their king; in whose time Hungar and Hubba, two Danish Captains, with an in∣numerable multitude of Heathen Danes, entred the Land at the mouth of Humber, and from thence inua∣ded Nottingham, Yorke and Northumberland, where (without respect of age or sex) they laid all wast, and left the Land whence they departed like to a desolate Wildernesse. From thence they came with the like furie into Edmunds territories, and sacked Thetford. a frequent City in those daies: but he not able to with∣stand their violence, fled into his Castle at Framing∣ham, Fabian. wherein hee was of them besieged; and lastly, ta∣ken (saith Abba Floriacens s) in a village then called Heglisd ne, of a wood bearing the same name, or ra∣ther yeelded himselfe to their torments, to saue more Christian bloud; for it is recorded, that because of his Edmund taken of the Danes, and put to death for the faith of Christ. most constant Faith and Profession, those Pagans first beat him with bats, then scourged him withwhips, he still calling vpon the name of Iesus; for rage whereof, they bound him to a stake, and with their arrowes shot him to death; and cutting off his head, contemp∣tuously threw it into a bush, after he had raigned ouer the East-Angles the space of sixteene yeeres, hauing had neither wife nor issue that is read of. His body and head, after the Danes were departed, were buried Malmes. His raigne. at the same roiall Towne, as Abbo terms it, where Si∣gebert the East-Anglean King, and one of his predeces∣sors, at his establishing of Christianity, built a Church, and where afterwards (in honour of him) was built another most spatious, and of a wonderfull frame of Timber, and the name of the Towne, vpon the occa∣sion of his burial, called vnto this day, Saint Edmonds∣bury. Church S. Edmondsbury builded in honor of Edmund. This Church ra∣zed to the ground by Sue∣nus a Danish King. This Church and place, Suenus the Pagan Da∣nish King in impiety and fury burned to ashes. But when his sonne Canute had made conquest of this Land, and gotten possession of the English Crowne, terrified and affrighted (as saith the Legend) with a vision of the seeming Saint Edmund, in a religious deuotion to expiate his Fathers sacrilege, built it a∣new most sumptuously, enriched this place with Reedified and richly endowed by sonne. Charters & Gifts, and offred his owne Crowne vpon the Martyrs Tombe. After the death of this Edmund the East-Angles Country was possessed by the Danes, & so continued about some fifty yeers, vntil that Ed∣ward surnamed the Elder, expulsed these Danes, and ioined that kingdome a Prouince to the West-Saxons, The Danes ex∣pulsed hence by . after it had stood three hundred fifty three yeeres. A CATALOGVE OF SVCH BRITISH PRINCES AS WITHSTOOD THE SAXONS IN THEIR CONQVESTS FROM VORTIGER'NE THEIR FIRST MAINTAINER, VNTO CADWALLADER THEIR LAST RESISTER. CHAPTER XII. N Ow as we haue spoken of euery seuerall Saxon King, that attained vnto, and Hither the Sa∣xons Heptarchy. held possession of any part in the East & South of this Iland, vntill such time as their Crownes were worne by their Con∣querors, and the seuen∣fold diuided Heptarchy, vnited into an absolute Monarchy: so by order of Hi∣story The British Op∣posers. it is required, that their opposers (the Britains) so long as they kept their ground, and stood in defence of their owne rightful inheritance, should be shewed: who with as great a disdaine, and valorous resistance, vnder-went the yoake of the Saxons subiections, as their ancient Ancestors had endeauoured to cleere themselues from the chaines of the Romans captiuity. And vntill God and destinie withdr from them the hand of defence, they mated the Saxons in all their designes. For albeit that the Romans had robbed the Land of her strength, and the aspired Vortigern, called in these Strangers for his defence: yet their purposes being wisely perceiued, the execution therof was as presently practised, and as eagerly pur∣sued, whilest the pillars (that supported the frame of their gouerment) stood vpon their owne Bases. But the ground-work failing, and those props not many, Resisters of the Saxons. the waight of all, fell vpon some few, whose acts and manly resistance (Christ assisting) shall further bee re∣lated, as time shall bring them to the yeeres of their aduentures, and carry our History thorow the af∣faires of their times. Meane while, as we haue recor∣ded the names of their Ancestors, and worthy fore∣runners, the resisters of the Romans: so now if you please, behold the Catalogue of their Kings, from the foresaid Vortigern (the first subdued by these Sax∣ons) Vortigern the first and Cadwallader the last resister of the Saxons. vnto Cadwallader the last of those British Princes; who left to them his Land, and went himself to Rome: whose times & stories, according to those Guids that lead vs, wee wil declare, referring the credit thereof to our British Historians; against whom howsoeuer some exceptions are, and may be iustly taken, yet are they not altogether to be cast off, in the affaires of these en∣suing Princes, especially Gyldas and Ninius, who liued in, and presently after the times of those resisters. Neither is it to be doubted, but that many others there were of that Nation, no lesse carefull for trans∣ferring the remembrance of their Ancestors actions to posteritie, (no Nation liuing being more zealously deuoted in that kinde,) though their writings haue in Times ruines beene buried, and their remembran∣ces preserued onely by perpetuitie of traditions. and although wee haue shewed the ancient Coines of the Britaines, and obserued a series thorow the Romanes succession: yet be not offended, that I leaue onely Blanks for these latter Princes, as also the first Saxons, wanting the Monies of their owne seuerall Mintes. Such therfore as I haue found of any Kings stamp, raigning whilest the Land was diuided and enioied a∣mongst A successiue Se∣ries of Great Britaines Coines. them, I haue in the margent of their remem∣brances affixed, with the Armes attributed to euery seuerall kingdome: and hence will obserue the same order, without any inuention or fained inscription: which howsoeuer wee want to furnish their successi∣ons, yet this am I sure of, no Nation in Europe can shew the like, or can come to so true a series of their Soueraignes Coines, as England is able at this day to doe. VORTIGERN. 1. Vortigern among the many molestatiōs of the Scots and Picts, was ordained the supreme Gouernor of these affaires; and to that end, with the Britaines full consent was elected their King. For as touching that Monkish Constantine, the sonne of Constantius, who is said to be the brother of Aldreonus, King of Little Bri∣taine in France, sent for and made King by these Bri∣taines, whose simplicitie this Vortigern is said to abuse, and lastly to cause his murther and death; I rather thinke the storie to be the same that happened aboue fortie yeeres before, in the daies of Honorius the Em∣peror; when Constantius among other Conspirators, was raised vpon a hopefull expectation conceiued in his name. This Constantius indeed had a sonne that bare his name, a man of a soft spirit, and no deepe reach, and therefore in his youth was made a Monke. But his Fa∣ther risen to his aspiring honour, created him first his Caesar, and next Augustus, till Fortune turned those smiles into frownes, and stained their purple robes in both their own blouds. For not only the same names induceth this doubt, but the place, which was Winche∣ster, and Abbey Amphibilus, where this Imperiall Monke was shorne, doth not a little confirme the same; the remaines of which Colledge, by that strong and thicke wall standing to this day at the West gate of that Cathedrall Church, doth not a little con∣firme. But wanting better directions to our pro∣ceedings, we must follow for these times men of latter yeeres, and not without some suspect of vncertaintie. The rather, for that the Saxons as then the chiefe Actors in this Land, haue purposely concealed all Saxons haue con∣cealed all victo∣ries against themselues. Victors and victories against themselues; neither but sparingly haue recorded their owne. This Vortigern, howsoeuer attaining the Crowne, was ouer-awed (saith Ninius) by the Picts & Scots, stood The causes of Vortigerns feare, and his sending for the Saxons. in feare of the Roman forces, and dread much the returne of Aurelius Ambrosius, with his brother Vter, surnamed Pen∣dragon: and therefore wanting strength of his owne to maintaine his standing, sent for the Saxons, as wee haue said. He (saith the British Story) was Earle of Corn∣wall, of an honourable Familie and noble descent, his Beda lib. 1. cap. 14. Lady euery way answerable to both; by whom hee had three sonnes, Vortimer, Catigern, and . . . . His second wife . His second wife, or rather Concubine, (hauing cast off this first) was Rowena, the daughter of Hengist, which Pagan mariage prooued not only the bane of the Land, but so ruinated the Church of Christianity, that a Prouinciall Councell of the was sembled in Ann. 470. to repaire those things that this mariage had decaied. By this Heathen Damosell he had a daughter, who (against the law of God and Nature) was his third wife, His third vvife daughter. that Kings (as he pretended, to excuse his est) might be descended from the right issue of Kings, vpon whom he begot his sad lamenting sonne Fausius, a vertuous Fausius the sonne o by his third wife. Impe of those impious parents, that spent his life in a solitarie place neere to the Riuer Llynterrenny, as wee haue said; who abandoning the companie of men, among those mountaines serued God in continuall teares and praiers, for remission of the fault commit∣ted in his incestuous generation, for the recalling of his parents to a better life, and for the restitution of his Country to her former libertie. This Vortigern raigned first sixteene yeeres, and Vortigern how long he raigned. Fabian. Chro. Vortigern depo∣sed and impri∣soned. then deposed for his fauours to the Saxons, was retai∣ned in durance all the raigne of Vortimer his sonne, af∣ter whose death reestablished, but oppressed by his Saxons, and pursued by Aurelius, he withdrew himselfe into Wales, and among those vast mountaines built a He flieth into Wales. Castle by Merlins direction, wherof we haue spoken, and more we would speake, were those fantasticke fi∣ctions vnderset with any props of likelihood or truth, which Rand. of Chester in his daies vtterly reiected. Polychr. li. 5. ca. 1. In this Castle, Vortigern with his incestuous wife, after hee had secondly raigned the space of six yeeres, Vortigern and his wife destroied by fire from heauen. Henr. Hunt. Rand. Higd. 5. c. 1. was consumed to ashes, by the iust reuenging hand of God, by fire from heauen, as some haue written; or else kindled by Aurelius and Vter, as his Ministers to execute his wrath. VORTIMER. 2. VOrtimer, the eldest son of King Vortigern, through the abuse of his fathers gouernment, for which 2. An. Do. 454. Vortimer the se∣cond resister of the Saxons. he was deposed by his owne subiects, was erected King of the Britaines the yeere from Christs birth 454. a man of great valour, which altogether hee im∣ploied for the redresse of his Countrey, according to the testimonie of William Malmesbury, whose words are these: Vortimer (saith hee) thinking not good to dis∣semble the matter, for that hee saw himselfe and Countrie daily surprised by the craft of the English, set his full pur∣pose Vortimer how long he main∣tained warre against the Saxons. Foure chiefe battles, and the successe of the first. to driue them out, and from the seuenth yeere after their first entrance, for twenty yeeres continuance fought many Battles with them, and foure of them with great puis∣sance in open field; in the first whereof, they departed with like fortune, and losse of the Generals brethren Horsa and Catigern: in the other three the Britaines went away with victorie, and so long vntill Vortimer was taken away by fa∣tall death. Huntington, Monmouth, Randulphus, and Fabian, name both the places and successe of those Battles: The first was in Kent, and vpon the Plaine neere vnto The place of the first battle. Beda lib. 1. ca. 15. Ailsford, where the memoriall of Catigern to this day remaineth; & Horsted doth as yet relish of Horsa there interred. The second Battle was fought likewise in Kent at Crocanford, now Craford, where many perish∣ed The place of the second battle. as well Britaines as Saxons. The third was at Wep∣peds Fleet, with great losse to the Britaines: and the The place of the third battle. The place of the fourth battle. fourth vpon Calmore, where many of the Saxons, after long and sore fight, were slaine, and more drowned in flight, and lastly driuen into the Ile of Thanet, their first assigned habitation, (if not ouer the Seas) so that small hope rested for them so long as this valiant Vor∣timer The Saxons quite dispossessed. liued, who had now dispossessed them of all their footing in the Continent, and often assailed them in the Ile of Tannet likewise, as Fabian confi∣dently affirmeth. But destiny going forward for the downfall of Bri∣taine, remooued these rubbes out of her way: for Rowena, the mother of the Britaines mischiefe, and the maintainer of the Saxons residence, found the meanes Vortimer made away by Rowena. to make this worthy Vortimer away, and by poison caused the end of his life, after hee had valiantly raig∣ned the space of foure yeeres; all which time, by the Vortimer the continuance of his raigne. Fabian. Chro. par. 5. cap. 89. testimonie of an old Chronicle that Fabian had seene, Vortigern the father remained in durance, and vnder assigned Keepers in the Citie Caerlegion, now Chester, and so demeaned himselfe towards his sonne (then his Soueraigne) in dutifull obedience and faith∣full counsell, that hee wonne againe the hearts of the Britaines, and was againe re-established their Vortigern reesta∣blished King. King. It is recorded by Ninius, that after his last victorie ouer the Saxons, he caused his Monument to be ere∣cted Ninius. at the entrance into Tanet, and in the same place of that great ouerthrow, which by the said Author Vortimer his monument the Stonar. is called Lapis Tituli, of vs the Stonar, where for cer∣taine it seemes hath been an hauen. In this Monu∣ment hee commanded his body to be buried, to the further terror of the Saxons, that in beholding this his Trophy, their spirits might bee daunted at the re∣membrance of their great ouerthrow. As Scipio Afri∣canus conceited the like, who commanded his Sepul∣chre to be so set, that it might ouerlooke Africa, sup∣posing that his very Tombe would be a terror to the Carthaginians. But how that desire of Vortimer was performed, I finde not, but rather the contrary: for an old Manuscript I haue, that cōfidently affirmeth him to be buried in London: yet others from Ninius the Uortimer suppo∣sed to be buried in London. disciple of Eluodugus, hold the place to bee Lincolne. But howsouer his graue is forgotten, yet let this bee remembred, that Sigebertus hath written of him, that Sigebertus. is, After he had vanquished the Saxons (saith he) whose drift was not onely to ouer-runne the Land with violence, but also to erect their owne Lawes without clemencie, he re∣stored the Christian Religion then sorely decaied, and new built the Churches that those enemies had destroied. AVRELIVS AMBROSIVS. 3. AVrelius Ambrosius, verily descended of that Con∣stantine who in the fourth Consulship of Theodo∣sius 3. An. Do. 466. The third resister of the Saxons. the younger, was elected here in Britaine, onely in hope of his luckie name, succeeded Vortigern the Fa∣ther in the Gouernment of Britaine, and Vortimer the sonne, in affection and defence of his Country. He with Vter (saith Geffrey Monmouth) when their bro∣ther Constantine was murthered by Vortigern, fled into Galfrid. M . France, where they remained the yeeres of his first raigne; whose returne (as we haue heard from Nini∣us) he greatly feared, and whose force at his last he felt to his smart. For hauing againe resumed his Crowne, he liued in his old sinnes, and suffered the Saxons to be Lords of his Land: to preuent which (saith Beda from Gyldas) the Britaines by little and little beganne to Beda hist. lib. 1. cap. 16. take strength, and with some courage to come forth of their Caues, who with one vniforme consent, called to God for his heauenly helpe. They had (saith he) for their Captaine a Ro∣man called Ambrosius Aurelianus, a gentle natured man, which onely of all the bloud of the Romans remained then aliue, his parents being slaine, which bore the name of King of the Country. This man being their Leader, prouoked the Victors to the fight, and through Gods assistance atchieued the victory. From that day forward now the Britaines, now the Saxons did preuaile, vntill the yeere that Bathe was be∣sieged, which was fortie foure yeeres after their first com∣ming into the Iland. His first expedition (as our British Historians re∣port) was against Vortigern, and his Castle in Wales, Geffrey Caxton, Polych. wherein that incestuous King was consumed to ashes by lightning from heauen, as we haue said: and then following the Saxons, made toward Yorke, & at Maes∣bel beyond Humber, encountering Hengist, became his Victor: vnto whose mercy (say they) his sonne Occa yeelded himselfe, and obtained in free gift the Coun∣try in Gallaway in Scotland for him and his Saxons. But these his affaires thus prospering against the common Enemie, was enuied at by Pascentius, the youngest son of King Vortigern, who not able either to mate the Saxons, or after his Brethrens deaths to recouer the Kingdome to himselfe, ambitiously sought to prefer his base humor before the recouery of his Countries libertie, which then lay gored in her owne bloud. For hauing gotten the aid of Gillamare King of Ireland, whether hee had fled vpon the death of his Father, and now returned into the west of Wales, first indam∣maged the Citie of S. Dauids, and thence proceeded with fire and sword. Aurelius then sicke in the Citie of Winchester, sent his brother Vter to withstand his force, who slew both Pascentius and the Irish King his partaker, in a set & sore battell fought betwixt them. But before this battell, Pascentius had sent a Saxon, whose name was Eopa, in shew a Britaine, and in habit a Physitian, to minister poison in stead of physicke, which according was effected with Ambrosius his Hector Boetius. death. Vnto this Aurelius Ambrosius is ascribed the erecti∣on Aurelius Ambro∣sius erected Stonhenge. of that rare and admirable monument, now called Stonhenge, in the same place where the Britaines had been trecherously slaughtered and interred, whose manner and forme in our draught of Wiltshire wee haue inserted. The matter being Stones of a great and huge bignesse, so that some of them containe twelue tunne in waight, and twenty eight foote or The description of the Monu∣ment of Ston∣henge. more in length, their breadth seuen, and compasse six∣teene. These are set in the ground of a good depth, and stand in a round circle by two and two, hauing a third stone somewhat of lesse quantitie laid gate-wise ouerthwart on their toppes, fastned with tenons and mortaises, the one into the other; which to some seeme so dangerous, as they may not safely be passed vnder, the rather for that many of them are fallen downe, and the rest suspected of no sure foundation: notwithstanding, at my being there, I neither saw cause of such feare, nor vncertaintie in accounting of their numbers, as is said to be. The stones are gray, but not marbled, wherein great holes are beaten euen by force of weather, that serue for Rauens and other birds to build in, and bring foorth their young. The ground-plot containeth about three hundred foot in compasse, in forme almost round, or rather like vnto a horse-shooe, with an entrance in vpon the east-side. Three rowes of stones seeme formerly to haue beene pitched, the largest outwards, and the least inwards; many whereof are now fallen downe: but those that stand, shew so faire an aspect, and that so farre off, that they seeme to the beholders to bee some Fortresse or strong Castle. A Trench also is about them, which hath beene much deeper; and vpon the plaines ad∣ioining, many round copped hilles, without any such trench, (as it were cast vp out of the earth) stand like great hay-cockes in a plaine meadow: In these, and thereabouts, by digging haue beene found peeces of Ancient fashio∣ned Armor found at Ston∣henge. ancient fashioned armour, with the bones of men, whose bodies were thus couered with earth that was brought thither by their wel-willers and friends, euen in their head-peeces; a token of loue that then was v∣sed, as some imagine. This Trophey, Aurelius Ambrosius (in memoriall of the Britaines massacre) erected, and is worthily ac∣counted for one of the Wonders of this Iland, and in the verses of Alexander called The Giants Da nce, wherein this Ambrosius was interred after h e had raigned thirtie two yeeres, and wherof the towne Ambresbury beares the name. Others report, that the Britaines erected this most stately Sepulcher uer the body of Ambrosius there slaine by the sword of his e∣nemies, that his Countries loue, in such a costly peece of worke, might remaine vnto posterities in this, the Altar of his vertue and manhood: for saith, that this man, in succouring his , . tooke vpon him the Imperiall Robe, and aganist the rage of those German enemies, oft times ouer pu∣issant armies, but was lastly slaine by them vpon the plaines of Salesburie. I cannot with silence let passe the ridi∣culous reports of the bringing of the Stones out of Africke into Ireland, and from thence, vnder the con∣duct . Do . of Vter the brother of Ambrosius, vnto this Plain, by the industrious meanes of Merlin, surnamed Am∣brose, borne in the ancient City Merd n, and as Hum∣frey of Bri∣ e. Lh d saith, of a noble virgin, whose father, for his skill in the Mathematicks, and wonderfull knowledge in all other kinde of learning, was by the rude common people re∣puted to be the sonne of an Incubus, or a male Diuell, which in the similitude and likenesse of men doe vse carnally to companie with women. But how this may agree with his diuine mouth, that telles vs the Spirits haue nei∣ther Luke 24 39. flesh nor bones; and the whole Scriptures, that man is carnally begotten, conceiued and born, I leaue for others further to dispute. Only I know, that such begettings as Merlines is reported to bee, without fa∣ther, and Simon Magus also, that before him would needs be the sonne of a Virgin, doe not a little contra∣dict in his . our Christian Profession, who acknowledge onely the conception of Christ to be conceiued without the seed of man, or of sinne. But to our purpose: Ambro∣sius Aurelius (by Panuinius accounted the last Empe∣rour Aurelius Ambro∣sius, the continu∣ence of his . of the British bloud) is said to raigne in Britaine thirty two yeeres, and to die in that of Christs Incar∣na on foure hundred ninety seuen. VTERPENDRAGON. 4. VTer, surna , the brother of Ambro∣sius, succeeded him both in valour, and in the Go∣uernment An. Do. 498. of Britaine. His entrance was with trou∣bles Mat. Westminster. against the Saxons, who vnder the leading of Eske and O a, the sonnes of King Hengist, had passed with spoile to the Citie Yorke, whither this new-made Ge∣nerall presently rep d, and giuing them battell, with the discom of the whole Army, tooke both the pri ers, and committed them to safe cu odie. But the Brita es (saith ) becomming disloi∣all to their Prince, seldome assisted him with preuen∣ting . . counsell: and the Princ enamored vpon the Duke of Cornwals Wife, consulted more with Mer∣li to transforme himselfe from himselfe, then to giue direction against the common enemie. For com∣ming to Tindagell Castle in Cornwall, possessed by Gor∣lois, A ex. . Uter in loue with La∣ Igren. Duke of that Prouince, beheld (in his eye) the Pa∣ragon of Nature, which was Lady Igren, his Dutches and wife. Vter, whose thoughts till then had bin free, and from his childhood had euer followed Mars in the field, was now surprised so far with her loue, that his Shield and Armes were both neglected and vn∣worne, and all his thoughts set on worke to purchase his most wis ed desire; which lastly, by Merline and Magick was effected, and that after this manner (if we . will beleeue him of Monmouth, who is the reporter.) His suites and hopes failing (saith he) to win her vnto dishonor, Merline altogether new-moulded the shape of King Vter, and printed in his face the feature of Gorlois her owne Lord, by which meanes, and with∣out suspect the King dishonourably violated this La∣dies chastitie, in which Bed of deceit, the famous Ar∣thur An ancient Ma∣nuscript. was begot. The captiue Captaines Eske and Octa in these loose times of his loue, gat loose from their Keepers, and with their ratling armour roused Vter from this wanton Lullaby; who with troopes of strength, and trumpets of defiance, met these Sax∣ons face to face in the field, where betwixt them was fought a most bloudy battell, and that euen almost to the last stroke, and wherein, if fatall destinie had with∣drawne her hand, the Iland had been rid of these In∣truders for euer. For therein (say our Authours) the Saxons perished by the Britaines swords; vpon whose Geffrey, &c. points also Eske and Octa paid their escapes with the losse of their liues. This field was at Verolam, whither Vter sicke, and in his Horse-litter, was borne among Iohn Harding. his Army, and after long and sore siege, wonne from them that Citie. Finally, when this King had raigned Pendragon the continuance of his raigne. the space of eighteene yeeres, he died by poison put into a well, whereof vsually he dranke, and was buried at Stonhenge with his brother Ambrosius. Of his surname Pendragon, these supposals are made: At his natiuitie (say some) appeared a fierie Co∣met, in some part resembling a Dragons Head: where∣upon that great reputed Prophet Merline, attributed this heauenly Meteor vnto this Princely new-borne Babe; and gaue him the name of Vter-Pendragon. Others for his serpentine wisdome, deriue the surname of this Serpents Head, who like vnto that of Dan, bit Gen. 49. 17. the Horse heeles, so that the riders fell backward. For in all his warres against the Saxons, hee was most fortu∣nate and victorious, with their great ouerthrowes. But others will haue him so named from his Royall Banner, borne euer before him, wherein was portrai∣ed a Dragon with a Golden Head; of which Standerd since, neighbour Nations haue had good experience, and in far Country it hath been displaied in the cause In gold and iew∣els, as Hardig saith. of Christianitie, to the terror of the Pagans, as in Syria by that inuincible English King, Richard the first, surna∣med Cur-de-lion; in Scotland and Wales by that conque∣ring Prince Edward the first, and the same as yet is in field borne for an Imperiall Standard in our English Campes. KING ARTHVR. 5. ARthur the sonne of Vter, begotten as is said of La∣die Igren Dutchesse of Cornwall, was crowned 5. An. Do. 516. King at fifteene yeeres of age, about the yeere of Christ fiue hundred and sixteene; or as Matthew of Matth. West . Westminster hath it, fiue hundred and eighteene. His prosperous entrance was enuied at by Lotho King of the Picts, and by Couran King of the Scots, who had Scotia Chron. married his owne Aunts, Anna and Alda, the two si∣sters of Ambrose and Vter, each of them expecting the Crowne before him, through the opinion and re∣pute of his bastardie, especially Lotho, who had is∣sue by Anna, Mordrad, and Gawan: the latter of which spent his life in the cause of that quarrell. His first proceedings were against the common ene∣mie the Saxons, whose Captaine Colgerne, he chased from Northumberland into Yorke; which Citie likewise he girt with a strait siege, notwithstanding Colgerne thence escaped into Germany, and of King Cherdick got succour for his Saxons, who with seuen hundred saile arriued in Scotland. Arthur aduertised of his great Matth. West . power, raised his siege, and drew towards London, and thence sent for aid to his Nephew Howel, King of Little Britaine in France, who came himselfe in person to ioyne with his Vncle. These from South-hampton marched to Lincolne, which Citie Cherdick had strongly besieged, but was thence forced by Arthurs conquering sword. Twelue battels he fought against these Saxons (as Ninius re∣cordeth) with great manhood and victorie. The first was at the mouth of the Riuer Gleyne: the second, third, fourth, and fifth, vpon the Banks of Douglasse, in the Countie of Lineux: the sixth vpon the Riuer Bassus; the seuenth in the wood Calidon; the eighth neere to the Castle Guynien; the ninth in Wales, at the Towne Cairelien; the tenth at Trachenrith, or Ritho∣wode vpon the Sea side: the eleuenth vpon a hill na∣med Agned Cathergonien; and the twelfth at Bathe, or Bathen-hill, where the Britaines (as Beda saith) gaue the Beda hist. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 16. Saxons a very great ouerthrow; which (by Gyldas re∣port) happened fortie foure yeeres after the Saxons first arriuage into Britaine, the yeere wherein himselfe was borne. Of Arthurs successe both at home and abroad, his great magnificence in Court and Countrey, his Banners, and foure Golden Swords borne before him, his Round Tables, and challenges of Martiall Honour, let Mon∣mouth Monmouth. Wil. Ne . Leiland. the Writer, Newbery the Resister, and Leiland the Maintainer, be heard for me. But certaine it is (by the report of Malmesbury) that Arthur was a Prince Wil. Malmes. more worthy to be aduanced by the truth of Records in war∣rantable credit, then by fables scandalized with poeticall fictions and hyperbolicall falshoods. Whose Banner was so often spread for the cause of Christianitie, and de∣fense of his Countrey, being the only proppe that vpheld the same. And lamentable it is, that the fame of this pu∣issant Prince had not beene sounded by a more certaine Trumpet: for to say the truth of his Writer euen in a Of Ieffrey Ar∣thur, or Monke of Monmouth. word, hee was well skilled in Antiquities of tradition, but as it seemeth, not any of ancient credit, so many toies and tales hee euery where interlaceth out of his owne braine, wherewith hee was charged while him∣selfe liued, insomuch as he is now ranged among those Writers whom the Roman Church hath censured to be forbidden. This hurt therefore those ouer-zealous Monkes haue done to the Subiect whereof they wrote, that through an ouer-much conceited opinion, with the vertue and fame of the person, they haue mingled such matters as may iustly be reiected, whereby their worths are not only depriued of their truly-deserued honours, but which more is, euen their persons suspe∣cted to be nought else but fictions, as Hercules in Ouid, or Hector in Homer. And so hath Geffrey done by this most worthy Prince Arthur, whose warres against the Saxons for defense of this Iland, he hath enlarged with the Conquests of other Kingdomes and Countries, wherein he neuer came: which hath made not onely his Acts to be doubted of, but euen his person to bee called in question, whether any such Arthur euer ru∣led in Britaine. Yet with better regard to the Recor∣ders of his spreading fame, we grant both the man, and many honorable parts in him, though not in the like manner as they haue laid them downe. Neither are we straied so farre from the steps of credulitie, that we can beleeue no more then wee see, or that seeing, bee fore-stalled with a preiudicate opinion: for though we consent not to the fables of Homer, neither to the inuentions that Euripides and Sophocles made vpon the Hom. Iliad. lib. 5. Euripides. Sophocles. Battles of Troy, yet wee denie not but that there were Warres and Battles at Troy, wherein many Martiall acts vndoubtedly were performed: neither doubt wee of his person, as Seneca seemeth to doe of Iupiters, but Seneca in his Morals. acknowledge it with reuerence for truth, yet with this reseruation, that all is not Gospell which is written in Greeke. And had there not beene a truth of things whereupon Poets made their fables, there had beene at this day no fables of Poets in the world. And as Geffrey wondreth that neither Gyldas nor Beda doe mention Arthur nor his great deeds, so saith Randul∣phus, may we at Geffrey, that hath augmented them a∣boue the pitch of credulitie. But for the truth of this Prince, besides a Charter exemplified vnder the s ale of King Edward the Third, wherein mention is made of King Arthur, to haue beene a great Benefactour to the Abbey of Glastenbury, who as Iohn Rouse reporteth, Iohn Rouse. had giuen Bren-march and other Demaines, to the va∣lue of fiue hundred Markes yeerely, to the said Mona∣sterie. His Armes (being an Escocheon, wheron a Crosse, The Armes of Arthur. with the Virgin Mary bearing Christ in her armes) cut in stone, and standing ouer the first Gate of entrance as yet, is said to be the Armes of that Abbey. And Io∣seph, the iudicious Monke of Excester, who followed Iosephus Isc . King Richard the First in his warre for the Conquest of the Holy Land, in his poeticall verses extolleth Ar∣thur with Alexander, Caesar, and Hercules; yea and Ni∣nius, farre his ancient, calleth Arthur an Iron Mall, that both bruised and brake the Lions iawes asunder. Arthur an Iron Mall. Therefore of his person we make no doubt, though his acts haue beene written with too lauish a pen: nei∣ther consent we with those Historians that naturalize him for a Britaine, seeing that Ninius, Beda, Malmesbu∣rie, and himselfe seeme to speake the contrarie: for Ambrosius being the brother of Vter Pendragon, as we already from Beda haue shewed, was a Captaine de∣scended from the bloud of the Romans, whose parents saith Ninius, had worne the Purple Robe, and both of Ninius. Malmesb. de ge∣st Reg. Angl. them the sonnes of Constantine, whose father in Bri∣taine against Honorius the Emperour had put on the said Robe. And by his naturall descent from the Ro∣mans, Arthur not only denied them Tribute, but also threatned to haue a Tribute from Rome: for in his Letters to that end sent vnto the Senate, thus in an old Manuscript we finde it indited: Vnderstand among you of Rome, that I am King Arthur of Britaine, and freely A namelesse old Manuscript, chap. 154. it hold, and shall hold; and at Rome hastily will I bee, not to giue you tr age, but to haue tr age of you: for Constantine that was Helenes sonne, and other of mi Ancestors con∣quered Rome, and thereof were Emperours, and that the had and held I shall haue your Godd s grace. Whereby is manifest his bloud was from the Romans. Let not therefore any of our Britaines take exceptions against me for this, neither that I enlarge not his fame, by the enlargement of his Empire in Russia, Lapland, and in making Norway his Chamber of Britaine, as if that Kingdome and Title should bee giuen him by the Pope, that indeed cuts large thongs out of other mens Leather: his Conquests of thirty Kingdomes, and kil∣ling of Denabus the huge Spanish Giant, & his combat with Frolo Gouernor of France, and with Lucius Hibe∣rus the Roman Legate, whose slaine body hee sent to the Senate for the tribute of Britaine by them deman∣ded: seeing that others before mee, farre more rip Historians, haue made both doubts and obiections against them. And therefore I conclude with this Ar∣thur, as Saint Augustine with the Athenians, whose men . . 10. (saith he) were euer greater in fame then in deeds. And with Ninius will end with his saying; Arthurus pu a bat contra illos in diebus illis; & licet multi ipso no ∣res essent, ipse tamen duodecies Dux belli fuit, Vi∣ctorque bellorum: Arthur made warre against them in those daies; and though many were more noble then be, yet was hee twelue times Generall in the Field, and retur∣ned Conquerour. But more constant is the memorie of his death, and place of his buriall, both which are re∣ported vpon warrantable credit: for Mordred the sonne of Lotho, whereof wee haue spoken, affecting the Crown, vpon a pretence of right from King Vter, and supposed bastardise of Arthur, gaue many at∣tempts, through the aid of his Picts, and assistance of the Saxons, to dispossesse him of that wherein he was seated: and lastly at Camel ord. Kamblan or Cambula in Cornwall (saith Leland) this British Hector encountring Mordred, slew him out-right, and receiued of him his owne deaths wound. The witnesse of this Field as yet are those peeces of Armour, horse-harnesse, and other habili∣ments of Warre, which are daily digged vp in tillage of the ground; vnlesse those reliques of Battle be the seales of that fight which Marianus writeth to haue Marianus Scotus. beene in this place betwixt the Britaines and Saxons, in the yeere of our Lord eight hundred and twenty. If then it bee true that Arthur heere died, this place we may say seemeth to be consecrated vnto Mars: for Tindagell Castle, standing hard by, first brought into the world this glorious Prince, for one of her nine Worthies, and Cambula againe receiued his last bloud. But from this place he was carried vnto Glastenburie in Somerset-shire, where he died the one and twentieth of May, in the yeere of our Saluation fiue hundred Wal. sonne An∣tiq. Glasten. Arthur the con∣tinuance of his raigne. forty and two, after he had most victoriously raigned twenty six yeeres. His body was there buried, and six hundred yeeres after was taken vp, and found vpon this occasion: When Henry the second, and first Plan∣tagenet, had swaied the English Scepter to the last of his raigne, it chanced him at Pembrooke to heare sung to the Harpe certaine Ditties of the worthy exploits and acts of this Arthur, (by a Welsh Bard, as they were ter∣med, whose custome was to record and sing at their Feasts the noble deeds of their Ancestours) wherein mention was made of his death, and place of buriall, designing it to be in the Church-yard of Glastenburie, and that betwixt two Pyramides therein standing: whereupon King Henry caused the ground to be dig∣ged, and at seuen foot depth was found a huge broad stone, wherein a leadden Crosse was fastned, and in that side that lay downeward, in rude and barbarous letters (as rudely set and contriued) this inscription written vpon that side of the Lead that was towards the stone: HIC IACET SEPVLTVS REX AR∣TVRIVS IN INSVLA AVALONIA. Heere lieth King Arthur buried in the Ile of Aualonia. And digging nine foot deeper, his body was found in the trunke of a Tree, the bones of great bignesse, and in his scull perceiued ten wounds, the last very great, and plainely seene. His Queene Guineuer, that had beene neere kinswoman to Cador Duke of Cornwall, a Lady of passing beautie lay likewise by him, whose The tresses of haire my e saw in a coffin digged vp in an old house neere Pauls in London, very beautifull in shew, but be∣ing touched, was nothing but dust. tresses of haire finely platted, and in colour like the gold, seemed perfect and whole vntill it was touched, but then (bewraying what all beauties are) shewed it selfe to be dust. Giraldus Cambrensis, a worthy Author and an eie-witnesse, is the reporter of this finding of Arthurs bones; and the Crosse of Lead, with the In∣scription, as it was found and taken off the stone, was kept in the Treasurie or Reuester of Glastenburie Iohn Stow. Church, saith Stowe, till the suppression thereof in the raigne of King Henry the eight, whose forme and rude letters we haue here expressed to thy sight. The bones of King Arthur, and of Queene Gui∣neuar Arthurs bones in ombed. his wife, by the direction of Henry de Bloys, Ne∣phew to King Henry the second, and Abbat of Gla∣stenbury, at that present were translated into the great new Church, and there in a faire Tombe of Marble, his body was laid and his Queenes at his feet; which noble Monument among the fatall ouerthrowes of infinite more, was altogether raced at the dispose of some then in Commission, whose too forward zeale, and ouer hastie actions in these behalfes, hath left vnto vs a want of many truths, and cause to wish that some of their imployments had bin better spent. CONSTANTINE. 6. Constantine the sonne of Cador Duke of Cornwall, and cosen to King Arthur by his alliance in mari∣age, An. D. 542. at his death was appointed by him to succeed in his Dominions, and most ioifully receiued of the Brute booke. Commons, as the man, in the opinion of this worthy elector and themselues, accounted most fit to defend the Land from the many oppressions of the Saxons, who now beganne to spreade the wing as farre as to Tyne in the North, and to set downe the limits of their seuerall Kingdomes; which notwithstanding, these strangers daily enlarged vpon the home-bred Inhabi∣tants, the ciuill warres of the Britaines giuing way to the same, and that not onely among themselues, but by the Picts also, in the behalfe of the two sonnes of Mordred, that sought to dispossesse him of the Crown. In which quarrel many battles were fought, but with such successe to the attemptors, that these two Com∣petitors were forced for refuge into London and Win∣chester, Gyldas. Ab r suc . whither Constantine pursued them, they taking Sanctuarie in the Churches, and not farre from the Al∣tars he slew them: for which deede, the Priest Gyldas, that flourished in those daies, in his inuectiue reprehen∣sions thus writeth: Britaine hath Kings (saith hee) but In his Booke De excidio Britan. Hum. Lluyd. Bre. Brit. they are Tyrants: Iudges it hath, but they are wicked, pil∣ling and harming the innocent people; reuenging and defen∣ding, but whom? Such as be guilty and robbers. They haue many wiues, yet breake they wedlocke; many times swea∣ring, yet periure themselues; vowing, but for the most part with dissembling lies; warring, but stillmaintaining vniust and ciuill broiles; abroad pursuing theeues, and yet at home cherish them, euen at their owne Tables, and sometimes also reward them. They giue large almes indeed, yet heape they vp sinnes high as the Mountaine. They sit in the Seat of sentence, yet seldome seeke the rule of right iudgement, de∣spising the humble and innocent persons, and extolling vp to Heauen proud and bloudie Murderers, Theeues, and Adul∣terers, yea and if he would permit them, the very enemies of God. Many they keepe in prison, and load them with irons, more to serue their owne purposes, then for any guilt in the person, taking solemn Oaths before & vpon the Altars, and yet despise they the Altars, as altogether vile, and but filthie stones. Of this hainous and wicked offense, Constantine the tyrannicall whelpe of the Lionesse of Deuon-shire is not ignorant, who this yeere, after the receiuing of his dreadfull Oath, whereby he bound himselfe, that in no wise he should hurt his Subiects, (God first, and then his Oath, with the company of Saints, and his owne mother being present did notwithstanding in the reuerend laps of both his Mothers, the Church, and her by nature, and that vnder the vesture of an holy Abbat, deuoure with sword and speare, instead of teeth, the tender sides and the entrailes of two children of noble and Kingly race, and likewise of their two Gouer∣nours, yea and that (as I said) before the sacred Altars; the Armes of which Persons so slaine, not stretched forth to defend themselues with weapons (which few in those daies handled more valiantly then they) but stretched forth to God, and to his Altar, in the day of Iudgement shall set vp the reuerend ensignes of their patience and faith at the Gates of the Citie of Christ, which so haue couered the seat of the Celestall Sacrifice, as it were with the red Mantle of their cluttered bloud. These things hee did not after any good deeds done by him deseruing praise: for many yeeres before ouercome with the often and changeable filths of adulterie, and for∣saking his lawfull wife (contrary to the law of God) beeing not loosed from the snares of his former sinnes, hee increa∣seth the new with the old. Thus far Gyldas, for this time, and for the raigne of Constantine; whose life being no Constantines raignes conti∣nuance. better, was cut off in battell by Aurelius Conanus, when he had raigned fully three yeeres, and without issue was buried at Stonhenge. AVRELIVS CONANVS. 7. AVrelius Conanus, the Nephew of King Arthur, af∣ter 7. An. D. 545. Mat. Westminster. he had slaine his Cosen Constantine in battell, was made King ouer the Britaines in the yeere after Christs Natiuitie fiue hundred fortie fiue. He was of disposition free and liberal, but therewithall of a light credit, and very suspicious, cherishing them that accu∣sed others, without respect of right or wrong, putting some to death, and retaining others in perpetuall pri∣son, among whom his own Vncle was one, whose two sons he caused to be slain, no causes obiected, but that these three were in truth betwixt him & the Crowne: for which, and other the like impious parts, the said Gyldas continueth the tenor of his vehement repre∣hension in this manner. And thou Lions whelpe (as speakes the Prophet) Aurelius Conanus, what dost thou? Gyldas. art thou not swallowed vp in the thy mire of murthering thy Kinsmen, of committing fornications and adulteries, like to the others before mentioned, if not more deadly, as it were with the waues and surges of the drenching Seas, ouer∣whelming thee with her vnmercifull rage? dost thou not in hating the peace of thy Country, as a deadly Serpent, and thirsting after ciuill warres and spoiles (often times vniust∣ly gotten) shut vp against thy soule the Gates of celestiall peace? Thou being left alone, as a withering tree in the middle of a field, call to remembrance (I pray thee) the vaine youthfull fantasie, and ouer timely deaths of thy Fa∣thers and thy Brethren: shalt thou being set apart, and cho∣sen forth of all thy lineage for thy godly deserts, be reserued to liue an hundred yeeres, or remaine on earth till thou bee as old as Meth shela? nothing lesse. And thus with ex∣hortations for his amendment, turneth his speech to his Successor. The raigne of this King, among the vncertain∣ties of other proceedings, is ranged by our owne Hi∣storians, as vncertainly. For some hold him to rule onely two yeeres, and no more, being then cut off . by the iust reuenging hand of God for his sinnes: o∣thers . allow three yeeres for his raigne, wherein, as they say, most viciously hee liued: and yet Mat∣thew of Westminster will haue him continue in go∣uernement no lesse then thirty yeeres; and Iohn the con∣tin of his raigne. Stow addeth three more: such extremes are weedri∣uen vnto, that haue our relations onelie from them. VORTIPORVS.8. VOrtiporus, after the death of Aurelius, succeeded him in the Kingdome of the Britaines, which 8. An. Do. 578. then was much scantled by the intrusions of the Sax∣ons whom in many battels (as saith the British Histo∣rians) he vanquished, and valiantly defended his Land and Subiects, from the danger of them and of their Allies: notwithstanding these reported actions thus honorably atchieued, yea and his Parentage with suc∣cession of gouernment, may be both suspected and iustly called in question, as by the words of Gyldas is manifest; who sufferd not this King also to passe vn∣touched in his Inuectiue and lamentable passions. And thou (saith he) Vortiporus the Tyrant of South-wales, like to the Panther in manners and wickednesse, diuersly spot∣ted, as it were with many colours, with thy hoarie head in Gyldas. the Throne full of deceits, crafts, and wiles, and defiled euen from the lowest part of thy body to the Crowne of thy head, with diuers and sundry murthers committed on thine own kin, and filthy adulteries, thus prouing the vnworthy sonne of a good King, as Manasses was to Ezechias; how chan∣ceth 2. King. 20. 21. it that the violent streames of sinnes, which thou swal∣lowest vp like pleasant wine, or rather art swallowed vp by thē, (the end of thy life by little & little now drawing neere) cannot yet satisfie thee? What meanest thou, that with forni∣cation, of all euils as it were the full heap, thine own wife be∣ing put away, with her death, which thou wroughtest, dost op∣presse thy soule with a certain burthē that cānot be auoided? By this testimonie of Gyldas, this Vortiporus could not be the sonne of bad Conan, as Geffrey Monmouth and Matthew of Westminster affirme him: his Father being compared to godly Ezechias King of Iudah, and himselfe continuing his gouernment, as is said the Uortiporus, the continuance of his raigne. space of foure yeeres, ended his life without issue to succeed him. MALGO CANONVS. 9. MAlgo Canonus, the Nephew of Aurelius Conanus, as some write, succeeded Vortiporus in the King∣dome 9. An. D. 581. Mat. Westminster. of Britaine, a man of a most seemely presence, but withall, charged with many vnbeseeming and foule sinnes, by ancient Gyldas, the onely recorder of the Actions in these times; who calleth him the Dra∣gon of the Iles, greater in power then many, but exceeding all in mischiefe and malice; a large gi r, but more lauish and prodigall in all sinnes and licentiousnesse: in Armes and dominions more strong, and greater then any other Bri∣tish Potentate; but stronger in the destruction of his owne soule, in committing the grand abhorred sinne of Sodomie. In his youthfull daies, with sword and fire he brought to de∣struction his Vncle by the mothers side (being then king) together with many others, and after vppon a shew-see∣ming remorse of Conscience, vowed the profession and life of a Monke; but returned shortly after to his owne vomit, and became worse then he was before: for despising his first mariage, he became enamored vpon the wife of his brothers sonne, whiles he was liuing; and after that he had kept her a certaine time, murthered them both. In these sinnes hee Malgo Canonus, the continuance of his raigne. continued the terme of fiue yeeres, and dying without issue, left his Crowne to another. By these reprehensions of Gyldas it should rather seeme that these Princes liued all together at one and the same time, vnto whom hee spake personally, and mouth to mouth, which could not be, if such succes∣sions and such yeeres had beene expired, as heere is laid downe. And therefore not without cause some haue affirmed, that these Captaines vsurped authori∣tie together in diuers parts of the Iland, and not suc∣cessiuely one after another; neither indeed as Kings, but rather Tyrants, polluted with these greeuous sinnes, as you haue heard, and are so termed by their own Historian, that bringeth If erdix be not another whom beda calleth a King, lib. 4. cap. 3. one more to tyrannize, whom neither Monmouth nor hee of Westminster hath spoken of, which is Cuneglasus, whom hee calleth, a Lion tawney Butcher, a Beare, a Contemner of Religion, an Oppressour of the Clergie, that fought against God with his many grecuous sinnes, and warred vpon man with his mar∣tiall weapons. Hee (saith hee) did put away his lawfull wife, prouoked the godly with many iniuries, was proudly conceited of his owne wisdome, and set his whole hope in vn∣certaine riches. If then the head was so sicke, could the body be sound, that (as Beda saith) were so set to breake all orders of truth and iustice, that scant any token or re∣membrance thereof remained? And for witnesse against Beda hist. Angl. . 1. cap. 21. them, calleth their owne Historian Gyldas, that accu∣sed them of many impieties, and this not the least, that those Britaines neglected the preaching of the Gospell to the Saxons. For these sinnes assuredly, God gaue their Land to another Nation, and themselues to exile, or to the swords of their enemies. Howsoeuer, some latter Britaine hath rather excused their sinnes by the ouer∣rash zeale of Gyldas, whom he tearmeth a Pulpit-Priest Hum. . . Brit. (but no perfect Historian) that beat down sinnes with an ouer-sharpe censure of the sinners, as the ma∣ner of many Preachers is at this day. But (saith hee) let the true renowne of the Britaines appeare to the world: and surely so shall it doe for me. And againe I returne to my intended purpose. CARETICVS. 10. CAreticus succeeded Malgo in the gouernment of Britaine, as destitute of vertue and fluent in vice, 10. An. Do. 586. as any of these his preceding Kings: for it is recorded that hee was a nourisher of dissensions, and sowed ci∣uill warres among his subiects; a sinne odible to God and Man, and vnto the vnconstant Britaines gaue oc∣casion of his hatred: which when the Saxons percei∣ued, was further instigated, and with the assistance of Gurmund an Arch-pirate, and Captaine of the Norwe∣gians, followed against the King, who not able to re∣sist them, fled into the Towne of Chichester for safety, but by the deuice of his pursuers, certaine sparrowes being caught, and fire fastned to their feet, were let flie into the Towne, where lighting vpon straw and Sc Cr . other matter fit for flaming, burnt in short space the whole Citie, and Careticus flying beyond Seuerne, secured himselfe among the Mountaines of Wales, wherein he died, after he had vnprosperously raigned three yeeres: and from that time foorth (saith Randul∣phus) Careticus, the cō∣tinuance of his raigne. Polych. lib. 5. cap. 6. the Britaines lost their whole Kingdome in the East part of the Iland, and were confined in the West by the Riuers Seuerne and Dee. CADWAN. 11. CAdwan, after foure and twenty yeeres ciuill dissen∣sion maintained among the Britaines, euer since 11. An. Do. 163. they had forgone their Country, and betaken them∣selues to those vast, but securing Mountaines; of a Ruler only of North-wales, was made Gouernour of all those parts, a man deseruing well before hee came Wil. Malmesb. to that estate, and being risen, maintained himselfe and subiects in great honour and peace. His first af∣faires against the Saxons, was to reuenge the deaths of his Britaines, and harmelesse Monkes of Bangor, slaine (as we haue said) by wild Ethelfrid, the mighty King of Northumberland, who in Field had assembled all their powers, wherein the fatall end either of the Bri∣taines or Northumbrians must needs haue ensued, had not the quarrell beene staied by the mediation of friends. These Kings, then, and there reconciled, embraced peace, with such true friendshippe, that they continued amitie together so long as they liued. Harding saith, that this British King Cadwan, hono∣rably receiued and worthily cherished Acca, whom Cadwan, the con∣tinuance of his raigne. Iohn Harding. Chro. cap. 90. this King Ethelfrid had put from his bed, for the loue he bare vnto his Concubine, but is deceiued in ma∣king her the mother of Edwin, that was his sister, and Cadwan to raigne but thirteen yeeres, whereas others Paulus Diaconus. allot him two and twentie. CADWALLO. 12. CAdwallo or Cadwallin, the sonne of Cadwan, was made King ouer the Britaines, the yeere of Christs 12. An. Do. 635. Incarnation six hundred thirty fiue. He warred most strongly against the Saxons, and either by Conquest or Alliance ioined amitie with Penda the cruell King of the Mercians, a Pagan Idolater, himselfe by the re∣port of Beda, although a Christian in name and profession, Beda hist. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 20. yet in minde and manners so rude and outragious, that hee spared neither womens weaknesse nor childrens innocencie, but put all to death with greeuous and bitter torments, to fulfill his cruell and vnmercifull tyrannie, wasting a long time, and raging ouer the Prouinces, purposed to extermi∣nate out of the borders of Britanny the whole Nation of the English, and to extinguish the very name of them. Neither did he ought esteeme any reuerence or honour to the Christi∣an Religion, which those men embraced: so that en to this day (saith he) the Britaines custome is to set light by the Faith or Religion of the Englishmen; neither will they com∣municate with them more then with Heathens or Pagans. These two cruell Kings slew the most Christian Ed∣wyn King of Northumberland, with his sonne Prince Osfride, in a great and bloudy battle at Hethfild, the yeere of Christs incarnation six hundred thirty three: and the yeere following, with wicked force (saith Be∣da) but with worthy vengeance, Cadwallo the Britaine slew Osrike and Eanfrid, Kings of Deira and Bernicia, that Beda hist. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 1. were become Apostataes from their Christian Faiths, and that with crueltie and losse of the Saxons, as their owne Hi∣storians held it fit neither to mention their names in their monethly Calendar, nor register the yeere wherin they were slaine, in account of their gouernment, but assigned it vnto the raigne of their Successour King Oswald, which was so obserued vnto his daies; so terrible was this worthy Cad∣wallo, and odious the remembrance of this vnfortunate Battle. But this cursed Captaine (saith he) enioied not this felicitie long: for the said Oswald, to reuenge his brothers death, came with a small power, but strongly fensed in the faith of Christ, and neere to the Riuer Denise gaue him bat∣tle, wherein himselfe and late-victorious Host were all slain and confounded. But we must rememher that Beda was a Saxon, in whose behalfe his penne hath somewhat passed the bounds of equitie (if not veritie) in charging this most valiant Conqueror with tyranny, and his Martiall Sword with crueltie, that was drawne and strucke in defence of his natiue Country, wherein the Saxons claime stood only vpon vniust intrusion. So likewise himselfe being a Monke and Priest, hath euery where blamed the Britaines for dissenting from the Roman Church, in celebration of Easter and other Ceremo∣nies; whereas in doctrine they were as sincere, which is the true substance of the Gospell. But the Britaines record that this valiant Cadwall died not in Heuen∣feild, Geffrey Monm. neither by the hand of King Ofwald, but that he raigned in great honour the space of eight and fortie yeeres, and in peace died 22. of Nouember, in the yeere Cadwallo or Cad∣wan, the continu∣ance of his raign. of Christ Iesus six hundred seuentie seuen. His body the Britaines buried in S. Martins Church in London, neere Ludgate; whose Image great and terrible, trium∣phantly riding on horsebacke, being artificially cast of Brasse, they placed vpon the same West gate, to the further feare and terror of the Saxons, as Vortimer be∣fore had commanded his at Stonar. But this relation, as also that he married the sister of King Penda, as my often named Manuscript reporteth, I leaue to the best liking of my Reader. About this time the most blasphemous doctrine of Mahomet began to infect all the Easterne World. For although himselfe liued some nine yeeres before the gouernment of this Cadwallo, yet presently after his death his doctrine was more publikely imbraced. He was borne in Arabia, of a poore and base stocke, and being fatherlesse, was sold for a bondslaue vnto an Ismaelite, whose name was Abdemonaples, a man of exceeding great riches, and in great trade of merchan∣dizing, and Mahomet for his subtiltie in wit, was his fit instrument, and greatly in his fauor. The Master dying, left Mahomet his chiefe Factor, who hauing great riches in his keeping, married his Mistris, and so became heire of all; with whom consorted one Ser∣gius a Monke, which for heresie was fled into Arabia, who instructed Mahomet in the heresie of the Ne∣storians, and now for his wealth and Magicall Arts, wherewith hee bewitched the minds of the people, assumed to himselfe the name of the great Prophet of God, and began to be famously published for the doctrine which he taught: the which was none other but a confused Chaos of all the heresies that had been before him: for with the Sabellians he denied the Tri∣nitie; with the Manichies, he affirmed but two persons to bee in the Deity; with Eunomius, hee denied the e∣qualitie of the Father and the Sonne; and with Ma∣cedone, taught that the Holy Ghost was a creature. He borrowed of the Iewes Circumcision; of the Nicho∣laitans, pluralities of wiues; and of the Gentiles, much Superstition; and more to cloake his diuellish inuen∣ted fantasies, somewhat he tooke from the veritie of the Gospell. Of these compounded he deuised a Law, and wrote this his Religion in the booke called his An. Do. 625. Alcaron; and those his Professors he named Saracens, from Sara the wife of Abraham. Hee died of the falling sicknesse, which long time hee had dissembled, saying forsooth after his tran∣ces, that the Angell Gabriel had conference with him, the brightnesse of whose glorie hee could not behold. CADWALLADER. 13. CAdwallader, the sonne of Cadwallo, and last King of the Britaines, after the death of his Father, suc∣ceeded 13. An. Do. 685. him in his dominions, and with great valour fought against the Saxons, as hee of Monmouth affir∣meth, of whom heare him speake in his owne words. Cadwalader (saith he) raigning victoriously the time of Geffrey Monm. twelue yeeres, fell lastly into a dangerous sicknesse, with de∣spaire of recouery, and vnable to gouerne. Much debate and strife arose among his great Lords, and others of high estate, insomuch that they warred each against others, to the no small annoiance and detriment of the whole Country. At which very time likewise, so great a dearth of corne and victuall raigned, that herbes and roots were the Commons chiefest sustenance: whose third calamitie was mortalitie and pestilence, raigning so sore, and so suddenly, that in their eating, drinking, walking, and speaking, they were surprised with death, and in such number, that the liuing were scarce able to bury the dead; which miseries lasted no lesse then eleuen yeeres continuance, whereby the Land became desolate, and brought forth no fruit at all, insomuch that the King and many of his Nobles were driuen to forsake their natiue Country, and to seeke releefe in forraine parts. Cadwallader repaired to the Court of Alan his cosen, the King of Little Britaine in France, where he was ho∣nourably receiued and maintained. But now the Ange God sheathing his sword from slaughter, and earth answering man a∣gaine with her former abundance, those Saxons that were escaped, sent for more of their Nation to their further supplie, who replenished the Cities, and manured the Countrey, at this day called Lhoyger, containing all the Land that lay on the East of Se∣uerne and Dee, dispossessing the poore Britaines of their rightfull inheritance, and diuiding their Lands vnto their owne vse. Cadwallader hearing of their daily arriuage, and their vniust intrusion vpon his home-bred subiects, minded their redresse by his present returne, and to that end had wrought King Alan, for his succour & assistance. But see how it chan∣ced: He being now ready to imbarke his Host, and to hoise vp his sailes for Britaine, and in the silent night much spent in praier & supplication, that God would prosper with good successe these his great affaires, be∣hold an Angell appeared to him, or at leastwise to his seeming he heard a voice, that forbade him the enter∣prise, declaring that it was not Gods will that hee should vndergoe that Voiage, or that the Britaines should rule their Land any longer; but contrariwise bade hie him to Rome, and of Pope Sergius receiue the habit of Religion, wherein hee should die, and rest in peace. This dreame (for I hold it no other) being told vnto Alan, search was made into the Bookes of both D. Powel. Chron. of VVales. the Merlines, as also into the speech of the Eagle at Shaftesbury, pronounced eight hundred and eighty yeeres before the birth of our Sauiour Christ (if wee doe beleeue these to be true) wherein it was prophe∣cied forsooth, that the Britaines should lose their Kingdome, and that the same should be possessed of others, vntill the time that the bones of Cadwallader should bee brought from Rome. By such toies and illusions in those daies of darknesse, the euer-erring minds of men were content to be lead: for not onely Cadwallader, a quiet and meeke-spirited man, was pos∣sessed with this conceit, that it came vnto him by a di∣uine prouidence, but also King Alan perswaded him to obey his Oracle; and thereupon preparing for his Pilgrimage, gaue ouer his expedition for Britaine, and left his distressed Subiects to bee ouer-runne by strangers, and the Land to bee enioied by a forraine Nation: and receiuing the habit of seeming Religion at the hands of Pope Sergius, died soone after in the yeere of our Lord six hundred eighty nine, and there was buried in S. Peters Church, being the last King of the Britaines bloud, after they had held possession therof the space of one thousand one hundred thirty and seuen yeeres before the Natiuitie of Christ, and six hundred eighty eight yeeres after his Birth, as the Chronicle of Wales, with other Britaine Writers, haue calculated, though (as is said) after the largest size. But howsoeuer this sudden alteration was wrought in Cadwallader, yet whiles he continued a King in health, hee raigned (saith Geffrey) in great magnanimitie, the terme of three yeers, and fought many Battles against Cadwallader, the continuance of his raigne. the Saxons, whose sword was euer sheathed with vi∣ctorie; for Lothaire King of Kent he slew in the Field, and Edilwach also King of the South-Saxons, with the ruine of his Country, as the British Historians report, and would haue it. But Beda, vnto whom more credit is heerein to be giuen, telles vs, that Lothaire was slaine by Edrik, his Beda histor. lib. 4. cap. 26. Nephew and Successour, declaring the manner and day of his death; and that Ceadwall, a young man of Cap. 15. the West-Saxons bloud royall, being banished from a∣mong them, fell vpon the South-Saxons, harrying the Country and killing their King. But afterwards la∣menting the bloud he had spilt, whereat euen Nature her selfe seemed to bee offended, in great repentance abandoned his Kingdome, and pilgrim-like went vn∣to Rome, where of Pope Sergius he was baptized vpon Beda hist. lib. 5. cap. 7. Easter Euen, the yeere from Christs Natiuitie six hun∣dred eightie nine. The times thus agreeing, their names so neere, their deuotions alike, Sergius the same ghostly father to both, their sepulchers in one and the same Church, doe strongly confirme that they both were the same and one only man, as we formerly haue said. But with this man Cadwallader, wheresoeuer he died, lay buried the last bloud of their Kings, their go∣uernment, and immediatelie the very Name of Bri∣taine, for many hundred yeeres ensuing, as in the sequell of this Historie (Christ assisting) shall bee shewed. And now at last, according to my first intendment, I am come to speake of the succession of Great Bri∣taines Monarkes, from which (vpon the fore-shewed occasions of the Ilands diuision, the Saxons possessi∣ons, and these Britaine Resisters) I haue beene ouer∣long staied, and am forced to returne againe to King Hengist, the first of the Saxons, that I may shew their succeeding succession in this English Monarchy: wher∣in of necessitie I must desire the patience of my Rea∣der, if some things be againe touched that formerlie haue beene spoken, the Matter of Historie so much requiring, and the Method that to my proceeding I haue herein proposed, enforcing it. THE SAXONS SVCCESSIONS IN THE MONARCHY OF GREAT BRI∣TAINE, Saxon Mo∣narchs. WHEREOF HENGIST THE FIRST KING OF KENT BECAME THE FIRST MO∣NARCH OF THE ENG∣LISHMEN. CHAPTER XIII. H Engist, a Prince of the Eng∣lish-Saxons, hauing the An. Do. 450. Beda. Malmsb. Command ouer certaine forces planted in the Low∣countries of Germany, in the yeere of Christs Incar∣nation foure hundred and fiftie, transported them ouer into Britaine, where the fifth yeere after his ar∣riuall, he began his Kingdome in Kent; & hauing sur∣prised his son in law King Vortigern, slain his Britaines, and seized into his possession the best of the Iland, he laid the foundation of a Monarchy, and deserueth to be reputed the first Monarch of the English Nation. (2) He (as all the Saxon Kings besides) doth claime his originall from Prince Woden, and his wife Fria, by Wechta the eldest of their uen sonnes, being the Floren. Wigorn. fifth in issue from them; as thus: Himselfe was the sonne of Withtgils, who was the sonne of Witha, and he the sonne of Wechta, the eldest sonne of the Deified Woden. This Prince held the supreme Scepter of this Iland for thirty foure yeeres continuance, and therein died Hengist, how long he raigned. honorably, saith Marianus Scotus. But Peter de Ikham, Polydore, and others say, that he was slaine in battell, Maria. Scot. Peter Ikham. or else taken by Edol, Earle of Glocester, and beheaded at Conesborow. Hee left issue behind him two sonnes and one daughter, whose names were Hatwaker, Eske, Geffrey Mon. Polydor Uirgil. and Rowena. (3) Hatwaker his eldest sonne, is reported by Pe∣trus Albinus of Wittenberg, a great Genealogist and Petrus Albinus. Hitoriographer also) to be Duke of the Saxons in Ger∣manie, and there left to gouerne the people at his Fa∣thers departure for Britaine. And if Albinus authority be sufficient, he was the Father of Duke Hatwegat, and grandfather of erik King of the Saxons, ance∣stor to the valiant Witikindus, the principall progeni∣tor of the most noble Familie of the Dukes of Saxony. (4) Eske, the second sonne of King Hengist, came ouer with his Father into Britaine, and was his assi∣stant in all his warres, wherein he gaue worthy testi∣monie of his valour: whose Kingdome of Kent after his death he enioyed, and gaue name to that Coun∣tries Beda hist. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 5. Eske, how long he raigned. Inhabitants, who were from him called Eskings, ouer whom he raigned peaceably twenty yeeres. (5) Rowena, the daughter of King Hengist, was borne in Germany before her Fathers departure, and afterwards sent for by him into Britaine, to further his designes. At whose surpassing beautie and feature Vortigern so lawfull and louing w , to Paganish bed, and to the and griefe of the Nob , cond wi e, and the struction. By her he had a all lawes either of God wife; by whom he had i ue ly spent the daies of his life, as he was got in that wicked bed. This Rowena, whom some call Ro a, by . is accounted the Neece, and not the Daug ∣gist. But seeing his opinion is grounded vpon youth of Hengist, as not sufficient in yeeres to a daughter so mariageable, I rather thinke and hold this bare testimonie vnable to turne the great streame of other Writers out of their vsuall course and chanell. ELLA THE FIRST KING OF THE SOVTH-SAXONS, AND SECOND MO∣NARCH E , Mo at. OF THE ENGLISHMEN. CHAPTER XIV. E Lla a noble Saxon, being sent for by King Hengist, An. D. 581. Beda. hist. lib. 2. cap. 5. about the three and twen∣tith yeere of his raigne, brought a fresh supply of those Germans to the re∣liefe of his Countrymen, who with his forces lan∣ded at the hauen now cal∣led Shoreham in Sussex, where putting backe the Inhabitants in many skir∣mishes, lastly chased them into a great wood then cal∣led Matt. Westminst. Andredflege, whence often being assailed by the sudden assaults of the Britaines, wherein as may bee thought, he lost the liues of his two elder sonnes, was so hardly beset, that hee sent for more aid of his Sax∣ons, who came to his supply. (2) His strength thus augmented, and ambition still increased, he fought three cruell and bloody bat∣tels, but the last of them most fatall against the Bri∣taines, in the place then called Macrodes-burne, and be∣sieging the ancient and famous City Anared-Chester Henry Huntington situated in the said great forest, and chiefe defensible fortresse in all those Southern parts, intercepted the Britaines that came to their reliefe, and entring the same by an assault, put to the sword all that were found within it. After which great losse, the Britaines sought rather to prouide for their owne safety by fly∣ing into desert places, then by making open resistance to procure their owne too apparant destruction. (3) Ella in this state continued the time of fiue yeeres before he assumed the name of King, o the li∣mits An. Do. 488. of that Prouince assigned vnder his gouernment, but then without any shew of resistance laid the foun∣dation of this Kingdome, which was the second of the Saxons; and as Hengist held Kent, so he had Sussex and Surrey for his Possession, wherein for six yeeres space E , how long h raigned. with Hengist he liued, and that with such approbation of valour as that after his death he became the second Saxon Monarch of the Englishmen, in the yeere of grace 488. (4) He is said to be the elder sonne of Osa, whose genealogie Florentius of Worcester thus deriueth: Osa Florent. Wigorn. (saith he) was the sonne of Ether ert, and he the sonne of Ingengeat, who was the sonne of , whose father was Alusa, the sonne of Ingebrand, the sonne of Wegbrand, the sonne of Beorn, the sonne of Beor∣nus, the elder sonne of Brand, the sonne of Bealdeag, the sixth sonne of prince Woden and of Lady Fria his wife. (5) His issue were Kymen, Plenching, and Cissa, three valiant sonnes, that came ouer with him, and assisted him in his enterprises for Britaine. From Kymen, the port wherein they arriued, was called Kymenishore; by VVil. Malmsb. the Britaines, Cuneueshore, which time and seas hath both shortened, and altered: and now is it called Shoreham, a well knowne hauen in Sussex. This Prince came to his graue before his Father, either by the stroke of warres, or by the course of nature, without further mention of his acts, and his succession, cut off by his death. (6) Plenching his second sonne, was borne vnto him Florent. VVig. in the Lowe countries of Germany, and with his bre∣thren assisted his Father to the attaining of the South-Saxons Crowne; but being cut off by vntimely death, whether by the hand of the enemy, or by natures ap∣pointment, is vncertaine. (7) The yongest sonne of king Ella, was Cissa, whom death spared to liue a long life; but fame as sparing to adorne it with memory of his acts: for no∣thing of him is left memorable, besides the building of Chichester. Fortune indeed set his fathers Crowne on his head, but kept the Imperiall Diademe in her owne hand, to adorne the head of a worthier bearer, which was Cherdik the West-Saxon, vnto whom Cissa gaue yeerely contribution, to secure him from the Britaines, as before and after hath been, and shall bee shewed. (8) This Ella his entrance and erection of his Kingdome, for time is vncertaine; but his raigne therein, as also in his Monarchie, is more certainelie knowne: for hee was King of the South-Saxons the See Chap. 6. space of thirty two yeeres, and Monarch of the Eng∣lish-men six and twenty, dying in the yeere of Christs Incarnation fiue hundred and foureteene, which was the thirty sixth after his first arriuall into Britaine. CHERDIK THE FIRST KING OF THE VVEST-SAXONS, AND THIRD MONARCH OF THE ENG∣LISHMEN. CHAPTER XV. Cherdik. T He Saxons Sunne, thus ri∣sen and high ascended vp∣on 1. An. Do. 495. the South of Britaine, began now to spreade his beames towards the West; for Kent being quietly possessed by King Eske, and South-Saxia, with all the subdued, at the dis∣pose of great Ella, Cherdik a valiant Captaine of the Low Country Germans, thought himselfe as sufficient in warres, and as a∣ble to reach at, to weare, and to weld a Crowne of Estate, as either of them that had so done before him: and seeing that Britaine was now the seede∣plot for Diadems, set his affection and preparation that way. (2) He with his forces entred in the West of that Iland, where he in his first battell so danted the Inha∣bitants, M . . that apparāt signes of approching glory were added to his aspiring hopes: for therein hee slew Na∣tanleod, otherwise called Nazaleod, a mighty King of the Britaines, whereby an easie entrance was laid open Henr. Hunt. to his desired Empire, and a more easie warre left to his posteritie. This battle chanced about the yeere of Christ Iesus fiue hundred and eight, and was fought in the region of Natanleod, (which Country bare the name of the King) and neere vnto a brooke of water in the West of Hampshire, which from Cherdik began to be called Cherdiks-ford, where now a Towne of the same name standeth, but by contraction and short∣nesse of speech is called Chardford. (3) Florentius of Worcester, the Saxons Genealogist Flor. VVigorn. (as I may well terme him) bringeth this Cherdik (as he doth the rest of the Saxon Kings) from the ancient Prince Woden, and that in this manner: Cherdik (saith he) was the sonne of Elisius, and hee the sonne of Esla, the sonne of Gerisius, the sonne of Wigga, the sonne of Friairin, the sonne of Freodegar, the brother of Beorn, the progenitor of Ida the first King of Bernicia, and both of them the sonnes of Brand, the sonne of Beal∣deag, the fift sonne of the foresaid Woden. (4) In the seuenth yeere of Ella his Monarchie, was his arriuage, and six yeeres after hee beganne his Kingdome of the West-Saxons, seating himselfe and foundation therof betwixt the Britains and the South-Saxons, for whose further securitie, Cissa King of that Prouince, gaue him an yeerely contribution towards the maintenance of his charge in warre; wherein hee got such reputation, that after the death of Ella, and the thirteenth of his owne raigne, hee▪ assumed the Monarchie vnto himselfe, and was both the first King of the West-Saxons, and the third Monarch of the En∣glish-men, wherein he continued the space of twentie cherdik, how long he raigned. one yeeres, and deceased in the yeere of our Lord fiue hundred thirty fiue, being the three and thirtieth of his Kingdome, and the fortieth after his first ar∣riuall. (5) His issue were two sonnes, Kenrik and Chel∣wolfe: the one immediately, and the issue of the other collaterally attained to the same possession and title that Cherdike heere first laid. (6) Chelwolfe his second sonne (for of Kenrik the eldest wee are hereafter to speake) hath little mention made among our writers: more then that hee was the Ancestour of Eskwin the eight King of the West-Sax∣ons, that is to say, the father to Kenfrid the father of Kensy; which Kensy had issue the said Eskwin, who was the Successor of king Kenwalk, and predecessor of King Kentwin in the kingdome of the West-Saxnos. See chap. 7. KENRIK THE SECOND KING OF Kenrik. THE WEST-SAXONS, AND FOVRTH MONARCH OF THE ENG∣LISHMEN. CHAPTER XVI. K Enrik, the eldest sonne of King Cherdick (as is said) 1. An. Do. 534. being borne in Germanie, and following his father into Britaine, valiantly serued vnder him, as well in the Battle fought a∣gainst Mat. VVest . King Natanleod, the first day of his arriuage, as in other battles against the Britaines in other places; namely, at Cherdiksford, Cherdisley, and in the Conquest of the Ile of Wight. Im∣mediately vpon the death of his Father, he succeeded in his whole dominions, and was ordained the second King of the West-Saxons, and the fourth Monarch of the Englishmen, beginning his raigne ouer both at one and the same time, the yeere of Christ his Natiuitie fiue hundred thirty foure. (2) And enlarging his confines vpon the Terri∣tories of the Britaines, gaue them two great ouer∣throwes; the one at Searesbery in Wilt-shire, and the o∣ther at Banbury in Oxford-shire, which was fought the An. Do. 556. two and twentieth of his raigne, whereby his fame grew more renowned, and his Kingdome in more quiet after. He raigned the space of twenty six yeeres, Kenrik, how long he raigned. and left this life in the yeere of our Lord God fiue hundred sixty. (3) He had issue three sonnes, Chenl e, C thwolfe, and C th. Chelwin the first, succeeded his father in the Monarchie, and West-Saxons Kingdome. (4) C thwolfe, the second, assisted his brother in many victories, as presently in his raigne shall follow. And C th, the third brother, famous in his issue, though mentionlesse for action in himselfe, whereof more largely hath beene spoken in the raigne of Ken∣rik, In Chap. 7. Soft. 2. as he was King only of the West-Saxons. CHEVLINE THE THIRD KING OF Cheuline. THE VVEST-SAXONS, AND FIFTH MONARCH OF THE ENG∣LISHMEN. CHAPTER XVII. C Heuline, the eldest sonne of King Kenrike, serued An. D. 561. with great commendati∣ons vnder his father, in all his warres against the Bri∣tains, and is specially men∣tioned at the Battle of Banbury in Oxford-shire; and after his fathers death Matt. Westm. became the third King of the West-Saxons, and the fifth Monarch of the English∣men. Hee much enlarged the bounds of his King∣dome, and increased the power and glorie of the West-Saxons. (2) For continuing the warres where his Father left, did not onely subdue the Britaines in many Bat∣tles, Henry Hunting. but also set himselfe against his owne Nation the Saxons, and sought to impose the scope of his power vpon the South of the Riuer Thames: for entring Kent (whose King was then a childe, by name Ethel∣bert, the sonne of Imerik) at Wiphandun or Wimbledon. Wilbandun in Surrey, in a set and sore Battle, defeated all his for∣ces, whence the young King was chased, and two of his greatest Captaines, bearing the names of Dukes, were slaine, as we haue said. (3) Not long after this victory, he set his minde to inlarge his West-Saxons Dominions vpon the pos∣session of the declining Britaines, and to that end fur∣nished forth a great Band of his Souldiers, whereof he made his brother Cuthwin chiefe Generall. These marching to Bedford, gaue Battle to the Britaines, where they slew them downe-right, and surprized soure of their chiefest Townes, at that time called Liganburge, Ail . Eglesbourgh, Bensington, and Eusham, which they fortified, to their owne strength, and the Britaines great losse. (4) And following the Tract of his fore-going fortunes, about six yeeres after sent forth againe his Saxons, vnder conduct of the foresaid Cuthwin, who encountred the Britaines at Di th or Deorham, with such valour and successe, that besides great slaughter of the British Souldiers, three of their Kings, whose names were, Coinmagill, Candidan, and Farimna∣gill, fell in the Field, with the surprizall of these three Matth. West. Cities, Glocester, Bathe, and Cirencester. Then (saith Gyldas. Gyldas) euidently appeared the Lands destruction, the sins of the Britaines being the only cause, when neither Prince nor People, Priest nor Leuite, regarded the Law of the Lord, but disobediently wandred in their owne waies. (5) But no greater were the sinnes of the Britains, then the vnsatiable desires of the Saxons were to con∣quer: for Cheuline about the last of Malgoe his gouern∣ment, met the Britaines at Fethanleah, in the face of a Th . . Field, which was fought out, to the great slaughters of them both, and with the death of Prince Cuth, King Cheulins sonne: notwithstanding the victorie fell on his side with great spoiles obtained, and possessions of many Prouinces, which himselfe no long time enioied. (6) For growne proud through his many pro∣sperous victories against his enemies, and tyrannizing ouer his owne Subiects, the West-Saxons, fell into such contempt, that they ioined with the Britaines for his destruction. The greatest against him, was disloyall Chell, or Cealrik, his nephew, the sonne of Cuthwin his most loyall brother, whom both the Nations had e∣lected for Generall. Vnder him they muster and march into Wilt-shire, and at Wodnesbeothe (now Wannes-ditch) pitch downe their Standards. Cheuline that thought Leyland. hee lead fortune in a lease, with confident boldnesse built his present proceedings vpon his former suc∣cesse, and in the face of his enemies displaied his co∣lours. But the Battles ioined, and the Field goared with bloud, the day was lost vpon the Kings side, and he in distresse saued himselfe by flight. Heere might you haue seene the world, as it is, vnconstant and vari∣able; for he a Mars, that had ouer-borne the Britains in so many Battles, and had raised his Saxons vnto so great a height, is forced to flee before his conquered Captiues, and to exile himselfe from the sight of his owne Subiects, after he had gloriously raigned thirty one yeeres, or (as some will) thirty three, and as a meane man, died in his banishment, the yeere of grace Cheuline, how long he raigned. fiue hundred ninety two. (7) He had issue two sonnes, which were Cuth and Cuthwin, the elder whereof had valiantly serued in his fathers warres, namely at Wimbledone in Surry, against King Ethelbert and his power of Kentishmen, in the yeere of Christ fiue hundred sixty seuen; and lastly in the Battle at Fethanleah, where the Britaines receiued a great ouerthrow. Notwithstanding, as hee was vali∣antly fighting among the thickest of his enemies, hee was there slain, in the yeere of our Lord fiue hundred eighty foure, being the fiue and twentieth yeere of his fathers raigne, and that without issue. (8) Cuthwin, the younger sonne of King Cheuline, suruiued his father, but succeeded him not, because of his young yeeres; or else (and that rather) for the hatred that his father had purchased of his Subiects, which they repaied him in his owne expulsion, and in this his sonnes depriuation. But although the wreath of the West-Saxons did not adorne this Cuthwines head, yet shone it more bright, and stood with greater maiesty vpon the browes of Ina, the warlike and zea∣lous King of West-Saxons, and of Egbert the victorious and first sole absolute Monarch of the English Empire: both of them in a right line issued from this Cuthwin, as in the seuenth Chapter we haue said. ETHELBERT THE FIFTH, AND FIRST CHRISTIAN KING OF KENT, AND THE SIXTH MONARCH OF THE ENG∣LISHMEN, HIS WIVES AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XVIII. T He flame of the West-Sa∣xons for a time thus quen∣ched, An. Do. 561. the Lampe of Kent began againe to shine, and to assume the Title of the Monarchie, after it had beene suppressed in them through the raignes of VVil. Malmes. these foure last Kings: for young Egberts entrance, with the great losse of his Kentish, ouerthrowne by King Cheuline, gaue rather inducements to a tributary subiection, then any apparant hopes to purchase an Empire. (2) But such is the dispose of God in his hidden Counsell, that things of least appearance many times become the greatest in substance, as in this Prince it was euidently seene, who making vse of his owne youth and losse, got thereby experience, both to de∣fense himselfe, and to prouoke others, and with such victories abroad, repaired his losses at home, that as farre as Humber he made all subiect to Kent. (3) Thus growne to be the greatest of any Saxon before him, hee sought to hold it vp by forraine alli∣ance, Beda histor. lib. 1. cap. 25. and to that end became suter for Berta a most vertuous Christian Lady, the daughter of Chilperik King of France; vnto whom by her father she was last∣lie granted, but with these conditions, that she might reserue her Christian Profession, enioy the presence and the instructions of Luidhard her learned Bishop, with the place of his Queene. (4) These couenants concluded, and many French Christians attending her in his Court, by their daily seruice of God, and continuall practise of pietie, drew many of the English to fauour their Religion, yea and the King also to bee inclined that way. And as these were working the saluation of Kent, behold Gods proceedings for the conuersion of the rest. (5) It chanced great Gregory (then but Arch-dea∣con of Rome) to see certaine youths of this Iland brought to that Citie, to be sold for slaues: His Chri∣stian heart pitying at such heathenish tyrannizing, and beholding stedfastly their faces to be faire and Angel∣like, demanded of their Merchants, of what Nation they came; who made him answer, that they were Angles, and by that name were knowne vnto other Nations. Indeed, said he, and not without cause, for their resemblance is Angelicall, and fit it is that they be made inheritours with the Angels in Heauen. But of what Prouince are they? said Gregory. It was repli∣ed; Of Deira, a Country situated in the Continent of Britaine. Now surely, saith he, it is great pity but these people should bee taken from Dei ira, the ire of God. And farther asking what was the name of their King, it was answered, that he was called Ella; whereunto he alluding, said, that Alleluia, to the praise of God, in that Princes Dominions should shortly be sung. (6) And to that purpose himselfe, being after∣wards Pope, sent Austine a Monke, with forty others, Austine com∣meth into Eng∣land. for assistance, whereof Melitus, Iustus, and Iohn were chiefe. These landing in Tanet, in the moneth of Iuly, about fiue hundred ninety and six yeeres after the In∣carnation of Christ, and one hundred forty and seuen after the first arriuage of these Angles into Britaine, had immediately accesse vnto the presence of King Ethel∣bert, but yet in the open Field, for hee feared to con∣ferre with them in any house, lest by sorcerie (as hee fondly surmised) he might be ouercome. (7) These preaching vnto him the word of life, his answer was, that presently he could not consent to their Doctrine, neither rashly forsake his ancient and accustomed Religion. But seeing (said hee) you tell vs strange things, and giue vs faire promises of after life, when this life shall be ended, wee permit you to preach the same to our people, and to conuert as ma∣ny as you can; and wee our selues will minister all things behoouefull for your liuelihood. Which pro∣mise hee instantly performed, and in Canterburie his Austine and his followers main∣tained in Cantur∣bury. head City, allowed them fit places for residence, and sufficient prouision for their maintenance; wherein these religious men, following in some measure the examples of the Apostles, spent their times in prea∣ching and praiers, watching for the peoples conuersi∣ons, and exercising the workes of true piety, as exam∣ples and motiues vnto others, to embrace the Gospel Beda hist. lib. 2. cap. 26. Beda hist. lib. 1. cap. 26. which they sought to plant. (8) Neere vnto the East part of the City, stood an ancient Church, built by the Christian Romans, whiles they had dwelt in Britaine, and by them dedicated to the honour of S. Martin, and is so yet called. To this Church the Christian Queene Berta, with her Com∣municants the French, daily resorted to pray, and vn∣to these, and in this Church, Austine and his fellowes began daily to preach: vnto whose Sermons so many of the Kentish also resorted, that a plentifull haruest in short time appeared, vpon the seede-plot of their tillage; for it is reported that ten thousand of the En∣glish people were baptized there in one day, insomuch Gregory lib. 7. cap. 26. that the King himselfe forsooke his Heathenish Idola∣trie, and likewise receiued the Sacrament of Baptisme, vnto his saluation in Christ: in witnesse whereof, hee gaue the Lordship and Royaltie of his chiefe Citie Canterburie, vnto Augustine, and resigned his princely Canturbury giuen to Austine. Palace therein vnto him, who in the East of this City laid the foundation of that great, and afterwards mag∣nificent Church, dedicated to the seruice and name of Christ, which at this day is the Cathedrall of that Me∣tropolitan See: and Ethelbert to giue him more roome, withdrew himselfe vnto Reculuer in Tanet, where he erected a Palace for himselfe and his successours, the Wil. Lambert P mb. of Kent. compasse wherof may be traced by an old wal, whose ruines remaine there yet to this day. (9) Austine thus seated, and in the well deserued fauour of King Ethelbert, got one request more, which was this, that whereas by the Law of the Twelue Ta∣bles, it was forbidden to bury the dead within the walles of any Citie, (the practise whereof, wee daily finde by monuments taken vp in the fields adioining) it would please him to giue to that vse, an old Idoll-Temple standing without the East Wall of the Citie, The buriall of the dead granted within the Citie. wherin the King himselfe had wontedly worshipped his Idols. This obtained, and the Church purged frō that prophane exercise, to the seruice of God, be∣ing honored with the name of S. Pancras, King Ethel∣bert added thereunto a most faire Monasterie, built vpon his owne cost, and dedicated it vnto the name of Peter and Paul the Apostles, appointing it to bee the place for the Kentish Kings Sepulchers, and Austine likewise meant it for the burials of his successours in that See. But first it became the Monument of his owne name: for in regard of the Procurer, both Pan∣cras, Peter, and Paul were soone swallowed vp, and the whole called onely by the name of S. Austines. In this place, eight Kings of Kent had their bodies inter∣red, and tenne of their Arch-bishops therein laid, vntill S. Austines Mo∣nasterie. that Cuthbert the eleuenth in succession, in fauour of S. Iohns, a new Church by him erected, procured of King Egbert the sonne of Ercombert, that the succec∣ding Arch-bishops might be buried there. This Mona∣sterie, as all the rest did, came to her fatall period in the daies of King Henry the Eighth; whose vncouered walles stood so long languishing in time and stormes of weather, that daily increased the aspect of her ru∣ines, till now lastly they are made subiect to other publike vses, and the whole tract of that most goodly foundation in the same place no where appearing. Onely Ethelberts Tower, in memorie and honour of Ethelberts Tower yet standing. the man, as yet hath escaped the verdict and sentence of destruction; whose beauty, though much defaced and ouerworne, will witnesse to succeeding ages the magnificence of the whole, when all stood compleat in their glory together. (10) These his happie beginnings, Austine sig∣nified by Letters to Rome, and withall demanded di∣rections, how he might further proceed: which que∣stions, were they not written by the Venerable Beda, Beda hist. lib. 1. cap. 27. wee could hardly beleeue that such idle conceits should haue place in the minde of a man so well and fruitfully busied: as, Whether a woman with child might Austines questi∣ons to the Pope. receiue the Sacrament of Baptisme, or in her monethly dis∣ease, the holy Communion, or enter the Church: how long after her deliuerance, the husband ought to refraine her Bed: How the Gifts that were offred on the Altar, ought to be distributed: and vnto what degree of consanguinitie Christians might marie: and many others such like, as though himselfe had neuer read either Moses or Paul. But of the thing then more needfull, for that at that time it stirred most contention, it seemeth he was suf∣ficiently instructed; neither among his other questi∣ons is it once named: and that was, the due time for the celebration of Easter: the difference whereof, be∣twixt the Britaines and the Romans was such, that it caused Lord-like Austen to prophecie (if not to seeke) their destructions; and they in their opinions, to hold him no better then the Man of Sinne: for thus the Storie is reported. (11) Austine, by the assistance and authoritie of King Ethelbert, called an Assemblie of the British Bi∣shops Beda hist. lib. 2. cap. 2. Rand. Cest. Sigebertus. Galfr d. lib. 8. cap. cap. 4. and Doctours, that had retained the doctrine of the Gospell amongst them, euen from the first planta∣tion thereof by the Apostles themselues, to be holden in the Borders of the Victians and West-Saxons, and at the place vpon that occasion called About South∣h oton as is thought. Augustines Oake: thither resorted seuen British Bishops, and many other well∣learned men (saith Beda) out of their greatest Monasterie at Bangor, where at that time Dinoth was Abbat. These men now ready to goe to the foresaid Synod, came first to a certaine holy and wise man, which liued thereabout an An∣chorets life, to aske his counsell, whether they ought at Au∣stins preaching and exhortation, leaue their Traditions or no: The Anchoret replied, If he be a man of God, follow him. But how shall we prooue (said they) that hee is a man of God? The Anchoret answered, Our Lord saith, Takeyee on you my Yoke, and learne ye of me, for I am milde and humble of heart. If therefore this Austine bee milde and humble of heart, it is like that himselfe beareth the Yoke of Christ, and will offer you the same to beare. But if hee bee curst and proud, it is certaine that hee is not of God, neither must we much esteeme his words. Then they enquired, how they might know whether this Austine were proud or no: Prouide (quoth he) that he, and his companie may come first The Ancho es counsell. to the place of the Synod or Councell-house: and if it bee so that when you approch neere him, he arise courteously, and salute you, thei thinke him to bee the seruant of Christ, and so heare him, and obey him: but if when you approch, hee despise you, and will not vouchsafe to rise at your presence, which are the greater number, let him likewise bee despised of you. And truly (saith hee) as this Anchoret bade them, so did they: for it happened, that when they came thither, S. Austine was already set in his chaire, and stirred not: which when they saw, forthwith waxing wroth, they noted him of pride, and therefore endeuoured to ouerthwart and gainsay whatsoeuer he proposed. And so the Synod brake vp without any thing done. Thus then wee see, that the substance of doctrine was embraced in Britaine, before the sending of Austin from Rome: only in ceremonies they dissented, as the most of Christian Churches, without derogation to the Gospell, at this day doe. And this for the cele∣bration of Easter, a matter of no great moment (if we consider our Christian libertie, and the Apostles feare, Galla. 4. 9. that the obseruations of daies, moneths, times, and yeeres, turne the hearts after beggerly rudiments, bring againe into bondage, and make his labours for Christ in vaine) yet for the different obseruation only of this Feast from the Romans, how oft are the Britaines tear∣med by Beda, a wicked people, a cursed nation, and well deseruing those calamities which the Lord did afflict vpon them? This controuersie for Easters ce∣lebration, thus begun, continued no lesse then ninety yeeres after, and was lastly concluded in manner as followeth. (12) This variance (saith Beda) made not onely Beda hist. lib. 3. cap. 25. the people to doubt and feare, lest bearing the name of Christians, they did and had runne in vaine, as the Apostle speaketh, but also good Oswy King of Nor∣thumberland, and learned Prince Alkfryd, with Queene Eanfled, were much distracted and perplexed: for by this variance (saith hee) it often times hapned, that in one yeere two Easters were kept; for the King brea∣king vp his Fast, and solemnizing of the Feast, the Queene with Prince Alkfrid, continued their Fast, and kept that day their Palme-Sunday. To conclude which contrarietie, a Synod purposely was called, and the Question disputed by their best Diuines. The place was Stranshalch or Whitby, whereof Hilda was Abbesse. Stranshalch Synode. The chiefe parties for, and against the accustomed time of keeping that feast, were King Oswy and Prince Alkfrid his sonne. The Disputers for Oswy and the established orders, were Colman Arch-bishop of Yorke, with his Scotish Clergie, and Hilda the vertuous and learned Lady Abbesse of the place. For Alkfrid and the attempted alteration, were Agilbert Bishop of the West-Saxons, Wilfrid Abbat of Rippon, with Iames and Romanus, two learned men, and the reuerend Cedda newly consecrated Bishop, appointed Prolocutor of the Assembly. The Conuocation set, King Oswy made a solemne King Oswy per∣swadeth to vnion. Oration, wherein hee vrged a necessitie, that those people which serued one God, ought to celebrate his heauenly Sacraments alike, and should keepe one or∣der and rule in the same: the truth of which seruice, and surcease of that long vnchristian variance, for the Christian celebration and time of Easter, was then presently by those learned men to bee handled, and by best approouements to be determined; whereun∣to hee requested their vttermost endeuours, and to that purpose commanded his Arch-bishop Colman first to speake: whereupon Colman with reuerence stood vp and said: The Easter which I obserue, I receiued Colmans speech to the Synode. of my Fore-fathers, of whom I was consecrated, and sent hither for your Bishop. They all (you know) were godly men, and obserued the Feast as we doe now; neither thinke you they kept this tradition without sure warrant from greater then themselues, which was S lut Iohn the Euan∣gelist, and the Disciple whom Iesus especially loued, who in the Churches which himselfe pl ted, celebrated the Feast of Easter, as we doe now. Therefore knowing the man so worthy, and the manner so ancient, I hope you will all con∣fesse, it is not safe for vs now to reiect. Wilfride the declaimer, appointed to answer, stood vp and said: The Easter which we obserue, wee our selues Wilfrides answer. haue seene obserued in Rome, where the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul liued, preached, suffred, and are buried: and in our trauels thorow France and Italie, either for stu∣die or vpon pilgrimage, we haue seene the same order kept: and we know by relation, that in Africke, Asia, Aegypt and Greece, nay thorowout all nations and tongues in the world where Christ hath his Church, that this our time and order is obserued. Shall then these obstinate Picts (I meane the Britaines) and these remote Ilands in the Ocean Sea, and yet not all of them neither, fondly contend in t is point against the whole world? But here Colman interrupted him, and said, I much maruell, brother, that you terme our doings a fond contenti∣on, Colmans . seeing we haue for our warrant so worthy an Apostle as Iohn was, who only leaned vpon our Lords brest, and whose life and behauiour all the world acknowledgeth to bee most wise and discreet. Godforbid (said Wilfrid) that I should accuse Iohn: but Wilfrids mode∣ration. yet we know that he kept the decrees of Moses literally, and according to the Iewish Lawes; and so the rest of the Apo∣stles were constrained in some things to doe, for the weake∣nesse of them who accounted it a great sin to abrogate these rites that God himselfe had instituted; and for that cause S. Paul did circumcise Timothie, offred bloud-sacrifices in the Temple, shaued his head at Corinth with Aq a and Priscilla: vpon which consideration also spake Iames vnto Paul, You see brother how many thousand of the Iewes haue receiued the faith, and all of these are yet zealous followers Act. 21. 20. of the Law. But the light of the Gospell now shining thorow the world, it is not lawfull for any Christian to bee circum∣cised, or to offer vp bloudy sacrifices of Beasts. Saint Iohn therefore, according to the custome of the Law, in the four∣teenth day of the first moneth, at euen began the celebration of Easters Festiuitie, regardlesse whether it fell vpon the Sabbath day, or any other of the weeke. But S. Peter prea∣ching the Gospell in Rome, remembring that our Lord arose from his graue the first day after the Sabbath, giuing there∣by vnto vs certaine assurance of our resurrection, obserued the Feast of Easter according to the Commandement of that Law he looked for, euen as S. Iohn did, that is to say, the first Sabbath after the full Moone of the first moneth. Neither doth this new obseruation of the Gospell, and Apostles pra∣ctise, breake the old Law, but rather fulfilleth it; for the Law commandeth the Feast of Passeouer to bee kept from the foureteenth day of that moneth, to the twentie and one Exod. 12. of the same. And this hath the Nicene Councell not newly decreed, but rather confirmed (as the Ecclesiasticall Histo∣rie Ruff lib. 10. cap. 6. witnesseth) that this is the true obseruation of Easter, and of all Christians after this account is to bee celebrated: and thereupon charged Bishop Colman, that hee neither ob∣serued it according to Iohn nor Peter. To this the Bishop replied, that A tholius for his holinesse much commended by the said Ecclesiasticall Histo∣rie, Colman. and Columba a Father of like sanctitie, by whom mira∣cles were wrought, kept the Feast according as he then did, from whose imitation he durst not digresse. Your Fathers, which you pretend to follow, how holy soe∣uer Wilfrid. they bee (said Wilfrid) and what miracles soeuer they haue wrought, yet this I answer, that in the day of iudge∣ment many shall say vnto Christ, that they haue prophecied, Matth. 7. cast out Diuels, and wrought miracles in his name, to whom our Lord will answer, I know you not. And if your Father Columba (yea and our Father, if hee be the true seruant of Christ) were holy and mightie in miracles, yet can hee by no meanes bee preferred to the most blessed Prince of the Apo∣stles, vnto whom our Lord said, Thou art Peter, and vpon this rocke I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall Matth. 16. not preuaile against it, and to thee will I giue the keyes of the Kingdome of Heauen. Thus said, the King asked Colman, whether our Lord indeede spake thus vnto Peter, who answered, He did. But can you (said hee) giue eui∣dence of so speciall authoritie granted to your Father Co∣lumba? The Bishop said, No. Then (quoth the King) doe you both agree confidently, that thesewords were prin∣cipally spoken vnto Peter, and that vnto him the keyes of the Kingdome of Heauen were giuen? They all answered, It is most certaine. Whereupon the King concluded this great controuersie, and said, Then will not I gaine say The Synod mild. lie dismissed by King Oswy. such a P rter as this is, but as farre as I know, and am a∣ble, I will couet in all points to obey his ordinante, lest per∣haps when I come to the Doores of Heauen, I finde none to open vnto mee, hauing his displeasure, which is so cleerely prooued to beare the keyes thereof. And with this so simple a collection of King Oswy, concluded this long and great contention for the ce∣lebration of Easter; which heere, as borne before the time, I haue inserted, to continue the narration there∣of together, & to auoid repetition of the same things, which I seeke purposely to shunne; and so returne a∣gaine to King Ethelbert. (13) Who now became an instrument himselfe for the conuersions of his Nation the Saxons. The first fruits of his intendements were wrought vpon Sebert King of the East-Angles, his owne sisters sonne, whom not onely hee conuerted to Christianitie, but therein assisted him in the building of the Cathedrall Church of S. Paul for Miletus his Bishop; as also the Church of S. Peters on the West of London, then called Thorny, with the assistance of a London Citizen, as Holinsh. hist. Ang lib 5 cap. 21. Beda or. lib. 2. cap. 3. some haue said; and himself at Rochester, built the Ca∣thedral Church there, which he dedicated to the Apo∣stle S. Andrew. (14) This noble King hauing a care for them that should come after, brought the Lawes of his Country into their owne mother tongue, and left no∣thing VVil. Malmes. Wil. Thorne. Register Cant. vnattempted, that might aduance the glorious Gospell of Christ, or with honour adorne his owne tem∣porall raigne; and is worthily an example to all suc∣ceeding Princes, in all true pietie, and heroicall parts of a true Christian King. He died the foure and twen∣tieth Beda hist. lib. 2. cap. 5. Ethelbert, how long he raigned. day of Februarie, in the yeere of our Lord God six hundred and sixteene, being the one and twenti∣eth of his Christianitie, the three and twentieth of his Monarchie, and the fifty sixth of his Kingdome of Kent, and was buried at Canterbury in the Church of S. Peter and Paul, afterwards called S. Augustines, in the Chapell of S. Martines. (15) His first wife was Berta, the daughter of Chil∣perik King of France, as we haue said, who was the son of King Clotayre, the sonne of Clodoue, the first Chri∣stian King of that Country. Shee deceased before the King her husband, and was buried in the Church of S. Peter & Paul at Canterburie, within the Chapell of S. Martines there. (16) He had a second wife, whose name is not re∣corded by any Writer, being, as is thought, vnwor∣thy of remembrance, because of the vnnaturall con∣tract and mariage of Edbald her husbands sonne; a sinne that both Law and Religion doe condemne: and lastly by her conuerted husband was forsaken, without either note of her issue or death. (17) The issue of King Ethelbert by Queene Berta were Edbald that succeeded him in the Kentish King∣dome, Ethelburg, and Edburge two daughters. (18) Ethelburg, the elder, was a Lady of passing beautie and pietie, and surnamed Tace, who greatly desired and intended a Virgins life, had not her mind beene auerted by the intreaty of her brother, the per∣swasions of Bishop Paulinus, and the earnest suit of Edwine King of Northumberland; vnto which Edwine lastly she yeelded to bee his wife, in hope of his con∣uersion, and vnto whom for that purpose Pope Boni∣face directed his Epistle from Rome, earnestly ex∣horting Beda hist. lib. 2. cap. 11. her that shee should bee diligent for the Kings saluation: which shee soone after effected, to the great ioy of both the Kings, and to the comfort and increase of the Christian Faith thorowout Eng∣land. (19) Edburg, another daughter of King Ethelbert, is warranted only by the testimonie of Iohn Capgraue, Capgraue. a great traueller in Antiquities, and should bee most skilful in his own Country of Kent: notwithstanding he is to be suspected in this, that hee reporteth her to haue beene a Nunne in the Monasterie of Minster in the Ile of Thanet, vnder the Foundresse Domnewe, be∣ing the daughter of her nephew Ermenred, and that shee succeeded in the gouernment of that house, Mil∣dred the daughter of the same Domnewe. Hee repor∣teth also, that shee died and was buried in the same place, and that her body was from thence remooued by the Arch-bishop Lankfrank, to his Church of S. Gregorie in Canterburie. REDVVALD THE THIRD KING OF Monarch 7. Redwald. THE EAST-ANGLES, AND SEVENTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS WIFE AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XIX. R Edwald, the sonne of Titu∣lus, and the third King of An. D. 616. the East-Angles, had been a substitute vnder Ethel∣bert King of Kent, and ser∣ued a long time as his Vice-roy ouer all his do∣minions, whereby he gai∣ned such reputation to himselfe, that either for his owne valour, or Edbalds vices, (contemned of the people for his Apostasie, frensie, and incestuous bed) became the seuenth Monarch of the Englishmen, a∣bout the yeere of Christ his Incarnation six hundred and sixteene; and the twentieth and fourth of his raigne ouer the East-Angles. (2) This Redwald (saith Beda) had receiued Bap∣tisme in Kent, but in vaine, and without zeale, as it af∣terwards Beda hist. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 5. appeared. For returning to his Country, through the perswasion of his wife, returned againe to his superstitious worships; and in one and the same Temple, after the manner of the old Samaritans, hee erected an Altar for the seruice of Christ, and ano∣ther little Altar for burnt sacrifices to his Idols, which stood vnto the daies of Beda himselfe. But as she was an instigator to the East-Saxons idolatry, so was shee an instrument to the further spreading of Christia∣nitie (though not by her so purposely meant) in sa∣uing the life of Edwine, who afterwards planted the Gospell in all the North parts of the Saxons gouern∣ment. (3) For Edwine flying the rage of wilde Ethelfrid, was succoured and maintained in the Court of King Redwald, vnto whom lastly, the Northumbrian sent both threats and rewards to haue him deliuered, or else put to death: and surely had not the Queene stood for his life, he had presently died. But she allea∣ging the law of humanitie, the trust of a friend, and the royaltie of a Prince, preuailed so farre, that Red∣wald did not onely saue his life, but assi ted him in battell, to the destruction of his enemie, and the gai∣ning of Northumberlands Crowne. For vpon the re∣turn of Ethelfrids Ambassadors, vnto whom Redwald Beda hist. Ang. lib. 2. cap. 12. had yeelded to make Edwine away, he with his power of the East-Angles were at their backes, and as an ene∣mie made towards Northumberland. (4) Ethelfrid, whose rage and reuenge was ready e∣nough vpon lesser occasions, with such sudden prepa∣ration as he was able to make, met the East-Angles Henry Hunting. almost at Nottingham, and that not farre from the Ri∣uer Idle, where boldly encountring his vnequall ene∣mie, at the first brunt slew Reynhere the sonne of King Redwald, to the great griefe of him and his whole host: whose reuenge was so violently sought, that they slew King Ethelfrid in the field, and established Edwine to be his successor; which was the second yeere of Red∣walds Redwald, his raigne. Monarchy. (5) Wherein he raigned the space of eight yeeres, and was King of the East-Angles thirty one, and de∣ceased in the yeere of our Lord six hundred twentie foure; the eighth of Edbalds King of Kent; the thir∣teenth of Kingils King of the West-Saxons, and the eighth of Edwins ouer the Northumbrians. (6) The Queene and wife of this King is not na∣med by any of our Writers, but that she had been the widow of a Nobleman, descended of the bloud-roy∣all of that Nation, and was a Lady that had deserued great commendations for the many vertues by her possessed, had she been a Christian, or a fauorer of the Christians, or had not been an vtter enemy to their faith. Notwithstanding by her first husband she had a sonne named Sigebert, that proued a learned and most religious Prince, of whom we haue spoken in Chap∣ter eleuenth. (7) His issue were Reynhere and Erpenwald. Reyn∣here the elder, and Prince of the East-Angles, was slaine as you haue heard, in the battell that his father fought against wilde Ethelfrid, neere vnto the Riuer Idle in Nottingham-shire. (8) Erpenwald the younger succeeded his father Redwald in the Kingdome of the East-Angles, and was the fourth King of that Nation, whose life and raigne we haue declared in the succession of the East-Angles Kings: Chapter II. EDVVINE THE GREAT KING OF Monarch. 8. Edwine.] NORTHVMBERLAND, AND THE EIGHTH SOLE MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS RAIGNE, WIVES, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XX. T He Monarch reuerted from the East-Angles, was An. Do. 617. next possessed by the Nor∣thumbrians, wherein it was held with greater glorie and for longer time. For Edwine in King Redwalds life growne very potent, after his death became his successor in the English Monarch, and most worthily did adorne the same by his ciuill iustice and diuine pietie: his exile, visions, and obtaining of the Northumbrians Crowne, we haue already spoken of, and therefore without repetition will passe on to his end. (2) This Edwine, the sonne of great Ella, the first King of the Deirians, was the third King that posses∣sed the same, the eighth of Bernicia, the second (and first Christian) King of all Northumberland, at the age An. Do. 624. of twenty three, and in the yeere of Christ six hun∣dred twenty foure, succeeded Redwald in the Monar∣chy, and was the greatest King of all the Saxons. For (as Beda saith) hee subdued all the coasts of Britannie Beda hist Angl. lib. 2. cap. 9. wheresoeuer any Prouinces were inhabited, either of English or of Saxons, which thing no King of the Eng∣lish before him had done; and added the * Meuian Iles Hebrides. vnto his owne Dominions. The first of them, and next the South, was large and fertile, gaue roome for nine hundred and sixty of his English Families, and the second, ground for aboue three hundred Tene∣ments. (3) His first wife dead, he became suiter for Lady Ethelburg, daughter to Ethelbert King of Kent, decea∣sed, and sister to King Eadbald then raigning: whose Ambassadours were answered, that it was not lawfull for a Christian Virgin to bee espoused to a Pagan, lest the faith and sacraments of the heauenly King should bee prophaned, by the matching with that earthly King, which knew not to worship God aright. But Edwine hearing of the Virgins beautie, integrity, and Ethelburs good parts. pietie, was so farre ouergone and rauished therewith, that hee condescended, shee should with her place re∣tain her owne Christian Profession, and enioy the Chri∣stian societie both of her men, women, Priests, and seruants, to bee her attendants in his Court. These couenants thus confirmed, the Lady accompanied with Paulinus the reuerend Bishop, and an honoura∣ble retinue, all of them Christian, came to King Ed∣wins Court, and with great ioy shee was espoused his Queene. (4) The greatnesse and prosperitie of this Nor∣thumbrian King, was both feared by them a farre, that raigned in no such power, and beheld by his neerer, with an enuious eie: among whom, Quinchelme that raigned with his father king ouer the West-Saxons, sent a desperate Ruffin, whose name was Eumerus, to mur∣der Edwin the next yeere of his mariage; who repai∣ring to his Court, then resident neere the riuer Der∣uent, at the place that is now called Aldeby in Yorkshire, A conspiracie. with a double-edged short sword, the point thereof poisoned, and girt vnder his garment, vpon Easter day entred his Palace, as an Ambassadour, and with craf∣tie speech reteined the Kings attention, where get∣ting occasion, and stepping forward, drew his sword, which one Lilla the Kings seruant saw, and wanting wherewith to defend his person, put himselfe betwixt the King and the sword: and thorow his bodie so slaine, the same was so farre runne, that it dangerously wounded the King with his point, and with the same sword, before he could be beaten down by the Guard, slew another seruant, whose name was Fordhere. (5) It happened the same night, being holy Easter Beda hist. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 9. Sunday, that Queene Ethelburg was brought to bed of a daughter: for ioy whereof, and her safe deliue∣rance, the King gaue thankes to his Idols; which Bi∣shop Paulinus, then in presence, greatly reproued, and bade Edwin to giue thankes vnto God, from whom only all goodnesse came; and spake vnto him of our new birth in Christ: at which conference the King much reioiced, and promised that hee would euer af∣ter renounce all his Idols, and worship that Christ whom he preached, if that God would grant him his Bishop Paulinus. life, and giue him victorie against that King, who had sent this Manqueller to murder him; in pledge wher∣of, he assigned Paulinus to baptise his daughter, the which vpon Whitsunday following was performed in her, by the name of Eanfled, and shee the first of the Northumbrians which receiued that Sacrament. At which time also, Edwin being recouered of his wound so lately receiued, made an Armie, and marched forth against the West-Saxons, and in battle either slew or tooke prisoners al them that had conspired his death, and as a victorious Conquerour, returned to his Country. (6) Where continuing in honour, and his affaires prospering to his owne desires, hee was yet in minde distracted, and his thoughts continually perplexed, what God he should worship. The sanctitie of the Christians mooued him much, and the ancient cu∣stomes of his Ancestours sate neere his heart, betwixt whom there seemed a combat in himselfe. And in these dumps sitting one day alone, it chanced Bishop Paulinus to haue accesse to his presence, where laying Beda hist. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 12. his right hand vpon the kings head, demanded of him whether hee remembred that signe: whereat Edwine suddenly fell at the Bishops feete, whom hee in haste and reuerence presently lifted vp, and spake vnto him as followeth. Behold O Soueraigne (said he) by the bountifull band and power of our God, you haue escaped the hand and vengeance of your most hated and dreadfull enemie. Behold also, by his most gracious goodnes you haue obtained the soueraign∣tie of raigne and rule of the Kingdome. Remember now therefore the third thing which you promised him, and de∣ferre no longer to accomplish the same by receiuing his faith Edwine put in minde of co∣uenants. and keeping his Commandements, who hath deliuered you from your temporall aduersities, and exalted you to the ho∣nour and Maiestie of a King; whose holy will if you hereaf∣ter obey, and doe his precept which by mee is preached, hee will also deliuer you from the perpetuall torment of Hell, and make you partaker with him in his heauenly Kingdome and eternall blisse without end. (7) Whereupon conferring with his Counsell, whereof Bishop Coyfi was chiefe, for the establishing of the Gospell, and suppressing of Idolatrie, it was then concluded, that the true God should bee wor∣shipped, and the Altars of their wonted Idols ouer∣throwne: vnto which action, Coyfi himselfe became the first man; for mounted on horsebacke in armour, Idolatrie abo∣lished. with a girt sword and launce in his hand (all which was vnlawfull for those Idoll-Priests) he brake downe their Altars, Grates, and Barres, and destroied their Temples wheresoeuer he came. Some ruines there∣of not farre from Yorke, and neere vnto the rising of the riuer Derwent, remained to be seen vnto the daies of Beda, and were then called Gotmund in Gaham. And king Edwine himselfe, with all his Nobilitie, and most Beda hist. Angl. cap. 13. of the Commons, receiued the lauer of Baptisme, the eleuenth yeere of his raigne, and of Christs Incarna∣tion six hundred twenty and seuen, one hundred and eighty yeeres after the Saxons entrance into Britaine. The king was baptized the twelfth of Aprill, being Easter Sunday, at the Citie Yorke, in the Church of S. Peters, built then of wood, and was the kings Ora∣torie, which he enclosed about with a deepe founda∣tion; and laying the walles with squared stones, made it the Cathedrall Church, and his Conuerter Paulinus Arch-bishop of that See. (8) The Gospell thus established in these Nor∣therne parts, spread daily further into other Prouin∣ces, and with such fruit of peace, that in the raigne of this Edwin, and thorowout his Dominions, a weake woman with her new-borne babe might haue passed Beda hist. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 16. without dammage or danger ouer all the Iland, euen from Sea to Sea. And so much did the King tender his Subiects, that his prouident care was extended to the way-faring passengers, for whose vse he enclosed cleere Springs by the waies, where he set great Basens of brasse, both to wash and to bathe in; which either for loue or displeasure of the king, no man defaced, or tooke away. And so great was the magnificence of this Monarch, that (according to Bede) he had not only in Battle the Ensignes proper to battle borne before him, but in his ordinarie passages thorow the Cities and Towns of his kingdome, there alwaies went an Ensigne-bea∣rer before him. And (to vse the words of the same venerable Author) he went not in any street, in which there was not borne before him that kinde of Stan∣dard which the Romans called Tufa, and the English Tufa the Romans Ensigne. Thuuf. That the Romans had such an Ensigne, as that which here is called Tufa, Iustus Lipsius in his Com∣mentarie Iustus Lipsius. vpon that place in Vegetius (lib. 3. cap. 5.) where the seuerall Ensignes of the Romans are recited, doth declare, correcting that place of Vegetius (where Rufa was set for Tufa) by this place of Bede, and in the same shewing, that Tufa signified a Ball, as the Ball (by the example of Augustus) was an Ensigne of Monar∣chie, or absolute gouernment. (9) But as the Sunne hath his rising, his height and descent, and euer is moouing in the circle of his celestiall orbe; so man hath his birth time, being, and death, and till then is neuer staied in one certaine point. Kings therefore, as they be Kings, are the Suns of their owne world, but as they are men, goe to the shadow of death: neither can the strength of their power, wisdome, or policie, loue or applause, stay the hand heere that holds the fatall knife; for so in this King Edwin wee see, raised aboue hope to attaine the Diademe, and ruling in loue and liking of the people, was notwithstanding cut off in the midst of his glorie and greatnesse of strength. (10) For Penda the stout Mercian enuying his peace, and Cadwallo the Britaine seeking to receiue his right, ioined in friendship against this Monarch, and met him as his enemies in the face of a Field. The plaine was large, and called Hethfeild, where after a long and most bloudie fight, king Edwin was slaine, with prince Offryd his sonne, his whole Host put to the sword, or most shamefull flight: which chanced the fourth of October, the yeere of our Lord six hun∣dred thirty three, the sixth of his Christianitie, the se∣uenth of his Monarchie, the seuenteenth of his king∣dome, and the forty seuenth of his age. His bodie was lastly buried in S. Peters Church at Strea shall, after called Whitby. His Wiues. (11) Quenburg his first wife, was the daughter (as Beda reporteth) of Ceorle; but as all other Writers doe witnesse, of Crida King of Mercia. She was married vnto him in the beginning of his youth, (and when he was dispossessed of his inheritance by the Tyrant E∣theifrid, as we haue said) with him shee liued a great part of his banishment, and in the Court of Redwald King of the East-Angles deceased, before her husband could recouer his Kingdome. (12) Ethelburg, surnamed I ce. Tate, was the second wife of this King, who was the daughter of Ethelbert King of Kent, and of Queene Berta his first wife. She was married vnto him in the yeere of grace six hun∣dred twentie fiue, being the second of his Monarchy, and was his wife six yeeres: but suruiuing him, and desirous to liue a religious life, shee returning into Kent, withdrew her selfe to a place not far from the Sea side, called Lymming, wherein shee built a Mona∣sterie of Nunnes, and among them spent the rest of her life, and therein died, and was there buried. His Issue. (13) Offride, the eldest sonne of King Edwine, and Quenberg his first wife, was borne in the time of his fathers exile among the East-Angles. He was baptized in the faith of Christ by Paulinus the first Archbishop of Yorke, and was slaine the same day, and in the same battell that his father was. He had a sonne named Iffy, who was baptized also by Bishop Paulins; and after the death of his father and grand-father, for feare of King Oswald, was conueied ouer the Seas into France, to bee brought vp in the Court of King Dagobert, where he died in his childhood, and was there honou∣rably interred. (14) Edfrid, the second sonne of King Edwine and Lady Quenberg his first wife, was borne in the time of his fathers exile, and baptized with his brother Of∣frid by Bishop Paulinus. After his fathers death, for feare of King Oswald, hee fled to Penda King of Mer∣cia, who was his fathers enemie, and his mothers kins∣man; by whom hee was most treacherously murthe∣red. He left behind him a son named Hererik, who by his wife Bertswith had issue the vertuous & learned la∣dy Hilda, Abbesse of Streansbalch: & Queen Hereswith her sister, the wife of Ethelbere King of the East-Angles brother to King An a, by whom shee had issue Ald wolfe, Elswold, and Beorne, all three succeeding Kings of the East-Angles. (15) Ethelme, the third sonne of King Edwine, and the first of Queen Ethelburg his second wife, was bap∣tized by Paulinus Arch-bishop of Yorke, not long after his father and halfe-brethren; but in short space after his baptisme, he departed out of this world, euen in the time that he wore the white attire, which in those daies was vsed to bee worne by such as were newly baptized for a certaine space. His body was with all due funerall obsequies enterred within the new Church of S. Peter in the Citie of Yorke, which his fa∣ther had newly founded. (16) Vskfrea, the fourth sonne of King Edwine, and the second of Queene Ethelburg his second wife, and the last and youngest of them both, bare the name of his fathers great grandfather. He was baptized by the Arch-bishop Paulinus at one time with his brother Ethelme. After the decease of his father, his mother carried him with her out of Northumberland into Kent; and from thence conueied him ouer into France with his Nephew Iffy, the sonne of his halfe-brother Offrid, where hee continued in the custodie of King Dagobert, being his mothers cosen-german, and there died, and was honourably buried in a Church with his Nephew Iffy. (17) Eanfled, the elder daughter of King Edwine and Queene Ethelberg his second wife, was borne the Beda hist. Ang. lib. 3. cap. 15. night following that her father was wounded and baptized, hee being a Pagan. Shee was afterwards married to Oswy, the fourth King of Northumberland, and tenth Monarch of the Englishmen, as shall bee said (18) Etheldrid the younger daughter, the fifth and last-borne child to King Edwine and of Queene Ethelburge, was baptized at the same time with Ethelwe and Vskfrea her brethren. She died an infant, the white clothing not yet put off, which in those daies was vsu∣ally worne at certaine set times after their baptisme, and was with like funerall obsequies buried by her brother Ethelwe in the Church of S. Peters in Yorke, which their father had founded. OSVVALD KING OF NORTHVM∣BERLAND, Monarch 9. AND THE NINTH MO∣NARCH Oswald. OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS RAIGNE, WIFE, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XXI. O Swald, the fifth King of Deira, the ninth of Berni∣cia, An. Do. 634. the third of Northum∣berland, and the ninth Mo∣narch of the Englishmen, began his raigne the yeere of Christs incarnation six hundred thirty foure. He with Eanfrith and his bre∣thren, the sonnes of wilde Ethelfrid, and Osrik also the sonne of Alfrid King Ed∣wins Vncle had been secured in Scotland all his raigne, and among the Red-shanks liued as banished men, where they learned the true religion of Christ, and had receiued the Lauer of Baptisme. But Edwines death wrought and divulged, these Princes returne again to their Country, and the Northumbrians King∣dome lately gouerned by one, was now againe diui∣ded into two seuerall parts, as formerly it had been. (2) Ouer the Deirans, Osrik was made king, and of Bernicia, Eanfrid assumed the raigne; but Gods iustice ouer taking their Apostasie, neither their liues nor this diuision lasted long. For Cadwall the Christian, and Penda the Pagan were Gods instruments, that with worthy vengeance in the first yeere of their go∣uernment, cut the one off in battell, and the other Beda hist. Ang. lib. 3. cap. 1. by trechery; whose names and yeere of raigne as vn∣happy and of hatefull remembrance, the Historio∣graphers of those times would haue to be omitted. (3) But religious Oswald lamenting the effusion of his Countries bloud, long slept not, their reuenge. For assembling his power, which was not great, hee suddenly and vnlooked for came vpon Cadw , and at Deniseburne pitched downe his tents. The place (saith Beda) stood neere the wall that Seuerus had made, where Oswald for the first day forbare to fight, and among his Souldiers for his Standerd set vp a Crosse of wood; wherunto it seemeth those dawning daies of Christianity were ouermuch addicted. Here Oswald making first intercession to God, the onely preseruer of his people, in sore & long fight obtained great victory, with the slaughter of Cadwallo, and of all his British Army: which so accomplished, many haue attributed the vertue of that Crosse to bee no small cause of that great ouerthrow. This Crosse so set vp, was the first we read of to haue been erected in England, and the first Altar vnto Christ among the Bernicians, whose pretended miraculous cures, not onely in the wood it selfe, but in the mosse and in the earth wherein it was set, let Beda report them, and Stapleton vrge them, yet for my part, I hold them no Article of our canonicall Creed. (4) But certaine it is, that Oswald himselfe was a most religious and godly king, and tooke such care for the conuersion and saluation of his subiects, that he sent into Scotland for Aidan a Christian Bishop, to instruct his Northumbrians in the Gospell of truth. And whereas the Bishops could not speake their lan∣guage, Beda hist. Ang. lib. 3. cap. 3. the king himselfe was interpreter at his Ser∣mons, and gaue his words in the English, as hee spake and pronounced them in the Scotish, which language Oswald perfectly spake, hauing beene there the space of eighteene yeeres. Ho . Boetius. Thus the godly proceedings of the king and Bi∣shop, produced such increase of their heauenly seed, that it is reported in seuen daies space, fifteene thou∣sand Christians receiued Baptisme; and many of the forsaking the pleasures of the world, to haue be∣take themselues to a religious and solitarie life. (5) At this time the whole Iland flourished both with peace and plentie, and acknowledged their sub∣iection Beda hist. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 6. vnto king Oswald. For, as Beda reporteth, all the Nations of Britannie which spake foure languages, that is to say, Britaines, Redshanks, Scots, and Englishmen, Became subiect vnto him. And yet being aduanced to so roy∣all Maiestie, he was notwithstanding (which is maruell to be reported) lowly to all, gracious to the poore, and beau∣tifull to strangers. The fruits whereof the same Author exemplifieth in his bounty and humilitie towards the poore; who vpon a solemne feast day, seeing many such at his gates, sent them both the delicates for him∣selfe prepared, & commanded the charger of siluer to be broken, and diuided among them. The Bishop much reioycing thereat, tooke the king by the right hand, and praied that it might neuer consume; as after his death it did not, but was shrined in siluer, and in S. Peters Church at Bebba, now Bambrough, with worthy honor was worshipped for the many miracles in cures that it did, as likewise the earth wherein his bloud was spilt: with such lauish enlargements haue those writers interlined the deeds of Gods Saints. (6) But as the Sunne hath his shadow, and the highest tide her ebbe, so Oswald, how holy soeuer, or gouernment how good, had emulators that sought his life, and his Countries ruine: for wicked Penda the Pagan Mercian, enuying the greatnesse that king Oswald bare, raised warres against him, and at a place then called Maserfeild in Shrop-shire, in a bloudie and sore fought battle slew him; and not therewith satis∣fied, in barbarous and brutish immanitie, did teare him in peeces, the first day of August, and yeere of Christ Iesus six hundred forty two, being the ninth Beda hister. lib. 3. cap. 9. of his raigne, and the thirty eighth of his age: where∣upon the said place of his death is called to this day Oswaldstree, a faire Market Towne in the same Countie. (7) The dismembred limmes of his body were first buried in the Monastery of Bradney in Lincolnshire, shrined with his standard of Gold and Purple erected ouer his Tombe, at the industry and cost of his neece Offryd, Queene of Mercia, wife vnto king Ethelred, and daughter to Oswyn that succeeded him. From hence his bones were afterwards remooued to Glocester, and there in the north side of the vpper end of the Quire in the Cathedrall Church, continueth a faire Monu∣ment of him, with a Chapell set betwixt two pillers in the same Church. His Wife. (8) Kineburg, a most vertuous Lady, and daugh∣ter to Kingils the sixth, and first Christian king of the West-Saxons, was the wife of king Oswald, who be∣came both his father and sonne in the day of her ma∣riage, by receiuing him at the Font, and her of his gift. She was maried vnto him in the second yeere of his raign, which was the yeere of Christs Incarnation six hundred thirty six: no other relation made of her besides the birth of his sonne. His Issue. (9) Ethelwald, the only childe of king Oswald and Queene Kineburg his wife, was borne in the yeere of our Lord six hundred thirty seuen, being the third yeere of his fathers raigne; and but an infant at his fathers death, was disappointed of the Northumbrian Kingdome by the fraud of his vncle Oswyn. Notwith∣standing at the death of Oswin king of Deira, and then not aboue sixteene yeeres of age, hee tooke the same kingdome, and by strong hand held it against his vn∣cle so long as he liued, and at his death left it to his co∣sen Alkefryd, the naturall sonne of king Osuyne, as in the ninth Chapter we haue said. OSVVY KING OF NORTHVM∣BERLAND, Monarch. 10. AND THE TENTH MO∣NARCH Oswy. OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS ACTS, WIFE, AND CHILDREN. CHAPTER XXII. O Swye, the illegitimate sonne of King Ethelfrid, An. Do. 643. surnamed the Wilde, at thirty yeeres of age suc∣ceeded Oswald his halfe brother in his Domini∣ons, being the fourth King of Northumber∣land, and the tenth Mo∣narch Beda hist. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 24. of the Englishmen, entring his gouernment the thirteenth day of October, and yeere of Christs Incarnation six hundred forty three. His first begin∣nings were much disquieted by Penda the Heathen Mercian, by the rebellions of his base sonne Alkfrid, and by the oppositions of Ethelwold the son of King Oswald: but none sate more neere his heart then Oswyn Oswyes enuie. king of the Deirians did, whose vertuous gouernment did much darken (as hee tooke it) his owne, and the free loue of those subiects, daily to lessen his among the Bernicians. (2) This Oswyn of Deira was the sonne of Osrike Oswyn King of the Deirians. (who did apostate from his faith) and ruling his Pro∣uince in plentie and peace the space of seuen yeeres, Oswyn King of the D tans. was therefore greatly enuied by Oswy of Bernicia, and lastly by him prouoked into the field. Their hosts met at the place then called Wilfares Downe, ten miles West from the village Cataracton, and there attended Cataracton. Village. to hazard the day. But Oswyn finding himselfe too weake for Oswy, and to saue the effusion of Christi∣an bloud, forsooke the field, accompanied onely with one Souldier, and went to Earle Hunwald his friend as he thought, to secure his life. But contrary to trust, hee deliuered him vnto King Oswy, who Oswyn betraied into the hands of Oswy. cruelly slew him the twentieth of August, and ninth of his raigne, at the place called Ingethling; where af∣terwards for satisfaction of so hainous an offence, a Monasterie was built, as vpon like occasions, many the like foundations were laid; whose stones were thus ioyned with the morter of bloud. (3) Of this Oswine thus slaine, Beda reporteth the Bedas his report of Oswyns vertue. Story following: Among his other rare vertues and princely qualities, his humility (saith he) and passing low∣linesse excelled: whereof he thus exemplifieth: The re∣uerend Christian Bishop Aidan vsing much trauell to preach the Gospell thorowout that Prouince, the King for his more ease, gaue him a goodly Gelding with rich and costly trap∣ping. His gift to the Bishop Aidan. It chanced one day, as the Bishop rode to minister the word of life, that a poore man demanded his almes: but hee not hauing wherewith to releeue him, and pitying his di∣stressed poore estate, presently alighted, and gaue vnto him The Bishops Almes to a poore man. his horse and rich furniture; whereof when the King heard, he blamed him, and said, What meant you (my Lord) to giue to the begger the horse that I gaueyou, with my saddle and trappings? Had we horses of no lower price to giue away to the poore? To whom the Bishop replied, And is the brood of a beast dearer in your sight, then this poore man the childe of God? The King reprooued, turned himselfe towards the fire, and there dly pausing vpon this answer, presently gaue from him his sword, and in haste fell at the Bishops King Oswins re∣pentance. feet, desiring forgiuenesse in that he had said. The Bishop much astonied, suddenly lift vp the King, desiring him to sit to meat, and to be mery; which the King immediately did, but the Bishop contrariwise began to bee pensiue and sadde, and the teares to trickle downe his cheekes: in which passion hee burst out into these speeches, and said to his Chaplaine in an vnknowne tongue, I neuer till this time haue seene an Bishop' Aidans testimonie of King Oswyns pie e. humble King; and surely his life cannot bee long, for this people are not worthy to haue such a Prince to gouern them. But to returne to King Oswy. (4) Who after many cruell inuasions of the mer∣cilesse Penda, was forced to sue vnto him for peace, Beda hist. Ang. lib. 3. cap. 24. with proffers of infinite treasure and most precious iewels: all which reiected, and the Tyrant comming on, Oswy sought his helpe by supplication to God, and with such zeale as then was embraced, vowed his young daughter Elfled to be consecrated in perpetuall virginitie vnto him, with twelue Farmers and their Elfled the daugh∣ter of King Oswy. lands, to the erection and maintenance of a Monaste∣rie: and thereupon prepared himselfe for battle. (5) The Armie of this enemie is reported to re∣double thirty times his, all well appointed and old tri∣ed souldiers: against whom Oswy with his sonne Alk∣fryd boldly marched, Egfryd his other sonne then be∣ing Alkfrid. an hostage with Cinwise an vnder Queene of the Mercians: Ethelwald the sonne of Oswald, tooke part with Penda, against his naturall Vncle and natiue Ethelwald. Country: so did Ethelherd the brother of Christian Anna, side with this heathenish and cruell Mercian. (6) The battle was fought neere to the riuer Iunet, which at that time did ouer-flow his bankes, so that Iunet Riuer. the victorie falling with Oswy, more were drowned in the water then slaine with the sword. And heerein proud Penda lost his life, with the discomfiture of all his Mercian power. Heerein also died Ethelherd, the Penda slaine. East-Angles King, who was the only motiue to these warres: and Ethelwald escaping, returned with disho∣nour vnto Deira. The day was thus gotten the thir∣teenth Ethelwald his escape. yeere of King Oswy his raigne, the fifteenth day of Nouember, and yeere of Christ his Incarna∣tion six hundred fifty fiue. (7) After this victorie, king Oswy raigned in great glory the space of three yeeres, subduing the Merci∣ans, the south parts of the English, and made the nor∣therne parts likewise subiect vnto him. He it was that decided the long controuersy for Easters celebration, and founded the Cathedrall Church in Lichfeild for a Bishops See: which Citie, with all South-Mercia, di∣uided Liber Lichfeild. Tho. Rudburne. from the north by the riuer Trent, hee gaue to Peada the sonne of king Penda, in mariage with his na∣turall Oswy his gift to Penda. daughter Alkfled, on condition that he should become a Christian: all which the said king not long enioied, but was murdered in his owne Court. And the Mercians erecting Vulfhere his brother and their natiue country-man for king, rebelled against Oswy, and freed themselues from a forraine subiection. (8) Thus Oswy ending in troubles as he began in warres, raigned the space of twenty eight yeeres, and Beda hist. Angl. lib. 4. cap. 5. The time of King Oswy raigne. then falling sicke, was so strucke with remorse for the death of good Oswyn, and bloud which hee had spilt, that hee vowed a pilgrimage to Rome, in which repu∣ted holy place hee purposed to haue ended his life, and to haue left his bones therein to rest: but his dis∣ease increasing, and that purpose failing, he left this life the fifteenth of Februarie, and his body to re∣maine in S. Peters Church at Streanshach, the yeere af∣ter Christs birth six hundred seuentie, and of his own age fifty eight. His Wife. (9) Eanfled; the wife of this king, was the daughter Eanfled. of Edwin and Ethelburg, king & Queene of Northum∣berland. She was the first Christian that was baptized in that Prouince, and after her fathers death, was brought vp in Kent vnder her mother, and thence maried vnto this Oswy, whom she suruiued, and spent the whole time of her widow-hood in the Monastery of Steanshalch, where her daughter Elfred was Abbesse, Steanshalch Mo∣nasterie. wherein she deceased and was interred in the Church of S. Peter, hard by her husband king Edwin. His Issue. (10) Egfryd, the eldest sonne of king Oswy and of Egfryd the eldest sonne. Queene Eanfled, was borne in the third yeere of his fathers raigne, being the yeere of grace six hundred forty fiue. In the twenty fifth yeere of his age, and of our Lord God six hundred seuenty one, he succee∣ded his father in Northumberland, but not in his Mo∣narchie: of whose life and acts, wee haue further spo∣ken in the seuenth Chapter of this Booke. (11) Elswine, the second sonne of king Oswy, and Elswyne the se∣cond sonne. of Queene Eanfled, was borne in the yeere of our Lord six hundred sixty one, being the ninth of his fa∣thers raigne; at whose death he was nine yeeres old: Beda hist. Angl. lib. 4. cap. 21. and in the ninth yeere after, being the eighteenth of his age, was vnfortunately slaine in a battell, wherein he serued his brother Egfrid, against Ethelred king of the Mercians, to the great griefe of them both, the yeere of Christs natiuity six hundred seuentie nine. (12) Elfled, the eldest daughter of king Oswy and queene Eanfled, was borne in the month of September, Elfled his eldest daughter. the yeere of grace six hundred fiftie foure, being the twelfth of her fathers raigne; and when she was a yeer old, by him committed to the custodie & bringing vp of the renowned Lady Hilda, Abbesse of Strean∣shall, wherein she liued vnder her a Nun, and after her Hilda Abbesse of Streanshall. death did succeed her Abbesse of the place, and in great holinesse and vertue, spent therein her life, vnto the day of her death, which was the yeere of Christ Iesus seuen hundred fourteene, and of her owne age sixtie, being interred in S. Peters Church within the same Monasterie. (13) Offrid, the younger daughter of king Oswy and queene Eanfled, was borne about the fifteenth Offryd the youn∣ger daughter. yeere of her fathers raigne, which was the yeere of our Lord six hundred sixtie seuen: and when she was fully twenty, was married vnto Ethelred king of Mer∣cia, the twelfth Monarch of the Englishmen, in the third yeere of his raigne, and of Christ six hundred seuenty seuen. (14) Alkfrid, the naturall sonne of king Oswy, did first succeed his cosen Ethelwald, sonne of king Oswald Alkfryd a ∣rall sonne. his Vncle in part of Northumberland, and held the same by force against his Father, which afterwards he peaceably inioyed both with him and his halfe bro∣ther King Egfrid, whom lastly hee succeeded in the whole kingdome of Northumberland, as more at large Chap. 7. sect. 1 . in the same story we haue declared. (15) Al fled, the naturall daughter of king Oswy, borne before her father was king, in the yeere of Al fled a natural daughter. Christs incarnation six hundred fiftie three, and the eleuenth of her fathers raigne, was married to Pe d: the sonne of Penda, that by his permission had gouer∣ned some part of Mercia, and by Oswy his gift with this Alfled, all the South of that Prouince. She was his wife three yeers, and is of most writers taxed to be the actor of his death, being wickedly murthered in the feast of Easter, the yeere of grace six hundred fiftie sixe, and the fourteenth of her Fathers raigne. VVLFHERE THE SIXTH KING OF Monarch II. Vulfhere. THE MERCIANS, AND THE ELE∣VENTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISH∣MEN, HIS RAIGNE, ACTS, WIFE, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XXIII. V Vulfhere, after the murther An. Do. 659. of his brother Peada, ad∣uanced against Oswy by the Nobles of Mercia, main∣tained his title and king∣dome for twelue yeeres continuance, in the life time of that Northumbrian Monarch, and after his death translated the Mo∣narchy from those Kings, and Country, vnto himself Beda hist. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 4. and his successors the Mercians, who now wore the Imperiall Diademe without reuersement, vntill such time as great Egbert set it vpon the West-Saxons head. He was the second sonne of Penda King of Mercia, and the sixth in succession of that kingdome, begin∣ning Vulfheres pa∣rentage. his raigne the yeere of Christ his Incarnation, six hundred fiftie nine, and twelue yeeres after, Anno six hundred seuenty one, entred his Monarchy ouer the Englishmen, and was in number accounted the ele∣uenth Monarch of the Land. (2) His entrance was with trouble against the Northumbrians; for vnto Egfrid their King he had lost the possession of the Iland Linsey, and was expelled Linsey Iland lost to the Northum∣brians. the Country: yet three yeeres after he fought against the West-Saxons with better successe, whose Country with conquest he passed thorow, and wan from Red∣wald their King the Ile of Wight? which Iland he gaue Beda hist. Angl. lib. . cap. 12. to Edilwach the South-Saxons King, whom he receiued his God-sonne at the font-stone: notwithstanding himselfe had lately been a prophane Idolater, and most cruell Heathen, as by the Liger booke of the Monastery of Peterborow appeareth, whose story is Lib. peter . this: (3) King Vulfhere of Mercia remaining at his Castell in Vlferchester in Stafford-shire, and vnderstan∣ding Vulferchester Castell. that Vulfald and Rufin his two sonnes, vnder pre∣tence and colour of hunting, vsually resorted to reue∣rend Chad, to bee instructed in the fruitfull faith of Christ Iesus, and had at his hands receiued the Sacra∣ment of Baptisme, at the perswasion of one Werebod, suddenly followed, and finding them in the Oratory of that holy man, in deuout contemplations, slew Vulfhere slaieth his two sonnes. them there with his owne hands. Whose martyred bodies Queene Ermenehild their mother caused to be buried in a Sepulchre of stone, and thereupon a faire Church to be erected, which by reason of the many stones thither brought for that foundation, was euer Iohn capgran . after called Stones, and now is a Market Towne in the same County. But King Vulfhere repenting this his Vulfheres repen∣tance. most vnhumane murther, became himselfe a Christi∣an, and destroied all those Temples wherein his hea∣then Gods had been worshipped, conuerting them all into Christian Churches, and religious Monaste∣ries: and to redeeme so hainous an offence, vnder∣went the finishing of Now . Medis am, his brothers foun∣dation, enriching it largely with lands and possessi∣ons: notwithstanding hee is taxed by William of Malmesbury with the foule sinne of Symony, for sel∣ling W. l. Mal sbury. vnto Wyna the Bishopricke of London. (4) He raigned King ouer the Mercians the space of seuenteene yeeres, and Monarch of the English ful∣ly foure, leauing his life in the yeere of our Lord six The time of his raigne. hundred seuentie foure, and his body to be buried in the Monastery of Peterborow, which was of his bro∣thers and his owne foundation. His Wife. (5) Ermenhild, the Wife of King Vulfhere, was the daughter of Ercombert, the seuenth King of Kent, and Ermenhilds pa∣rentage. sister to Egbert and Lothair, both Kings of that Coun∣tie. Her mother was Sexburg, daughter to Anna, the seuenth King of the East-Angles, whose sisters were many and most of them Saints. She was married vnto him in the third yeere of his raigne, and was his wife fourteene yeeres. After his decease, she went to her mother Queene Sexburg, being then Abbesse of Ely, Queene Sexburg Abbesse of . where she continued all the rest of her life, and there∣in deceased and was buried. His Issue. (6) Kenred the son of King Vulfhere and of Queen Ermenhild, being the heire apparant of his fathers Kenred the first sonne. possessions, was vnder age at his fathers decease; and by reason of his minority, was withheld from the go∣uernment, which Ethelred his Vncle entred into, with∣out any contradiction of this Kenred, who held him∣selfe contented to liue a priuate life: notwithstanding Ethelred taking the habit of a Monke, left the Crowne to him who was the right heire. (7) Vulfald a young Gentleman conuerted to the Christian faith by Bishop Chad, and martyred for profession of the same by King Vulfhere, is reported Uulfald a suppo∣sed sonne. Water Wittlesey. by Water of Wittlesey, a Monke of Peterborow, in a Re∣gister which he wrote of that Monastery, to bee the supposed son of King Vulfhere himselfe, and to haue been slaine by him in his extreme fury before he was a Christian, or could indure to heare of the Christian faith. He was buried in Stone, as we haue said, where his father built a Colledge of Canons regular, which was afterwards called S. Vulfaldes. S. Vulfaldes Col∣ledge. (8) Rufine the fellow martyr of Vulfald, is by the same Writer reported to be his brother, and the sup∣posed Rufine another supposed sonne. sonne also of Vulfhere the King. Their mur∣thers, as he saith, was committed the ninth Calends of August, which is with vs the foure and twenty of Iuly, vpon which day there was yeerely celebrated a solemne memoriall of their martyrdomes in the same place, where they both suffered, and where their Monument was then remaining. (9) Wereburg, the daughter of King Vulfhere and Wereburg, the daughter of Vulfhere. Queene Ermenhild, was in her childhood committed to the bringing vp of Queene Etheldrid her mothers Aunt, in the Monastery of Ely, by whose perswasion she professed virginity, and returning to her Country in the raigne of King Ethelred her Vncle, was by him made ouerseer of all the Monasteries within his do∣minions. She deceased at Trickingham (now called Trentham) in Stafford-shire, and was buried at Han∣bery. Buried at Han∣bery. Her body was afterwards remooued to West∣chester, where Leafrik the Earle built in honour of her S. Wereburgs Church. a goodly Church called S. Wereburgs, which to this day is the Cathedrall Church of that Citie. ETHELRED THE SEVENTH KING Monarch 12. OF MERCIA, AND TVVELFTH MO∣NARCH Ethelred. OF THE ENGLISH: HIS ACTS, WIFE, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XXIIII. E Thelred, the third sonne of An. Do. 675. King Penda, and brother to the last declared Vulf∣here, in the yeere of Christ Iesus six hundred seuenty fiue, beganne his raigne in the kingdome of Mercia, and at the same time in the Monarchy of the Eng∣lishmen, Circumstances belonging to the beginning of his raigne. being the seuenth King among them that ware their Diademe, and the twelfth person that bare the Imperiall title of the whole: his claime was not immediately nor next in succession, young Kenred his Nephew standing be∣twixt him and the Crowne. But himselfe a child in yeeres, and in them also addicted vnto a priuate life, he gaue his Vncle way to vndergo so publike a charge, which without contradiction was likewise accepted of the subiects. (2) His entrance was with warre against the Ken∣tish Lothaire, whose Country he destroied, sparing nei∣ther . Churches nor religious Abbeys, the King not daring to appeare in field. The Citie Rochester felt also his fury, whose Citizens were ransacked, their buil∣dings ruinated, and their Bishop Putta driuen to such Putta Bishop of Rochester. distresse, that he became a Teacher of good Arts and Musicke in Mercia, to maintaine his aged yeeres from the necessity of perishing want. These stirres (saith Beda) happened in the yeere of grace six hundred se∣uenty Beda hist. Angl. lib. 4. cap. 12. seuen; and the next following, so fearefull a Blazing starre, as was wonderfull to behold, first dis∣couered A blazing starre. in the moneth of August, and for three mo∣neths together continued rising in the morning, and giuing forth a blazing pile very high, and of a glitte∣ring flame. (3) The remorse of conscience for the bloud he had spilt, and the places of Oratories by him destroi∣ed, (besides his intrusions into another mans right) strucke so deepe a wound into King Ethelreds breast, that euer hee bethought him what recompence to make. First therefore building a goodly Monastery at Bradney, and that most fruitfully seated in the The occasion of founding Brad∣ney Monastery. County of Lincolus, thought that not sufficient to wash away the scarres of his foule offence, but deter∣mined in himselfe to forsake the world, for that was the terme attributed to the monasticall life: wherein notwithstanding, in lesse cares they liued, and their persons more safe from all dangers attempted, then when they publikely administred their lawes to their people, the iust executions whereof, many times breed the ouerthrow of their Princes, and their Per∣sons neuer secure amidst their owne gards. (4) But such was the religion then taught, and the godly zeale of the good Princes then raigning, whose works haue manifested their vertues to posterities, and faith in Christ the saluation of their soules, in whose Paradise we leaue them, and Ethelred to his de∣uout intent: who to reconcile himselfe first vnto Ken∣red, bequeathed the Crowne solely to him, although Ethelred res g∣neth his Crown. he had a sonne capable thereof: then putting on the habit of religion, became himselfe a Monke, in his owne Monastery of Bradney, where he liued a regular life the terme of twelue yeeres, and therein lastly died Abbat of the place, when hee had raigned thirty yeeres, the yeere of Christs natiuity, seuen hundred The continuance of his raigne. sixteene. His Wife. (5) Offryd, the wife of King Ethelred, was the daugh∣ter of Oswy, and of Lady Eanfled, King and Queene of Off yd. Be a hist. Angl. lib 3. cap. 11. Northumberland. She was married vnto him in the yeere of our Lord six hundred seuenty seuen, being the third of his raigne, and the twentieth of her age. Shee was his wife twenty yeeres: and passing tho∣row the North parts of Mercia, she was set vpon and slaine by the people of that Country, in reuenge of Beda in E t. Off yd slaine. the death of Peada their King, who had long before bin murthered by Alkefled his wife, and her half sister, as we haue said. And thus strangely came shee to her vntimely end, the yeer of our Lord six hundred nine∣ty seuen, the twenty three yeere of her husbands raigne and the fortieth of her owne age. His Issue. (6) Chelred the sonne of King Ethelred, and of Chelred the first sonne. Queene Offryd his wife, was the heire apparant of his fathers kingdome, and of sufficient yeeres to haue succeeded him, when he entred into religion; but that it was his fathers will to make amends to his Nephew Kenred, sonne to his elder brother King Vulfhere, that now he might raigne before his sonne, who should haue raigned before himselfe. KENRED THE EIGHTH KING OF MERCIA, AND THE THIR∣TEENTH Kenred. MONARCH OF THE Monarch 13. ENGLISHMEN. CHAPTER XXV. K Enred the sonne of Vulf∣here, because of his mino∣ritie An. Do. 704. at his Fathers death, was defeated of his domi∣nions by his Vncle Ethel∣red, and vntill it pleased him to resigne his Crown, liued a priuate life, where∣unto by nature hee was most inclined. But King Ethelred for the wrongs to him committed, and to re∣deeme the time that in warre and wealth he had pro∣digally The pertaining to his trance into . spent, yeelded the Scepter vnto his hand, and set his seeming ouer-heauy Crowne vpon his Ne∣phew Kenreds head: who began his raigne at one and the same time, both ouer the Mercians and Monar∣chy of the English , which was the yeere of Christs Incarnation seuen hundred and foure. (2) He is in account the eighth King of that Pro∣uince, and the thirteenth Monarch since Hengist the Saxon. He raigned in peace the space of foure yeeres; then weary of gouernment, and desirous of contem∣plation, The of his raigne. after the example of his Vncle, sought a more priuate and religious life: and thereupon appointing Chelred his Cosen germane to rule in his place, in the Beda hist. Angl. lib. 5. cap. 20. fifth yeere of his raigne, abandoned his kingdome and Country, and departed for Rome, accompanied with Offa King of the East-Saxons, and with Edwine Bishop of Worcester; where both these Kings were made Monks in the time of Pope Constantine the first, Iustinian the younger then wearing the Imperiall Crowne: and in a Monastery at that citie, both these penitent Conuerts in the Coules and Orders of Monks, spent the rest of their liues, and therein died Kenred and Offa turne Monks. and were enterred; this Mercian King Kenred hauing had neither wife nor child, that I can reade of. (3) It is not greatly to be wondered at, in that these times to much ouershadowed with superstitious zeal, the holy acts of men, which no doubt were many, & the habit of Monks, the accounted holy garments of humility, were so meritoriously respected and repu∣ted in the deuout hearts of the religious, when by the Clergy (that are accounted the light of the world) in a Councell at Rome held vnder Pope Constantine the Bale. first, it was decreed and commanded, that carued Images, which neither had action, nor life, nor could saue themselues from the stroke of destruction, should bee made to the memoriall of Saints, and should be set vp in Churches, with respectiue adora∣tion, contrary to Gods most expresse commande∣ment, and condemned for idolatry by the warrant of Leuit. 2 . sacred Scripture. CHELRED THE NINTH KING OF Monarch 14. THE MERCIANS, AND THE FOVR∣TEENTH Chelred. MONARCH OF THE ENGLISH, HIS RAIGNE AND SVCCESSION. CHAPTER XXVI. C Helred, the sonne of King Ethelred, was of sufficient An. Do. 709. yeeres, and well able of rule, at such time as his fa∣ther resigned his Scepter vnto his Nephew Kenred, had not the pricke of that sinne touched his consci∣ence, The appendan∣ces of his ingresse into gouernmēt. which made him to bestow the same as he did; notwithstanding the Crown being too waighty for Kenred to weare, he as freely againe gaue it the sonne, as he had receiued it of the father before, and relin∣quished his claime and title thereto. (2) Chelred thus aduanced before he it expected, entred his gouernment with great applause of the Chelred worthy of the Crowne. people, in whose opinions he was held the onely man worthy of their Crowne. Ouer the Mercians he raig∣ned the ninth King, and of the English Monarchs the fourteenth in number, beginning them both in the yeere of grace seuen hundred & nine, and the fourth of Iustinian the younger, Empire. (3) His quietnes was disturbed by Inas the West-Saxon, whose fame for his fortunes beganne then to Inas King of the West-Saxons. grow great. For Kent he had forced to buy their peace with mony: the Britaines subdued, and had inlarged his confines vpon them. And now against Chelred this new rise Monarch, he meant to try chance, whose glo∣ry he looked at with an ouer enuious eye. (4) His greatnesse likewise Chelred suspected, who either to himselfe or successors, (by the foundation Chelred prepa∣reth against Inas. which he laid) would diuert the Monarchy from him and his Mercians, and entaile it to himselfe or his West-Saxons. Hereupon great preparation was made, and each set forward with all the powers, the one to attaine, and the other to keep, the glory and title that both of them so much thirsted after. At Wodnesbury Henry H ting. they met, and with vndaunted spirits so fought, that the victory was doubtfull, for neither could say the battell was his, or that he departed with the lesser Mat. Westminster. losse. (5) These emulations were followed betwixt these two Princes the space of seuen yeeres, and lon∣ger had done, if Chelred had liued, or Inas not been strucke with remorse of conscience for his ouermuch spilling of bloud. Of this Chelred, some Authors haue censured, that he was maruellous in prowesse, and valiant of courage, but his Country miserable Iohn . by his vntimely death, whose raigne lasted only seuen yeeres: and death in the yeere of our Lord seuen The continuance of his raigne. hundred and sixteene: his body was buried in the Cathedrall Church of Lichfield: and he died without any issue. His Wife. (6) Wereburg the wife of King Chelred, is mentio∣ned Inas wife. M rian Scot. by Marianus the learned Scotish Historian, and by Florence of Worcester, who was the follower and continuer of his History, whom we may reasonably credit in this matter, being not incredible, although she must of necessity be thought to haue been mar∣ried very young, or to haue died very old, because they record her decease to haue beene in the yeere of Christ seuen hundred eightie one, which was almost sixtie yeeres after the death of her husband, She died sixtie yeeres after her husband. and towards the end of the long raigne of King Offa. ETHELBALD THE TENTH KING Monarch 15. Ethelbald. OF THE MERCIANS, AND THE FIF∣TEENTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISH∣MEN: HIS RAIGNE AND ACTS. CHAPTER XXVII. E Thelbald, cosen germane once remoued vnto King An. Do. 716. Chelred, succeeded him in the kingdome of the Mer∣cians, whereof he was the tenth in number, and of the Monarchs ouer the Englishmen, the fifteenth in The precedents of his raignes initium. account. He beganne his raigne in the yeere of grace seuen hundred sixteene, and with great honour raigned ouer all the Kings on the South side of Humber, whose time for the most part was spent in peace; yet some wars he had, and those with variable euents. (2) For in the eighteenth yeere of his raigne, hee besieged Sommerton, and wanne it; and inuading and. Cestern. Northumberland, without proffer of resistance, retur∣ned with great riches by spoile. The Britaines also that were ioined confederates with the West-Saxons, hee molested and ouercame, for whose reuenge King Cu∣thred gaue him battell neere vnto Burford, where he with his Mercians receiued the foile, and lost the Ban∣ner, Henry Hunting. wherein was portracted a Golden Dragon, the thir∣ty seuenth yeere of his raigne. (3) The sinnes of these times both in Prince and Chron. of Holl. people, were many and great, as by the Epistles of Bo∣niface an Englishman, and Archbishop of Mentz, is most manifest, wherein he reprooued his adulterous life, who refraining to marry, wallowed in filthy le∣cheries; by whose example the Noblemen of Mercia did the like: and their women, as well Nunnes as others, made away their chilaren borne out of wedlocke, whereby Ro. i. the graues were filled with dead bodies, as hell it selfe with damned soules. And in another Epistle sent vnto Cuth∣bert, Archbishop of Canterbury, he complaineth of the English Nunnes, who wandring in pilgrimage vnder Nunnes infamy. shew of deuotion, liued in pleasure and wanton fornications, through all the Cities of France and of Lumbardy. (4) This his Epistle tooke so good effect, that in re∣pentance King Ethelbald released and priuiledged the Church from all tributes to himselfe, and built the Abbey of Crowland in Lincolnshire, for the pacifying Crowland Ab∣bey buil . of Gods wrath towards his sinnes; when also it was enacted by Cuthbert and his Clergy, in a Conuoca∣tion held in his Prouince, that the sacred Scriptures should be read in their Monasteries, the Lords Praier and Creed, taught in the English tongue: which accordingly was done. Which Councell was held in the thirty yeere of this Kings raigne, and of Christs incarnation seuen hundred forty eight. (5) Finally, when he had ruled forty two yeeres, fighting against Cuthred the West-Saxon, in a warre not The continuance of his raigne. prudently vndertaken, he was traiterously slaine by his owne subiects, at the procurement of Bernred a Leader of them, who affecting the kingdome by this stratagem of Treason, sought to attaine it, but was himselfe slaine by Offa the Mercian, before that this ill sowen seed could take any roote. The place of this Great Ethelbalds death, was Secondone, three miles from Ta worth, in the County of Warwicke; and of Wil. Mal bury. his buriall, Rept n in Darby-shire, where with honou∣rable obsequies he was enterred, the yeere of Christs humanity seuen hundred fiftie eight, hauing had nei∣the Wife nor Children. OFFA THE ELEVENTH KING OF Monarch 16. Offa THE MERCIANS, AND THE SIX∣TEENTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISH∣MEN, HIS ACTS, RAIGNE, WIFE AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XXVIII. O Ffa, the cosen of King Ethel∣bald, An. Do. 758. after some time of Inter-regnum, succeeded him in his dominions of Mercia; a man of so high stomacke and stoutnes of mind, that he thought no∣thing vnpossible for him to attaine: and for vertue and vice, so equally com∣posed, that hardly could bee iudged to whither of them the scale of his carriage most inclined, although Wil. Malmsbury. the Monke of S. Albans, and writer of his life, doth blanch out his graces with superlatiue praises. Liber M. S. (2) His Parents hee nameth Twin reth and Mer∣cella, and himselfe hee saith to haue been first named The parents of Offa. Pinered, borne both lame, deafe, and blinde, wherein he so continued vnto his mans estate. The rage of Bernred (saith the same Author) had forced all three into a solitary place, where suddenly by miracle Pine∣red was restored, and for that cause called another Offa; who presently assailed, and in a great battel man∣fully fought, slew the vsurping Bernred. The Nobles Bernred slaine. of Mercia being rid of that Tyrant by the valour of Offa, gladly imbraced & receiued him for their King; who began his raigne with greater shew of glory, then any Mercian before him had done, being in number the eleuenth that had raigned in that Prouince, and is accounted the sixteenth Monarch of the Englishmen. (3) His neighbour Kings foreseeing whereat his eye glanced, sollicited by Letters Charles the Great, King Charles the Great. then King of France, against him, who wrote vnto Offa in their behalfe, and in threatning wise commanded him to desist. But he was so farre from fearing of his threats, that to his contempt he was the more eager. (4) The first that felt his fury, were the Kentish∣men vnder Alrik their King, whose ouerthrow was the lesse dishonourable (saith Malmesbury) for that they Malmsbury. were vanquished by so great a Monarch. The place was Otteford, vnfortunate to them, where their King was slaine by the hand of Offa himselfe, their forces quite discomfited by the losse of this field, and their Coun∣try trodden downe vnder the feet of the Mercians. (5) From South to North King Offa then mar∣ched, and beyond Humber made hauocke of all that stood against him; whence returning triumphant, he set vpon the West-Saxons, that had formerly ioined with his enemies: the place was Bensinton, which Ca∣stell King Offa tooke, with the discomfiture of King Bensinton Castel taken by King Offa. Kenwolfe, and all his West-Saxons; who sought their reuenge by the aides of the Britaines in Wales. Their King (saith mine Author) was then Marmodius, Liber S. Albans, M. S. Marmodius a Welsh King. betwixt whom some intercourse by letters passed, & great presents to King Offa sent, onely to protract time, and to worke vpon aduantage. (6) In this Interim of complements, for a further security, Offa caused a great ditch to be drawn betwixt Offaes ditch. his and the Britaines borders, which worke began at Basingwark in Flint-shire, and North-wales; not farre from the mouth of Dee, and ranne along the moun∣taines Chron. Wallis. into the South, & ended neer Bristow at the fall of Wye; the tract whereof in many places is yet seene, and is called to this day Clawdh Offa, or Offaes ditch. Marmodius, who openly bare saile to this wind, and Marmodius trea∣chery. seemed to winke at Offaes intent, secretly called a Counsell of State, wherein he declared how the Act thus in working, would soone proue the bane of li∣berty vnto their country, and the marke of dishonor to thēselues & posterity for euer; therefore his aduice was, that by some stratagem it might be staid by time. (7) To this his Britaines consented, the truce yet lasting, and the feast of Christs Natiuity euen then at The Britain ac∣cessary to it. hand; in the celebration wherof was held the greatest aduantage with least suspect, to put themselues in action against it; and secretly working the assistance of their allies the Saxons; both of the South, the West, and the North, vpon Saint Stephens day at night, sud∣dainely Saxons assistance. brake downe the banke of this fortification, filling vp againe a great part of the Ditch, and in the morning most furiously rushed into Offa his Court, putting a great number to the sword, who were more intentiue and regard full to the Feast, then to a∣ny Offa ple . defence from their cruell and mercilesse swords. (8) These wrongs King Offa delaied not to re∣quite, first making their hostages his vassals and slaues, and then with a great army entring Wales, in a bloody and sore-fought battaile hee ouercame Marmodius and all his associates in the field. Thus Marmodius van∣quished by Offa. then as a Conquerour ouer all his enemies trium∣phantly after ten yeares wars abroad returned he to his owne Kingdome, neither puffed with pride, nor suffring his title to be enlarged according to his con∣quests: yet he was not neglectiue of regall state, by the report of the Ligger booke of S. Albans, which saith, that in regard of his great prerogatiue, and not of The Ligger of . M. S. any pride, he first instituted and commanded, that euen in times of peace also, himselfe and his Successors in the Crowne, should as he passed through any Cities, haue Trumpetters going and sounding before them, to shew that the person of the King should breed both feare, and honor in all which either see him or heare him. (9) Vnto King Charles of France he wrote in ex∣cuse of his warres, and desire of his amity; whom King Charles con∣gratulateth Offa. Charles againe congratulated with letters of gladnes, both for his victories, and the Christian piety in his land embraced; desiring of Offa safe conduct for such his subiects, as came to his country in deuoti∣on to God, and withall sent to him, (for a present) a Booke of the Decrees of the second Councell of Nice. Which Synodall Booke (to vse Roger Houedens owne words) was sent vnto King Charles from Con∣stantinople, Ro. Houed. nal. part 1. The second Councell of Nice. wherin (alas for pity) by the vnanimous as∣sertion of three hundred Bishops or more congregated in that Councell, were decreed many things inconuenient, yea and quite contrary to the true faith; as is most especially the worshipping of Images, which the Church of God doth vtterly detest. Against which Booke Alcuinm. Albinus wrote an Epistle, admirably strengthned by the authority of the holy Scriptures, which together with the foresaid Booke him∣selfe presented in the name of the Princes & Bishops of this land, vnto the foresaid Charles King of France. Such in∣tercourse both for State and Church had this great Offa with that great Charles. (10) His last warres (according to mine Author) were against the Danes, whom he forced to their ships Offa last wars. with the losse as well of their booties, as of many of their liues; and then (saith he) with the spirit of humi∣lity, both to recall himselfe from the trace of blood, and to the better establishment of his kingdomes peace, he ioined in affinity with his neighbour Prin∣ces, vpon whō he bestowed his daughters in mariage. (11) And making Egfrid his sonne a King with himselfe, in great deuotion went to Rome, where Offa went to Rome. with the like zeale and example of Inas the West-Sax∣on, he made his Kingdome subiect to a Tribute, then called Peter-pence, afterwards Rom-Scot; besides other rich gifts that he gaue to Pope Hadrian for canoni∣zing Albane a Saint: in honour of whom, and in re∣pentance of his sinnes, at his returne (ouer against Verolanium, in the place then called Holmehurst, where that Protomartyr of Britaine, for the constant profession of Christ, lost his head) Offa built a mag∣nificke Monastery in Anno 795. indowing it with lands and rich reuenewes for the maintenance of an hundred Monks: vpon the first gate of entrance in stone standeth cut a Salteir Argent in a field azure, & is assigned by the iudicious in Heraldry to bee the Armes that he bare. (12) Also in testimony of his repentance for the bloud hee had spilt, he gaue the tenth part of all his His repentance. goods vnto the Churchmen, and vnto the poore. At Bathe he also built another Monastery, and in War∣wickshire a Church, where the adioyning towne, from it and him, beareth the name Off-church. (13) Finally, when hee had raigned thirty nine yeares, he died in peace at his towne Off-ley the nine Off-ley Towne. and twentieth of Iuly, the yeare of Christ Iesus, se∣uen hundred ninety foure: and with great solemnity his body was buried without the towne of Bedford in a Chapell standing vpon the Banke of Owse, which long since was swallowed vp by the same riuer: whose Tombe of lead (as it were some phantasticall thing) appeareth often (saith Rouse) to them that seek it not, I S Al s M. S. . but to them that seeke it, is altogether inunible. His wife. (14) Quendrid the wife of King Offa hath not her parentage set down by any of our Writers: notwith∣standing, the recorder of this his life, saith that her In the life of S. Albane. prefixed before the Led∣ger booke of that Abbey. name was Drida, and that shee was the kinswoman to Charles the Great King of France, and by him for some offence banished his Realme, who arriuing vpon the coasts of England in a ship without tackle, was taken thence, and relieued by Offa, being then a young Nobleman, where shee changed her name Offa affectioned to Quend d. vnto Petronilla; with whom hee fell so farre in loue that hee made her his wife, contrary to the liking of his Parents. She was a woman of condition am∣bitious, couetous, and cruell, as appeared special∣ly in the death of Ethelbert, King of the East Angles, that came to her husbands Court to marry their daughter; whose port shee so much enuied, that shee procured him to bee treacherously murdered: the Quend d her trechery. manner the foresaid Author declared to be by his fall into a deepe pit, purposely made in his bed-chamber, and vnder his chaire of estate. That his head was cut off, and found by a blind-man, that the well which beares his name sprung vp presently in the place where it lay, that the bloud thereof gaue the blind man his sight, and that Dryda died in the same pit which she had digged for Ethelbert, I leaue to the credite of my author, and the liking of my Reader: but certaine it is that Gods vengeance followed this heynous fact within one yeare after the same was committed, by the death of her selfe, her husband, & Quendred rewar∣ded with the like paines. her Sonne, and the translation of that Kingdome from the Mercians to the West-Saxons. An ancient Saxon coine inscribed with her name, CENEDRED REGIN. we haue found and here placed, which the iudicious suppose to be hers, and that not vnlikely, shee being so powerfull, proud and ambitious. His Issue. (15) Egfrid the onely sonne; and heire apparant Egfrid the only son of Offa. of King Offa and Queene Quendred, was the onely ioy and pride of his parents, who succeeded his Fa∣ther in his dominions and title, and in the same yeare also in the shades of death. (16) Ethelburga, the eldest daughter of King Offa Ethelburga the first daughter. and Queene Quendred was maried to Brithrick the sixeteenth King of the West-Saxons: shee was a Lady of passing beautie, but withall of an insolent dispo∣sition, hating all whom her husband loued, and practising the deathes of them that she hated. She departed into France after the poisoning of her husband, & for that her offence, a law was enacted to the great preiudice of the West-Saxons Queenes, as in the raigne of Brithrick we haue declared. Cap. 7. Sect. 16. (17) Elfled, the second daughter of King Offa, & Polycbr. sted the second daughter. Queene Quendred, by the report of Randulph Hig∣den the Monke of Chester, was the second wife to E∣thelred King of Northumberland, who in regard of her had put from him his former wife, for which his subiects rose in Armes against him, and slew him in the last yeare of King Offa his raigne. (18) Elfrid the third and yongest daughter of Elfrid the third daughter. King Offa, and Queene Que dred, being promised in mariage, and assured vnto Ethelbert King of the East Angles, after the murther of her hoped Bridegroom, with great lamentations, and prophesying threats of reuenge, abandoned the society of men, and with∣drew herselfe vnto the monastery of Crowland in the Fennes, where in contemplation and solitary sadnes she spent the remainder of her life; and yet there are that suppose her to bee the wife of King Kenwolfe, who was the founder of Winchcombe Monastery, & the successor of his brother Egfride. (19) Fremund by Iohn Capgraue is supposed to be the sonne of King Offa, who, as he saith, was traite∣rously Iohn Capgraue. murdered by one Oswy that enuied his victo∣ries which he gat against the Danes: his body was buried at Offchurch in Warwickshire, and neere vnto the Palace of Offa; alleadging for his Author one Burghard, who was at his death, and wrote his life; yet some there are that thinke him mistaken, for Burghard. that hee calleth him a young man, when as those warres hapned an hundred yeares after King Offa his life. EGFRID THE TVVELFTH KING Egfrid. OF THE MERCIANS, AND THE SE∣VENTEENTH Monarch 17. MONARCH OF THE ENGLISH. CHAPTER XXIX. E Gfrid, the sonne of King Offa, succeeded his father An. Do. 794. in the Mercians Kingdom, wherof he was the twelfth in number, and in the Mo∣narchy of the Englishmen, ranked in account the se∣uenteenth. He began his raigne the thirteenth day of Iuly, in the yeer of Christ his natiuity, seuen hundred ninety foure. The first businesse that he vndertooke after hee came to the Crowne, was the restauration of antient priuiledges to the Church, which his father had depriued them Egfrid restoreth antike priuiled∣ger. of; and great hope was conceiued of his further pro∣ceedings, had not God cut him off by vntimely death. For hauing raigned onely foure moneths, hee gaue place vnto nature, and to another successour, the sins of the people deseruing no such Prince: for whose cause, and his fathers great bloudshed, as Alcuine wrote to Osbertus, he was taken away so soone. Fl Albinus. (2) He deceased the seuenth day of December, and in the first of his raigne, hauing had neither Wife nor The continuance of his raigne. Issue that we reade of. His body with all due obse∣quies was honourably buried in the Abbey Church of S. Albans, of his fathers foundation. KENVVOLFE THE THIRTEENTH Monarch 1 Kenwolfe. KING OF THE MERCIANS, AND THE EIGHTEENTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN. CHAPTER XXX. K Enwolfe, not so neere in bloud to king Egfryd, as An. Do. 794. he was like him in all ver∣tuous conditions, by him was ordained to succeed in his Dominions, where∣by hee became the thir∣teenth King of the Mer∣cians, and the eighteenth Monarch of the English∣men, in the yeere of our Lord seuen hundred ninety seuen. At home he was an example of piety, peace, and religion, & set the scale of Iustice without respect Ke olfes praise. to all alike; abroad temperate; humble; and courte∣ous, without vain ostentation or ambitious conceits; in warres hee was stout and victorious; in peace stu∣dious to enrich his subiects: briefly, at all times so carrying himselfe, that enuie could not touch him with her tongue. (2) Whether vpon a new quarrell begun, or the old retained, (as inheritable to the Mercians against those of Kent) I cannot say; but true it is, that in the entrance of his raigne, he entred that Prouince with a great host of men, and in a fore fought field discom∣fited the Kentish, and carried away prisoner their King, whose sirname was Pren. His kingdome hee gaue to Cuthred, and kept him captiue in Mercia, to Wil. Mal b. his great griefe, and his subiects dishonour. (3) But Kenwolfe in peace, & minding the works of true piety, gaue himself to the building of a good∣ly Winchcombe Mon ry. Church at Winchcombe in Glocestershire; where vpō the day of dedication in the presence of Cuthred (as∣signed his Viceroy in Kent) thirteene Bishops, ten Dukes, many Nobles, and a great concourse of peo∣ple, he led Pren this Kentish captiue vp to the high Al∣tar, and there without either his entreaty, or ransome for Redemption, released and set him free; shewing thereby his deuotion to God, and the heroicall parts of a magnanimous Prince. (4) His raigne was twenty two yeares, and death in Anno eight hundred nineteene, beeing solemnely buried in the Church of the Monastery at Winchcombe aforesaid which himselfe had founded. His Wife. (5) Elfryd, the wife of King Kenwolfe, hath not her parentage certainely reported by any of our Hi∣storians; Elfrid vn . yet some later vpon a likelihood of her name, the place and time agreeing; haue thought her to be the daughter of Off , affianced to King Ethel∣bert, as hath beene said: but in these obscurities▪ con∣iecture may wander astray. His Children. (6) Kenelm the sonne of King Kenwolfe, and of Queene Elfryde his wife, was very yong at his fathers death, and succeeded in the Mercians Kingdom, but not in the Monarchy of the English; King Egbert the West-Saxon King then growne too great. And in the same yeare that he beganne his raigne, by the treason of his vnnaturall sister hee was murthered, and first Ken d th. obscurely buried, but afterwards solemnly remoued and reposed neere to his Father in the Monastery of Winchcombe, as in the Mercian Kings successions wee Chap. 10. ct. 14. haue said. (7) Quendred the eldest daughter of King Ken-Wolfe, and Lady Elfryd his Queene, after the decease Qu dred th el∣d st d ughter of K wolfe. of her father▪ ambitiously aspiring to compasse the sway of the Mercian Kingdome wholy to her selfe, wickedly conspired the death of her brother King Kenelme, which was traiterously acted by Askebert her instrument, who had the charge of him: but the same turning to her reproch; for very shame of so damnable a deed, shee within short time after ended her life, but not her ignominie. (8) , the yonger daughter of King Ken∣wolfe, and of Queene Elfryd, hath not been so famous Burg ild younger daug ∣ter. to posterity as her sister Quendred was for her infa∣mous Act; notwithstanding, she may reasonably be supposed to haue lead a better life, and to haue di∣ed a better death; especially of vs, who find her no s ained with any aspersion of misdeseruing. EGBERT THE EIGHTEENTH KING Monarch 19. Egbert. OF THE WEST-SAXONS, THE NINE∣TEENTH, BVT FIRST SOLE AND ABSO∣LVTE MONARCH OF THE ENGLISH-MEN, HIS ACTS, WIFE, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XXXI. T He Saxon Heptarchy draw∣ing now to a period, the spring of an entire Mo∣narchie An. Do. 800. began to shew it selfe, and the glory of the Englishmen more cleere∣ly to arise: for thongh they had weakned each other by their own wars, yet stood their power strong in the possession of the whole, and the ouer∣borne Britaines held still at the worst. (2) But such is the dispose of the sole disposer of Empires, that they haue their risings, their fuls, and their fals: neuer staying in one and the same point, neither entailed to one and the same Nation, how strong, politicke or populous soeuer. The proofe whereof is apparant in all the Kingdomes of the earth, and this of ours as mutable as any; whose change of State vnto, and in, this seuen-fold Gouern∣ment The seuen fold gouernment mu∣table. hath hitherto beene seene: the seuerall Kings thereof long contending to branch their own foun∣taines furthest and fairest, lastly let them fall into one streame, which so meeting, made a more fa∣mous confluence in this Monarchy, then the seauen heads of Nilus in the Egyptian Sea. (3) Formerly, the Kentish, South-Saxons, East-Angles, Northumbrians, and the Mercians, through no lesse then eight descents had worne the Emperiall Diademe, whose rayes shone now so bright in the West-Saxons eyes, that they againe sought to reestate west-Saxons am∣bition. themselues in so glorious a possession. For, where∣as Brightrik was possessed and contented with the West-Saxon Crowne, neither that worne without iealousie and feare; yet others of the bloud royall from Cherdik raised the wings of their soaring thoughts much higher, among whom Egbert was one, neither the last nor the least in the opinion of the people, or suspect of his Prince. (4) This Egbert hauing commaund of some part of that Prouince, so carried himselfe, that his fame grew fearefull to Brightrik the King, and hatefull to the enuious Ethelburg his most proud Queene, by Egberts exigents and reliefes. whom he was enforced first to secure himselfe with the Mercian Offa; and lastly constrained to flie in∣to France: where vnder Charles the Great, he turned his aduersity into an occasion of his valour, by ser∣uing in his warres, and learned by his politicke go∣uernment, how to rule a quiet or disturbed State. (5) But King Brightriks death acted, and his Queene the contriuer banished, Egbert is solicited to the wearing of the West-Saxon crowne, where hee be∣came the eighteenth King in number, and nineteene yeares after the nineteenth Monarch of the English∣men; entring his raigne the yeare of Christ Iesus, eight hundreth, being the same yeare that Charles Simon D el. saith 80 . Mat. Westminst saith 801. was made Emperour of the West, and Conwall then ruling ouer the Scots. (6) His first warres were against the Cornish, and their associats the Welsh, both of them a remnant of the old Britaines, who had beene oftentimes van∣quished, but neuer would seeme to be subdued, and for foureteene yeares continuance held side against Egbert; which their resistance so prouoked his furie that hee enacted a most seuere law against them, commanding that no Britaine should presume to passe ouer great Offaes ditch, and present death to Iohn B . them that durst set foot vpon any English ground. Their great Caer-legion (now West-chester) hee tooke from them, and at London from their West-gate cast downe the brasen Image of Cadwallo there set vp by the Britaines for a terrour to the Saxons, as we haue said. Chap. 12. (7) His warres thus prospering, his puissance grew dreadfull, and his glory much enuied at by the other Princes, whereof Bernulfe of Mercia was the first attempter that sought to plucke the wing of this west-Saxon Eagle, but thereby wrought his owne downefall; for Egbert ioyning battaile with him at Ellenden ouerthrew his power, and in that quarrell Chap. 10. sect. 16. Bernulfe was lastly slaine. (8) Kent was the next, and fairest marke in Eg∣berts , whose not gratious in his own subiects . ight, was the to be subdued; him he chased o∣uer Thamisis, and added not onely that Countie, but also Sussex and Surrey, for Prouinces vnto his owne Kingdome: next were the East-Saxons, the East-Angles, and in truth all, both vpon the North, and the South of Humber gaue him obedience; so that the bounds of his Dominion were greatly enlarged, and his royall authority by those seuerall Kings ac∣knowledged. (9) Then hee to confirme his estate called an as∣sembly vnto the City Winchester, where causing him∣selfe to bee solemnly crowned, became the first Sax∣ons absolute Monarch of the whole Iland, so redu∣cing Egbert the first sole Monarch. the Monarchiall title from the Mercians to the West-Saxons, in whose Progeny it continued with∣out reuersement vntill the Danes first got, and againe lost it, and the Saxons issue failing, the same fell to the Normans Duke by Conquest, as in continuance of our history, Christ assisting, shall be seene. (10) His Coronation was at Winchester, and en∣trance in the yeare of Grace, eight hundred and nine∣teene, An. Do. 819. at which time by his Edict in that City da∣ted, he caused all the South of the Iland to bee cal∣led England, according to the Angles, of whom him∣selfe came, and promising great felicity to his State and Successors, was therein not so happy as in his affaires he had beene fortunate. (11) For those Saxons that by warre and blood, had made themselues Lords of other mens rights, and of one Kingdome no lesse then seuen, are now endangered to bee made seruants vnto subiection, and by warre and bloud their seuen-fold Kingdome brought againe vnto one; neither yet freed from the reuenge of bloodie violence: for that a fierce and cruell nation (the Danes) ceased not con∣tinually to inuade them, till they had subdued and set the crowne thereof vpon their owne heads, who in King Brightrick dayes, and about the yeere seuen Floren. igorn. hundred eighty seuen, hauing with three vessels lan∣ded in the West of England, at three seuerall times, in so many seuerall places, sought the ruine of the land in the raigne of this Egbert. (12) The first was in his thirty third yeare, when with thirty fiue ships they landed at Lindisferne vp∣on Simon. D n. Henry Hunting. Mat. W st. the North of England, where they were met and fought with at Carham, but with such losse to the English, that two chiefe Captaines, Dudda and Os∣mond, two Bishops, Herefrid of Winchester, and Vig∣ferd of Shirborne, with many Souldiers were there∣in slaine, King Egbert himselfe hardly escaping by the couert of the night. (13) Their second attempt was in the second yeare following, when in West-Wales they landed, vn∣to whom the Britaines there ioyned, and in the place called Hengistenton abode the King in field, where Egbert with prosperous fortune vanquished and slew both the Danes and the Welsh. (14) The third place of their arriuage was Shee∣pie in Kent, which Iland they sacked, and with much a doe were expelled in the last of King Egberts raign, and but the new beginning of their sauage cruelties. (15) This Egbert by Florentius of Worcester is said to be the sonne of Alkemund, who was the sonne of Eafa, and he the sonne of Eoppa, the sonne of Ingils, the brother of Ine, the eleuenth King of the West-Saxons, and both of them the sonnes of Kenred, des∣cended from Cherdik the first King of that Prouince: he was but ow o , strong of mme, very valiant, , skilfull souldier, and as great in , in warre; he raigned ouer the of thirty six yeares and seuen , of the whole Iland seuenteene: his d th fourth day of February, and yeare of Chr s ∣nation eight hundred thirty six. (16) His bodie was with all solemnly buried at Winchester, and his bones sin taken vp ∣maine with others in that Cities Cathedral , bestowed in Chests set vpon the Wall of each the Quier, with these verses neither ancient, nor , thereon inscribed: Hic Rex Egbertus pausat cum Rege Kenulpho, Nobis egregia munera vterque tulit. His wife. (17) Redburg, the wife of King Egbert, was the first of the West-Saxons, that by their new made law was depriued of title, authority, or place of a Queene; notwithstanding it seemeth shee bare a great stroke with her husband, in that Iohn B uer the Monke of Westminster reporteth, that shee pro∣cured a law to be made against the Britains, the pe∣nalty whereof was present death for any of them to set footing within the realme of England, or to passe the Ditch that King Offa had made. His Issue. (18) Ethelwolfe, the eldest sonne of King Eg∣bert; son e. and Lady Redburg his wife, was in his child∣hood committed to the charge of Helmestan of Winchester, vnder whom hee was carefully tray∣ned vp in learning and vertue, who comming to mans estate proued also a perfect Souldier, and had leading of his fathers power against Baldred King Kent, whom he forced to flie ouer the Thamisis, and to abandon his Kingdome, which he subdued to the subiection of his father, and afterwards succeeded him in the Monarchy of the Englishmen. (19) Ethelstane, the younger sonne of King Eg∣bert, E an yonger sonne. and of the Lady Redburg his wife, was by his father deputed King ouer the Kentishmen, the South-Saxons, and the East-Saxons after hee had brought them vnto his subiection; which people hee most valiantly defended against the inuasions of the Danes, defeating their forces both by sea and land, and at Sandwich gaue them a most memorable ouerthrow, in the yeare of our Lord eight hundred fifty one, be∣ing the sixteenth of his brother King Ethelwolfes raigne; in whose time hee deceased, and is reported to haue left a sonne named Ostride, who by reason of his minority succeeded not in his fathers dominions, which Ethelbert the second sonne of King Ethelwolfe entred vpon, and being Monarch reunited these king∣domes inseparably vnto the Monarchy. (20) Edgith, commonly called Saint Edith the a daugh∣ter. daughter of King Egbert, was in her childhood by her brother Ethelwolfe committed to the charge and bringing vp of a Lady in Ireland, greatly renowmed for her holinesse of life, named Modewine, by whom she was afterwards recommended to a Disciplesse of the said Lady, named Athea, and made Gouernesse of a Monastery of the Ladies, by her planted in a place which the King her brother had giuen her, called Pollesworth, situated in Arden in the north verge of the County of Warwicke, wherein she liued, died, and was honourably buried, and the place in regard of her afterwards called Saint Ediths of Pollesworth. ETHELVVOLFE THE NINTEENTH Monarch 20 Ethelwolfe. KING OF THE VVEST-SAXONS, AND THE TWENTIETH MONARCH OF THE ENG∣LISHMEN: HIS WARRES, ACTS, WIVES, AND CHILDREN. CHAPTER XXXII. E Thelwolfe, the eldest sonne An. Do. 837. of King Egbert, commit∣ted in his youth to the care of Helmestan Bishop of Winchester; and by him vnto Swithun a famous learned Monke of that time, tooke such a liking vnto the quiet and solita∣rie life, (onely enioyed by men of Religion, all other degrees molested to with∣stand the intruding Danes) that he vndertooke the Monkish vow and profession, and was made Dea∣con; shortly after which degree taken, Helmestan di∣ed, in whose place Prince Ethelwolfe was consecrated, as Roger Houeden affirmeth, or at least elected, (as Roger Houeden. Iohn Brampton. Iohn Brampton Abbat of Iaruaux writeth) Bishop of Winchester. But the death of his Father King Eg∣bert immediately following, by great intreaty of the Henry Hunting. Mat. Westminster. Nobles, and partly by constraint of the Clergy, hee was made King, and was by the authority of Pope Gregory the fourth, whose creature in both professions he was, absolued and discharged of his vowes. (2) He entered his Monarchy the fourth day of February in the yeare of Christs Incarnation, eight Wil. Malmsb. hundred thirty seuen, and was the nineteenth King of the West-Saxons, and the twentieth Monarch of the Englishmen. His Bishopricke he gaue vnto Swithun his Tutor, and according to his place, combined all his powers to withstand the dangerous Danes, that attempted the vtter subuersion of his faire land: whose fift inuasion in his first yeare happened; which drew the Saxons ciuill warres vnto a constrained peace, hauing more then they could well doe to de∣fend their liues from their slaughtering swords, or to saue their vniustly gotten land from the spoiles of those common enemies; who, not like Conquerors, but destroying Caterpillers, left nothing vndeuou∣red wheresoeuer they came, and had now begunne their mercilesse depopulations in diuers places at once, so that the distracted English were to seeke where was most need first to withstand. (3) At Hampton & Portesmouth many of these Nor∣way Simon Dunelm. Henry Hunt. Pirates had entred; at Hampton with their ouer∣throw, at Portesmouth with victory; and the same time at Carrum, a Troupe of these Danes discomfited King Ethelwolfes power. The next yeare at Merse∣ware, Lindsey, in East-Angle, and Kent, they did An. Dom. 838. much mischiefe, and harried all the Country before them: yet in his tenth yeare at Pedredesmouth, the Sommerset and Dorsetshire men gaue them a memo∣rable ouerthrow, vnder the conduct of Earle En∣wulfe, Bishop Adelstan, and Osred their captaines. (4) But in the sixteenth yeare of this King, the great Planet Mars seemed to praedominate continu∣ally, and Fortune to cast the chance of victory euer on his side: for two hundred and fifty ships, (some reckon a hundred more) entred into Thamesis mouth Henry . Ar iual. and set on shore an infinite number of these destroy∣ing Danes. London and Canterbury they had sacked and left wast, had pierced into Mercia, and chased Berthulfe their King out of his Country, and now in Southery had pitched their battle, as able and reso∣lute to abide all the power of the English, whither King Ethelwolfe with his sonne prince Ethelbald re∣paired, and tooke the field at the place called Ocley; wherein after a long and sore fight, the victory fell to the English, with such slaughter of these Norway in∣uaders, as is incredible to report, and the same held as great and famous, as euer had hapned in the land before. (5) With the like successe his Brother Athelstan King of Kent, fought with the Danes at Sandwich, where chasing them to sea, tooke nine of their ships; and in Deuonshire, Earle Ceorle at Winleshore so ouerthrew their whole power, that in despaire they withdrew themselues into the Ile of Thanet, where they made their abode all the winter season; and if destiny had not withstood the English, the Danes had beene expulsed for euer. But the Saxons seeming cleared of this common enemy, fell to their wonted quarrels with the euer depressed Britaines, against whom Burthred the M rcian obtained the as∣sistance of King Ethelwolfe in his eighteenth yeare, Si on Dun. whose daughter Ethelswith hee had obtained in ma∣riage; whereby for a while was encreased the fame and power of that valiant, but vnfortunate King. (6) In this State the affaires of the land stood vn∣to See Chap. 10. Sect. 20. the nineteenth yeare of King Ethelwolfes raigne, who now remembring his former Ecclesiasticke pro∣fession, ordained that Tithes and Lands due to holy Church should bee free from all Tributes or Regall seruices; and in great deuotion went himselfe to Rome, where hee was both honourably receiued, and entertained the space of a whole yeare; in which time hee new built the English Schoole, that Offa the Mer∣cian before had there founded, and lately was fi∣red, bearing the name of Thomas the Holy; confir∣ming also his Grant of Peter pence, and further co∣uenanting in lieu of his kind entertainement to pay yeerely three hundred markes to Rome, thus to bee emploied; one hundred to Saint Peters Church, an Wil. Mal sbury. Simon. Dun. other hundred to Saint Pauls Light, and the third to the Pope: the Bride that euermore must be kissed and largely paid. (7) His returne from Rome was through France, and being a Widower, hee there married Iudith the most beautifull daughter of Charles the Bald then Emperour; in honour of whom in his owne Court, he euer placed her in a Chaire of Estate, with all o∣ther maiesticall complements of a Queene, contrary to the law of the West-Saxons for Ethelburgaes offence, formerly made. Which his doing so disliked the No∣bles, that Prince Ethelbald his eldest Sonne, Adelstan Bishop of Shirborne, and Enwulfe Earle of Somerset, rose vp rebelliously in Armes and sought to depose him; yet by mediation of friends, the matter came to a comprimize, and the land to be diuided betwixt Wil. Mal s. the Father and Sonne, but with such partiality that the better part west-ward was allotted to Ethelbald: which vnequality gaue great suspition, that this re∣uolt was rather grounded vpon ambition, then any inclination they had for the defence of their lawes, which commonly is the pretence and vaile for all disloiall attempts of seditious subiects against their soueraigne Lords. (8) Howsoeuer it was, long after this he liued not, but left his Monarchy vnto his eldest sonne Ethel∣bald: and by will appointed. Ethelbert his second, to be King of Kent and Essex, which countries he had conquered. He raigned twenty yeares, one mo∣neth, and nine dayes, and deceased at a place cal∣led Ethelwolfes time of raigning. Stamrige, the thirteenth day of Ianuary, in the yeare of our Lord, eight hundred fifty seauen, be∣ing the twenty one of his Raign. His body was first buried at the place of his decease, and afterwards re∣moued into the Cathedrall Church at Winchester. His wiues. (9) Osburg, the first wife of King Ethelwolfe, was Osburgs parents. the daughter of a Nobleman named Oslake, who had the office of Great Butler of England, and was descen∣ded of the stocke of Stuffe and Withgar two bre∣thren, being noblemē of the people called Iutes, who were the first Princes of the Ile of Wight, and Ne∣phewes to Cherdik, and cosen germans to Kenrik the first and second Kings of the West-Saxons, and the third and fourth Monarchs of the Englishmen. She was the second Kings wife that was debarred of the title and place of Queene. Shee deceased three years before the King her husband, in the nineteenth yeare of his raigne, being the yeare of Christs Na∣tiuity eight hundred fifty fiue. (10) Iudith his second wife, was the daughter of Charles the Emperour, and King of Fra e, as wee Iudith a second wife. haue said: her Mother was Queene , the daughter of Vodon Earle of Orl ance. She was a La∣dy of passing beauty, and marryed to this King in France; and when she came into England was recei∣ued with the title and place of a Queene, in abolish∣ment of the peruerse law of the VVest-Saxons, made against the Kings VViues, as before was touched. She was his wife three yeares, and suruiued him without any issue. His Issue. (11) Ethelbald, the eldest sonne of King Ethelwolfe, and of Lady Osburg his first wife, was brought vp in the first Sonne. his youth in the exercise of warre, and serued vnder his Father in the great victory obtained against the Danes at Ocley in Surrey, in the yeare eight hundred fifty one: afterwards hee turned his force against his Father; and at his returne from Rome, practised to defeat him of his Kingdome, and was ready to haue giuen him battaile, had not his Father parted with him his Dominion. (12) Ethelbert, the second son of King Ethelwolfe Ethelbert the second sonne. and Lady Osburg his first wife, was in the life time of his Father, after the decease of his vncle Ethelstan, appointed and placed his Successor in his Kingdome ouer the South-Saxons, the Kentish, and the East-Sax∣ons, without any mention or meaning (as it seemeth,) that hee should intermeddle further with any other part of England. Notwithstanding after the death of his brother Ethelbald, it was generally holden of all men for law, equity, and reason, that he should succeed him in the Monarchy: and so he did, with the consent of his Brethren, and without resistance, or contradiction of any other. (13) Ethelred the third sonne of King Ethelwolfe, Ethelred a third sonne. and Lady Osburg his first wife, had by the dispo∣sition of his Father in his last will, the one halfe of his Fathers proper inheritance; which was all such land as King Egbert his Grandfather had before hee was King, and was no part of the Demaines of the Kingdome, and this was diuided betwixt him and his brother Elfred, as the kingdome was betweene their elder Brethren Ethelbald and Ethelbert: with an intent that this Ethelred should succeed his brother Ethelbald in the kingdome of the West-Saxons; not∣withstanding, his brother Ethelbert, after the de∣cease of King Ethelbald, entred into the other part, adioining it to his former kingdome, and was king of the whole, and after left it entire to this Ethelred, who succeeded him in the Monarchy. (14) Elfred, the fourth sonne of King Ethelwolfe and of Lady Osburg his first wife, was borne at Wan∣tage Elfred a fourth sonne. in Barkeshire, in the yeare of our Lord God, eight hundred forty nine; and the thirteenth of his fathers raign. Being a child of fiue yeeres old, he was sent very honourably attended to the City of Rome, where Leo the fourth then Bishoppe confirmed him, was his Godfather at the confirmation, and annointed him to the expectation of a kingdome: growne in yeares, hee grew so in discretion, magnanimity and fauour of all men, that in the successiue raignes of his three elder Brethren, he ruled as a Vice-roy or se∣condary king vnder euery of them, and after them at the last succeeded in the English Monarchy. (15) Ethelfwith, the daughter of King Ethelwolfe a daughter. and Lady Osburg, was maried to Burthred the twen∣tieth King of Mercia, which mariage was solemnized at the towne of Chippinham in Wiltshire, in the mo∣neth of Aprill, and yeare of Christs Natiuity eight hundred thirty fiue, and the fifteenth of her fathers raigne: but within twenty two years after, they were both forced by the Danes to abandon their kingdom, and departed into Italy, where the King died the same yeare in the English Colledge at Rome: shee liued af∣ter him fifteene yeares in the habite of a N ne, at the City of Pad a, and there died, and was honou∣rably buried in the yeare of our Lord God eight hun∣dred eighty nine, which was the eighteenth yeare of her brother King Elfreds raigne. (16) Ne te, supposed by Iohn Capgra e the Legend writer, to be the sonne of King Ethelwolfe, was in his Ne a suppo∣s d . youth brought vp at Glastenbery vnder Dunstan, who was afterward Arthbishop of Ca terbury. He proued a man of great learning, and was one of the first Rea∣ders of Diuinity in the Vniuersity of Oxford, at the foundation, or as some will haue it, the restauration thereof by King Elfred; hee planted a Monastery in Cornwall, whereunto hee vsed for deuotion and studious meditations often to withdraw himselfe, which of his abode there, was afterward called Neotestoke, and when he was dead, his body was with great honour enterred in the County of Hunting∣don, at a place then called Anulfesbery, and afterward in regard of his enterment, Saint Neotes, and now S. Need s Towne. Saint Needes. ETHELBALD THE TVVENTIETH Monarch 21. Ethelbald. KING OF THE VVEST-SAXONS, AND THE TWENTIE ONE MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS ACTS AND RAIGNE. CHAPTER XXXIII. E Thelbald, the eldest sonne of king Ethelwolfe, hauing had An. Do. 857. Floro . Wigo . part of the kingdome in the life time of his Father, after his death entred vp∣on the whole, and was the twentieth King of the West Saxons, and the twenty one Monarch of the English∣men, beginning his raigne in the yeere of Christs incarnation eight hundred fif∣tie seuen. (2) His youth he had spent in the exercise of war, His wars against the Danes. hauing made proofe of valour in his seruice against the Danes in many battels; and likewise attempted (though not in so good a cause) to haue fought a∣gainst his owne father. Which his assaies, as they see∣med violent and vnnaturall, yet being in the quar∣rell of the West-Saxons law, enacted in preiudice of their Queenes, he was both sided and approued, as hath been said. (3) But howsoeuer vnwilling he was this faire Queene should sit in state by his fathers side, yet con∣trary to all lawes either of God or man, hee laid her l. . by his owne, and by nuptiall rites, brought her to his sinfull and incestuous bed. Which act, though foule enough, some haue made worse, in reporting his Wife to be his owne Mother, whom King Ethelwolfe kept for his Concubine. And surely this his sin was not long vnpunished by the shortnesse of his raigne and life, leauing no other memory of his acts, besides this foule blot to his faire name. The time of his raigning. (4) His raigne was onely two yeeres and an halfe, and death chanced vpon the twentieth day of De∣cember, the yeere of Christs assuming our flesh, eight hundred sixtie. His body was first buried at Sh rburne in the County of Dorset, where at that time was the Cathedrall Church and Episcopall See; but after∣wards was remoued and enterred at Salesbury, in the County of Wiltshire. His Wife. (5) Iudith, the Wife of King Ethelbald, was the wi∣dow of his owne Father, a most vnlawfull matrimo∣nie contracted against all law of God or of nature; 1. Cor. 5. 1. which being both dissolued and punished by the ha∣stie death of the King, and she returning towards her father and Country in Flanders, was rauished by Bald∣win the Forester of Arden in France, and by him for∣cibly kept vntill shee consented to become his wife, who in regard of that marriage, when he was recon∣ciled to the Emperor Charles her Father, was by him created the first Earle of Flanders, by whom she had issue Baldwin the second, who espoused Lady Elfrid, the youngest daughter of Elfred King of England, from whom, through fiue descents lineally, Ma d Queene of England, Wife to William the Conquerour descended, and from her, all our Norman English Kings vnto this day. ETHELBERT THE TVVENTIETH Monarch 22 Ethelbert. ONE KING OF THE VVEST-SAXONS, AND THE TWO AND TWENTIETH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN: HIS RAIGNE AND ISSVES. CHAPTER XXXIIII. E Thelbert, the second sonne of King Ethelwolfe, who had succeeded his Vnckle An. Do. 860. Ethelstan in the kingdome of the South-Saxons, Ken∣tish, and East-Saxons, and for fiue yeeres continu∣ance, ruled those Coun∣tries with great equity and valour, after the decease of his brother Ethelbald, suc∣ceeded him also both in the West-Saxons kingdome, and the whole Lands Monarchie: whereof he was the one and twentieth King, and the two and twen∣tieth Monarch. (2) His raigne began in the yeere after Christs natiuity, eight hundred and sixtie, and was disquieted from first to last by the inuasions of the bloudy Danes. For presently after his coronation, these com∣mon enemies entred the Land, ruinating all be∣fore them vnto the Citie Winchester, which they sac∣ked, Hen. unting. and left it troden vnder their destroying feete, euen to the ground. But in their returne were en∣countred by the Barkshire-men, vnder the leading of Osrick, Earle of Hampton, by whom they were van∣quished, the prey recouered, and a great number of those Infidels slaine. (3) In his first yeere also a nauie of Danes and Normans entred into the Iland Tanet, and began their wonted spoiles among those people: whereupon the Kentish compounded their peace for a great sum of The Kentishmen compound for their peace. money giuen. Notwithstanding these miscreants, which knew not God, gaue little regard to their pro∣mised couenants, and before the daies of truce were expired, like a sudden floud ouer-bare all before them. These their irruptions to withstand, the Ken∣tish then prepared, rather aduenturing themselues vpon the chance of battell, then to rest vpon a see∣ming truce, wherein their destruction was too appa∣rant, and forthwith assembling all the powers toge∣ther, set vpon those truce-breakers, and with much slaughter forced them at length out of their Coun∣try. (4) But the date of King Ethelberts life being ex∣pired, hee yeelded his body to the course of nature, Ethelberts ti of raigning. and his Kingdomes to his next Brother, after he had raigned ouer the Kentish, South, and East-Saxons, the terme of ten yeeres, and had sate Monarch of the whole onely fiue. He died the yeere of grace eight hundred sixty six, and was honourably buried in the Cathedrall Church of Shirburne in Dorset-shire, by his brother King Ethelbald. Hi supposed Issue. (5) Athelm, the brothers sonne of King Elfred, mentioned in the last will and testament of the same Athelm the eldest sonne. King, seemeth by all likelihood to be the eldest son of this King Ethelbert, elder brother to the same King Elfred, although hee succeeded not his father in his Kingdome. For in those daies, if the Kings sonne were vnder age, the succession went to the next brother; and if that brother left his sonne at full age, then it went vnto him; otherwise it reuerted to the elder brothers sonne. (6) Ethelwald, surnamed Clit , which is a word of addition giuen to all the Saxon Kings sonnes of Eng∣land, Ethel ld the se∣cond sonne. is mentioned in King Elfreds wil to be his bro∣thers sonne, and is most likely to be the sonne of this King Ethelbert, he prooued a most deadly enemy to his cosen King Edward, the sonne of King Elfrid his Vncle, destroying his townes in Dorset-shire, and be∣ing driuen out of England, ioined himselfe with the Danes, who made him their King in Northumberland, He y H ing. and vnder his leading, greeuously assailed the Coun∣tries of the East-Saxons, East-Angles, and Mercians, wherein hee was lastly slaine, the yeere of our Lord nine hundred and fiue, being the fourth of King Ed∣ward his cosen-germanes raigne. ETHELRED THE TVVO AND Monarch 23. Ethelred. TVVENTIETH KING OF THE WEST-SAXONS, AND THE TWENTY THIRD MO∣NARCH OF THE ENGLISH-MEN, HIS ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XXXV. E Thelred, the third sonne of King Ethelwolfe, after the An. Do. 866. decease of his Brother suc∣ceeded him in his Domi∣nions, and was in num∣ber the two and twen∣tieth King of the West-Saxons, and the twenty third Monarch of the Englishmen; he beganne his raigne in the yeare of our saluation eight hun∣dred sixty and six, and for the time that hee was King, raigned in continuall warres against the Pagan Danes, whose numbers now were greater, and foo∣ting surer in this land then formerly had beene. (2) In the first yeare of his raigne, there arriued vpon the English coasts a huge Army of these Danes, Hunger and Hubba. whereof Hungar and Hubba, men of incredible strength and cruelty, were the Captaines: These wintred in East Anglia, made truce with the inha∣bitants vpon certaine conditions, and forbare a time from their wonted rauening. (3) But in the next yeare the King being busied to put backe a fresh inrode of Danes in the South and West of the Iland then entred; these deuourers tooke aduantage vpon the ciuil broiles commenced among the Northumbrians, who in these turmoiled times sought to withdraw their subiections from the West Saxons, and to set vp Kings againe of their owne. The foresaid Captaines Hungar and Hubba, hauing The Danes march North∣ward. in time of their truce strengthned themselues with new supplies of aid, marched further into the North, where finding the people vnprouided of strength, and the two Kings Osbright and Ella of reconciled enemies to be made no sure friends, they harried the Country before them, and entring Yorke slew the two Kings, with infinit number of the English; which City they consumed with fire, and burnt therein all those that had fled thither for succour. (4) The State thus standing, and their forces en∣creasing euery day, brought new feares vpon the in∣habitants, when euery late victory with increase of Captiues and rich spoiles, ministred occasion & meanes of some other conquest to follow; which these Pagans so pursued, till lastly they set a substi∣tute King to raigne vnder them, ouer all the North Borders beyond the riuer Tyne; and so retiring them∣selues out of Northumberland into Mercia, came to Nottingham, which City they wanne, and therein wintred the third of King Ethelreds raigne, who with the aid of Burthred the Mercian King, constrained Ing s. the Danes to sue for peace, and a safe departure, yeel∣ding the City, and againe retyring themselues ouer Tyne, remained in Yorke all the next winter. (5) The Summers opportunity approching, An. Do. 870. their wonted desire for spoile was with it encreased, and to cut off long trauell these Danes by boates passed Humber, where Hungar and Hubba beganne with fire and sword to lay all wast before them, spa∣ring neither Person, sexe nor age. The places respe∣cted for publike good, and sacred Temples con∣secrated onely to God, which all other Tyrants haue forborne, these sauage men as the earths destroiers cast downe and trampled vnder their prophane feete: among which for note were the goodly Mo∣nasteries of Bradney, Crowland, Peterborow, Ely, and Huntington, all laid in leuell with the ground, and their Votaries, aswell the Nunnes as the Monkes, murthered with their vnhumane and mercilesse swords; to auoid whose barbarous pollutions, the chast Nunnes of Coldingham defo ed themselues to their lasciuious eyes, by cutting off their vpper lips and noses; but to euerlasting remembrance they Fl es Histor. remain most faire, and well beseeming faces of pure Virgins. (6) These Pagans piercing further into the land, came into the territories of the East-Angles, wherein holy Edmund raigned King, whose Martyrdome in most cruell manner they wrought, he constantly cal∣ling vpon the name of Christ, whereof wee haue al∣ready spoken, and shall bee occasioned hereafter to speake. (7) But in the last yeare of this Kings raign, their raging power was most great: for with a new sup∣ply two Danish Kings Sreeg, and Halden, entred in∣to West-Saxia, and at Reading the Kings towne in∣trenched themselues: these forraging the Coun∣try, were encountred with at Engl field by Ethelwolfe Earle of Barkeshire, and his men, who in skirmish slew one of their leaders; and chased the rest backe to their Trench. (8) These Danes fearing lest delaies would proue dangerous, and knowing that the first successe is commonly seconded with further courage of hope; foure dayes after shewed themselues in field rea∣dy to fight: their hoast they diuided into two bat∣talians; whereof the one was guided by two of their Kings and certaine Earles were leaders of the o∣ther; which when the English perceiued, they also Assendon battaile. diuided theirs, whereof King Ethelred had the lea∣ding of the first, and Elfred his brother was Gene∣rall of the second; the place was Assendon, where their Tents were pitched, and the day approached for battaile: King Ethelred in his Tent staid so long in praiers that Elfred vpon a forward courage hasted to encounter the enemy, and that with a most fierce and sharpe fight, wherein hauing spent the most of their strengthes; and ready to decline, and giue backe: Ethelred manfully entred the battaile, and so secon∣ded his brother, and ouer-tyred Souldiers, that hee Scala Chronicon. made way by dint of his sword through the thickest of their almost-conquering enemies, and with such losse of the Danish bloud, drawne from the sides of one of their Kings, fiue Earles, and an infinite num∣ber of the common Souldiers, that the streames ther∣of seemed as an ouer-swelling tide, altogether to couer the face of the field, and is accounted for the noblest victory that the English till then had gotten of the Danes. (9) Yet were not these Pagans therewith dis∣couraged, but gathering more strengthes and sup∣plies from other parts; foureteen dayes after, made head againe against the English, and pitching downe Basing battaile. their standards at Basing, abode the cōming of Ethel∣red and triall of battaile, wherein successe was alto∣gether altered; for herein the Kings part was dis∣comfited, and the Danes the winners of the day. (10) Thus both sides borne vpon rage & hope, in their heat of bloud prepare for new fight. The Danes power was augmented with a further supply sent from beyond Seas, and the English confirmed with hope of successe: These meeting at Merton (two moneths after the battaile of Basing) encoun∣tred each others both boldly and bloodily; where∣in at first the English preuailed, and the Danes were chased; but their numbers the greater, and fresh supply maintaining their , they r uered themselues, and wonne the day; wherein King Ethelred receiued his deaths wound, with such slaughter of his people, that little wanted the end of all encounters, to haue been afterwards attemp∣ted any more by the English. (11) Great was the valour and resistance of this King; for in his short time of Raigne, as Writers record, no lesse then nine set battales against the Danes he fought in one yeare, to the great effusion of Christian bloud, and to no little losse of the Da∣nish power; for in his raign fell of them one King, nine Earles, and of the common sort without num∣ber. (12) He died at Wittingham of his wound receiued the three and twentieth day of April, in the yeare of our Lord God eight hundred seauenty two, and was buried in the Collegiat Church of Winburne in Dor∣cetshire, where remaines his Tombe and his Armes vnto this day, with this Inscription: In hoc loco quiescit corpus Sancti Ethelredi Regis West-Saxonum Scala Chr n. Marian. Scot. Martyris, qui Anno Domini 872. 23. die Aprilis, per manus Dacorum Paganorum occu∣buit. His Issue. Elfred, the eldest sonne of King Ethelred seemeth to be Grandfather to the noble and learned Ethel∣ward, Elfred the eldest sonne. who being Kinsman, Counsellor and Trea∣surer to King Edgar; wrote an history of his Coun∣try, beginning at the first arriuall of the Saxons into England, and continuing vnto his own time: which history he dedicated to his kinswoman, and cosen germane the Lady Mande Abbesse of Quedlingburg in Saxonie, being the daughter of the Emperour The Abbesse of Quedlingburg. Otho, by Edgith his wife, daughter of King Edward the elder, and sister of Ethelstane, and Edmund Kings of England. Oswald, a young sonne of King Ethelred, is men∣tioned Oswald a yonger sonne. in a Charter of his Fathers, by which he gaue lands to the Monastery of Abingdon neere Oxford; and to which this sonne of his hath his name set downe for a witnes; which Charter is yet extant, recorded in a great Legiet-booke, and Register of the Euiden∣ces of the lands, sometime belonging to the said Mo∣nastery. Thyre, the daughter of King Ethelred, is reported Thyre a daughter by the histories of Ireland to bee married to King of the Danes, and to haue had issue King Harald, which Harald, by Queene Go hild his wife, had issue, Sweyn king of Denmarke, Iringe king of Northum∣berland, and Gonhild Queene of North-Wales. King Sweyn by Queene Sigred his wife, had issue C te King of England and Denmarke, Ostryde wife of Duke Wolfe, and mother of King Sweyn the yonger, and Thyre the first wife of Earle Goodwin of Kent. ELFRED THE TVVENTIE THIRD Monarch 24. Elfred. KING OF THE VVEST SAXONS, AND TWENTIE FOVRTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS ACTS, RAIGNE, WIFE AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XXXVI. E Lfred, or Alfred, the fourth sonne of King Ethelwolfe, An. Do. 872. though he had beene an∣nointed King at Rome by Marianus. Florentius. Pope Leo in his young years & Fathers life time; yet raigned he in no part of his dominions, before the deathes of all his Bre∣thren, vnder whom hee serued in most of their warres, assisting them like∣wise in all their counsels: the land now miserably torne by the cruell incursions of the bloudy Danes, was left vnto him, both to redeeme, and to raigne ouer, by the death and Testament of King Ethelred his last brother. (2) Hee beganne his raigne in the yeare of his age twenty two, and of our Lord God eight hundred seuenty two, being crowned in the City of Winche∣ster, the twenty third King of the West-Saxons, and the twenty foure Monarch of the Englishmen: but of some Historians he is famoused by the stile of the first absolute Monarch. (3) His raigne beganne with troubles and wars in defence of the land which the Pagan Danes inten∣ded Asser. to destroy; and though his powers were smal, yet was he forced into the field within one month af∣ter his Coronation; the place was Wilton in the Coun∣ty of Wiltstire, on the south-banke of the riuer Wily: Speculum hist. Ricardus Cirence∣strencis. where the Danes at first gaue backe and fled but seeing the fewnes of their pursuers, reenforced their battle, and got the field, with whom the West-Sax∣ons entred league, and compounded for their depar∣ture from among them. (4) These Rouers then with their associates at Reading, got themselues into London, where they wintred; with whom the Mercians likewise compoū∣ded for their peace, which proued shortly to be the destruction of their princely bloud; and lastly, the lands subuersion to a forraine nation. For the Mat. West. Danes hauing got footing in the North, the West, and the South of this land, (vnto whose aide many new-come guests from their Easterne countries were arriued, vnder the leading of other three Kings, Gurthrun, Esketel, and Ammond) all together set their griping tallents with such fast hold vpon Mercia, that at Ripendon they constrained Burthred the King with his Queene Elswith out of the land, and in his stead placed a King of their owne choise, vpon Polychro. lib. 6. c. condition to deliuer vp the same againe vnto them when they would demaund it. (5) In the fourth yeare of King Elfred their ar∣mies diuided themselues into two parts, the one of An. Dom. 875. them guided by King Halden, returned into Northum∣berland; where hee bestowed that Country among his followers, and therein remained for two yeares continuance, doing much harmes both to the English and Picts. The other part led by the last new-come King, came to Granabridge, whence they wintered and spoiled the Country, and there sprea∣ding themselues as Grashoppers vpon the face of the earth, eate vp all where they came; so that King El∣fred was enforced to compound for their departure Elfreds compo∣sition. out of his owne kingdome in West-Saxia; to which couenants they promised and swore; yet contrary to both, tooke into Deuonshire, and wintred at Ex∣cester, vnto whom a further supply by sea sought to ioine themselues, but met with such boisterous blasts, that one hundred and twenty of their ships were cast away by tempest at Swanwicke vpon our coasts, and their land-army marching towards Ex∣cester, were there welcommed with so sharpe an en∣counter by King Elfred, that they gaue him both pledges and oath to depart with all speed. (6) But Fortune euer dallying with them, whom shee meanes to down-cast, set the chance of losse pre∣sently vpon the Saxons side: for now the three Kings Gurthrun, Esketel, and Ammond thought it not good to let Elfred thus rest, and thereupon drew their forces westwards towards him, where at Chi∣pingham Three Kings against Elfred. (a Mannor of his) they wintred, and com∣pelled th West-Saxons there, either to yeeld, or to forsake the Country. (7) King Elfred therefore, with such strength as he had, hasted towards them, and seuenteene miles An. Do. 876. from Bristow pitched downe his tents euen in the face of the enemy; where betwixt these fierce nati∣ons a great battaile was fought, to the infinite losse of bloud on both sides, and that vpon such equall departure, as neither could challenge to bee masters of the field; yet the report went, that King Elfred was discomfited, which turned greatly to his ad∣uantage; for thereupon many of the English hasted to his succour, lest the ouerthrow of him should be the bane of them all; his strengthes thus renued with an vnexpected supply, no time was detracted to stay the Danish rage, who were now returned fur∣ther into the heart of the land, and at Abington by Ox∣ford had pitched their standreds for fight. Abington. (8) Thither the English repaired, and the next morning he ordered his Army; neither were the e∣nemies vnprepared, but with braues stood ready to receiue the encounter. The battaile ioyned, conti∣nued with such losse of bloud, that it is accounted one of the sorest that euer betwixt them before had beene fought, and onely parted by the approch of the night, neither party challenging the honor of the day, the losse being so great vpon both sides. Seuen of these battailes are reported to be fought in that yeare, whereby both their strengthes were much abated, and their spilt bloud so cooled Seuen battailes in one yeare. their liuers; that lastly they concluded vpon a peace; one article was this, that the Danes should admit no more of their nation to arriue in this Iland: but how soone that was broken, the sequels did shew. (9) For in the yeare eight hundred seuenty sixe, (saith Simon Dunelmensis) Rollo a nobleman of Den∣marke with a great Army entred into England, with An. Do. 876. Simon Dunel. no lesse spoile and destruction then other of those Danes before him had done, notwithstanding the truce: with whom King Elfred met, and gaue him so hoat welcome, that hee liked not greatly his enter∣tainement; and being warned (forsooth) in his sleepe, that better fortune attended him in France, hee left his countrimen to tugge with the English. (10) The Danes then accounting the peace to be broken, like Bees from the Hiue, infect all the Elfreds exigents. land, insomuch that this vndaunted King Elfred was ofttimes brought to such extremities, that he hid himselfe out of sight, and in the Fens & Marsh grounds was forced with such small companies as he had, to liue by fishing, fowling, and hunting of wild beasts for his food, hauing no more of his great Mo∣narchy left him, but Somerset, Hamton, and Wilt∣shires only, neither yet them free from the incursi∣ons of the Danes. (11) The solitary place of his most residency, was an Iland inclosed with the two riuers Tho e and Parret, at their meeting in the County of Sommer∣set, Edelingsey Iland. commonly called Edelingsey, where he in very poore attire disguised, was entertained into a Cow∣heards house (if not into his seruice,) where on a time as he sate by the fire in trimming of his bow and Asser. S . Hist . Ric. Cir . shafts, a cake of dow baking vpon the hearth be∣fore him, chanced to burn; the Cowheardesse com∣ming in, and seeing him mind more his bow then his bread, in a great fury cast away both his bow and arrowes, and checking him as her Groom, said, Thou fellow, doest thou see the bread burne before thy face, and wilt not turne it? and yet art thou glad to eate it before it bee halfe baked? little suspecting him to be the man that had beene serued with more delicate cates. (12) But this Prince, the very mirrour of Prin∣ces, more minding the wealth of his subiects, then Polydor. Virg. the maiesty of State, disguised himselfe in the habite of a common Minstrell, and in person repaired to the Danes Campe, who lay like sena , wal∣lowing in wantonnesse, and secure in their owne . conceit from impeach of danger; which Elfred a most skilfull Musitian, and an excellent Poet, did not a little egge on by his sweet musicke, and songs of their valour; so that he was suffered to passe vncontrol∣led into the company of their Princes, at banquets, or else where: whereby he both saw their negligent security, and by diligent obseruance learned the designes that in their counsels they entended. (13) Returning to his comfortlesse company, he told them the condition of the hostile Campe, and how easie it was to recouer againe their decaied e∣states: H y Hunt. An. Do. 878 whereupon shewing himselfe to his subiects, vnto whose sight nothing could bee more ioyous; on the suddaine set vpon the carelesse Campe of the Danes, and made thereof a very great slaughter, to the great terrour of others in other parts, that had ac∣counted him dead long since. (14) Hubba, that had harried the English, and now rowzed vpon the newes of King Elfreds victo∣ry and life; with thirty three ships sailed from Wales, and arriuing in the mouth of Tau, where it falleth into the Seuerne Sea, assaied to take there the then-strong Castle called Kinwith, vnto whom the Deuonshire men gaue battle, and slew eight hundred and eighty persons of their retinue; where died the An. Do. 879: Danish King Hubba, whose corps being there inter∣red vnder a great heape of copped stones; gaue name to the place, and was called Hubblestone. There and Asser. . then was taken the Danish much esteemed Banner, called Reafan, wherin a Rauen was purtraied wrought in needle-worke, (so Asserius Meneuensis reporteth) by the three sisters of Hubba and Hungar the daugh∣ters of Lothbroke (that is Leather-breach) the Dane: In regard whereof, as also for the opinion of good lucke, as they tooke it, it was cuer born before them in their wars. (15) These aduerse proceedings of the Danes de∣signes, especially falling when the game was neere wonne, made them suspect, how faire soeuer the ball lay to hand, yet fortune would serue it in the end to their losse: for Elfred now flocked vnto vpon euery Danes send for peace. side, beganne to build fortresses behind his backe, and forward to march with his conquering sword: whereupon the Danes sent to him for Peace, and de∣liuered him hostages, vpon assurance that they meant as they spake: The conditions were, that their King should receiue Baptisme, and the great Army of the Danes quietly to depart out of the land. (16) Whereupon Gurmound or Gurthrun the Da∣nish King repaired to the new built Castle of Edeling∣sey vnto King Elfred, and in the place then called Al∣re, was washed in the lauer of Baptisme, whom Elfred receiued for his God-son by the name of Athelstane, and gaue him in free gift the Country of East-Angles. In the same fountaine of Grace (saith Simond Dunel∣mensis) thirty of the chiefe Danish Nobility were ini∣tiated: Sl D lm. vpon whom the truly Christian King Elfred bestowed many rich gifts: And that the limites of the English might be free from their incursions, thus the confines of King Elfreds kingdome were laide forth, as we find it in the end of those Lawes that El∣fred published, whose words are these: Let the bounds of our Deminio stretch from the riuer Thamesis, and from . Lambere in his booke of the old English lawes. thence to the water of Lea, euen vnto the head of the same water, and so forth straight vnto Bedford: and finally, going along by the riuer of Ouse, let them end at Watling street. (17) But so farre were the Danes from perfor∣mance of couenants, that in this eight yeare of King An. Do. 879 Elfreds raigne, and the eight hundred seuenty nine after Christ, this Gurmund and his company winte∣red Mar . at Chipnam in Wiltshire, and a new supply of these Pagans (known by the name of the Wicci gi) wintred at Fulh m neere London; yet after vpon better ad∣uice, the one went into their assigned circuit, and the other departed to the realme of France; and so to his twelfth yeare the land tooke some rest, that had been kept long waking by the loud sound of warre. (18) In the yeare of Grace eight hundred eighty fiue, these last retired Danes finding France not fitting their purpose, returned into Kent, and put into Medway, where on his East side they began a fierce siege vnto the City Rochester, before whose gate they built a strong Castle: Thither King Elfred hasted, before whose power these Danes could not stand, but were forced to their shippes, and backe againe into France, (19) Whereupon the King remoued his siege vn∣to London, whence all the Danes fled (as Wolues a∣bide An. Do. 889. not the presence of the Lion) the inhabitants Asserius. Flo. Wigorn. reioicing to see the face of their King: which City hee restored to her former liberty and beauty, and committed the custody thereof vnto Ethelred Duke of Mercia, that had maried his daughter the Lady E∣thelfred, Wil. Malmsbury. whose title the King had maintained against Colwolphus, made King thereof by the Danes. Wher∣upon both Kent, the South-Saxons, and West-Saxons came willingly, and submitted themselues to King Elfred. The East-Angles being gouerned, or rather spoiled by Athelstan the christned Dane, who after twelue yeares raigne there died, and was buried at Hadley in Suffolke. (20) But in the one and twentieth of his raigne, and of Christs Incarnation eight hundred ninety An. Do. 892. two: those rouing Danes returned out of France, & againe arriued in Kent in the mouth of the riuer Li∣men, with two hundred and fifty ships, which they drew foure miles into the great wood, then called Andreads Weald, and there destroied a Castle that stood for defence, building another more strong at Apulder, wherein they kept. At the same time like∣wise entred one Hastings, a Nobleman of Norway, Si Dun. with eighty ships; but with a fairer shew as hee en∣tended, for he sent his oath vnto Elfred not to an∣noy any part of his dominions, and withall his two sonnes to bee baptized: which King Elfred accepted, himselfe becomming the Godfather of the one, and Duke Ethelred of the other; and both they, and his Ambassadors returned with rich gifts. Against these Kentish inuaders, King Elfred fought a great battaile at Fernham, neere vnto Aelesford, wherein he Fernham battaile wounded their King, and forced his Army to flee o∣uer Thamesis; in passing whereof, through ouer∣much hast, and great feare many of them were drow∣ned, and they that escaped, fled to an Iland called Breklesey inclosed about by the riuer Colne. (21) Newes then being brought into the East, that the Danes from Northumberland had infested the West, and with a strong siege begirt the City Exce∣ster. Elfred left for Generall his sonne in law Duke Ethelred; whilest he with a strong power went to sup∣presse their rage: who hearing of his comming, brake vp their siege, and were gone: vpon the aduantage of his absence, perlured Hastings then wrought, who out of his new built Castle at Beamfield, made spoile of the Kings people, and forraged all the Country * Bea fles. before him. Whereupon Duke Ethelred assembled a power, and first assailing his wel stored Castle, tooke thence his wife and two sonnes, with exceeding spoiles of gold, siluer and garments; all which were presented vnto King Elfred at his returne to London: who out of his princely magnanimity, sent backe to Hastings his wife and two sonnes; because (said hee) Hastings wife and children set at liberty. shee was no warriour, and his two sonnes were his God-children: whereupon Hastings repaired his Ca∣stle, and ioined with the other Danes that lay at A∣pulder. (22) Those then that had fled but lately from Excester, in their returne met with other their con∣sorts, Excester and Chester besieged. and rouing about the coast for their prey, fell lastly vpon the ancient City Chester, which presently they beganne to sacke and burne. But the country inhabitants comming to the rescue, begirt them a∣bout with their hoast, and forestalled the passages of all supply of victuals; so that for want of food, the Danes were constrained to eate vp their horses, and vpon composition thence to depart. (23) Thence fetching a compasse all along the coasts of Wales, in the same yeare they arriued in Es∣sex, An. Do. 895. Flor . Wigorn. Marian. Scotus. being the twenty foure of King Elfreds raigne: and in the Winter following, drew their ships by the Thamesis into the riuer Lea, by which they passed in those light Pinnaces twenty miles North-ward into the land, and built them a fortresse at the place cal∣led Ware. Weare, thither forthwith the King repaired, and pitched his tets before his enemies in the same place; who seeing their strength, and the danger of long The riuer Lea deuided and ade vnnauiga∣ble. siege, did that by policy, which power could not so sodainely do: for he diuided the riuer into sundrie streames, whereby the Chanell was made vnnaui∣gable, and the Shippes bedded in the mudde, lay rather to their annoiance then defence; the former Henry H ting. experience of their hunger-starud besiege made thē the more fearefull to fall into the like; and therfore in great hast departed their fortresse, leauing their wiues and children to the mercy of the English. Nei∣ther stayed they till they came vnto the borders of Wales, when at Cartbridge vpon Seuerne they built another Castle, and lay there all the next winter. (24) Long there they stayed not, without dislike of their lodgings, and cold entertainments, but that An. Do. 897. they returned to their wonted spoiles, and diuiding themselues, some to Northumberland, and some into East-Anglia, like Locusts eate vp all as they went: whose breath as it were, so infected the aire, that for three yeares following a great mortality raigned both vpon men and beasts, and ended not much before the death of this incomparable Prince: which hapned to the great sorrow of his subiects vpon wed∣nesday the twenty eight of October, when hee had raigned twenty nine yeares and sixe moneths, of his age fifty one, and yeare of Christ Iesus nine hundreth and one. (25) The vertues of this Prince are matchable to any that euer raigned before him, and exceed the most that euer raigned after him, both in seruice of God, whose Substitutes they are, in defence of his Country, which charge they all beare, in prouiding Seal. Chr. Regist. Hyde. Tho. Rudburne. Reg. Hig. good lawes, the sinewes of Kingdomes, and care of posterities, from which no man is exempted: The day and night containing twenty foure how∣ers, he designed equally to three especiall vses, and them obserued by the burning of a taper set in his Chappell or Oratory; eight howres hee spent in con∣templation, reading, and prayers; eight, in prouisi∣on for himselfe, his repose and health; and the o∣ther eight in the affaires of his common-wealth and state. His Kingdome hee likewise diuided into Shires, Hundreds and Tithings, for the better orde∣ring Asserim Men. and administring of iustice, and for the abando∣ning of theeues, which had formerly increased by the meanes of long warres; whereby, notwithstan∣ding the multitude of souldiers continually imploi∣ed, it is reported that a Virgin might trauaile alone in his daies through all his dominions, without any violence offered; and that bracelets of gold were hanged in the high waies, and no man so hardy as to wil. Malmsbury. take them away. Hee was a most zealous, and studious protector and prouider for the Clergy, Widdowes, and Or∣phans, liberall of his goods, wise, temperate and iust, valiant, patient in aduersities, and euer relgious in the seruice of God. A most learned Prince, a skil∣full Musition, and an excellent Poet: the best lawes beefitting his Subiects he translated into the English tongue: as also the Pasterall of Gregory, the history of Beda, and Boetius his consolation of Philosophy, the Psalmes of Dauid (whose godly raigne he proposed to Elfreds good studies. himselfe for imitation) hee likewise began to tran∣slate, but died before hee could finish the same. And so great a desire had he vnto learning, that (as Alfre∣dus Riuallensis witnesseth) he published this Act: We Alfred Ri es∣sit in Apo∣logia Oxen. will and command, that all Freemen of our Kingdom, who∣soeuer possessing two hides of land, shall bring vp their sons in learning till they be fifteene yeares of age at least, that so they may be trained to know God, to bee men of understan∣ding, and to line happily: for, of a man that is borne free, and yet illiterate, we repute no otherwise then of a beast, or a brainelesse body, and a very sot. And for the furthe∣rance of this his roiall intent, consorted with Aserius Meneuensis, Grimbald, Iohn Scot and others, neither Aserius. Grimbald. Iohn Scot. permitted he any in office in Court, or elsewhere, vn∣lesse he were learned, which incited his Nobles to the earnest pursuit of learned Arts, and to traine vp their children in good letters: his buildings were many, both to Gods seruice, and other publicke vse, as at Edelingsey a Monastery, at Winchester a New-Minster; and at Shaftsbury a house of Nunnes, wherein hee made his daughter Ethelgeda the Abbesse. But the Annales of Win∣ton Monast. foundation of the Vniuersity of Oxford (which hee be∣gan in the yeare of our Lord eight hundred ninety fiue, and whose lectures he honoured with his owne presence) surmounteth all his others, to the continu∣ance of posterities, a liuing spring and gratious foun∣taine, whence issue the streames of all knowledge, that abundantly haue watred both this and other kingdomes. (26) His body was first buried in the Cathedrall Church of S. Peters at Winchester, vnder a faire Monu∣ment Mal s. de Reg. l. 2. . 4. of most pretious Purphory, afterwards because the lewd-religious Chanons giue it out (to work some feat of their vsual imposture) that his Ghost did walk euery night from house to house; both it and the Monument were taken vp, and by his son the Kings commaund (in detestation of those sorceries) remo∣ued into the Church of the new Monastery: and last∣ly, his body, Monument, Church and Monastery, were taken thence, and remoued without the North∣gate of the City, since called Hyde. (27) Some alleadge that the malice of those Chanons against him, was for displeasure that he pla∣ced ouer thē a rude Swineheard named Denewlphus, Wigornensis. Th. Rudburne. whom he made their Bishop; but the ground of that assertion seemeth vnwarrantable by the relation of Wigornensis, & also of Tho. Rudburne; the first of which saith, that Elfred caused him to be trained vp in lear∣ning, and the later, that after long study, he attained to the degree of a Doctor of Di inity in the Vniuersi∣ty of Oxford, and was afterward made Bishop of Win∣chester by the King. For doubtlesse at that time the Bishops of Rome had not deuested our Kings of that prerogatiue- His Wife. (28) Elswith the wife of King Elfred was the daughter of Ethelred surnamed M hel, that is the Elswith. Great, an Earle of the Mercians, who inhabited about Gainesborough in Lincolnshire: her mother was Ed∣burg a Lady borne of the Bloud-roiall of Mercia. She was married vnto this King in the twentieth yeare of his age, being the second of the raigne of his brother King Ethelred, and was his wife twenty eight yeares, and liuing after him foure; died in the year of grace nine hundred and foure, and was buried in the Mo∣nastery of Nunnes which shee had founded at Winche∣ster; out of which afterwards King Henry the first took to his wife Ma d the daughter of Malcolme King of Scots, by whom the roiall bloud of the ancient Kings of England became vnited to the Normans, whereby he wanne much loue of the English nation. Malcolme King of Scots. His Issue. Edward, the eldest sonne, and second child of King Elfred, and Queene Elsewith, was borne about the Edward the eldest sonne. beginning of his Fathers raigne, in the yeare of our Lord eight hundred seuenty one: hee was brought vp in his Fathers Court, and carefully attended, and instructed by men of great vertue and knowledge, in learning, and in all other qualities, and exercises conuenient for Princes. He was maried, and had di∣uers children: hee was thirty yeeres of age before his Father deceased, and then he succeeded him in his Kingdome and Monarchy. Ethelward; the second son, & fift, and last child of King Elfred and Queene Elswith, was borne about Ethelward the second sonne. the midst of his Fathers raigne, and about the yeare of our Lord eight hundred and eighty. Hee was in his youth by his Fathers appointment, and for the example of other young Nobles brought vp in the Rudburne Anna∣les . study of good Arts, at the vniuersity of Oxford, where (saith Th. Rudburne, and the Annales of Winchester) he became a man very learned, and a great Philoso∣pher: he had of his Fathers gift by his last Wil great liuings in the Counties of Deuon, Sommerset, South-Hampton: he proued a man of great iudgement and wisedome, and liuing vntill he was aboue forty yeres old; hee died the sixteenth day of October, in the two and twenty yeare of his brother King Edwards raign, Anno nine hundred twenty two, and was buri∣ed at Winchester. Elfleda, the eldest daughter and first child of King Elfleda the eldest daughter. Elfred, and Queene Elswith his wife, was married to Ethelred Duke of Mercia, who in respect of this mariage was suffered to haue all roiall iurisdiction ouer that Country, in as ample maner as the Kings thereof had enioied; and after the decease of her husband, which happened in the yeare of our Lord nine hundred and twelue: shee continued the go∣uernement in the same sort eight yeares, with such resolution and valiant resistance of the common ene∣my (the Danes) that she stood her brother Edward in great stead, as in the relation of his life shall be fur∣ther shewed. She died the fifteenth of Iune nine hundred and nineteene, and was buried in S. Peters Church at Gloucester, leauing issue, a daughter, na∣med Elswin, whom King Edward her brother depri∣ued of that Duchy, which her owne mother enioied, and he his crowne by her assistance. Ethelgeda, the second daughter and fourth child of King Elfred and Queene Elswith, was neuer mar∣ried, Ethelgeda the se∣cond daughter. but tooke vpon her the profession and vow of Virginity, and was by her fathers appointment made a Nunne of Shaftsbury in the County of Dorset, in the Monastery there founded by him: who is also accounted the first of the Towne it selfe. Shee was afterward Abbesse of the house, and therein spent, and ended her life, and was there also buried. Elfride, the yongest daughter, and child of King Elfride the yo ∣gest daughter. Elfred (and Queene Elswith his wife, was married to Baldwin the second, surnamed the Bald, Earle of Flan∣ders, sonne of Earle Baldwin the first, and Queene Iu∣dith his wife, the widdow of King Ethelwolfe her Grandfather. Shee was his wife thirty yeares and more; shee suruiued him and was a widdow eleuen yeeres, she died the seuenth of Iune, in the yeere of our Lord nine hundred twenty nine, being the fift of the raigne of King Ethelstan her Nephew. She is bu∣ried by her husband in the Chappell of our Lady; within the Monastery of S. Peter, at the City of Gaunt. She had issue Arnulfe the third Earle of Flanders, pro∣genitor of all the Earles of Flanders since his time, & Ad lfe Earle of Bol igne and Terwi . EDVVARD SVRNAMED THE EL∣DER Edward Monarch 24. THE TWENTIE FOVRTH KING OF THE WEST SAXONS, AND TWENTY FIFT MONARCH OF THE ENGLISH-MEN, HIS RAIGNE; ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XXXVII. N O greater were the griefes conceiued for the death of worthy Elfred, then were An. Do. 901. the hopes of the people in his sonne Prince Edward, whose valour had beene often approued against the raging Danes, & whose vertues were both many and princely; not so lear∣ned as his Father, neither so patient to vndergoe his chance; but as glorious in martiall prowesse, and as fortunate in al his fights, vnder whose hand the Danes euery where fell, and vnder his Monarchy all the Eng∣lish did stoope excepting the Northumbrians. (2) He entred his raigne the yeare of Christs na∣tiuity, nine hundred and one, and at Kingston vpon Speculum hist. . Ciren. Thames was crowned and annointed with holy oyle. The Danish warres continuing in a successiue maner, Iohn Stow. fell as it were hereditaryly from the Father vnto the Sonne, and ripened dayly towards their wished har∣uest. Besides Ethelwald the sonne of Ethelbert, the vn∣cle to this King Edward, young at his fathers decease, Ethealwld his minority. and therefore perhappes held vncapable of gouern∣ment, shewed now the blossoms of vnder-sucking plants, whose fruits are neither plenteous nor plea∣sant in tast; for his humours euer working vpon discontents, drew his thought onely how to make the possessor fall. (3) He then entring action of rebellion, tooke the towne of Winborne neere vnto Bathe, and besides the Winborne taken by him. allegiance due to his Prince, in sacrilegious manner brake the hests of holy Church, in deflowring and ta∣king a Votarist to wife: Edward the elder so called, (it may be in regard of this his Opposite) with a sele∣cted Army repaired to Bathe, and thence prepared for the field: whose sight was so cockatrice-like to his cosen-Germans eye, that in the night he bade his Nun and Winborne adew, posting to Northumberland, and proffering his seruice to the Danes that lay for ad∣uantage of rapine and spoile. Henry . (4) Him as a fitte instrument they created their King, and forward in hope of some prosperous suc∣cesse, passed through the East-Saxons, the East-An∣gles, and the Mercians Countries: and laden with rob∣beries came to Crikelade in Wilt-shire, whence they de∣parted ouer Thamesis to Basingstoke; and harrying the Ran. Higd. land before them, with triumph returned vnto East-Anglia. Edward thus endangered by these dreadfull enemies, gaue them no aduantage by lingering de∣laies, but followed their tract vnto Saint Edmunds S. Edmunds ditch. Ditch, whence in his returne, the Danes gaue him battaile, and obtained the victory, though bought with the liues of Ethelwald and Cochricus their Kings, and losse of many English, which made Edward the readier to enter a truce with them about the fift of his raigne. (5) That the English were most expert for war in these daies, is witnessed by their resistance of those sturdy Danes, against whom the Commons many times with victory fought, without either King or Captaine to guide them: and they were likewise fa∣mous in other lands: for about this time it was, that the Englishmen at the perswasion of the Gothes, An. Do. 905. besieged the great City Argilla in Barbary, which they wanne with such slaughter of the enemy, and spoile of the towne, that for thirty yeares after it lay deso∣late without inhabitants, whereby it was hoped that the Saracens would haue departed Europe, as Io∣annes Leo Afer hath told vs, who according to the Ioannes Leo Aph r in Descrip . A ric. lib. 3. Saracens doth referre this siege to the three hun∣dred and foureteenth of Mahomet Hegira, which meeteth with the yeare of Christs Natiuity, nine hundred and fiue. (6) The truce yet lasting, the Danes in Northumber∣land were nothing quiet, to stay whose irruptions The Danes breake truce with the Eng∣lish. King Edward sent a great power, who harried the Country before them, and with much slaughter returned victorious. These daliances of Fortune made the Danes very desperate, and therefore to stay the rowling ball before it should passe their goale, they gathered their powers & entred Mercia, where with victory and spoile they raged for a time. But Edward to aid Ethelred his brother in law, and Earle of that Prouince, mustered his men, and at Wodnes∣field neere Wolfrune-hampton in Stafford-shire gaue thē battaile, wherein the English so behaued themselues that the two Pagan-Kings Cowilfu & Healidine, the An. Do. 910. two Earles Vter and Scurfa, besides other Nobles & Simon Dunelm. Two Danish Kings slaine. Commons innumerable they slew: and now the clouds of these distemperatures being driuen backe, King Edwards Monarchy ascended the Horizon, and the Sunne of his power beganne to shine very bright, therefore he seeking to hold what he had got, set his thoughts to secure his towns with Castles and walles of defence. (7) These his proceedings caused him to be both beloued and feared; but his mind still free from any ambitious pride, as may appeare by the intercourse betwixt Leolin Prince of Wales and himselfe, wherof Wal. Mapaeus maketh mention as followeth. What Wal. Mapaeus. time Edward the Elder (saith he) lay at Austeline, and Leolin Prince of Wales at Bethesley, intending a Parly, Leolin refused to come downe, or to crosse the Seuerne: Whereupon Edward tooke boat and entred the riuer to∣wards Leolin his ho∣mage to King Edward. him, which when Leolin saw, and knew who hee was, he cast off his rich roabe wherewith he was clad, and which hee had prepared for that roiall assembly, and entred the riuer breast-hie, where clasping the boat with an im∣brace, submissiuely said: Most wise and sage King, thy humility hath ouercome my insolencie, and thy wisedome His admiration of King, Edwards mildnes. triumphed ouer my folly; come, get vpon my necke which I haue (foole as I am) lifted vp against thee, so shalt thou enter into that land which thy benigne mildnes hath made thine owne this day: and after he had taken him vpon his shoulders, he would needs haue him sit down vpon his roi∣all roabe, and so putting his hands iointly into his, did him homage. (8) In the twelfth yeare of his raigne, as Henry Huntington hath it; Ethelred Earle of Mercia, who had Hen. Hunting. An. Do. 912. married Elfleda King Edwards sister, departed this life, she hauing borne him one onely daughter named Elfwen, whose trauell in childbirth was so grieuous, that euer after she forbare the nuptiall imbracements Elfleda dislike of wedlocke. of her husband, alleadging that it was an ouer foolish pleasure, which brought with it so great paines; and thereupon changing the wonted affection of her sexe from the bed vnto battaile, gouerned Mercia eight yeares after her husbands decease, as another Zenobia, and did not a little assist her brother in his warres: for the Welsh she pursued as farre at Brek∣noke, which she tooke with their Queene: from the Danes shee wonne the Connty of Darby, and assaul∣ting the towne vpon them, put herselfe in great dan∣ger; She winneth Brec k & Darby for enterprising to enter the Gate, shee was re∣sisted by whole multitudes of Danes; notwithstan∣ding, she persisted, & got entrance, in which encoun∣ter many died, and foure of her chiefe men of war, being Warders of her person-euen fast by her side were slaine. The Danes in Yorkeshire she constrained to bee at her deuotion, so that some of them became her sub∣iects, some vowed to attend in her aide, and some promised to be prest at her dispose. Her policie in warre proued euer the surest; her counsell of State was regarded with the wisest, and her prouidence in building, and repairing Cities for the weale-publick, or fortifying places for munition of warre exceeded others: which shee extended vpon Chester, Tam∣worth, Lichfield, Stafford, Warwicke, Shrewsbury, Wed∣desb ry, Many towns planted by her. Eadsbury, Finborow, Rimcorne, Brimsbery-Bridge and others. This renowned Lady giuing place vnto Nature, left the warres to bee continued by her brother; her daughter at the dispose of her vncle, and her body to be buried at Glocester in the Monastery of S. Pe∣ter, which her husband and her selfe had formely built. (9) The last battaile of this King against these vn∣satiate enemies, was in the Country of the East An∣gles, Polydor. whereof Edrick the Dane was King; for hee in∣tending new warres with the English; sought to in∣cite other Danes to his aide, whereof Edward ha∣uing intelligence, preuented his purpose, by his so∣daine approch into those parts. Edrick therefore hauing all in a readinesse, rashly Edrick his do∣ings. encountred with his enemy, and fought a fierce bat∣taile to the geeat losse of his Army, and dammage of his life; for returning to his Court after so foule a dis∣comfiture, became odious to his owne subiects, who violently fell vpon him and murdered him; and them selues brought low by ciuill dissention were shortly made subiect to the English King Edward, and that Kingdome with Mercia, ioined vnto his West-Sax∣ons. And now hauing raigned in great warres and honour the space of twenty foure yeares deceased at The time of King Edwards raigne. Faringdon in Barke-shire, the yeare of Christs incarna∣tion, 924. and was buried in the new-Monastery of His death and buriall. Winchester, which his Father begunne, and himselfe wholy finished. His Wiues. (10) Eguina the first wife of King Edward, was the Eguina. daughter of a meane Gentleman named Bercher, whose eye-pleasing feature and alluring beauty made her to be educated aboue the degree of her birth, and was brought vp by the nurse of King Edward in ten∣der affection and great esteeme. It chanced Prince Edward in kindnes came to visite his nurse, where see∣ing the admirable beauty of the Maide, fell so farre in Prince Edward marrieth Sg inae. loue, that he tooke her to his wife without the con∣sent or knowledge of his father: In which regard she is reputed by some Writers rather his Concubine then his Queene, no other cause mouing them but her meane parentage, and secret making and keeping of this mariage, although there bee some good histories and many likelyhoods to induce that she was his law∣full Queene. (11) Elfleda the second wife of King Edward, was the daughter (as Mathew of Westminster reporteth) of Elfleda. an Earle named Ethelhelme, and Asser the Bishop of Sherborne maketh mention of an Earle in Wiltshire a∣mong the West-Saxons of the same name, who was in great fauour with King Elfred, the father of this King, by whom hee was sent Ambassador to carry his Almes to Stephen the sixt, of that name Bishop of Stephen the sixt Bishop of Rome. Rome, in the yeare of our Lord 887 and by all proba∣ble conference of name, time, and place, hee seemeth to bee the man that was father to this Queene. Edgina. (12) Edgina, the third wife of King Edward, was the daughter and heire of Earle Sigeline Lord of Me∣apham, Culings, and Leanham in Kent, who was there slaine in battaile against the Danes, Anno 927. She was married vnto King Edward about the fourteenth yeare of his raigne, being the yeare of Grace, 916. She was his wife ten yeares, and after his death she liued a widdow all the times of the raignes of King Ethelstan her sonne in law, of King Edmund, and King Edred her owne sonnes, of King Edwy her Two Kings her sonnes. Grand-child, and was liuing in the Raigne of King Edward another of her Grand-children, almost fortie yeares after the death of her husband. It is writ of her that in the yeare of Grace, 959. Shee offered her lands and euidences to Christ vpon his Altar at Can∣terbury. She deceased the twenty fift of August in the fourth yeare of the said King Edgar, and of Christ, 963. His Children. (13) Ethelstan, the eldest sonne of King Edward, and the Lady Eguina, was borne and growne to good Ethelstan the first sonne. yeeres in the time of the raigne of his Grandfather King Elfred, who with his owne hands gaue him the order of Knighthood, after a very honourable man∣ner of creation, as William the Monke of Malmsbury, a great obseruer of such things, hath left in writing: Wil. Malmsb. who reporteth, that he put vpon him a Purple Robe, and girt him with a girdle wrought with pearle, and a Saxon sword in a scabard of gold, hanging at the same. He was the Successor of his Father in the West-Saxons dominions, and the English Monarchy. (14) Elfred, the second sonne of King Edward and the Lady Eguina, is warranted by the testimony of Elfred the se∣cond sonne. the story of Hyde, to haue been loued of his Father a∣boue all his other children, that he caused him in his owne lifetime to bee crowned King, and to sit with him in his Seat of Estate, as his Partner in the King∣dome, and that he enioyed that great honour but for Crowned King in his fathers time. a small time, deceasing shortly after his creation, and long before his fathers death; and was buried in the New Monastery at Winchester, which afterwards was remoued to Hyde. (15) Editha (whom the Scotish Writers call Bea∣trite) the daughter of King Edward and the Lady Editha the first daughter. Mat. Westminster. Po dor. Eguma; with great honour was maried to Sythrick, the Danish King of Northumberland, in the first yeere of the raigne of her brother King Ethelstane, being the yeere of grace 915. Within one yeere after her mari∣age, her husband deceased, and his sonne Guthfrid suc∣ceeded him in his Kingdome. Wherefore she forsa∣king that Country, obtained of her brothers gift, the Castell of Tamworth, in the County of Warwicke, Tamworth Ca∣stell. where she began a Monastery of Nunnes, and therein liued, died, and was interred, and both the Monastery and Body afterwards was remoued from thence vnto Pollesworth. (16) Elsward, the third son of King Edward, & the first of Queen Elfleda his second wife, was born, as Elsward the third sonne. it seemeth, about the beginning of his Fathers raigne. He was carefully brought vp in the study of Liberall Arts, and in all other princely qualities; so that it was expected he should haue succeeded his Father in the Kingdome: but presently vpon his fathers decease, he deceased himselfe in Oxford, and was buried at one time, and in one place with him in the New Mona∣stery at Winchester, in the yeere of Christ Iesus 924. Buried at Winche∣ster. (17) Edwine, the fourth sonne of King Edward, and the second of Queene Elfleda his second Wife, Edwine the fourth sonne. Wil. Malms. was very young when his father was buried, and his brother Ethelstane crowned. Notwithstanding a deep ielosie possessing the King, that his title was too neere the Crowne, he caused him to be put into a little Pin∣nesse, without either Tackle or Oares, one only page accompanying him, that his death might be imputed to the waues: whence the young Prince ouercome with griefe, and not able to master his owne passions, cast himselfe headlong into the sea, and his dead body being driuen vpon the coasts of Flanders, was taken Iames Maier, in his Annals of Flanders. vp by Adulphe, Earle of Boloine, his cosen-germane, and honourably buried in the Monastery of Saint Bertin, in the Towne of S. Omers. Which fact was much lamented by King Ethelstan, who greeuously punished the suggestions of his owne ielosie, and the procurers of his brothers death; sending great thanks to the Earle that buried him, and rich presents to the Monastery which entombed him, and to appease the ghost of his innocent brother, built the Abbey of Mi∣aleton in the County of Dorset. (18) Elfleda, the second daughter of King Edward, and the first of Queene Elfleda his second Wife, en∣tred Elfleda the se∣cond daughter. into the orders of Religion, and tooke vpon her the profession and vow of Virginity, in the Mona∣stery of Rumsey, situated vpon the Riuer Test, in the County of Southampton. In which Monastery, she was R msey Mona∣stery. first a Nunne, and afterward Abbesse during the whole time of her life, which was there spent and en∣ded, and her body in the said Abbey buried. (19) Eguina, the third daughter of King Edward, and the second of Queene Elfleda his second Wife, Eguina the third daughter. was the second Wife to Charles the third, surnamed the Simple, King of France, son to King Lews the bro∣ther of Iudith, Queene of England before mentioned. She had issue by him Lewis the third, surnamed Be∣yond-sea, because he was brought vp here in England with his Vnkle King Ethelstan; and Gillet Duchesse of Normandy maried to Rollo the Dane: who in regard of his marriage, was allowed to bee the first Duke of that Country. This Queene suruiued King Charles her Husband; and afterwards was remaried to Her∣bert, the younger Earle of Vermandoys; which marri∣age Her marriage with Herbert disliked. was taken for so great an indignity, because Earle Herbert the elder, father to this Earle, had caused the King her Husband to die in prison, that King Lewis her sonne presently pursued her, apprehended, and committed her to the strait custody of Queene Ger∣berge his wife: so as shee had no recourse vnto him, nor issue by him. (20) Ethelhild, the fourth daughter of King Ed∣ward, Ethelhild the fourth daughter. and the third of Queene Elfleda his second Wife, followed the example of her elder sister Elfleda, and became a Nunne in the Monastery of Wilton, which was sometime the head Towne giuing name to the whole County of Wiltshire, and antiently called Ellandon. (21) Edhild, the fifth daughter of King Edward, Edhild the fifth daughter. and the fourth of Queene Elfleda, was maried to Hugh surnamed the Great, Earle of Paris, Grand-master and Constable of France, in the yeere of our Lord 926. being the third of her brother King Ethelstanes raigne. This Hugh was the sonne of Robert, brother to Endes King of France, and father of King Hugh Capet, proge∣nitor of the Kings of France, eue sithence vnto this day: but shee died before him without any issue by him. (22) Edgith, the sixth daughter of King Edward Edgith the sixth daughter. and the fifth of Queene Elfleda, was the first wife of Otho the first, surnamed the Great, Emperour of the West, sonne to the Emperor Henry, surnamed the Fal∣coner. By him she had issue Ludolfe, Duke of Swabe, William Arch-bishop of Mentz, Ludgard married to Com d Duke of Lorrayn, and Mechthild Abbesse of Quedlingburg in Saxonie: in which Citie she deceased the seuen and twenty of August, in the yeere of Christs Natiuity 947. the eleuenth of her husbands Empire, and the first of her brother King Edreds raigne in Eng∣land. She was buried at the East end of the North side of a Chapell which her selfe had founded in the same Citie. (23) Elgiua, the seuenth daughter of King Edward, and the sixth of Queene Elfleda his second Wife, was Elgiua the se∣uenth daughter. by King Ethelstan her brother, with her sister Egith sent to the Court of the Emperor, Henry the first King of the Saxons in Germany, who honourably entertai∣ned her, brought her vp with his owne daughters; and after he had maried her elder sister to his eldest sonne, he placed her also in marriage with a Duke of Italy obout the Alpes, who is not named of our Wri∣ters, Married to a Duke of Italy. but may easily be coniectured by the honoura∣ble disposition of the maker of the match, to haue been a Prince of note and account, worthy of her estate and parentage. (24) Edmund, the fifth sonne of King Edward, and the first of Queene Edgiua his third and last Wife, was Edmund the fifth sonne. borne in the twentieth yeere of his fathers raigne, be∣ing the yeere of the worlds saluation 921. and at his fathers death little more then three yeeres of age, was notwithstanding by the carefull prouision of his mo∣ther, Three yeere old at his fathers death. brought vp with all princely education conue∣nient for his yeeres and estate, insomuch as there was generally a great expectation amongst the people conceiued of him in the life of his brother King Ethel∣stan, vnder whom he learned some experience of ser∣uice in warre, and after whom hee succeeded in the Kingdome of England. (25) Edred, the sixth sonne of King Edward, and Edred the sixt sonne. the second of Queene Edgiua his third Wife, and the youngest sonne of them both, was borne about the two and twentieth yeere of his fathers raigne, and yeere of grace 923. which was not long before the death of his father, who left him a little infant in the custody of his mother, by whom hee was carefully brought vp, and prooued a Prince of so great vertue A good Prince. and valour, as after the death of King Edmund his brother, in regard of the minority of his Nephews, hee was with the generall consent, and liking of the whole nation, chosen to be his brothers successor in the kingdome and gouernment ouer them. (26) Edburg, the eight daughter of King Edward, and the first of Queene Edgiua, in her child-hood had Edburg the eight daughter. Ran. Higd. polic. lib. 6. cap. 4. her disposition tried, and her course of life disposed by her Father in this manner: he laid before her gorgeous apparrell, and rich Iewels, in one end of a chamber, and the new Testament and Bookes of princely instruction in the other; willing her to make her choise of which she liked best: she presently tooke vp the bookes, and he her in his armes; and kissing her said, Goe in Gods name whither God hath called thee, and thereupon placed her in a Monastery at Winche∣ster, wherein shee did most vertuously spend whole life, and in that Abbey was bari d. (27) Edgiua, the ninth daughter of King Ed∣ward, and the second of his last Queene, whose the ninth daughter. name thee bare, is reported in the history of the Mo∣nastery of Hyde by Winchester, and other Writers of our Country, to haue beene married to Lewes Prince of Aquitane in France, which not long before had beene a Kingdome of it selfe, sometime allotted to the portion of Lewes the third sonne of the Emperour Charles the Great; of which house it seemeth this Lewes was; afterward it became a Dukedome, and the possession of an other Family, by whom it came to be the inheritance after the Conquest to the Kings Aquitaine belon∣ging to . of England, which were descended of the house of Angeow. ETHELSTAN THET VVENTIE FIFT Monarch 26 Ethelstan. KING OF THE VVEST SAXONS, AND THE TWENTIE SIXT MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS RAIGNE, ACTS, AND SVPPOSED ISSVE. CHAPTER XXXVIII. E Thelstan, the eldest sonne of King Edward (as hath beene said) for the great hopes conceiued of him, An. Do. 924. was crowned with a grea∣ter solemnity then any of his ancestors euer before him. The place was King∣ston vpon Thamesis in the County of Surrey, the yeer Crowned at Kingston vpon Thamesis. of Christ Iesus 924. where, in the midst of the town a high Scaffold was built, and thereon the coronati∣on performed to the open view of all, by Athelmus Archbishop of Canterbury, with shouts of ioy as that of Salomon. (2) His beginnings were with troubles, and that rather by reason of friends then force of foes: for it is recorded, that Elfred a nobleman, either in fauour of Wil. Malmsb. King Edwards other sonnes, holding Ethelstan a Ba∣stard, or else vpon an ambitious hope blinded of him∣selfe, intended at Winchester to haue pluckt out the eyes of his Soueraine: but his treason being knowne, before the seed could shew blade, he was apprehen∣ded & sent to Rome to purge himselfe by oth: where, before the Alta of S. Peter and Pope Iohn the tenth, he there abiured the act, and thereupon fell sodain∣ly down to the earth, so that his seruants tooke and Pope Iohn the tenth. bare him into the English Schoole, where, within three dayes after he died: the Pope denying him chri∣stian buriall vntill he knew King Ethelstans pleasure. (3) These stormes ouerpast, as great a cloud see∣med to arise vnto Ethelstans sight, whose eye of iea∣lousie euer followed the ascent, and his eare euer ope∣ned vnto the instillations of Parasites, amongst whom his Cup-bearer was a chiefe; who brought daily more and more suspition into the Kings head, Parasites. that lastly (as wee haue shewed) hee consented to young Edwins death, though with too late a sor∣row Edwins death. hee repented the same: for besides his seauen yeares penance voluntarily vndergone, to pacifie the ghost of his betraied brother, hee built the two Monasteries of Midleton and Michelnesse, as for the The occasion of the founding of Midleton and Michelnesse Mo∣nasteries. most part such seed-plots were euer sowne in the furrowes of bloud, which hapned vpon this occa∣sion: It chanced his Cup-bearer in his seruice vpon a festiuall to stumble with the one foote, and reco∣uering himselfe with the other, pleasantly to say, you see how one brother helpeth another; vpon which speech the King with griefe and touch of heart, called to mind the death of his innocent brother, and forth∣with commanded execution to be done on him the procurer, to repay his fact with deserued death: & His Cup-bearer put to death. himselfe was euer after more tender and carefull to∣wards his other brethren, with a more respectiue re∣gard, and bestowed his sisters most honorably in ma∣riage, as hath beene said. (4) At his entrance of gouernment, to discharge the expectations of his subiects, hee endeauoured both by warres and allianuces to make them strong and rich. First, therefore entring friendshippe with Sithricke the Danish King of Northumberland, vpon whom with condition that hee should receiue Bap∣tisme, Sithrick. Wil. Malmsbury. he bestowed his sister Editha in marriage, hee bent himselfe to ordaine Lawes for the weale-pub∣like, & those to bind aswel the Clergie as the Layety, out of which first sprang the attachment of Fellons, to A law against Fellons. take hold of such as stole aboue twelue pence, & were aboue twelue yeares of age. (5) But Sithricke the Northumbrian dying the first yeare of his mariage, and his Queene returning Godfrey and An∣lasse the sonnes of Sithrick. to a religious life, his sonnes Godfrey and Anlafe, of∣fended that their Pagan-Gods were neglected, and onely by the meanes of this their fathers last wife, stirred the Northumbrians to disquiet the English, which occasioned Ethelstan to inuade their country, and forced Anlafe into Ireland, and Godfrey into Scot∣land, which last so wrought with Constantine their King, that he vndertooke to side in his quarrell, with whom ioined Ludwall saith Malmsbury. Howel King of Wales. These in a fierce battle hee ouercame and constrained them to sub∣mit themselues to his will, who knowing the chance of warre to bee variable, and pittying the case of these down-cast Princes, restored them presently to An. Do. 937. their former estates, adding withall this princely saying, that it was more honour to make a King then to Mat. West. Rand. Higd. be a King. (6) This notwithstanding, the case of Godfrey so moued the spirit of King Constantine, that hee againe assisted him in his inrodes into the English part, King Constantine assisteth Godfrey. which drew againe King Ethelstan into the North: & cōming to Yorkshire (as he was a man much deuo∣ted to God-ward) turned aside to visite the tombe of S. Iohn of Beuerley, where earnestly praying for Wil. Malmsb. Simon. Dun. Ran. Higden. his prosperous successe, for want of richer Iewels, there offered his knife, vowing that if hee returned with conquest, hee would redeeme it with a worthy price, and thus armed with hope, proceeded forward pitching downe his tents at Brimesburie, his nauie waffing along those seas. (7) To the aide of Constantine came Anlafe, called by writers King of the Irish, and of the Iles, who had Anlafe King of Ireland. married his daughter, a man no doubt both hardy and desperate, as appeared by the Action he vnder∣went; Hector Boetius. for it is recorded, that as Elfred the English had attempted to know the State of the Danes: so this Dane at this place did to vnderstand the English: for, disguising himselfe like a Harper, hee went from Tent to Tent, and had accesse euen into King Ethel∣stans presence, vntill hee had learned what he most Anlafe his policy desired, and then returned againe to his Campe, which part of his was no bolder, or more wisely performed, then was kept secret, and after reuealed by a most faithfull souldier: for Anlafe departed & free from pursuit, this Souldier made the act known to King Ethelstan: who being sore displeased with his enemies escape, imputed the fault vnto him the reuealer: but he replying, made him this answere: I once serued Anlafe (said he) vnder his pay for a souldi∣er, Anlafe his soul∣diers fidelity. and gaue him the same faith that I doe now vnto you; if then I should haue betraied his designes, what trust could your Grace repose in my truth: let him there∣fore die, but not through my treachery, and by his es∣cape secure your royall selfe from danger; remoue your Tent from the place where it stands, lest at vnawares hee happily assaile you. (8) The King seeing the faith of his souldier, was therewith pacified, and forthwith commanded his Tent to bee remoued, where presently a Bishoppe new come to his Campe pitched vp his owne, and the night following both himselfe and retinue were slaine by the same Anlafe that sought the Kings life Wil. Malmsbury. in assaulting the place; and pressing forward came to his tent, who awaked with the suddain Allarum, boldly rushed vpon his enemies, & encouraging his Fiue Kings and twelue Dukes slaine. men, put them backe with the death of fiue petty Kings, twelue Dukes, and well neere of the whole Army, which Anlafe had brought. (9) The memory of this man is made the more la∣sting by a peece of ancient Saxon coine of siluer, in∣scribed with his name, ANLAF CYNYNE, which for the antiquity of the thing, and honour of the man, we haue here imprinted, & placed though in the texture of our English Saxon Kings. (10) To leaue a memoriall of King Ethelstans great victory, giue me leaue to write what I find; name∣ly, that neere vnto the Castle Dunbar in Scotland, he Polier. lib. 6. cap . Dunba Castle. praying that his right vnto those parts might bee confirmed vnto posterities by a signe, at one blow with his sword stroke an elle deepe into a stone, which stood so clouen a long time after, and vndoub∣tedly was the whetstone to the first Authors knife: but this is most certaine, that hee ioined Northum∣berland to the rest of his Monarchy, and returning to Beuerley. Beuerley redeemed his owne knife. (11) From hence he turned his warres into Wales, The Princes of Wales tribute. whose Rulers and Princes hee brought to bee his Tributaries, who at Hereford entered couenant to pay him yeerely twenty pound weight of gold, three hundred of siluer, and twenty fiue hundred head of cattle, with hawkes and hounds to a certaine num∣ber, towards which paiment by the statutes of How∣ell Dha, the King of Aberfraw was charged at sixty Corn. Wal. six pounds; the Prince Dineuwre, and the Prince of Powys were to pay the like summes. (12) The Britaines, which to his time with all e∣quall right inhabited the City of Excester with the Wil. Malmsbury. Saxons, hee expelled into the further promontary of Cornwal, and made Tamar the confines of his own Empire; so that his dominion was the largest that any Saxon before him had enioied, and his fame the Ran. Higd. in Po∣lier. lib 6. cap. 6. The King of France his Pre∣sents to King El elstan. greatest with all forraine Princes, who sought his friendship both with loue and alliance, by matching with his sisters, and presenting him with rich and rare presents; for Hugh King of France besides o∣ther vnestimable Iewels; sent him the sword of Constantine the Great, in the hilt whereof (all couered with gold) was one of the nailes that fastned Christ to his Crosse: he sent likewise the speare of Charles Consta sword with naile of the Crosse sent into England. the Great, reputed to be the same that pierced Christs side, as also part of the Crosse whereon hee suffered his passion, and a peece of the thorny Crowne wher∣with his blessed Temples were begoared, and with these came the Banner of S. Maurice so often spread by Charles the Great in his Christian warres against the Saracens: And from Otho the Emperour, who had married his sister, was sent a vessell of pretious stones artificially made, wherein were seene Lanskips with vines, corne, and men, all of them seeming so naturally to moue, as if they had growne and re∣tained life: And the King of Norway sent him a goodly shippe with a guilt sterne, purple sailes, and the decke garnished all with gold. Holinshed. (13) Of these accounted holy reliques King E∣thelstan gaue part vnto the Abbey of S. Swithen in Winchester, and the rest to the Monastery of Malmes∣bury, S. Swithens Abbey whereof Adelme was the founder, and his Tutelar Saint, in honour of whom he bestowed great immunities vpon the towne, and large endowments vpon the Abbey; hee new built the monasteries of Wilton, Michelnesse, and Midleton, founded Saint King Athelstans beneficence. Germans in Cornwal, Saint Petrocus at Bodman, the Pri∣ory of Pilton, new walled and beutified the City of Exceter, and enriched euery famous Abbey in the land, either with new buildings, Iewels, Books, or Reuenewes. (14) As also hee did certaine Cities with the Iohn Stow. Mintage of his money, whereof in London were eight houses, at Winchester sixe, at Lewis two, at Hastings two, in Hampton two, in Warham two, in Chichester one, in Rochester three, two for the King, and one for the Bishop; at Canterbury seuen; foure for him∣selfe, two for the Archbishop, and one for the Ab∣bat, although it appeareth the Archbishop had his before the raigne of this King. For among these an∣cient Ceolnothus coine. An. 31. Saxon-Coines, we find one of Ceolnothus, who sate there Archbishop in the yeare 831. which both for the antiquity & authority of truth wee haue here inserted. (15) This Prince King Ethelstan was of an indiffe∣rent vertues. stature, not much exceeding the common sort of men, chearefull in countenance, his haire verie yellow, and somewhat stooped forward as he went, for valour inuincible, in resolution constant, and for his curtesie beloued of all, he raigned in great honour The ti of his raigne. the space of fifteene yeares and odde monethes, and deceased in the City of Gloucester, vpon wednesday the seuenteenth of October, and was buried at Mal∣mesbury the yeere of Christs Natiuity: 940. hauing neuer had wife mentioned in our histories. His supposed Issue. (16) Leoneat, the supposed daughter of King E∣thelstan, is reported by Iohn Rouse and Papulwick, wri∣ters Iohn Rouse. Papulwick. of the mistrusted story of Guy of Warwicke to bee married vnto Reynburn Earle of Warwicke, and sonne to the same Guy, whose remembrance and reputati∣on is preserued & kept with no lesse renowne among the common people, for the liberty of England saued by his victory in single combate against Colbrand the Dane, then was Horatius the Romane for the pre∣seruatio of Rome, whose historie I wil leaue for others to enlarge that haue more leasure & bettet inuention. EDMVND THE TVVENTIE SIXTH Monarch 27 Edmund. KING OF THE VVEST-SAXONS, AND TWENTIE SEVENTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN: HIS RAIGNE, ACTS, DEATH, WIFE AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XXXIX. E Dmund the fifth sonne of King Edward, borne vnto him by Queene Edgiua his An. Do. 940. third and last wife, at the age of nineteen yeeres suc∣ceeded his brother King Ethelstan in his kingdome, and Monarchy: hee began his raigne the yeare of the worlds saluation 940. and with great solemnity was crowned at Kingston vpon Thamesis, in the fifth yeare Si , of Otho the first Emperour of that name, and his bro∣ther in law; his valour had often beene tried in the warres of King Ethelstan against those stout and sturdy enemies the Danes, Scotish, Irish, and Welsh∣men, that often had assaied to disturbe his peace. (2) Athelstan deceased, and the crowne scarse set Wil. M . vpon King Edmunds head, but that the Danes in Nor∣thumberland, disliking subiection, called again An∣lafe out of Ireland to be their King; who now in the infancy of Edmunds estate, with great power of men purposed to subdue all before him; but Edmund as forward, with full resolution ment to keepe what was got, and so gathering his power, proceeded towards the North, and at Leicester encountred with the Danes: howbeit, through the interceding of the Archbishops of Canterbury and Yorke, Odo and Wolston, the matter was mitigated before it came to the vttermost. (3) The next yeare of his raigne, the said Anlafe (whom some hold to haue beeene the King of Nor∣way) An. Do. 942. being dead, an other Anlafe, sonne to King Sithrick, of whom we haue spoken, intruded vpon Mat. Westminster the Kingdom of Northumberland. These heads, as Hidras, springing vp each after others, drew King Edmund againe into the North, who raging like a prouoked Lion, subdued, as he went, those townes where the Danes kept, and got from them Lincolne, Leicester, Darbie, Stafford, and Nottingham, com∣pelling them to receiue Baptisme, and to become his Subiectes; so that the Country was wholy his vnto Humber. These his proceedings caused Anlafe Wil. Malms. and Reinold the sonnes of the Danish Gurmo, subduers of Yorke, to yeeld themselues wholy to his deuotion, offering him subiection, and withall to receiue the Christian faith; for performance wherof, they like∣wise receiued Baptisme, vnto whom King Edmund was Godfather, to Reinold at his Confirmation, and to Anlafe at the Font: but how soone they fell from both, the sequell shewed; for casting off the faith and fealty thus promised, they stirred the Northum∣brians to another rebellion, yet with no better suc∣cesse An. Do. 944. Simon Dun. then desert; for they were forced into a perpe∣tuall exile, and King Edmund adioined that Coun∣try to his owne gouernment; without the admittance of any Secondary or Vice-roy to rule there vnder him. (4) Cumberland also, which seldome was quiet, hauing beene a Kingdome entire of it selfe, and now King Dunmaile. aided by Leolin King of Southwales, he vtterly wasted: and apprehending the two sonnes of Dunmaile King of that Prouince, commanded the eyes of those o∣uer-bold Princes to be puld out, and gaue their in∣heritance to Malcolme King of Scots, to hold the same by fealty from him. Thus by power and policie clearing those coasts whence the sharpest stormes had continually blowne, hee returned into the South, and there set himselfe to ordaine lawes for the good of his people, the which, left time the consu∣mer of al things might chance to obliterate, were by the labours of the learned Lambert translated into Latine, and imprinted in the yeare 1568. next, to Wil. Lambert. shew his loue to God, and bounty to his Church, he gaue the towne of Saint Edmondsbury with the liber∣ties thereof, wholy to that Martyr, and to the Monks that liued in seruing at his Altars. (5) But as each thing hath his spring, growth, & decay; so all men their dates, howsoeuer eminent in degree, & the shank of their Compas so set in a center that the Circle of their lines are oftentime abrupt, before it be drawn to the full round: for so with o∣thers, we may see in this Monarch, who being safely returned from many great dangers of war, at peace in his Pallace, came to a lamentable & vnexpected end: for at his Manor of Pucle-kerkes in the County of Marianus. Gloucester, whiles hee interposed himselfe betweene his Sewer and one Leoue to part a fray, was, with a thrust through the body, wounded to death the twenty sixt of May, in the yeare of our saluation 946. when hee had prosperously raigned the space of fiue Wil. Malms. yeares and seuen moneths, and his body, with no lesse sorrow then solemnity, was buried at Glasenbu∣ry His Wife. (6) Elfgine, the onely wife of King Edmund, hath not her parents declared (for ought I find) by any Elfgine. of our Writers: but this is affirmed, that shee was married vnto him in the first yeare of his raigne, which was the yeare of Grace, 940. and that she was his wife foure yeeres & vpward, after whose slaugh∣ter she remained a mournfull widdow all the rest of her life, which she spent with so great vertue and o∣pinion of the people, as by the writers of that age shee is commended to posterity by the name of a Saint. His Issue. (7) Edwy, the eldest sonne of King Edmund, and Queene Elfgine his wife, was borne in the second Edw . yeare of his fathers raigne Anno 942. When his fa∣ther died, hee was but foure yeeres of age, and in respect of his minority was not permitted to succeed him in the Kingdome, but forced to giue place to his vncle Edred, vnder whom he liued nine yeares; and in the tenth, his vncle being dead, and himselfe then growne to the age of thirteene, was admitted to the succession of the Monarchy. (8) Edgar the second sonne of King Edmund, and Edgar. of Queen Elfgine, was borne in the third yeare of his fathers raigne, the yeere of Christ Iesus 943, and was but three yeeres old when his Father died; notwith∣standing, he proued afterward a Prince of great expe∣ctation, and in the second yeare of King Edwy his bro∣thers raigne, being then but foureteene yeeres of age, he was chosen King by the Mercians and Nor∣thumbrians, both which people he gouerned vnder the title of King of Mercia, for the space of two yeeres befor his brothers death, and then succeeded him in the whole Monarchie. EDRED THE TVVENTIE SE∣VENTH Edred. Monarch 28 KING OF THE VVEST-SAX∣ONS, AND TWENTIE EIGHTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS ACTS, RAIGNE, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XL. E Dred, the sixth sonne of King Edward, borne vnto him by Queene Edgiua An. Do. 946. his third and last wife, at the age of twenty three yeeres succeeded his bro∣ther King Edmund in the nonage of his children in al his dominions, and was the twenty seuenth King of the West-Saxons, and the twentie eight Monarch of the Englishmen. He began his raigne in the yeere of Mans saluation 946. and was annointed, and Polier. lib. 6. cap. . crowned at Kingston vpon Thames in the County of Surrey vpon Sūday the seuenteenth day of August by the hands of Otho Archbishop of Canterbury. (2) His Coronation robes scarsly put off; news was brought him that the Northumbrians had re∣uolted and stirred a dangerous insurrection; notwith∣standing the Couenants that his brother Edmund had made with Malcolme King of the Scots to secure the same. Therfore lest delaies might proue dan∣gerous, with a great Army hee entred into the verge of Scotland, without sight of enemy, or any resistance. But peace being concluded betwixt E∣dred, Malcolme and the Northumbrians; yea and the Edred. Malcolme. same confirmed strongly by oath, yet was it little re∣garded of the last named lurers; for no sooner was Edred returned, but that they sent into Ireland for Anlafe, the sonne of Gurmo the Dane, who had been expelled the Country as we haue said. (3) Anlafe gathering a fleete and forces accor∣dingly, came into Northumberland, where he was with great ioy receiued and made their King, which Anlafe commeth into Northumb. title hee maintained for foure yeeres continuance, banding against Edred, and still holding him play, till lastly the Northumbrians disloiall to both, took their feather out of Anlafe his plume, and sent him pack∣ing to the place, whence he came, electing one He∣ricus King in his stead. Wil. Mal . (4) Edred awaked with the wasts that they made, prepared a iourney into those parts, where with fire and sword hee bare downe all before him; and albeit he was a man religiously bent, yet spared he not the Abbey of Rippon from flames, but laid all vnto ashes as he went, the enemy not daring to shew the face. In his returne suspecting no perill, sud∣dainely an hoast brake out of Yorke, and fell vpon the Rere-ward of his Army, marching but carelesly, R nd. Higd. S Dun. and broken out of their array, whereby many peri∣shed before any complete order of resistance could be made. The King seeing this bold attempt of these Rebels, stroke downe his standard, turning his face againe to the North, and threatened the reuenge, with the Countries spoile and their liues. (5) In this plot of sedition Wolstan Archbishop of Wolstan. Yorke had sowne some seed of treason, both in the assistance of action, and counsell for the enterprise, very ill beseeming a man of his ranke: this Wolfe therfore hauing thus awaked the Lion from rest, was the onely man that fell in his pawes; for the Nor∣thumbrians expulsing their statelesse Hericus with sub∣missiue teares and golden showers, so pacified the King, that their offences were therewith cleane wa∣shed away: but hee good man (a Saint at the least) was mued vp in prison (against whom accusations daily came, and namely, that he had commaunded sundry of the Burgesses of Thetford to bee slaine) where heeabode till he was by Edred vpon a reue∣rent regard of his calling, released from thence: for as this King is commended for his lenity towards the vertuous; so is he no lesse for his iustice towards the vitious, and for the practise of his Religion, as Wil. Malms. forward as any, suffering not onely his manners to be reproued and corrected, (a quality truely roiall, and best beseeming Princes) but also (so much below the pitch of soueraigne Maiesty) his body to bee chastised at the will and direction of Dunstan Abbot of Glasenbury; vnto whose custody, he also commit∣ted the greatest part of his treasure and richest iewels to be lockt in his chests, and vnder the keyes of this Monastery. (6) The stately Abbey of Mich at Abington neere Oxford built by King Inas, but destroyed by the Danes, he newly repaired, indowing it with lands & . faire reuenewes, and confirmed the Charters with seales of gold: hee also ordained Saint Germans in Cornwal to be a Bishops See, which there continued till by Canutus it was annexed to the Episcopall See of Kyrton in Deuon, both which Sees were after∣ward by King Edward the Confessor translated to the City of Excester: but sith the brightest day hath his night, and the highest tide his present ebbe, what maruaile is it, if then Edred in the middest of his strength were seazed vpon by sicknesse and death, which surprised him after hee had raigned in great honour nine yeeres and odde moneths, to the great griefe of his Subiects, who solemnly interred him in the old Minster within the City of Winchester, the yeere of Christ Iesus 955. whose bones with other Kings, to this day are preserued in a guilt Coffer, fixed vpon the wall in the south side of the Quier. His Issue. (7) Elfred, the sonne of King Edred, was borne before his Father was King; neither find I mention Elfred. of his Mother, or any act by him done; onely in the sixt yeare of King Edred his raigne, which was the yeere of Grace, 952. he is mentioned for a witnesse to his Fathers graunt of lands in Wittenham, to Ethel∣wolfe a Duke of England in those daies, as appeareth by the Charter thereof, bearing date in the yeere a∣foresaid. (8) Bertfrid an other, and as it seemeth an elder sonne of King Edred, was borne before his father Bertfrid. was King, without any mention also of his Mother, who liuing in the second yeare of his fathers raigne, namely Anno, 948. was written for a witnesse in the same yeare, to his grant of lands in Bedlaking, to Cu∣thred one of his Barons, the Charter whereof is extant to bee seene vnto this day. EDVVY THE TVVENTIE EIGHTH KING OF THE VVEST-SAXONS, AND Monarch 29. Edwy. TWENTIE NINTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN: HIS RAIGNE, ACTS, AND DEATH. CHAPTER XLI. E Dwy, the eldest sonne of King Edmund, after the de∣cease of his vncle Edred, An. Do. 955. succeeded him in his do∣minions, and was the twentie eighth King of the West-Saxons, and the twen∣tie ninth Monarch of the Englishmen: he began his raigne in the yeare of the worlds saluation, 955. and was annointed & crowned at Kingston vpon Thame∣sis, by the hands of Otho the 22. Archbishop of Can∣terbury. (2) Yong hee was in yeares, and vitious of life, if the Monkish Story-writers of those times Edwyes . his deadly enemies may be credited, not past thir∣teene when he entred gouernment, and that begun with a capitall sinne: for they report, that vpon the solemne day of his Coronation, and insight of his Nobles, as they sate in Counsell, with shamelesse and vnprincelike lust, he abused a Lady of great estate, & his neere kinswoman, whose husband shortly after he slew, the more freely to possesse his incestuous pleasure: and to fill the pennes of his further infa∣my ready to their hands, that wrote his life, hee was a great enemy vnto the Monkish orders (a sore in those dayes very tender to be touched, and may well be thought the cause of many false aspersions on him,) whom from the Monastery of Malmsbury Glasenbury and others, hee expelled, placing mar∣ried Priests in their roomes: Dunstan likewise the M. Fox Acts and Monuments. Abbot Saint of Glasenbury hee banished the Realm, for his ouer-bold reprehensions; if not rather for retaining the treasure deliuered him by King Edred, and demaunded againe in his sicknesse; when by the voice (forsooth) of an Angell from heauen, his Wil. Malmsb. iourney was staid, and those rich Iewels not deliue∣red the King in his life; I will not say kept backe, lest Dunstan with Balaam (whose stories are not much vnlike) should bee thought to follow (as he Iud. 1. 11. did) the wages of deceit. (3) Howsoeuer, the reuerent opinion of the Monks single life, and the conceiued holines of Ab∣bot Dunstan in those misty times, did daily counter∣poize Abbot Dunstan. young Edwy in esteeme, which made his best acts construed, and recorded to the worst; insomuch that his Subiects minds, ebbing as the Sea from the full, drew backe the current of their subiectiue affe∣ctions, and set the eye of obedience vpon Prince Ed∣gar his Brother: and albeit his young yeeres may seeme to cleare him from the imputation of so lust∣ful a fact, as he is charged with, at the day of his assu∣ming the Crowne; and the separation from his wife, (as too neere in consanguinity) wrought griefe en∣ough in his distressed heart, yet pittilesse of his e∣state, and carelesse of their owne allegiance, the Mer∣cians with the Northumbrians did vtterly cast off obe∣dience, and sweare their fealty to Edgar, not fully foureteene yeeres aged: Ed then raigning in a decaying estate, was he d of such his subiects, in no . better esteeme, then was Iehoram of Iudah, who is said to haue liued without being desired: for very griefe whereof after foure yeares raigne hee ended his life, the yeare of our Lord 959: whose body was buri∣ed in the Church of the new Abbey of Hide at Win∣chester, erected without the Wall in the North of that City. His Wife. (4) Elfgine, the wife of King Edwy, was a Lady of great beauty, and nobly descended, yea, and by some deemed somewhat too neare in the bloud roiall, to bee matched with him in spousall bed: her fathers name is not recorded, but her mother was Etheigiue, whom some scandalized to haue beene his Concu∣bine, and the onely causer of Dunstans banishment. The subiects disliking of this vnlawfull marriage, & further instigated by the Monkes, (whose humo∣rous Iohn . pleasures, or displeasures could very much sway the state in those daies,) failed by degrees to performe their duties to their King, and her they likewise enforced to a separation, in the third yeere of his regardlesse gouernment, and of Christ Iesus, 958. without other mention of her life or death. EDGAR SVRNAMED THE Monarch 3 Edgar. PEACEABLE THE THIRTIETH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISH-MEN, HIS RAIGNE; ACTS, WIVES AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XLII. E Dgar, the second son of King Edmund hauing raig∣ned An. Do. 959. two yeares ouer the Mercians and Northumbri∣ans, in the dayes of Edwy his Brother, to the great impairing of King Edwyes reputation and esteeme; after his death at sixeteen yeares of age was chosen to succeed in all his dominions, and was the thirtieth Monarch of the Englishmen, or rather now of whole England, all other titles of Kingdomes falling vnder his scepter, and becomming Prouinces annexed vnto his absolute Monarchie. (2) He beganne his raigne in the yeere of Christs Natiuity, 959. and was crowned (as some write) the same yeare at Kingston, vpon Thamesis, by Otho . Ran. Hig . W M . Saxon . Archbishop of Canterbury. But Randulphus Higden in his Polychronicon, referreth it to the twelfth yeere of his raigne: William Monke of Malmesbury to the thirtieth yeare of his age, and the Sax Chronicle of Worcester Church, to the yeere of Christ, 972, and that in the City of Bath, hee was annointed and con∣secrated with great solemnity by Dunstan Archbi∣shop of Canterbury. (3) The raigne of this King is said to haue beene altogether in a calme tranquility, and therefore hee was surnamed the Peaceable; his vertues were many, Edgar the Peace∣able. and vices not a few, the one gloriously augmented, and the other fairely excused, by those Monkish wri∣ters, vnto whose professions he was most fauoura∣ble: his Guides were Dunstan Archbishop of Can∣terbury, Ethelwold Abbot of Glasenbury, and Oswald Bishop of Worcester, three stout Champions against the married Clergie, (for women in those dayes were great bugs in their eyes,) therfore the married Priests he displaced, & brought in Monkes of single life to possesse their roomes, whose sinnes of incontinency grew after to be great, as the world did then witnes, which caused Treu sa the translator of Higden, to blame King Edgar, charging him to bee lewdly mo∣ued in following their counsell against married Pol er. lib. 6. cap. 9 Clerkes. (4) So doe Malmsbury and Higden taxe him with too fauourable affections towardes the Danes, who Wil. Malmsbury. dwelled alike in euery town with the English, though formerly they had sought the destruction of all, and still lay in wait attending for the spoile of his true subiects, who apt enough vnto euil, lerned the beastly sinne of quaffing, and emptying of cups, which King Edgar was enforced to redresse, by enacting a law against excessiue drinking, ordaining a size by certaine pinnes set in the pot, with penalties to any that should presume to drinke deeper then the marke. (5) His policie was no lesse prudent (but much more successefull) for the destruction of Wolues, that in his daies did great annoiance to the land; for the tribute imposed vpō the Princes of Wales by the Eng∣lish cap. 38. Sect. . King Ethelstan (as we haue said) he wholy remit∣ted, and in lieu thereof, appointed certaine numbers Cron. Wald. of Wolues yeerely to bee paid; and Ieuaf, or Iage Prince of North-Wales, did for his part pay him yeere∣ly three hundred, which continued for three yeeres space, but in the fourth was not a Wolfe to bee found, and so the tribute ceased. (6) His Nauie roiall, containing three thousand and sixe hundred ships, he diuided into three parts, appointing euery of them to a seuerall quarter to waffe the Seas, and secure the coasts from Pirats, and Marianus. Alred. . Ran. . forraine enemies, wherein himselfe euery summer would saile with those in the East parts, vnto those in the West, and sending them backe to their charge, would with the West saile into the North, and with the northerne fleete compasse againe into the East, whereby the seas were scowred, and his Kingdom ex∣ceedingly strengthned. (7) The like custome vsed he in the winter sea∣son in his ieysts, and circuits throughout his Coun∣try, Edgars honest vigilancy. so to take account of the administration of his lawes, and the demeanour of his great men, especial∣ly of his Iudges, whom seuerely he punished, so often as he found the execution of their places ballanced either with bribery or partiality; so that there was neuer lesse robbery, deceit or oppressions, thē in the raigne of this worthy King. (8) His state thus flourishing in peace and prospe∣rity, he caused diuers Princes to bind themselues vn∣to his allegiance, but perchanceit may iustly be doub∣ted, whether in such performance of homage and seruice, as Malmsbury, Florentius, Randulphus, Ma∣rianus, Houeden, and other writers affirme to haue Edgars league with diuers Kings. beene at the City Chester, where (they say) Kennadie King of Scots, Malcolme of Cumberland, Maxentius an Arch-Pirate, with the petty King of Wales, Duff∣nall, Griffith, Hunal, Iacob, and Indithil, did with oares row his Barge vpon the riuer Dee, from his Pallace to Saint Iohns Church, and thence againe backe to his Pallace, himselfe the while steering the helme, and saying in his glory that then his successors might trulie account themselues Soueraigne Kings of England, when they enioyed such a Prerogatiue of sublimity, and supreme honour: although (saith M. Fox) he might much bet∣ter, and more Christianlike haue said, God forbid that Gal. 6. 14. I should reioice, but in the Crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ. (9) Warres he had none in all his raigne; onely towards the end, the Welshmen moued some rebel∣lion, which to preuent, hee assembled a mighty Army, and therewith entred into the County of Glamorgan, sharply punishing the ringleaders there∣of, Polychron. but his souldiers doing great harms in the coun∣try, laden with spoiles for the returne, the King out of his bounty commanded all to be againe restored, whereby hee purchased singular loue and honour of the inhabitants. (10) To his magnanimity was ioined much de∣uotion, Monastery bulk by King Edgar. but most especially towards the Monks, for whom, and for Nunnes hee built and repaired forty seuen Monasteries, intending to haue continued their number vnto fifty, as himselfe testifieth in these words of his Charter. The Monasteries, aswell of Monks as of Virgins haue beene destroied, and quite neglected throughout England, Ex chart. Reg. which I haue now determined to repaire to the glory of God for my soules health, and so to multiply the number of Gods seruants and handmaides: and now already I haue set vp forty seuen Monasteries with Monks and Nunnes in them, and if Christ spare me life so long, I am determined in offering my deuout munificence to God, to proceed to fifty, euen to the iust number of a Iubilee. And by this his Charter did not onely approue the enlargement of S. Maries Monasterie in Worce∣ster, M Fox in his Acts and Monu∣ments. and the restoring of Votaries in stead of married Priests, but himselfe either new founded or repaired many others, as the house of Ely, Glasenbury, Abing∣ton, Burgh, Thorney, Ramsey, Wilton, Wenton, Win∣chorne and Thumstocke with great cost, and large en∣dowments, hauing the Clergie in an high and re∣uerent esteeme, and most of all his Confessor Dun∣stan: but with this wheate, there were tares grow∣ing, though the late Monkish Writers bind them vp for good corne: for some men tell (saith Randulphus Higden) that Edgar in his beginning was cruell to Citi∣zens, R . Higden. and lecherous to maidens, whereof these his acti∣ons ensuing beare sufficient witnes. (11) The first was committed against the virgine Wolfhild, a sacred Nunne as some affirme, though Wil. Malmsbury. Mathew Paris. Mat. others somwhat mitigating that sacrilegious offence, haue reported, that she to auoid his fleshly and las∣ciuious lust, was forced to take the habite of a Men∣chion vpon her, and in the same brought to his bed, wherein the chast S. Edith was begot, and for whom, say they, he vnderwent his seuen yeeres pe∣nance Policr. lib. . cap. 9 without the wearing of his Crowne. (12) A like offence hee committed against the virgine Ethelfleda, the daughter of Ordmar a Duke a∣mong the East-Angles, who for her surpassing beau∣ty was surnamed the White; on whom he begat his eldest sonne Edward; for which fact as M. Fox affir∣meth, hee did his seuen yeeres penance inioined by Dunstan: and indeed by Osberne it appeareth, that Edward was not legitimate, where he writeth, that Osbern in vit Dunstan. the child begotten of the harlot, he baptized in the holy fountaine of regeneration, and so giuing his name to bee called Edward, did adopt him to bee his sonne. With whom agree Nicholas Trinet in his English story, Nicholas Trinet. Ioan. Paris. written in French, Iohannes Paris in his French sto∣ry, written in Latine, both of them calling Edward a sonne illegitimate; as also doth Vincentius and Antoninus, howbeit William of Malmsbury, Mathew Vincen . Antonin. Paris, Mathew of Westminster, Randulphus and o∣thers, will haue her his first and lawfull wife, and Edward in true matrimony to haue descended from them. (13) An other instance of his lasciuious life is produced by the forenamed Writers, and thus both occasioned and acted. It chanced Edgar to heare a Virgine and daughter to a Westerne Duke, excee∣dingly Edgar with a damsell. praised for her incomparable beauty, the touch of which string from his care resounded to his heart, and as a bait it drew him presently into those parts; where comming to Andeuer, commanded the damsell to his bed: The mother tender of the Virgins honour, brought in the darke her maid, but not her daughter, who, all as well pleased the King in his sinnefull dalliance: the day approching, this late laid maid made hast to arise; but the King loth to part yet with his supposed faire Lady, demanded why she made such hast? who answered him, that her taske was great, and hardly would her worke be done, if day should preuent her ere she rose; but yet being staied aboue her howre, vpon her knees she made this humble request, that shee might be freed from her shrewde dame, alleadging, it was not fitting, that the woman who had tasted the pleasures of a Kings embracements, should endure a serui∣tude vnder the rule of any other. The King percei∣uing the deceit, and therewith moued to wrath, yet could not recall what hee had done (or rather vn∣done) and therefore turned his conceiued wrongs vnto a iest; but so, that hee both sharpely checked the deceiuer, and kept this damsell, (whose night∣worke and pleasance had fully wonne him) for his Concubine, whereby she ruled them that lately had the command of her: and to vse the words of Malms∣bury, he loued this Concubine most entirely, kee∣ping true faith of his bed to her alone, vntill the time he married for his lawful wife Elfrida the daugh∣ter of Duke Ordgarus. (14) His last lasciuious Act, was as Dauids ioyned with bloud, and wrought in manner as followeth. Malms. de regibus. Fames lauish report of beauteous Elfrida (the paragon of her sexe, and wonder of Nature) the only daugh∣ter of Ordgarus Duke of Deuonshire, sounded so lowd Duke Ordgarus. in those Westerne parts, that the Eccho thereof was heard into King Edgars Court, and entred his eares, which euer lay open, to giue his eyes the scope of desire, and his wanton thoughts the raines of will: to trie the truth whereof, hee secretly sent his minion or fauourite Earle Ethelwold of East-Anglia, who well could iudge of beauty, and knew the diet of the Ethelwold. King; with Commission, that if the Pearle proued so orient, it should bee seized for Edgars owne wea∣ring, who ment to make her his Queene, and Ordga∣rus the Father of a King. Ethelwold a iolly young Gallant, posted into De∣uonshire, and guest-wise visited Duke Ordgarus his Court, where seeing the Lady surpassing the report, blamed Fames ouer-sight for sounding her praise in so base and leaden a Trumpet; and wholy surpri∣sed with her loue, himselfe beganne to wooe the Virgin, yea, and with her Fathers good liking, so as the King would giue his assent. Earle Ethelwold re∣turning, related that the maide indeed was faire; but yet her beauty much augmented by babling reports, and neither her feature or parts any wise befitting a King. Edgar mistrusting no corriuall in his loue, nor dreaming false fellowship in wooing, did with a sleight thought passe ouer Elfrida, and pitcht his af∣fections the faster another way. Earle Ethelwold fol∣lowing the game now a foot, desired Edgars assistance to bring it to a stand, pretending not so much for any liking to the Lady, as to raise his owne fortunes to be her fathers heire, to which the King yeelded, and for his minion solicited Ordgarus, who glad to be Edgar a suter for Ethelwold. shrowded vnder the fauours of such a fauourite, wil∣lingly consented, and his daughters destinies assured to Earle Ethelwold. The marriage solemnized, and the fruits thereof a short time enioyed; the fame of her beauty beganne againe to bee spread, and that with a larger Epi∣thite then formerly it had beene: Whereupon Ed∣gar much doubting of double dealing, laid his angle Edgars plot to discouer Ethel∣wold. faire to take this great gull; and bearing no shew of wrong or suspect, inuited himselfe to unt in hi Parks, and forthwith repairing into those parts not a little grace his old seruant, to the great ioy of Ordgarus the Duke: but Ethelwold mistrusting the cause of his comming, thought by one policy to disappoint another: and therefore reuealing the truth to his wife, how in his proceedings hee had wronged her beauty; and deceiued his Soueraigne, requested her louing assistance to saue now his en∣dangered life, which lay in her power, and of the meanes he thus aduised: Like as (said he) the richest Diamond rough and vncut, yeelds neither sparkle nor esteeme of great Ethelwolds speech to Elfrida price, nor the gold vnburnished giues better lu∣stre then the base brasse; so beauty and feature clad in meane aray, is either sleightly looked at with an vnfixed eye, or is wholy vnregarded, and held of no worth; for, according to the Prouerbe, cloth is the man, and man is the wretch: then to preuent the thing that I feare, and is likely to proue my present ruine, and thy last wracke, conceale thy great beauty from King Edgars eye, and giue him entertainement in the meanest attires: let them (I pray thee) for a time bee the nightly curtaines drawne about our new-Nuptiall bed, and the day∣ly cloudes to hide thy splendent Sunne from his sharpe, and too too piercing sight, whose vigour & raies will soone set his waxen wings on fire, that ready are to melt at a farre softer heat. Pitch (thou seest) defileth the hand, and we are forbid to giue occasion of euill: vaile then thy fairenesse with the scarfes of deformity, from his ouer-lauish and vnmastered eye; for the fairest face drawes euer the gaze, if not the attempts, and natures endow∣ments, are as the bush for the wine, which being immoderately taken doth surfet the sense, and is a∣gaine cast vp with as loathing a tast. Of these dregs drunke Amnon after his fill of faire Thamar, Herod 2 Sam. 13. . Virgil Aened. Amnon and Thamar. of Mirami, & Aeneas of Dido; yea, and not to seeke examples farre off, King Edgars variation in his vn∣sted fast motion doth easily bewray it selfe: for could either holy Wolfhild, beautifull Ethelfled, or the wanton Wench of Andeuer, keepe the needle of his compasse certaine at one point? nothing lesse, but it was still led by the load-stone of his euer mutable and turning affections. But thou wilt say, hee is religious, and by founding of Mo∣nasteries hath expiated those sinnes. Indeed ma∣ny are built; for which time and posterities must thanke holy Dunstan, from whose deuotion those good deeds haue sprung: but is thy person holi∣er then sacred Wolfhilds; thy birth and beauty grea∣ter then Ethelfled the White, daughter also to a Duke? Wolfhilds Ethelfled. the former, of an holy Votary, hee made the sinke of his pollution; and the later is branded to all ages, by the hatefull name of a Concubine, and her sonne among vs esteemed for a Bastard. These should bee motiues to all beauteous and ver∣tuous Ladies, not to sell their honours at so low and too-late repented a price. Neither think (sweet Countesse) that thy husband is iealous, or suspects thy constancy, which I know is great, and thy selfe wholy complete with all honourable vertues: but yet consider I pray thee, that thou art but young, & maist easily be caught, especially of him that is so old a Master of the game; neither perswade thy selfe of such strength, as is able to hold out so great an assault; for men are mighty, but a King is much more. I know thou art wise, and enough hath been said, onely let mee adde this, that euill beginnings haue neuer good ends: and so with a kind kisse; hoping hee had wonne his Wife to his Will, prepared with the first to welcome King Edgar. Lady Elfrida thus left to her selfe, began seriously to thinke vpon this Curtaine Sermon, whose text she distasted, being taken out of an ouer-worne and threed-bare cloth prouerbe, as though her fortunes had been wholly residing, and altogether consisting in her parentage and apparell, but nothing at all in any parts of her self Hath my beauty (thought she) been courted of Elfrida alone. a King, famoused by report, compared with Helens, and now must be hid? Must I falsifie and bely Na∣tures bounties, mine owne value, and all mens re∣ports, only to saue his credit, who hath impaired mine, and belied my worth? And must I needs de∣foule my selfe, to be his only faire foule, that hath kept me from the State and seat of a Queene? I know the name of a Countesse is great, and the Wife of an Earle is honourable, yet no more then birth and endowments haue assigned for me, had my beauty been far lesse then it is. He warnes me of the end, when his owne beginnings were with tre∣chery; tels me the examples of others, but obserues none himselfe: he is not ielous, forsooth, and yet I must not looke out; I am his faire, but others pitch, fire, wine, bush, and what not? Not so holy as Wolf∣hild, nor so white as Ethelfled; and yet that must now be made far worse then it is. I would men knew the heate of that cheeke wherein beauty is bla∣zed, then would they with lesse suspect suffer our faces vnmaskt, to take aire of their eies, and wee no whit condemnable for shewing that which cannot be hid, neither in me shall, come of it what will. And thus resoluing to bee a right woman, desired nothing more then the thing forbidden, and made preparation to put it in practise. Her body shee en∣dulced with the sweetest balmes, displaied her haire, and bespangled it with pearles, bestrewed her breasts Elfrid disloi∣altie. and bosome with rubies and diamonds, rich Iewels glittering like starres depended at her necke, and her other ornaments euery way sutable. And thus, rather Angell, then Lady-like, shee attended the approach and entrance of the King, whom with such faire obei∣sance and seemely grace she receiued, that Edgars gree∣die eye presently collecting the raies of her shining beauty, became a burning glasse to his heart, and the sparkle of her faire falling into the traine of his loue, set all his senses on fire: yet dissembling his passions, he passed on to his game, where hauing the false E∣thelwold at aduantage, he ranne him through with a Iaueline, and tooke faire Elfrida to his wife. Ethelwold slaine. (15) These were the vertues and vices of this King, little in personage, but great in spirit, and the first vnresisted Monarch of the whole Land, whom all the other Saxons acknowledged their supreme, with∣out diuision of Prouinces or title. He raigned sixteene yeeres and two moneths in great tranquillity and ho∣nour, and died vpon tuesday the eighth of Iuly, the thirty seuenth of his age, and yeere of Christ 975. whose body with all funerall solemnitie was buried The fifteenth, saith Higden. in the Abbey of Glasenburie. His Wiues. (16) Ethelfled, the first wife of King Edgar, was surnamed in the Saxon English En a, in Latine Can∣dida, which with vs is White, because of her exceeding great beauty. Shee was the daughter of a Duke a∣mongst the East-Angles, named Ordmar, and was mar∣ried Ethelfleds pa∣rents. vnto him the second yeere of his raigne, and the eighteenth of his age, being the yeere of Christs Na∣tiuitie 961. She was his wife not fully two yeeres, and died the fourth of his raigne, in Anno 962. (17) Elfrida, the second wife of King Edgar, was the widow of slaughtered Ethelwold, of whom wee Elfridaes se∣cond wife. haue said. She was daughter to Ordgarus, and sister to Ordulfe, both of them Dukes of Deuonshire, and the Founders of Tauestoke Abbey in that Countie: a La∣die of passing great beauty, and as ambitious as faire: for after the Kings death, she procured the murther of King Edward her sonne in law, that her owne sonne Ethelred might come to the Crowne: and afterwards to pacifie his and her first husbands ghost, and to stop Wil. Malmsbury. the peoples speeches of so wicked a fact, she founded the Abbeys of Ambresbery & Whorwell, in the Coun∣ties of Wiltshire and South-hampton. His Children. (18) Edward, the eldest sonne of King Edgar and Queene Ethelfled his first wife, was born in the fourth Edward the el∣dest sonne. yeere of his fathers raigne, and a little before his mo∣thers death, in the yeere of Christ Iesus 962. He was a child disposed to all vertue, notwithstanding great meanes was made by his mother in law for the disin∣heriting of him, and the preferment of her owne son to the succession of the Crowne; yet by prouident care taken in the life time of his father, he succeeded him after his death, as right heire both of his king∣dome and conditions. (19) Edmund, the second sonne of King Edgar, and Edmund the se∣cond sonne. the first of Queene Elfrida his second wife, was borne in the seuenth yeere of his fathers raigne, being the yeere of grace 965. He liued but foure yeeres, and died in his infancie, in the twelfth yeere of his fathers raigne, and was honourably enterred in the Monaste∣rie of Nunnes, at Ramsey in Hampshire, which King Ed∣gar had founded. (20) Ethelred, the third sonne of King Edgar, and Ethelred the third sonne. the second of Queene Elfreda his second wife, and the last of them both, was borne in the eighth yeere of his fathers raigne, and yeere of saluation 966. He was ver∣tuously inclined, beautifull in complexion, and com∣ly of stature; at the death of his father being but se∣uen yeers old, and at his brothers murther ten: which deed he sore lamented, to the great discontentment of his mother, who for his aduancement had com∣plotted the same, and wherein at th se yeeres he vn∣willingly succeeded him. (21) Edgith, the naturall daughter of King Edgar, Edgith. had to her mother a Lady named Wolfhild, the daugh∣ter of Wolshelm, the sonne of Byrding, the sonne of Ne∣sting, the two latter bearing in their names the memo∣rie of their fortunes: the last of them being found in an Eagles nest, by King Elfred as he was on hunting. This Edgith was a vailed Nunne in the Monastery of Wilton, and according to some Authors, made Ab∣besse thereof by her father at fifteene yeeres of age, saith her Legend. She died the fifteenth day of Sep∣tember, the yeere of her age twenty three; the sixt of her brother King Ethelreds raigne, and of Christ Iesus 984. By all which accounts it is manifest, that she was borne before Edward, and by Master Fox proued, that Acts and Monu∣ments, in vita Edgar. for him, and not for her, King Edgar did his seuen yeeres penance. She is greatly commended for her chastitie and beauty, which later she somewhat aug∣mented with more curious attire then to her profes∣sion was beseeming: for which Bishoppe Ethelwold Polychr. lib. 6. c. 9. sharply reproued her; who answered him roundly, that God regarded the heart more then the garment, and that sins might bee couered as well vnder rags as robes. This Edgith, as Iohn Capgraue reporteth, after the Iohn Capgraue, in vita san Edi . slaughter of her brother Edward, the holy Archbishop Dunstan would haue aduanced to the Crown, & inue∣sted her against Ethelred the lawfull heire, had she not by the late experience of Edwards fall, vtterly refused that title, which neither belonged to her right, nor was safe for her person to vndertake. Her body was buried at Wilton, in the Monastery and Church of Saint Denisse, which her selfe had caused to bee built. EDVVARD SVRNAMED THE Monarch 31 MARTYR THE THIRTIE ONE Edward. MONARCH OF THE ENGLISH-MEN, HIS RAIGNE, AND DEATH. CHAPTER XLIII. G Reat were the troubles & sidings that presently en∣sued An. Do. 975. Simon Dunel. Roger H en. the death of King Ed∣gar, about the election of one of his sons to succeed; Queene Elfrida with Al∣ferus Duke of Mercia, and many other Nobles com∣bined for young Ethelred, disauowing Prince Edward as illegitimate, and therfore not reputable for suc∣cession: against them and Ethelred stood Dunstan and the Monkes, holding their states dangerous, & their new-gotten footing vnsure, if in the nonage of the King, these their opposites should rule all vnder him; whereas Edward was altogether wrought in their Edward the son of Ethelfleda. mould; whose title they abetted, as being lawfully borne, and begot in the nuptiall bed of Queene E∣thelfleda. Their claimes thus banded amongst these States-men, began to be diuersly affected among the Commons, and had put the game to the hazard, if the wisedome of Dunstan had not seene to the chase; for a Councell being assembled to argue their rights, the Archbishop came in with his banner and crosse, and not staying for further debating de iure, did de facto, present Prince Edward for their lawfull King; and the assembly consisting most of Clergy-men, per∣swading peace, drew the approbation of the rest, and so was the Prince admitted and proclaimed their So∣ueraigne. (2) He beganne his raigne at twelue yeares of age, in the yeare of Saluation 975 and was soone after by An. Do. 975 Archbishop Dunstan crowned King at Kingston vpon Thamesis: being the thirtie one Monarch (since Hengist) of the Englishmen. His beginning was mi∣serably afflicted with barrennesse of the ground▪ mine amongst his people, morrai their further terrour, a fearefull : A bla ng starre. which men thought to bee signes from heauen, as sent from God, for the sinnes committed against the married Clergy, whose cause was much pittied, espe∣cially of the Nobles, & whose complaints of wrongs they instantly vrged, that without deserts they were expulsed from their ancient possessions; a thing which neither God nor goodmen euer allowed, and was contrary to the prescript rule of Christ, that wils Wil. Mal . Fox. vs to doe, as wee would be done vnto: whereto the Monkes answered, that Christ respected neither the person nor place, but onely them that tooke vp the Crosse of Penance and followed him, as themselues in their single life pretended to doe. But they good men little knew the incumbrances of wiuing; for o∣therwise they would haue felt, that the condition of the married, was more truly a suffering of the Crosse, and enduring of Penance. (3) These Church men thus diuided and rent, were diuersly sided as affection did moue, and that not onely of the meaner sort, but euen of the Nobles & great Ones; for the Mercian Duke Alferus fauou∣ring Wil. Mal . Simon D . Ra . Higd. Iohn Capgra . in vita Edgari. the iust cause of married Priests, destroied the Monasteries in his Prouince, cast out the Monkes, and restored againe the ancient reuenewes to them & their wiues: contrariwise, in East-Anglia the Priests went to wracke, where the Monks were maintained by the authority of Edelwin their Duke, who in their quarrell, with the assistance of his brother Alfred, and of Brightuoth Earle of Essex, raised a mighty Ar∣my, and stood with that power for their defence. (4) The fire thus blown from a sparke to a flame, was feared to mount higher, if not quenched in time, and therefore by mediation, armes laid aside, the cause was referred to be heard in Councel, & at Win∣chester first the assembly was held, where after long disp ch against the Monkes it was greatly ide had own at the mat∣ vp∣on the refectorie Wall, where the Councell sate. To this great Oracle S. Dunstan, desired them deuoute∣ly to pray, and to giue diligent eare for an answere: who, with as great bounty, as they in deuotion, made Dunstans coun∣sell. it not squemish to giue them this aduice; God forbid it should be so, God forbid it should be so (said he,) you iud∣ged well once, and to change that againe is not good. This was authority sufficient to suppresse the Priests, who now with their wiues went downe the wind; and indeed too blame they were to suspect this their Iudge, who neuer was heard to giue wrong sentence before: but they vnsatisfied men, thought once more to blow the coale, though therewith they were likely to burne their owne lips; for per∣swading the people, that this was but a subtile pra∣ctise of the Monks, in placing behind the wall a man of their owne, who through a truncke vttered those The Priests sus∣pition of the Monkes. words in the mouth of the Roode; it was therfore instantly desired, that the cause might once more come to scanning. (5) This lastly was granted, and a great assem∣bly congregated at Cleue in Wiltshire, whither re∣paired An. Do. 977. the Prelates with most of the States of the land, besides Gentlemen and Commons an innu∣merable sort. This Synode being set, and the controuersie pro∣pounded, a hote and sharpe disputation ensued, and a while was maintained with many bitter inue∣ctiues, ill beseeming such persons: But whether through the weakenesse of the foundation, or the ouer-presse of weight, or both, the ioysts of this vpper-loft, wherein the Councell was held, suddain∣ly A heauy mis∣chance. brake, and down fell the floore with all the people thereon, whereof many were hurt, and some slaine outright, onely Archbishop Dunstan then Pre∣sident, and mouth for the Monkes remained vnhurt: for the Post whereon his chaire was set (and not without miracle) stood wholy vntouched. Polychr. lib. 6. c. 12 Thus by this fall, fel the cause of the secular Priests; and the Monkish foundations vnderpropped with more surer pillars, Dunstan vuburdened of many imputations, the peoples affections drawne to the Monkes, and the Priests at liberty now to accompa∣ny their wiues without any cure, though not without care; and all this was wrought by the prouidence Priests without cure, but not without care. of Dunstan, and his strange preseruarion on the post; no lesse wonderfull then that which with the like truth is related of him, how when a huge beam of a house was suncke out of the frame, and like to rui∣nate the whole building, with onely making of the signe of the Crosse thereon, with his fingers hee made it returne to his former place: so wonder∣fully potent was he in such woodden miracles. To which, why should wee not giue credite, since the very Harpe which hee had touched could worke miracles? as when of it selfe it sounded melodiou∣sly that Hymne, Gaudent in coelis animae Sanctorum, Wil. . &c. Yea sith the blessed virgine Mary her selfe, is said to haue come to solace him with her songs, Cantemus Domino Sociae, &c. For, as for Angels Mal s. de gestis Ponti. 1. singing familiarly vnto him, and Diuelsin shape of dogs, foxes and beares, whipped by him, that was but ordinary; as likewise his making the shee-diuel to roare, when comming to tempt him to dalliance, . in shape of a beautifull lasse, hee caught her by the nose with hote burning pincers, and so spoilde a good face. But to leaue those figments wherewith our Monkish stories are stuffed to the deluding of their Readers, and dishonouring of those, whom thereby they thinke to magnifie; let vs looke backe to yong Prince Edward. (6) Who in all princely parts was an imitator of his Father, and for his modest gentlenesse worthily fauoured of all men: but as enuy is alwaies the at∣tendant of vertue; so had he them that much ma∣ligned his life, namely, the fauourites of Prince E∣thelred, whereof Queene Elfrida his mother was chiefe, who lastly betraied him, and that in this ma∣ner. (7) King Edward for his disport was hunting in Wil. Mal . Polyd : Rand Chest. P . a forrest neere vnto the sea, vpon the south-east shore of the County Dorset, and in the Iland Purbeck; not farre off, vpon a small riuer, stood pleasantly seated a faire and strong Castle called Corfe, where his mother in law Queene Elfrida, with his brother Prince E∣thelred, were then therein residing: Edward that e∣uer Alfredus . Flares Histor. Rich. Cirecest. Speculum hist. had beene louing to both, held it a kind office, now being so neere to visite them with his presence, and thereupon either of purpose or chance singled from his attendants, hee secretly stole from them all, and came alone to the castle gate. (8) The Queene who had long laine in wait for occasions, now tooke this as brought to her hand, Queene Elfrid perfidie. and therefore with a face as meaning no guile, shee humbly and cheerefully gaue the King welcome, de∣siring him to grace her and her sonne with his pre∣sence for that night; but hee with thanks refused the offer, as fearing least his company would soone find him missing, and craued onely of his mother a cup of wine, that in his saddle hee might drinke to her and his brother, and so bee gone. The cuppe was no sooner at his mouth, then a knife in his backe, which a seruant appointed by this trecherous Queene stroke into him; who feeling himselfe hurt set spurs to his horse, thinking to escape to his more faithfull company. (9) But the wound being mortall, and he fain∣ting through losse of much bloud, fell from his horse, and one foot entangled in the stirruppe, hee Mat Westminster. Simon D l. Fabian. was thereby rufully dragde vp and downe through woods and lands; and lastly left dead at Corfes- gate: which hapned the eighteenth day of May, after hee had raigned three yeares and sixe (some say eight) monethes, the yeare of his age sixeteene, and of Christ Iesus 979. His body found, was first buried Polydor. Wil. Mal . at Warham without all funerall pompe, but after three yeeres by Duke Alferus remoued, and with great celebrity enterred in the Minster of Shaftesbury: and for this vntimely death, he gained the surname of Martyr. (10) Queene Elfrida sore repenting her cruell and step-motherly fact, to expiate her guilt, and pacifie Almesbury and Worwel Mona∣steries founding. the crying bloud of her slaine sonne, built the two said Monasteries of Almesbury and Worwell in the Counties of Wilt-shire and Southampton, in which la∣ter she liued with great repentance and penance vn∣till the day of her death, and in the same lieth her bo∣dy enterred. These and other the like foundations built vp∣on the occasion of rapine & bloud, howsoeuer they may shew the sorrowfull repentance of their foun∣ders: yet their stones being laide with the simmond of murther, and the morter tempered with bloud, haue felt the wrath of him, who by his Prophet hath pronounced, that from the wall the stone shall crie, and the beame out of the timber shall answere it; Woe vnto him that buildeth a towne with bloud, and erecteth a City by iniquity. Habacuc . 11. ETHELRED COMMONLY CAL∣LED Ethelred. Monarch 32. THE VNREADIE, THE TVVO AND THIRTIETH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISH-MEN, HIS WARS, RAIGNE, WIVES AND ISSVES. CHAPTER XLIIII. E Thelred the sonne of King Edgar, & brother to King An. Do. 979. Edward the Martyr, at the age of twelue yeers entred Wil. Malmsbury. Spe l, Histor. his gouernment ouer the Englishmen, the yeere of mans saluation, 979, and was the two and thirtieth Monarch since King Hen∣gist: he was crowned King at Kingston vpon Thamesis the foureteenth of April, being Easter day, by the hands of Dunstan Archbi∣shoppe of Canterbury, who did it much against his will. (2) He was a man neither forward in action, nor fortunate in proceedings, and therefore commonly called the Vnready: his youth was spent in idlenes, feeding his senses with all voluptuous baites, his middle yeares with a carelesse gouernment, main∣taining life, malitiously reported. ciuill diss nsions, and his latter end deser∣uingly in continuall resistance of the bloud-thirsty Danes. With these imputations by writers hee is taxed, though we find no such iust cause in recor∣ding his life; but to such extreames are euen great Monarches themselues brought, that their breath and dignity once left and laid downe, they are sub∣iect to the censures of euery affectionate and ma∣lignant reporter. And that this King lay lyable to such mens humors, the working of Dunstan euer against him, is a sufficient witnes, who not onely did refuse to act his Coronation, but would haue preferred Lady Edgith a bastard before him to the Crown, as we haue said. And besides the generall . quarrell of the Monkes and married Priests, to which later himselfe and his Abetters were better inclined; his iust indi nation conceiued against the Bishop of Rochester, d that not pacified without the Bishops Bishop of R e∣ster. submission and payment of money, was cause inough for those Monkish Writers to brand the Lords An∣nointed with their marks of infamie, vnto whom they impute the miseries of those times, and the destru∣ction of the English by the intruding Danes. (3) These Danes had kept quiet euer since the disliked raigne of King Edwy, without any notable attempts, for the space of twenty two yeares: but now perceiuing the hearts of the subiects to bee drawn from their Soueraigne, they thought it a suf∣ficient occasion to forward their intendements; and omitting no time, in the second of his raigne with An. Do. 980. seuen ships they arriued vpon the coast of Kent, spoiling the Country; but most especially the Iland Th at, from whence they did great hurt likewise to the towne of Southampton. The English led in dislike of young Ethelreds go∣uernment, were the rather drawne to impute these and other aduersities to this vnfortunate Prince, by reason of a prediction of Dunstan, who had prophe∣sied, That they should not bee free from bloud and sword, lyer. lib. . . 13 till there came a people of an vnknowne tongue, th t should bring them to thraldome: and that opinion was skrewed deeper into their fearefull conceit, by a cloud appearing of bloud and fire, immediately af∣ter his vnaffected Coronation. (4) The next yeere, those ouing Da es entred the British Seas, and coasting to Cornwall destroied An. Do. 981. there the Abbey of Saint Patrick, P land in De ∣shire, Si D . and many other places vpon those shores; the like was done vnto Cheshire by the Norway-P rates, which broke into those parts in the same yeare. . . (5) And these calamities were seconded with o∣thers as fe full; for in the yeare 982. the City London was mise bly destroied and defaced by fire, An. Do. 982. whose beauty then chiefly extended from Ludgate T . . . westward; for, that within the walles, and where the heart of the City is now, was then neither beautiful, nor orderly built; what time also raged a sicknesse till then vnknowne in England, which was a strong burning feuer, and bloody fluxe, as also scarsity of victuals, and murraine among cattle. This hand of Polychron. lib. 6. cap. 3. God thus correcting the sinnes of all, was receiued as sent for the offences of some few, and wholly imputed to the King and his Raisers; Dunstan still prophesying further woes to the land, when himselfe should be dead. (6) The Danes hereupon more boldly assaulted each shore, and in so many placcs at once, that the Wil. Malmsbury. English were to seeke, where first to withstand. In Mat. Westminster the West they were encountred by Goda Earle of Deuonshire, as saith Simon Dunelmensis, by whom they Simon Dun. were ouerthrowne, though with the losse of his life, An. Do. 989. as also of Sternwold a man of great esteeme and va∣lour in those parts, who serued there vnder him. (7) In the East their leaders Iustine and Guth∣mond warred with better successe; for at Malden An. Do. 991. in Essex they gaue Brightnod the Earle, a great and bloody battaile, wherein himselfe with most of his people were slaine. The Danes thus prospering, more boldly went forward; and where they set their tallants, there they held fast, and lay on the land like vnto Grashoppers. These euils King E∣thelred could not redresse, his strengthes being small, and his subiects affections lesse; therefore calling to Counsell his Statesmen & Peeres, demanded their aduice what was best to bee done. Some few of these proffered the King their assistance, but more of them perswaded vnto a composition, whereof Siricius Archbishop of Caterbury was chiefe; and in fine, Malmsb. de gest. Pontif. l. 1. Polycr. lib. 6. . 13. ten thousand pounds paid to the Danes for their departure. (8) This golden Mine once entred, was more ea∣gerly digged into, by these still-thirsting Danes, who finding the branch so beneficiall at first, hoped the veine in following, would proue farre more boun∣tifull, and therefore regardlesse of promise, the next yeere prepared themselues againe for England, and with a great fleete dispatched to sea: the newes An. Do. 992. whereof strucke such terror into the English hearts, Wil. Malmsbury. that despairing of hope, they accounted themselues the bond-slaues of misery: The King therfore with much adoe prepared a Nauie, whereof hee made Elfrick Earle of Mercia Admirall; who setting from London vnto the seas, had power sufficient to put Elfrick Earle of Mercia. backe the enemy: but hee once a traitor could ne∣uer proue true; for, hauing been banished, forgi∣uen, and now taken into fauour, found meanes to bee false, and to betray his charge; and sending the enemy intelligence of his power and intents, gaue the way to their escape; and another fleete of Danes en∣countring with the Kings, at first hee fainedly and faintly fought against; and lastly, turned to their side; through which treason many Englishmen died, and the Kings Fleete and power was greatly weake∣ned; but he escaping due punishment himselfe, left his sonne to answere the fault, whose eyes King Ethel∣red caused to be put out. (9) About which time also another Danish Fleet entring Humber, wasted the countries of Yorkeshire An. Do. 993. and Lyndsey: against these King Ethelred sent his power, vnder the charge of three valiant but treche∣rous Simon Dun. Polydor. Mal. West. Captaines, namely, Frena, Godwin and Frede∣gist; for the battle but begun, these with their fol∣lowers fled away, which was the occasion of a great ouerthrow of the English; notwithstanding the coun∣try people not able to disgest their intollerable dea∣lings, fell vpon the Danes, slew some, and chased the rest. At what time also other of the Danes with ninety foure ships sailed vp the riuer Thamesis, and A Fleete of Danes on the Thames besiege London. laid their siege against London, giuing it a great as∣sault; but the Citizens thereof so manfully defen∣ded themselues, that they chased the Danes thence to their shame and great losse: yet fell they so foule vpon Essex, Kent, Sussex, and Hampshire, that the King was enforced to compound a peace, with the payment of sixteene thousand pounds: for confir∣mation whereof, Ethelred sent to Southampton for An∣laf these Norwegians King, and honourably enter∣tained him at Andeuer, where the same time he re∣ceiued Baptisme, King Ethelred taking him at the Matt West. Simon Dun. Font for his God-sonne, and with great gifts returned into Denmarke without any further harme done to the English. (10) But God and destiny suffering it, (that would haue the Saxons to fall before the Danes, as formerly the Britaines had done before them) no co∣uenant could be so surely made, but was as slackly in thē performed; for albeit this Anlaf honourably kept both faith and promise, yet others of his Coun∣try continued their inuasions, and as an other Hydra shewed their still-reuiuing heads. (11) For the nineteenth yeare of King Ethelreds An. Do. 997. most troublesome raigne, and of our saluation 997. the Danes with a great fleete sailed about Cornwall, and came into the mouth of Seuern, robbing, as they went, Deuonshire, Cornwal, and South-Wales: and mar∣ching further into the Continent, consumed Lydford, and the Abby of Saint Ordulfes at Essingstocke, thence passing through Dorsetshire with fire & sword, found not a man in the way to resist them, and wintering in the Wight liued by spoiles gotten in Hampshire and An. Do. 998. Sussex. (12) The next Spring they put into the mouth An. Do. 999. of Thamesis, and so by the riuer Medway arriued at Rochester: thither the Kentish with their strengthes repaired, but vnfortunately fought, and left the field to the Danes, who shortly after hoised their sailes, & with a merry gale arriued in Normandy. (13) King Ethelred thus rid of these his vnlooked An. D. 1000. for guests, sought to remoue those leigers that lay in Cumberland, whither hee repaired, and with sore warre wasted the Country, before whose sword the Danes were notable to stand; which somewhat encouraged the spirits of his people, and bettered their conceits towardes him: but farre this sunne past not without a cloud, nor was his successe entailde to be fortunate. (14) For the next yeare, those Danes that depar∣ted from Kent, came now from Normandy with their full sailes, and landing in Exmouth, their first and greatest fury was against the City of Exceter, which when they fiercely besieged, they were so valiantly Roger Houed. Annal. pars pr . beaten by the Citizens, as that enraged aboue mea∣sure with the ignominy of that repulse, they thence as a sodaine floud bare downe all that stood in their way; and then plainely beganne to appeare the rise of the Danes, which euery where lorded it, where they had to doe, and the fall of the Saxons, whose ouer∣topped Monarchy, and weake walles now wanted props to hold vp the weight; for the Captains of the English (saith Higden) wanting lore in deeds of Arms, their direction neuer prospered; if ships were made they neuer sped well, but were either chased of the enemy, or destroied by tempest; if the Nobles e∣uer assembled to consult of the State, that time was rather spent in whetting the spleene each against o∣ther, then iointly agreeing how to redresse their pre∣sent danger, or to represse the common enemy: for most of the Nobles were allianced into the Danish Higden. . bloud, whereby not onely the secret of those con∣sultations were reuealed, but being imploied in ser∣uice, many of them reuolted to the enemy. The Clergy as backward as any, denied the King their The Clergies co∣ustousnesse. assistance, pleading their exemptions from warre, and priuiledge of the Church, when the land lay bleeding and deploring for helpe, and scandalized all his other proceedings for demaunding their aide: to these were ioined scarsity, hunger and robberies. These miseries caused the summes of their compo∣sitions to bee augmented, whose last was sixteene thousand, now twenty thousand, immediately twen∣ty four, then thirty, and lastly, forty thousand pounds, vntill the land was emptied of all the coine; the Kingdome of her glory; the Nobles of courage; the The effects of it. Commons of their content, and the Soueraigne of his wonted respect and obseruance. (15) The Danes thus preuailing; did not a little glory in their fortunes, and grieued the poore English, whose seruice they emploied to eare and till the ground, whilest themselues ate idle, & eate the fruit of their paines, abusing the wiues and daughters of their hosts where they lay, and yet in euery place for feare and reuerence were called the Lord-Danes, Hector Boetius. (which afterwards becam a word of derision to such sturdy and lazy lozels) so that the like daies of miserie the land neuer felt. To redresse which, the carefull King Ethelred was farre too weake, and therfore inten∣ding to doe that by policy, which he could not by strength, he deuised a desperate stratagem that pro∣ued the destruction of the Saxons royall bloud, and Ethelreds bad policie. conquest of the land to another nation. (16) For seeking to disburden the Realme of these deuouring Danes, which by open force hee could no waies doe; he attempted in a bloudy mas∣sacre to destroy them, giuing a secret commission vn∣to euery City within his dominions, that at an ap∣pointed time they should set vpon, and kill all the Polycr. li. 6. ca. 15. The massacre of the Danes. Danes; the day was the thirteenth of Nouember, being the festiuall of S. Bricius, the yeare of Christ Iesus 1002, and presently after his marriage with Emma, the flower of Normandy; in confidence of which affinity, hee presumed to do what he did. His Henry Hunting. commaund was accordingly performed, and with such rigour, that in Oxford the fearefull Danes for refuge tooke into the Church of S. Frideswyd, as into a Sanctuary of venerable antiquity and priui∣ledge among ancient Kings; but they in fury regar∣ding neither place nor person, set the Church on fire, Matth. West. wherein were burned a great sort of those Danes with many rich ornaments, and the Library thereof vtter∣ly Register of S. Frideswydes. defaced. At which time (if Malmsbury say true) King Ethelred himself was in that City, and had sum∣moned Malmsb. a Parliament both of Danes and English, with which euen the King was much grieued: and there∣fore at his very great co beautifully repaired the Church, and all the losses accruing by the fire, en∣dowing it with large priuiledges and donations, as appeareth by his owne Charter, mentioning the Charter tenour of that Danish slaughter. In this massacre, Lady Gunhild, sister to Swaine King of Denmarke, a great and continuall friend to the English, with her husband and sonne, together were slaughtered, although she lay in hostage vpon conditions of peace, whose husbands name was Palin∣gus (saith Malmsbury) an Earle of great might, & both of them Christians. (17) Newes brought into Denmarke of this sud∣daine stratagem, no neede there was to vrge them to Hen. Hunting. reuenge, or to adde more fuell vnto that ouer kindled Simon Dun. fire; for preparation being made, the yeere ensuing, Swain with a great Nauy landed in the West, spoiled King Swaines inuasion. the Country, and gaue assault to the City of Exceter, which by the trechery of one Hugh a Norman (whom An. D. 1003. in the fauour of the Queen, King Ethelred had made Gouernour of that City) he razed and leuelled with the ground, all along from the Eastgate to the West. This treason and stirres great of themselues, but made much more rufull in the relating, caused Ethel∣red presently to muster his men; ouer whom hee made Earle Edrik (for his couetousnes surnamed Stre∣ton) Earle Edrick for his auarice sur∣named . his Generall, who bare a braue shew till it came to the push, and day of battle: but then to couer his treason, he fained himselfe sicke, and left his soul∣diers to shift as they could. The Danes hereupon rifled Wilton, and passing forward tooke Salisburie in their way, to which they were as welcome as wa∣ter into ships; but hearing that the King himselfe in person was preparing to giue them battle, they left the land, and tooke againe to sea. (18) The next yeare following, (which was the twenty foure of King Ethelreds raigne, and of grace, An. D. 1004. one thousand and foure,) King Swaine with a mighty Simon Dun. fleete of ships arriued vpon the coasts of Norffolke, where landing his men, hee made spoile of all be∣fore him, and comming to Norwich sacked the Ci∣ty, Norwich raced. with great slaughter of the Citizens; then tooke he Thetford, and set it on fire, notwithstanding hee had entred a truce with them: but for want of vi∣ctuall which then was scarse in the land, he returned to sea, and so into Denmarke. An. D. 1005. (19 Where making preparation for another ex∣pedition, encreased his Nauie and number of men, Henry Hunt. and the next Spring arriued at Sandwich, miserably desolating the Countries along the sea side, neuer An. D. 1006. staying in any certain place, but to preuent the Kings Forces roued from coast to coast, euer carrying to their ships their booties and prayes, and to encrease the calamitie, the haruest was neglected, and in ma∣ny places spoiled, both for the want of labourers, & by the feet of the souldiers which lay in field all that season, who from place to place trauailed, al∣though in vaine- Towards the Winter the Danes tooke into the Ile The Danes in the Ile of Wight. of Wight, and in the deepest time thereof, passed through Hampshire, into Barkeshire, vnto Reading, Wallingford, Colesey, and Essington, making clean worke wheresoeuer they came; for that which they could not carry they consumed with fire, with triumphes euer returning to their ships. (20) The King lying in Shrewsbury, vnable to re∣sist, An. D. 1007. called to him his Councell, to consult what was best to bee done; whereof Edrik was a principall, and in so high esteeme with the King, that he crea∣ted him Duke of Mercia, and gaue him his daughter Edrick an vntrusty Councellor. Egith in marriage: notwithstanding, these gluts of fauours wrought onely the disgestion of falshood in him, who could taft nothing vnlesse it was saused with treason. This man, then the Kings onely A∣chitophel, perswaded him to pay thirty thousand Simon Dun. pounds to the Danes for their peace, whereof no doubt some fell into his owne Coffers. (21) This intollerable imposition extorted of the Subiects especially at that time when the land was least able, made many suspect great matters against Edrik, and some did not feare to accuse him to his face, to bee the onely causer of this payment; char∣ging him as ouer-affectionated to the Danes, and to haue bewraied the Kings secrets and designes vnto His accusations. them: but he seated in the heart of his Soueraigne, rubd off this staine with a few fawnings, and a faire shew, being in wit subtle, in speech eloquent, His subtilty. and for riches inferiour to none, (a stone that could turne euen great streames aside) so that these sup∣posals of treasons (as proceeding from enuy to him for his good seruices) wanne him greater trust, and sent he was Ambassador to the Danes to mediate for peace: where reuealing the weakenes of the land, and the feares which the English conceiued of a conquest, treacherously disswaded them from giuing His treachery. eare to any motiues of Truce. (22) The State of the land thus standing, or ra∣ther An. D. 1008. An. Reg. 30. hanging at suspence, King Ethelred gaue order, that out of euery three hundred and ten hides of land a shippe should bee built, and of euery eight hides a complete Armour furnished. These mee∣ting at Sandwich, and furnished with souldiers, made Henry Hunting. Simon Dun. shew of such resistance, as had not beene seene, al∣though the euent was nothing but a shew. For Wil mot a Noble man of Sussex (banished for some of∣fence by King Ethelred) with twenty Sailes roued Matth. West. vpon the coasts, and by Piracy did much hurt among the English Marchants: wherefore Brithrik the bro∣ther of Edrik to winne himselfe honour, got the Kings consent to pursue this grand-Pirate, with fourescore saile of the foresaid ships, threatning to bring in Wilmot either dead or aliue: but his sailes Brithrick (chasing Wilmot) crossed by tempest. being spread vnder a faire wind, a violent tempest sodainely arose, and outragiously droue his shippes vpon shore, where distressed and torne, their bea∣ten huls lay vnable to recouer themselues, or the Sea: Wilmot taking aduantage of this present mishap, fell vpon them, and after much slaughter of their weather-beaten warders, set them all on fire; so that all this preparation proued not onely vaine, but also very hurtfull. (23) At the receit of the said thirty thousand Money paid the Danes. pounds, the Danes departed, in semblance satisfied, and friends with the English; but how long that la∣sted the sequele shewed: for the next haruest, and yeere of saluation 1009. a great fleete of their ships An. D. 1009. strongly appointed landed at Sandwich, vnder the conduct of three Danish Princes, Turkil, Henning and Three Danish Captaines. Anlafe: these comming to Canterbury, were com∣pounded with by the Citizens, paying a thousand Money paied the Danes. pounds for their departure; who thence in the Wight, Sussex and Hampshire made hauoke of all. Three thousand Pound. aith Simon Dun. King Ethelred seeing no truth in their promises, nor quietnesse; in State, his land thus exhausted of prouision and coine, thought it best to aduenture once for all, and to commit his cause vnto God, by the fortune of warre. To which end hee gathered his power, and comming vnlooked for, when the e∣nemy was altogether vnprepared, and taken at dis∣aduantage, he had made an end of the quarrell if wic∣ked Edrick had not perswaded him from fight, and put him into a causle sse feare with his forged tales. The Danes thus escaping returned to Kent, and the Edrick againe perfidious. winter following lodged their ships in the riuer Tha∣mesis, whence often they gaue assaies for London, though to little purpose. (24) Then took they through the Chiltern woods vnto Oxford, which they fired, and in their returne wasted all the countries on both sides of Thamesis, An. D. 1010. but hearing that London was prepared against them, they crossed ouer at Stanes, passing through Surrey into Kent, where they fell to amending their ships, and thence sailing about the coasts of Suffolke, tooke Ipswich, and pitched their battle vpon Rigmer, a∣gainst Vikel (Gouernour of Norffolke) and his English, Henry Hunt. vpon the fift of May; where they wonne the day with a great slaughter made of the Suffolke, Norffolke, and Cambridge-shire men, and after harried those Countries with the borders of Lincolne and Hun∣tingtonshires; burning Thetford and Cambridge, and rifling all the Abbies and Churches that stood in their way, and then through Essex returned vnto their ships. (25) Neither rested they there long in quiet, ere, The Dene for∣rage the Coun∣tries before them as people wholly deuoted to spoile, they brake into Buckinghame, Bedford, and Northampton-shiers, the chief Towne of which last, they set on fire after much slaughter of the Inhabitants; and thence entring Wiltshire depopulated all before them, which was the seauenth Shire in number that they had laid wast like a solitude. (26) And now not satisfied with spoil nor bloud∣spilling, they prepare a new expedition for Canterbu∣ry, An. D. 1011. Henry Hunt. Vincentius. and in September beleagered the Citie, which by treason of a Church-man they wonne, tooke Elphegus the Arch-Bishop, and slew nine hundred Monks and men of Religion, besides many Citizens, without all mercy: for they tithed the captiue multi∣tudes after an inuerted order, slaying all by nines, Addit. ad Asseri . and reseruing onely the tenth to liue; so that of all the Monkes in the towne there were but foure saued, and of the lay people foure thousand eight hundred, by which account M. Lambert collecteth Wil. Lambert. in Peram. that there died in this massacre forty three thousand and two hundred persons. The Archbishop Elphegus, for that he refused to charge his Tenants with three thousand pounds to Polychr. li. 6. c. 16. An. D. 1012. pay for his ransome, they most cruelly stoned to death at Greenewith the nineteenth of April follow∣ing. Turkillus the Leader of these murtherers, tooke into his possession all Northfolke and Suffolke, ouer whom he tyrannized in most sauage maner. The rest compounding with the English for eight thousand pound soiourned a while quiet among them. Money paied the Danes (27) But King Swaine hearing of the dissensions, and weakenesse of the land, in the yeare of Grace, An. D. 1013. 1013, with a great number of ships arriued in the mouth of Humber, and entring Trent landed at Simon Dun. Gainsborough; whose terrour stroke so deepe into the Northumbrians conceites, that they with them of Lyndsey yeelded themselues to the yoake of his subiection, so that now ouer all the North from Watling street he raigned sole King, and exacted pled∣ges from them for their further obedience. From the North hee sought to spread his wings further into the South, and leauing his sonne Canute to take Canute. charge of his shippes, and new conquered countries, sped himselfe through Mercia to Oxford and Win∣chester, bringing all vnder the power of his com∣maund: with which gales of his fortunes, hee was so pusfed vp, that thinking nothing vnpossible for him and his Danes to doe, in the heat of his courage he came vnto London, and presently begirt the walles London besieged with a strait siege. (28) In the City lay vnfortunate King Ethelred, who (as Simon Monke of Durham reporteth) had Simon Dunel. Mat. Westminster. Henry Hunt. with him, and vnder his pay Turkillus the Danish Prince before spoken of, and forty fiue Danish ships to defend the coasts. King Swaine at his first com∣ming fiercely assaulted the City, hoping his fortunes would haue proued as before; but the presence of the King, and London the eye of the land, made the Poly Citizens aboue measure couragious, who beat the Danes from their walles, and sallying forth of the Gates, slew them on heapes, so that Swain himselfe was in great danger, had hee not desperately runne through the midst of his enemies, and by flight es∣caped their swords; marching both day and night in great feare vntill hee had entred Bath, where E∣thelmere Earle of Deuonshire with his Westerne peo∣ple submitted themselues vnto him. But this last Wil. Malms. Mat. Westminster. ouerthrow, and want of victuals, caused him after he had receiued a certaine summe of money, to hast in∣to Denmarke, minding with more power, and bet∣ter aduantage to prosecute the quarrell. (29) Not long it was ere he returned, and im∣mediately was met by the English, where betwixt them was strucke a fierce battaile, which had been A Battaile be∣tweene Danes & English. with good successe, had not the treasons of some hindered it, in turning to the Danes. King Ethel∣red therefore seeing himselfe, and land betraied in this manner, to those few true English that were left, he vsed this speech as followeth. (30) If there wanted in me a fatherly care, ei∣ther Ethelreds Oration. for the defence of the Kingdome, or admini∣stration of iustice in the common wealth, or in you, the courage of Souldiers for the defence of your natiue Country; then truely silent would I bee for euer, and beare these calamities with a more deiected mind: but as the case stands (be it as it is) I for my part am resolued to rush into the midst of the enemie, and to lose my life for my Kingdome and Crowne. And you (I am sure) hold it a worthy death that is purchased for the liberties of your selues and kindred; and therein I pray you let vs all die, for I see both God and de∣stiny against vs, and the ruine of the English nation brought almost to the last period; for wee are o∣uercome not by weapons and hostile warre, but by treason and domesticke falshood; our Nauy be∣traied into the Danes hands, our battaile weakened by the reuolt of our Captaines, our designes be∣wraied to them by our owne Counsellors, and they also inforcing compositions of dishonourable peace, I my selfe disesteemeed, and in scorne tear∣med Ethelred the vnready; your valour and loial∣ties betraied by your owne leaders, and all our pouerty yeerely augmented by the paiment of their Dane-gilt, which how to redresse God one∣ly knoweth, and we are to seeke; for if we pay money for peace, yea, and that confirmed by oth, these enemies soone breake it, as a people that nei∣ther regard God nor man, contrary to equity and the lawes of warre, or of nations: and so farre off is all hope of better successe, as we haue cause to feare the losse of our Kingdom, and you the extinct of the English nations renowne; therefore seeing the enemies are at hand, and their hands at our throats; let vs by foresight and counsell saue Paines taking for safetie. our owne liues, or else by courage sheath our swords in their bowels: either of which I am wil∣ling to enter into, to secure our estate and nation from an irrecouerable ruine. (31) This lamentable Oration deliuered from the passions of a iustly-pensiue King, touched the hearers to the heartes, and asmuch distracted their afflicted minds: to abide battaile they saw it was bootlesse, the treason of their leaders so many times defeating their victories; to yeeld themselues to the enemy, would but beginne their seruitude and mise∣ry; and to flee before them, their eternall ignominy and reproch. Thus their opinions were canuased, but nothing put in practise, whereas meane whiles the Danes went forward with victories, and had got the most part of the land, yea and London also by submission; wherewith vnfortunate Ethelred more and more de∣iected, Henry Hunting. Simon Dun. sent his wife Emma with his two sonnes by her, vnto her brother Richard Duke of Normandy, and for his owne safest refuge committed himselfe vnto Turkil the Dane, in whose shippes he remained a while at Greenewich, and from thence went into the An. D. 1014. An. Reg. 35. Isle of Wight, where he abode most part of the win∣ter, and thence sailed into Normandy to his wife and brother, leauing the Danes lording it in his realme. (32) These were the daies of Englands mour∣ning, shee being vnable to maintaine her defen∣ders, and yet enforced to nourish and cherish her de∣uourers: for the Danes in two factions most cruelly Swaine and Tur∣kils domineering. afflicted the land like two milstones crushing & grin∣ding the grain. Swayn as an absolute King, extorted of the English both victuals and pay for his souldiers: and Turkil on the other side, in defence of the Eng∣lish, commanded the like for his ships and men; so that the Danes had all, and the English maintained al. Neither were churches free from their spoils, (whom other Conquerors haue held most impious to vio∣late,) but either suffered the flames of their consu∣ming fire, or were forced to purchase their standings with great summes of money. Such composition King Swaine demaunded for the preseruation of S. Edmunds Monastery in Suffolke; which because the Inhabitants refused to pay, he threatned spoile both to the place, & to the Martyrs bones there enterred; in the midst of which iollity (saith Houeden) he sud∣dainely Houeden. Annal. pars prior. Fabian. Chron. par. 6. cap. 200. Polychron. lib. 6. cap. 10. cried out that he was strucke by S. Edmund with a sword, being then in the midst of his No∣bles, and no man seeing from whose hand it came; and so with great horrour and torment, three daies after vpon the third of February ended his life at Thetford (others say at Gainsborough:) but with his death died not the title of the Danes, who imme∣diately aduanced Canutus his sonne for their King. (33) The English that liked nothing lesse then bondage, especially vnder such tyrannizing intru∣ders, An. D. 1015 thought now or neuer the time to shake off the yoake; and therefore with great ioy and hast sent in∣to Normandy for their natiue King. Ethelred now not vnreadie for the recouering of his right, fore∣slowed no meanes either to hasten or strengthen the enterprize, and hauing the assistance of his brother of Normandy, in the Lent following landed in England, vnto whom resorted the people from all parts, accounting it their greatest ioy to see the face of their King. (34) Canutus then at Gainsborough, Souldier-like mustered and managed his men, and holding it good Canutus winneth loue of the English. policie to keepe that by bounty, which his father had got by tyranny, made no spare to purchase the hearts of the English; by which meanes those of Lyndsey became his Creatures, with an agree∣ment to find him both horse and men against their owne King and Country. Ethelred therefore now raging for reuenge, with a mighty host entered Lyndsey, where hee burnt all the Country, and put the inhabitants to the sword. He is chased by . Canute not able to resist this puissant Army, held the sea more safe for him then the land, and en∣tring Humber, sailed to Sandwich, where being sore grieued at the miseries of these his confederates, re∣quited King Ethelreds friends with the like, and commaunded that those pledges which had beene Matth. West. deliuered by the Nobles vnto his Father, should Wil. Mal . haue their noses slit, and their hands cut off: which cruelty acted, hee sailed to Denmarke, as hope∣lesse of any good issue in England. (35) But Turkil the Dane, retained (as we said) into King Ethelreds pay, seeing successe so sodainely altered, sore repented him of his reuolt from the Turkil inciteth Ca against, England. Danes, and knowing now the time to recouer his reputation, with nine of his shippes sailed into Denmarke, instantly importuning Canut to addresse againe for England; alleadging the feares and weak∣nesse of the people, the beauty and fertility of the land, an Eden, in respect of their owne barren seat, and (which did most moue) himselfe would assist, when the English least thought it: with these and the like hee spurred him on, who of himselfe was forward in a full curriere. Canutus therefore with the aide of his brother Harrold, rigged forth a Nauie of two hundred saile, all furnished with souldiers and abiliments of warre, whose terror landed in England before him, and his Canutus and his Nauie. power by report made greater then it was; and to encrease the terrour of this fearefull enemy, the sea with a spring-tide brake into this land, and destroy∣ed both townes and many inhabitants; a signe fore∣shewing (as was thought) the successe of that fleete, borne hitherward vpon those waues; and to encrease the English miseries, thirty thousand pound was Money collected for the Danes. then collected by way of Tribute to pay the Danish auxiliary Nauy lying before Greenewich. The States also conuening in a grand Councell at Oxford to determine vpon the great affaires of the Kingdom, were diuided into factions, and two Noblemen of the Danes there murthered by practise of Edrick the Traitor. These (I say) were accounted ominous amongst the English, that made each mole-hill to seeme a mountaine, and euery shadow the shew of an enemy. (36) In the meane while Canutus had landed at Sandwich, and giuen a great ouerthrow to the Eng∣lish; Wil. Malmsbury. Henry Hunt. Mat. Westminster. Simon Dunel. entred Kent, and by his sword had made way through the Countries of Dorset, Sommerset, and Wilton. Ethelred lying dangerously sicke at Cossam, the ma∣naging of these warres was transferred to Prince Edmund his sonne, who preparing to meete the enemie with his Army in the field, had sodainely notice that Edrik his brother in-law ment to betray him into his enemies hands; which newes strucke a great astonishment vnto his heart, and caused him to retrait his host into a place of security; where∣by Edrik perceiuing his trecherous purposes were Matth. West. disclosed, gaue more open proofe of his intend∣ments, flying to the enemy with forty of the Kings shippes; whereupon all the west Countries submit∣ted themselus vnto Canutus. Simon Dun. (37) By this time King Ethelred had recouered his sicknesse, and minding reuenge on his most wic∣ked sonne Edrik, with purpose to trie his last for∣tunes An. D. 1016. by hazard of fight, summond all his forces to meete him at a certaine day and place; where being assembled, he was instantly warned not to giue battaile, for that his owne subiects ment to be∣tray him. King Ethelred euer vnfortunate in this, to find treasons amongst them that ought him most trust, Londons fidelley. withdrew himselfe to London, whose seruice against the Danes he had lately seene, and therefore accoun∣ted his person most sure in their walles. Prince Ed∣mund with his power posted ouer Humber, where obtaining Earle Vtred to side in his quarrell, entred the Countries of Stafford, Leicester, and Shropshires, not sparing to exercise any cruelty vpon these inha∣bitants, as a condigne recompence for their reuolt. Neither did Canut for his part spare the Kings sub∣iects, but through Buckingham, Bedford, Huntington, Canutus deuastatiōs Nottingham, Lincolne, and Yorkeshires, made spoile of all, so that the miserable English went to wracke on all sides; insomuch that Vtred also forsaking Ed∣mund, became subiect to Canut: whereupon Ed∣mund hasted to London to ioine his strength with his Fathers, and Canute with no lesse speed sailed a∣bout the Coasts into Thamesis, preparing his Armie for the siege of London. (38) At which time King Ethelred, either faln in∣to relapse of his last sicknesse, or tired with the ma∣ny Ethelred dieth. troubles, and daily renued treasons against him, gaue vp his ghost, and found rest by death, which neuer hee could attaine by li e, the twenty third of April, and yeere of our Saluation 1016, when he had most vnfortunately raigned thirty seuen yeeres, and nine daies: his body was there buried in the Cathe∣drall The time of his raigning. Church of S. Paul, and bones as yet remaine in the north-wall of the Chancell in a chest of grey-Marble, reared vpon foure small pillers, couered with a copped stone of the same, adioining to ano∣ther His Tombe in S. Pauls in London. of the like forme, wherein Sebby King of the East-Saxons lieth intombed. (39) Of Parsonage he was very seemely, and of countenance gratious, affable and courteous to his Subiects, and a maintainer of iustice among them, as by his excellent Lawes which himselfe made, and by his sharpe, but godly and wise censures against Fox M yrologe in King Egelreds life ex Hist. Ior∣ lens. vnlearned, bribing, delaying, partiall Iudges & Law∣yers, and their purloining officers (at large set down by M. Fox) is very apparant. Very louing and ten∣der affectionated he was to his brother King Edward; for whose death hee made such lamentation, that his mother beat him with a taper of waxe that stood before her, yea and so sore that he could neuer after wel endure the sight of a taper. Fauourable he was to the married Priests, and least esteemed the opulent and idle liues of the Monkes, whose pens therefore (as in such cases we euer find them partial) haue been Polycr. li. 6. ca. 13. very lauish in his dispraise, accusing him with sloth and vnreadinesse of Armes, of voluptuous es and lechery, couetousnesse, pride and cruelty: whereas in following the records of his life, laying aside the Danish massacre, we find no such sinnes, neither a∣ny mention of Concubine that euer hee kept, or name of child vnlawfully begot, hauing had many by his wiues, which were as followeth. His Wiues. (40) Elgiua, the first wife of King Ethelred, was the daughter of an English Duke named Thored, Elgiua the first wife, by some called Elflede. who is reported in the history of that time, to haue done great seruice against the Danes. She was mar∣ried vnto him when hee was seuenteene yeeres of age, in the sixt of his raigne, being the yeare of grace 984. and was his wife seauenteene yeares, who de∣deceased in the twenty foure of his raigne, and of Christ Iesus, 1003. (41) Emme, the second wife of King Ethelred, was the daughter of Richard the second Duke of Emme the second wife. Normandy, and sister of Duke Richard, and Duke Robert Father to William the Conqueror; her mother was sister to Herfast the Dane, Grandfather of William Fitz-Osbert afterward Earle of Hereford. She was a Lady of passing beauty, and therefore commonly called the flower of Normandy; married vnto him in the twenty and fift yeare of his raigne, & yeere of Saluation, 1003. with whom shee liued thirteene yeeres, and suruiuing him was remarried to King Ca∣nute the Dane. His Issue. (42) Ethelstan, the eldest sonne of King Ethelred Ethelstane the el∣dest sonne. and of Queene Elgiua his first wife, was borne a∣bout the eight yeare of his Fathers raigne, and yeere of Christ, 986: hee liued vnto the age almost of twen∣ty fiue yeeres, (being then by great likelihood) cut off by vntimely death in the warres of the Danes, ra∣ging then most extreamely, which was the thirtie third of his Fathers raigne, and of Christs Natiuitie 1011. (43) Egbert, the second sonne of King Ethelred, and Queene Elgiua his first wife, seemeth to haue Egbert the second sonne. beene borne two yeeres after his brother Ethelstan, in the tenth yeare of his Fathers raigne, and yeare of our Lord 988, and to haue deceased in the very prime of his youth before the death of his father, or of his elder brother, and before hee had done any thing in his life worthy of remembrance after his death. (44) Edmund, the third sonne of King Ethelred & Edmund the third sonne. Queene Elgiua his first wife, was borne in the ele∣uenth yeare of his fathers raigne, and of Grace 989 and of all his fathers Children proued to be the on∣ly man that set his helping hand to the redresse of the estate of his Country distressed by the miserable oppressions of the Danes, which hee pursued with such exceeding toile, and restlesse hazards of his body, as he was therefore surnamed Iron-side; and when hee had followed those warres with great cou∣rage the space of seuenteene yeeres vnder his Fa∣ther, being come to twenty seuen of his owne age, hee succeeded him in his Kingdome and troubles, as presently shall be shewed. (45) Edred, the fourth sonne of King Ethelred, and of Queene Elgiua his first wife, was born about Edred the fourth sonne. the foureteenth yeare of his fathers raigne, being the yeare of Grace 992. His name is continually set downe, as a witnesse in the testees of his fathers Charters, vntill the thirtie fift yeare of his raigne, by which it appeareth that hee liued vnto the two and twentieth yeere of his owne age, although I find no mention of him, or of any thing done by him in any of our histories, and it seemeth he died at that time, because his name is left out of the Charters after that yeare. (46) Edwy, the fift sonne of King Ethelred, and Edwy the fifth sonne. Queene Elgiua his first wife, suruiued his father and all his brethren, and liued in the raigne of Canute the Dane, who being iealous of his new-gotten e∣state, and fearefull of the dangers that might accrew vnto him by this Edwy, and such others of the Eng∣lish bloud roiall, practised to haue him murthered, which was accordingly done by them, whom hee most fauoured, and least suspected, the yeare of our saluation, 1017. (47) Edgar, the sixt sonne of King Ethelred and of Edgar the sixt sonne. Queene Elgiua his first wife, was borne about the twentieth yeere of his fathers raigne, beeing the yere of our Lord God nine hundred ninetie and eight. He seemeth by the Testees of his fathers Charters, to haue beene liuing in the one and twentieth of his raigne, but beeing no more found in any of them af∣ter, may be supposed by all coniectures, to haue died in, or, about the same yeere, beeing but the eleuenth after his owne birth, and the seuenth before his fa∣thers death. (48) The eldest daughter of King Ethelred and The eldest daughter. Queene Elgiua his first wife, although her name bee not to bee found in any writer of those times, appea∣reth notwithstanding, to be married to one Ethelstan, a Noble man of England, who was the principall Commander of Cambridge-shire men, at the great bat∣tle fought betweene them and the Danes, wherein the English-men had the ouerthrow; and this sonne in law of King Ethelred, with the rest of the chiefe Leaders, were slaine in the yeere of Christs Natiuity 1010. be∣ing the two and thirtieth of his father in lawes raigne. (49) Edgith, the second daughter of King Ethelred Edgith the second daughter. and Queene Elgiua his first wife, was married to Edrik Duke of Mercia, who for his couetousnesse in get∣ting was surnamed Streattone: This Edrik was the sonne of one Egelrik surnamed Leofwin, an elder bro∣ther to Egelmere the grandfather of Goodwin Duke of the West-Saxons; and beeing but meanely borne, was thus highly aduanced by this King; notwithstanding he was euer a traitor to his Countrie, and a fauourer of the Danes, betraying both him, and King Edmund his sonne to King Canut, that he thereby might gette new preferments by him, who worthily rewarded him as a traitor and put him to death. (50) Elfgine, the third daughter of King Ethelred and of Queene Elgiua his first wife, was the second Elfgine the third daughter. wife of Vtred surnamed the Bold, sonne of Earle Wal∣defe the elder, Earle of Northumberland, by whom shee had one onely child, a daughter, named Aldgith, married to a Noble-man called Maldred, the sonne of Crinan; shee was mother of Cospatricke, who was Earle of Northumberland in the time of William the Conquerour, and forced by his displeasure to fly into Scotland, where hee abode and was ancestor to the Earles of Dunbar and of March in that Countrie. (51) Gode, the fourth and youngest daughter of King Ethelred and Queene Elgiua his first wife, was Gode the fourth daughter. first married to one Walter de Maigne a Noble-man of Normandy, greatly fauoured by King Edward her bro∣ther; who liued not long after the marriage, and left issue by her a sonne named Rodulfe, whom King Ed∣ward his vncle created Earle of Hereford. This Earle Rodulfe, died the one and twentieth of December, in the thirteenth yeere of his vncles raigne, and was bu∣ried at Peterborough; leauing issue a young sonne na∣med Harrald, created afterwards by King William the Conqueror, Baron of Sudeley in the Countie of Glou∣cester, and Ancestor to the Barons of that place suc∣ceeding, and of the Lord Chandois of Sudeley now be∣ing. This Lady Gode, after the decease of the said Water de Maigne, was remarried to Eustace the elder, Earle of Bulloigne in Picardy, a man of great valour in those parts of France, and a most faithfull friend to King Edward her brother; which Earle was grand-fa∣ther to Godfrey of Bulloigne, King of Ierusalem, albeit it seemeth he had no issue by this Lady. (52) Edward, the seuenth sonne of King Ethdred, and his first by Queene Emme his second wife, was Edward the se∣uenth onne. borne at Islipe in the County of Oxford, and brought vp in France all the time of his youth, with his vncle Richard the third of that name, Duke of Normandy, mistrusting his safety in England vnder King Canute the Dane, although he had married his mother; but hee found the time more dangerous by the vsage of his brother Elfred, at his beeing heere in the raigne of King Harrald sonne of the Dane. Notwithstanding hee returned home, when Hardiknut the other sonne (beeing his halfe brother) was King, and was honou∣rably receiued and entertained by him, and after his death succeeded him in the Kingdom of England. (53) Elfred, the eight sonne of King Ethelred, and Elfred the eight sonne. his second by Queene Emme his second wife, was conueied into Normandie for feare of King Conute, with his eldest brother Edward, and with him retur∣ned into England to see his mother, then beeing at Winchester, in the second yeere of King Harrald surna∣med Harefoote; by whose practize hee was trained to∣wards London, apprehended by the way at Guilford in Surrey, depriued of his eie-sight, and committed pri∣soner to the Monastery of Elie: his Normans that came with him most cruelly murthered, and hee himselfe soone after deceasing, was buried in the Church of the said Monasterie. EDMVND SVRNAMED IRON∣SIDE Edmund. THE THIRTIE THREE MO∣NARCH Monarch 33 OF THE ENGLISH-MEN, HIS WARRES, ACTS, RAIGNE, WIFE, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XLV. E Dmund, the third sonne of King Ethelred, and the eldest liuing at his Fathers An. D. 1016. death, succeeded him both in his dominions, & in his troubled estate a∣gainst the Danes; entring his gouernement in the moneth of April, and crowned at Kingston vp∣on Thamesis, by Liuingus Archbishop of Canterbury, the yeere of mans saluation 1016. Notwithstan∣ding, a great part of the English, considering the puis∣sance of the Danes, both feared and fauoured Ca∣nut, especially, a great part of the Clergy, who at Southampton ordained him their King, swearing to him the fealty of true subiection; but the Londoners stood most firme to Prince Edmund, and were prin∣cipall Polycr. lib. 6. . 7. Actors for his election. (2) In reuenge whereof Canutus who had besie∣ged the Citie before the death of King Ethelred, cau∣sed his ships now to be towed, and drawne vp the Henry Hunting. Simon Dun. Thamesis vnto the west side of the bridge, and from the riuer with a deepe and large Trench encom∣passed the City, shutting vp all entrance or egresse of any: but the Citizens manfully stood in resi∣stance, whereto the comming of their new King for their succour, did not a little encourage them, and daunted the Danes, who now thought it best to breake vp their siege and be gone: and the ra∣ther (saith the Author of Encomium Emmae) for that King Edmund sent Canute a peremptory challenge of single combate, which he neither accepted, nor Proffer of single combat. yet staied the siege to trie his chance; but waying his anchors sailed along the Coast to the Ile of Sheepie, where he wintred with his Nauie and men. (3) But loth to lose opportunity, when time serued for warre; on the sodaine he assailed the west of England, and brought much of those parts vnder his commaund: to meet whom the restlesse Iron∣side prepared, and with such small power as his lea∣sure would admit to leauie, he hasted into Dorset∣shire, where Cannut was forwarding his owne for∣tunes, and at Penham neere Gillingham, each met o∣ther An. D. 1016. In the Rogation . in the field, wherein a sore battaile was fought, and bloudy to the Danes, where many of them were put to the sword, and the rest to flight. (4) Canute immediately tooke into Winchester, to secure himselfe from danger, and the rest escaped towards Salisbury, and there begirt the Citie with a Polydor. strait siege. King Edmund as ready to saue, as they to destroy, made presently thitherward with his small and ouertired company; whom Canut, waiting for aduantage, followed with a great host, and in Worcestershire, at a place called Sherostan, in the sight of his enemy pitched his battaile. To the aide of Edmund came many of the English, so that his Army was greatly encreased, and their coura∣ges inhaunsed, which made the Danish souldiers som∣what to droope. (5) Notwithstanding, vpon the twentieth of Iune, 1016. their battailes ioined, and with equall fortune continued all the day, vntill the night con∣strained them to part. Simon Dun. Matt. West. (6) But their bloud not cold, the next day they buckled together againe with no lesse courage then before, till at length the Danes were going down, & the English in great forwardnes of victory: which when the Traitour Edrik perceiued, he cut off the head of a souldier, whose name was Osmearus, like vnto King Edmund both in haire and countenance, and shaking his bloody sword with the halfe-gas∣ping Wil. Malmsbury. Edrick . head, cried vnto the host of the English: Flie yee wretches, flie, and get away, for your King is slaine, behold here is his head, therefore seeke now to saue your owne liues. (7) But Edmund hauing present notice of this trea∣cherous stratageme, and seeing his men ready to giue ouer the fight, hasted himselfe where he might be best seene, encouraging his Army to stand to it like true Englishmen, and posting from ranke to ranke, both performed the parts of a wise Gene∣rall, and vnderwent the dangers of the meanest soul∣dier: his men seeing his presence, & the apparant trea∣chery of Duke Edrik, bent their bows against the trai∣tour, and had shot him to death, had he not presently auoided to the enemy: but the night approching, parted againe the battaile of this second day: Duke Edrik excusing his fact, as beeing meerely mistaken in the countenance of the man, and thirsting to saue the bloud of the English; was taken againe into fa∣uour, . and bare himselfe outwardly faire for his Country. (8) The third day appearing, both the Armies prepared for battaile, but yet stood still without any attempt, onely refreshing their wearied, and almost tired bodies, and burying the dead slaine in the two daies fights before. (9) The night following, Canutus in great si∣lence brake vp his Campe, and marched very fast towards London,, against whose Citizens he carried Canut marcheth to London. great spleene, and most earnestly desired the con∣quest of the Citie, which in a sort was still besieged by the Danish ships. (10) The Centinels the next morning certified King Edmund (who was addressing himselfe for the battaile) of the suddaine departure of his enemies, whereupon hee as ready to preuent their designes, followed them by tract euen vnto London: where with small adoe, hee remoued their siege, and en∣tred the City in manner of triumph. The Danes Dislodged by Edmund. thus discomfited, great hope was conceiued, that these faire proceedings would haue a prosperous end. (11) Edmund, therefore following the aduantage of their discouragements, two dayes after at Brent∣ford bad them battaile, and that with their great ouerthrow; notwithstanding, in passing the Thame∣sis at the same place, he lost many of his men, who were drowned before they could re ouer the shore: vpon which losse the Traitor Edrike plaied, who earst had much feared the downefall of the Danes. For hereupon hee perswaded his brother in law King Edmund to come to truce with Canute, which Edrik wicked counsell. as he confidently affirmed, should be to the great benefite and contentment of Edmund: Canute him∣selfe so plotting it, that by his meanes hee might continue his hopes, and bring his enemy into his Henry Hunt. danger. (12) The affaires thus standing, King Edmund returned into the West, and Canute with spoiles vn∣to his shippes that were in Medyway, not far from Rochester, where he a while lay still to learne what Edmund meant to doe; who contrariwise louing Edmunds prepa∣rations. nothing lesse then to linger his businesses, made preparation against those truce-breakers that had wasted the Country in their returne, and with a great Army entred Kent, where he pitched down his tents neere vnto Oteford. Canut, who had prepared himselfe in most war∣like array to meete his approch, beganne the bat∣taile in a furious manner, which continued verie bloudy for foure howres space, vntill the foot of his vaward beganne to shrinke, which when hee perceiued, he drew his horsemen for their aide; but whilest the one gaue hastily back, & the other made Polyd . Fabian. Ran. Higd. Mat. Westminster. Henry Hunt. Wil. Malms. as slowly forward, the array of the whole army was broken, and the Danes slaine on all hands: for it is reported that Canute lost foure thousand fiue hundred men, and King Edmund onely six hundred; the rest of these Danes trusting to their legs: whom if Edmund had pursued in chase, it is thought, that day had ended the warres betwixt those two Na∣tions for euer: but Destiny, that would haue the Saxons downe, who had raised themselues by the fals of the Britaines, made Edrik her instrument, & mall of the English, who kept King Edmunds ha∣sty foot from following his enemies, by guilefull vrging the danger of ambush, and the ouer-wearied bodies of his souldiers, so that Canute thereby had leasure in safety to passe ouer into Essex. (13) Where beginning againe, with the increase of his power to despoile al the Country before him, A battaile be∣tween Edmund & Canute. brought feare to the inhabitants, and to himselfe submission of many English. King Edmund there∣fore made preparation thitherward, and at Ashdone three miles from Saffron-Walden, gaue battaile to Canute, wherein a bloudy slaughter ensued, though a while with equall chance of foile or of victory, vn∣till lastly the Danes beganne to giue backe, which when the euer-traiterous Edrik perceiued, he went with his strength, vnto their side, and maintained their battaile, which otherwise was at point to be lost, whereby the Danes regained the day, and the betraied English, the ouerthrow. There died of Edmunds Nobility, Duke Alfred, Duke Goodwin, Duke Athelward, Duke Athelwin, and Earle Vrchell, Wil. Malmsb. Simon Dun. Ran. Higden. with Cad th Bishop of Lincolne, and Wols y Abbot of Ramsey, besides other of the Clergy that were come thither to pray for the preseruation of the King and his Army. The remembrance of which field is retained vnto this day, by certaine small hilles there remaining, whence haue beene dig∣ged the bones of men, Armour, and the wa∣ter-chaines of horse-bridles. (14) King Edmund thus traiterously forced to re∣tire from the field, on foot marched vnto Glouce∣ster with a very small Army, leauing Canut ouer-swollen Edmund put to retire. in conceit for this his great victorie, vnto whom then the Londoners submitted, and so did London yeeldeth to Canute. many other great townes of Name; after which hee followed Edmund into the West; who now like a Tygar robbed of her Whelpes, seeking the reuenge of his lost day, gathered a most puissant Army, meaning to trie the vttermost chance of Fate, or Battaile. Their hostes meete at Dear∣hurst neere vnto the riuer Seuerne, where they Mat. Westminster. Polydor. were resoluedly bent to establish the ones title with the others downefall; and now being ready to ioyne, a certaine Captaine of vncertaine name, stept forth (as is reported) betwixt the two Ar∣mies, and vttered in effect this speech. (15) Many battailes haue beene fought, and too much bloud already spilt for the soueraignitie The aduice of a Captaine for sin∣gle combat. of this Land, betwixt these two fierce Nations, and the valours of the Generals, Captaines and Souldiers sufficiently tried; wherein euen fortune her selfe seemeth to haue beene conquered; for if one Battaile were wonne, it was not long kept, neither the loser so weakened, but that hee had both courage and power to winne the next: what is the marke then that you aime at? is it honour and fame? Titles indeed which accompany war; but neither long enioyed, nor much attained vn∣to by the common Souldiers, by whose valours and bloud it is for the most part wonne. Let him therefore that would weare the Diademe, beare the hazard himselfe, without the confusi∣on of so many men, and either trie the fortune of a single combat, who shall commaund, and who obey, or diuide betwixt them the King∣dome, which may suffice two, that hath main∣tained seuen. (16) Some affirme that this speech was Duke Edriks; but I hardly belieue so good a motion Matth. West. should proceede from so bad a man; by whom so euer vttered, it was acceptably receiued by Ed∣mund and Canut, who thereupon in sight of their Armies, entred into a small Iland, embraced about with the armes of Seuern, called Alney, adioyning vnto the City Gloucester, where those princes in complete Armour at first assailed each other most Edmund and Ca∣nute at single fight. dangerously on horsebacke, and after as valiantly on foot. The Ironside was strong, and fought for his Kingdome; the Dane not so tall, but eue∣ry way as stout, fought for his honour, and so the combate continued with an absolute resolution, till at length Canute hauing receiued a dangerous wound and seeing himselfe ouermatched in strength, wi∣shed Mat. Westminster. a comprimise, and thus spake to Edmund with a loud voice. What necessity should thus moue vs most valiant Prince, that for the obtaining of a Title, we should o . thus endanger our liues? better it were to lay ma∣lice and Armour aside, and to condiscend to a lo∣uing agreement: let vs therefore now become sworne brothers, a d diuide the Kingdome betwixt vs, and in such league of amity, that each of vs may vse the o∣thers part as his owne; so shall this land be peacea∣bly gouerned, and we iointly assistant to each others necessity. Whereupon they both cast downe their swords, imbracing as friends with the great ioy and shou∣ting of both their Armies, who stood before doubt∣fully wauering betwixt hope and feare, and looking for their owne fortunes, according to the successe of their Champions. Thus was the Kingdome diuided betwixt those two Princes; Edmund enioying that part that lay The Kingdome parted betweene them. coasted vpon France, and Canute entring vpon the rest. (17) Thus then the Saxon Monarchy spent to the last period, and their tottering crowne fast grasped with a hard Danish hand, was suddainelyy torne from the Ironssides helmet, by his complotted and hastned death. For Duke Edrick a very compound of treasons, glutted with the fauours of both these Kings, to scrue himselfe deeper into Canut his con∣ceit, contriued the end of renowmed Edmund: who being retired to a place for natures necessity, was Edmund mur∣thered. thrust from vnder the draught into his body with a sharpe speare; which done, the treacherous Edrick A Spit, saith Higden. cutting off his Soueraignes head, presented it to Canut with these fawning salutations. All haile, thou now sole-Monarch of England; for, here behold the head of thy Copartner, which for thy sake I haue aduen∣tured to cut off. Canut, though ambitious inough of soueraigne∣ty, puni∣sheth the trai yet of princely disposition, abashed, & sore grie∣ued at so vnworthy and disloiall an attempt, repli∣ed, and vowed, that in reward of that seruice, the brin∣gers owne head should be aduanced aboue all the peeres of his kingdome. Which high honour whiles this pro∣digious Wil. Malmsbury. wretch greedily expected, (and indeed for a time, saith Malmesbury, hee found some shew of fa∣uour with the King:) soone after, by the Kings com∣maund, his head bad his shoulders farewell, and was placed vpon the highest Gate to ouerlooke London. (18) The traiterous death of this worthy Prince, Old Man st. Fabian. Ran. Higden. as some affirme, was acted at Oxford; yet the Au∣thor that wrote Encomium Emmae, and liued the same time, blancheth the matter, saying that hee died of a naturall death in London: God minding his owne doctrine, that a Kingdome diuided in it selfe, cannot long stand, and pittying the English, tooke away Edmund, lest if the Kings had continued long together, they should both haue liued in danger, and the Realme in continuall trouble. That hee died in London, Simon the Monke of Simon D el. Marian. Scotus. Ed ds raigne. Polychr. Durham agreeth, and saith further, it chanced a∣bout the Feast of S. Andrew: and Marianus is of the same opinion, being the yeere of Christ, 1016. Whensoeuer, or howsoeuer, his Raigne was but se∣uen monethes, and his body buried at Glastenbury; neere vnto his Grandfather King Edgar. (19) He was of personage tall, for courage, har∣dy, The feature of Edm nd. strong of limmes, and well could endure the trauels of warre, insomuch that some deeme the surname Ironside, giuen him onely vpon that occa∣sion . With him fell the glory of the English, and the aged body of their sore bruised Monarchy seemed to bee buried with him in the same Sepul∣chre. His Wife. (20) Algith, the wife of King Edmund, was the widow of Sigeferth, the sonne of E grin a Danish Algi . Nobleman of Northumberland; which Sigeferth, with his brother Morcar, was murthered at Oxford by the treason of the neuer-faithfull Edrick: & this Lady being of great beauty, and noble parentage after the death of her husband, and the seisure of his lands, was by King Ethelred, cōmitted in charge to the Monastery of Malmesbury, where Edmund see∣ing her, grew in great loue, and there married her a∣gainst the liking of his father, in Anno 1015. His Issue. (21) Edward the eldest son of King Edmund, and Queen Algith his wife, was surnamed the Outlaw, be∣cause Edward the out∣law. he liued out of England in Hungary as a bani∣shed man, through the raigne of C t, and of his sonnes the Danes. But when his vncle King Ed∣ward the Confessor, had obtained the English crown, he was by him recalled, and most honourably in his Court enterained, till lastly, hee was taken a∣way by death in the City of London, the yeere of Christ, 1057. He married Agatha sister to Queene Sophia, wife to Salomon King of Hungary, and His wife. daughter to the Emperour Henrie the second; by whom hee had Edgar, surnamed Etheling, confir∣med heire apparant by Edward Confessor, his great Vncle; which title notwithstanding, proceeded no further, for that hee was depriued thereof by Ha∣rold his Protector. The daughters of this Edward, as after shall be said, were Margaret and Christian, the younger of which became a valed Nunne at Ramsey in Hampshire, His daughters. where shee in that deuotion spent her life, and was there interred. Margaret the elder, and afterward sole heire vn∣to the Saxon Monarchy, married Malcolme the third of that name, King of Scotland, and commonly called Canmore: from which princely bed in a li∣neall descent, our high and mighty Monarch, King IAMES the first, doth in his most roiall person v∣nite the Britaines, Saxons, English, Normans, and Sco∣tish imperiall Crownes in one. (22) Edmund, the second and yongest sonne of King Edmund, and of Queene Algith his wife, after his fathers decease being a Child, was with his bro∣the Edmund. Edward, sent by Canute to Olaue King of Swedon his halfe brother, to the intent, that he by murther should make them both away: but this King taking pitty on the innocent Childrens estate, sent them to Salomon King of Hungarie, to the intent to haue them saued, where they were receiued with great fauour and honour: and Mathew of Westminster reporteth, that this Prince married the daughter of the same King; and other Writers of these times, that he died Mat. Westminster in the same Country without any issue of his body. (23) These two sonnes of the Ironside thus posted away, and the crowne already set vpon the Danes head, had not the meanes of themselues to displace it, nor the English, hearts to assist them to their right: so that they rather secured themselues from violent deaths in this their exile, then made claime to that which was vnrecouerable; and left the Danes quietly to possesse the land, which so long they had molested with their sturdy Armes. The End of the Seuenth Booke. THE ORIGINALL OF THE DANES, THEIR MANNERS, RELIGI∣ON, AND INVASIONS OF ENGLAND, THE RAIGNES OF THEIR KINGS HERE, UN∣TILL THE CROWNE REVERTED AGAINE TO THE SAXONS; WORNE BY KING EDWARD THE CONFESSOR, AND AFTER HIM BY HAROLD THE LAST KING OF THEIR RACE. CHAPTER I. T He Spirite of God in his sacred writings, to shew his all-commanding pow∣er ouer Kingdomes and Nations, compareth the transmigrations of peo∣ple from country to coun∣try, vnto the transfusion of wine from vessel to ves∣sell: and those that are at Ier. 48. . rest with sinne, to the setling vpon their lees, as Mo∣ab did, against whom hee cursed that hand that was negligent in his worke of reuenge, and the sword that was not sheathed in their bloud. Euen so the sinnes of the Saxons growne now to the full, and their dregs as it were suncke vnto the bottome, they were emptied by the Danes from their owne vessels, and their bottles broken that had vented their red & bloody wines: in lieu whereof, the Lord then gaue Esay 51. 17. them the cuppe of his wrath, whose dregs hee had formerly (by their own hands) wrung out vpon other nations. (2) For these Saxons that had enlarged their king∣domes by the bloud of the Britaines, and built their nests high vpon the Cedars of others, (as the Pro∣phet speaketh) committed an euill couetousnesse . 2. vnto their owne habitations, and were stricken by the same measure that they had measured vnto others. When as the Danes often attempting the lands in∣uasion; and the subuersion of the English estate, made way with their swords through all the Prouinces in the realme; and lastly aduanced the crowne vpon their owne helmets; which whiles it so stood, was worne with great honour, especially of Canutus the first and their greatest. (3) As touching this Nations originall, and first place of residing, seeing themselues know nothing at all, we cannot determine, but supposing them with Franciscus Irenicus, to be a branch of the anci∣ent Germans, and knowing them by the testimonies of al others, to inhabite in the same Country among them, we need not to doubt, but that their condi∣tions and customes were much alike. Of the for∣mer, what we haue obserued, is already set downe, where we spake of our Saxons; & now of these later, what is supposed for truth shall be produced. (4) These Danes so often mentioned by our histori∣ans, And. . for the great afflicters of the English state and peace, were a people descended from the Scythians, Dudo. S. Quint. as Andrew Velley a learned Danish Writer reporteth: but Dudo of S. Quintin (an ancient Author) will haue them to come from Scandia, an Iland situated north-ward, not farre from the continent of Den∣marke: which his opinion seemeth vnto some to be strengthned by Ptolemie the Alexandrian, who in his Geography placeth the people Da ciones (the suppo∣sed Ptol. Geograp. where some read . Ancestors of those Danes) in this Iland Scandia, at such time as himselfe wrote, which was in the raigne of Hadrian the Emperour, and about the yeere of Christs natiuity 133. But wheresoeuer the root had beginning, the branches did farre spread them∣selues into the vpper Germany, and parts of Norway, and Sweyden, whose faire fruit more particularly fil∣led that promontory, which tongue-like lieth into the Ocean on the north, being anciently called of the learned, Cimbrica Chersonessus, where, (as Tacitus Tacit. . . saith) was the vttermost end of Nature, and of the world; a strange conceit indeed; and yet more strange was their opinion, who were perswaded that the sound and noise of the Sunne was there heard at his dailie rising and setting in those seas. But from more warrantable witnesses it is reported, that this was the very place which the Iutes and Angles abandoned, when they remoued their Colonies for Britaine. (5) In this place then the Danes laid first the foun∣dation of their Kingdome; which, from the word Mars, signifying not a limit, but a region, was named Den-marc. But touching the former part of that com∣pounded . name, the truth and original occasion is not so soone found out: for the searching eye of truth hath long since seene into the receiued fable of Da∣marc their first King, and Giant-like sonne of Humblus; though Verstegan of late holds it more certaine in the search of originals, to follow the grounded o∣pinion Verstegan. Ant. cap. 6. that ancient Tradition hath held, then at ran∣dome to seeke them else-where: as these Danes (saith he) from Dan, and the Britaines from Brute; which truely for truth I hold much alike, and will herein make doubt as many more of riper iudge∣ment before me haue done. (6) For Goropius Becanus deduceth the name Dane from Da-hen, signifying a Henne, or rather (as some will) a fighting Cocke; Iunius, from Den, signifying Firre-trees, which doe there abound. Andrew Velley from a people in Scythia named Dahae, of whom Iosephus maketh mention in his eigh∣teenth Iosephus Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 6. booke, and placeth them by the Sacae. Ethelward our English historian will haue them named from the faire City Donia. And Ionas Iaco∣bus Venusinus, a diligent searcher of Antiquites, out of Pomponius Mela, findeth the names of certaine Ionas Iacob. Bays, opening into those parts, which now the Danes inhabite, to haue beene ancientlie written CDAN and CDANONVM; which Ortho∣graphie and Pronuntiation to the Latines was both harsh and hard, and therefore they added a vowell, and wrote it CODANVM and CODANO∣NIA, whereof (it may be thought) these people gi∣uen much to piracies, were knowne and called by that name, as breaking out of those Codanian seas. Some others from Ptolomie haue thought, that from his Daeuciones placed in Scandia, and corruptly so Cambd. Brit. written for Danciones; the name of these Danes hath beene deriued; whereto the neerenesse of the place induceth much. (7) For Nations Originals may well bee com∣pared vnto a spring, whose current surcharged with continuall supply of more, first filleth the neere Chanels; which done, they passe further, and at length are (oftentimes) diuided into many and great streames: and euen so these Danes, (saith Dudo of S. Quintins) after they had in heat, and lasciui∣ous Dudo. lust ingendred an innumerable ofspring, swar∣med out of Scandia like bees out of their hiues, & that both on diuers occasions, and in very barba∣rous manner; for growne to ripenesse of yeeres, & falling at strife with their Fathers and Grand-sires, yea, and most commonly, among themselues for lands and liuely-hood, necessity compelled them to disburden the land thus ouerflowed, for the bet∣ter maintenance of the residue, and to banish by lot (after their ancient custome) a multitude of their youth, that might conquere by their swords, in forraine Realmes, places to liue in. These then thrust out of their owne, fell vpon o∣ther lands with no lesse danger then the falling of a sword out of the sheath, or rather, as the breaking in of a tempestuous sea vpon the neighbouring grounds, sore distressing their neighbour nations, & among them England not the least, as shalbe said. (8) And yet their name was not much notified to the world before the raigne of Iustinian the Em∣perour, Cambd. Britan. about the yeere of mans saluation, 570, but then rouing vpon the coasts of England, & France; in exercising Piracies, were noted by writers by the name Wiccingi, for that Wiccinga in the Saxon tongue, as Alfricus witnesseth doth signifie a Pirate; they were also called Pagani, for that they were not Christians; but by the English Deniscan, and also Heathon-mon, as being Ethnicks. (9) The manner of their Religion, or rather su∣perstition and Idolatry, was much like vnto the o∣ther The Religion of the Danes. Germans and Saxons, whose principall God and Nationall reputed-Patron, was Thur, vnto whom the fourth day of the weeke for his seruice was as∣signed, whereof as yet it beareth his name Thursday; who in his robes was set vpon a sumptuous bed, the Canopie whereof was bespangled with starres of gold; vnto him they performed their chiefe deuo∣tions, Verstegan. and ascribed all their fortunes in their affaires; as the foresaid Dudo doth more particularly relate. They (saith he) sacrificed vnto Thur, whom they worship∣ped in old time as their Lord, for whom they killed not Dudo. many sheepe, oxen, or other cattle, but offered vnto him mens bloud, thinking that to be the most pretious oblati∣on of all others; whom, when the Priest by casting of lots had destinated to death, they were all at once deadlie smitten vpon the head with oxeyokes; and euery one thus chosen by lot, hauing at one stroke his braines dashed out, was laid along on the ground, and there with a narrow prying was sought out the Fibra, or veine of the heart on the left side, whence drawing the bloud, as their custome was, and therewith besmearing the heads of their deerest friends, forthwith they hoise sailes, thinking their Gods well pleased with such sacrifices, and fore-deeming happie successe to their intended voiage. (10) Ditmarus the Bishop (somewhat ancienter then Dudo) recordeth another detestable superstiti∣on Cambd. Brit. vsed by the Danes to purchase the fauour of their Gods. Because (saith he) I haue heard wonderfull reports of the ancient sacrifices which the Danes and Normans vsed, I will not let them passe vntouched. In those parts there is a place, and the chiefe it is of that Kingdome, cal∣led Lederum, in a Prouince named Selon, where euery ninth yeare, in the moneth of Ianuary, after the time in which we celebrate the Natiuity of our Lord, they all as∣semble together, and there they kill and sacrifice vnto their Gods ninety and nine men, and as many horses, with dogs, and also cocks, in stead of hawkes, assuring themselues that hereby their Gods are fully pleased and pacified. And thus much may serue for a tast and view of their customs, names and originals. THE DANES FIRST AT∣TEMPTS AGAINST ENGLAND. CHAPTER II. T Hough many were the Piracies of the Danes on An. Do. 787. the coasts of France and this our Island in former times; yet their arriuall heere, which gaue first breath to their ensuing conquests, was not till the wane of the Saxon Mo∣narchie, about the yeere of Christs Incarnation seuen hundred eighty seuen, in the raigne of Brightrik King of the West-Saxons: in whose dominions, after some proffer at Portland, they first came to land at Teigne-mouth in Deuon-shire; bee∣ing Cambden in Dan∣ . Iohn Stow. Lambert in Per∣ . mentio∣neth their Lan∣ding at Ty ∣mouth in the North, the neer∣nesse of the name (it seemes) deceiued him. sent then with three Ships onely, to espie the wealth of this Countrie, the forces of the Inhabi∣tants, the commodities of the Hauens, and aduantage of arriuall for a greater power, which was to follow them. The Kings Lieuetenant and Prefect for that place, vnderstanding of their landing, went himselfe to demand the reason thereof; and attempting to lay hands on some to carrie them to the Kings presence, hee was there slaine; which they tooke as a fortunate presage of the victories wherewith they afterward o∣uerranne this Kingdome; though for the present the inhabitants enraged with the losse of their Chiefe, addressing them in great numbers to reuenge, for∣ced some to lose their liues by the sword, the rest to saue them by flight to their ships. (2) Notwithstanding their former preparati∣ons, they were contented to deferre their returne till An. Do. 800. the dayes of King Eghert; whose raigne (as elsewhere See the seuenth Booke chap. 31. we haue touched) they disquieted with three seue∣rall inuasions; the first in the North,, the second in Wales, the last in Kent; in all which, the King though with many losses, and hazards of his owne person, yet with great resolutions persisted, till hee had disburdened his land of so dangerous guests. But those Flesh-flies hauing once tasted the sweet, though often beaten off, would not long bee kept away, . l. 5. c. 1 but could easily take, or make occasions of fresh at∣tempts; insomuch that after their first footing they continued here their cruelties, rapine and spoile the space of two hundred and eighteene yeeres, neuer Fabian. cap. 158. in termitting, till they had got the garland vpon their owne heads. The way whereunto was made vpon this ensuing occasion. (3) Osbright a Northumbrian Viceroy, deputed by the West-Saxons; by chance, as hee followed his disport in Hunting, came to the house of a Noble man, named Beorn-Bocador, whose Lady of passing feature (in his absence) gaue him honourable enter∣tainement, and intreated both himselfe and traine, to repose themselues there a while, after their wea∣risome delights. The Vice-roy already ensnared with her beauty, accepted her courteous offer, not so much to tast her meates, as to surfeite his eyes with her rare beauty, and lasciuiously to dote in his owne affections. The dinner ended, and all ready to depart, as though some weighty matters were to be handled, he commaunded an auoidance from the Presence, and taking the Lady into a withdrawing Chamber, vnder pretence of secret conference, great∣ly tending to the aduancement of her Lord & selfe, most vnnobly, being not able to preuaile by smooth perswasions, did by force violate her constant cha∣stity. Which dishonour thus receiued, and her minde distracted like to Thamars, at her husbands re∣turne, 2. Sam. 13. 1 . all ashamed to behold his face whose bed had so beene wronged, with flouds of teares shee thus set open the sluces of her passions. (4) Had thy fortunes accorded to thine owne desert, or thy choice proceeded as by vow was ob∣liged, then had no staine of blemish touched thine honour, nor cause of suspition once approched thy thought: or had my selfe beene my selfe, these blushing cheekes had not inuited thy sharpe pier∣cing eye to looke into my guilty and defiled breast, which now thou maist see disfurnished of honour, and the closet of pure chastity broken vp; onely the heart and soule is cleane, yet feares the taine∣ture of this polluted caske, and would haue passage (by thy reuenging hand) from this loathsome pri∣son and filthy truncke. I must confesse our sexe is weake, and accompanied with many faults, yet none excusable, how small soeuer; much lesse the greatest, which shame doth follow, and inward guilt continually attendeth; yours, is created more inuiolable and firme, both against allure∣ments and enforcements: by whose constancy as our flexible weakenes is guarded, so our true ho∣nours by your iust Armes should bee protected. O Beorn, Beorn, (for husband I dare not call thee) re∣uenge therefore my wrongs, that am now made thy shame and scandale of my sexe, vpon that mon∣ster, nay Diuell, Osbright, (O that very name cor∣corrupts my breath, and I want words to deplore my griefe) who hath no law but his lust, nor measure of his actions but his power, nor priui∣ledge for his loathsome life, but his greatnesse, whiles we with a selfe-feare, and seruile flatterie maske our basenesse with crouching obedience, & beare the wrongs of his most vile adulteries. Thou yet art free from such deiected and degenerate thoughts, nor hast thou smoothed him in his wick∣ed and euer-working vices: be stil thy self then, and truly Noble as thou art. It may be for his place thou owe t him respect; but what? therewith the losse of honour? thine affection, but not thy bed; thy Loue but not thy beloued, yet hast thou lost at once all these, and he thy only bereauer: thou wast my stay whilest I stayed by thee; and now beeing downe, re∣uenge my fall: the instinct of nature doth pitty our weakenesse, the law of Nations doth maintaine our honour, and the sword of Knighthood is sworne by to be vnsheathed for our iust defence; much more the linke of wedlocke claimes it, which hath lockt two hearts in one; but alas, that ward is broken, and I am thy shame, who might haue beene thine honour. Reuenge thy selfe therefore both on him and mee, else shall this hand let out the Ghost that shall still attend thee with acclamations, till thou re∣uenge my stained bloud. (5) Beorn vnwonted thus to bee welcommed, much amazed at his wiues maladies, with gentle words drew from her the particulars of her inward griefe, who reuealed (as well as shame, and teares, and sobs, would suffer) the manner of the deed, stil vrging reuenge for the wrong. Beorn touched thus to the quicke, to pacifie his distressed wife, did not a little dissemble his wrath, and excusing the fact, with the power of a Prince that might command, and her owne weak nesse vnable to resist the strength of a man: Commended much her loue and constan∣cy; and alleadging his wrongs to bee equall with hers, if not greater, in regard of their sexe, willed her to set her string to his tune till sitte opportu∣nity would serue to strike: but shee distasting that sweet consort, wrested her passiō into so high a strain, that nothing couldbe heard but reuenge & bloud. (6) Beorn thus instigated by the continuall cries of his wife, whose rape already of it selfe had giuen sufficient cause of wrath: first consulting with his neerest friends, was offered their assistance against that wicked and libidinous Prince, and then repai∣ring to his Court, in presence of them all, made knowne his vnsufferable wrongs, and with vtter de∣fiance departed, threatning his death. This Nobleman in his youth had been brought vp in Denmarke, and is reported to haue been alli∣ed into the Danish roiall bloud. Hee therefore ac∣counted this nation the surest vnto himselfe, and the fittest in will and power to enter his quarrell: so comming to Goderick King of that Country, made his case knowne, instantly desiring his aide against the villanie of Osbright. Godericke glad to haue some quarrell to enter Bri∣taine, leuied an Armie with all speed, and preparati∣on made for all things necessarie, sendeth forth In∣guar and Hubba two brethren to command in chiefe, ouer an innumerable multitude of his Danes: which two hee thought at this time the fittest for the at∣tempt, not onely for their well approued resolution and valour, but also for that hee knew them to bee, on particular motiues (which vsually more affect then doth a common cause) implacably enraged a∣gainst the English, on an occasion vnfortunately hap∣ning, but most lamentably pursued: which it will not bee amisse here to annexe. (7) A certaine Danish Nobleman of the roiall lineage named That is Lea∣ther-brichs. Lothbroke, Father to this Inguar & Flores historiarum Hubba, being vpon the shore, his Hawke in fly∣ing, the game fell into the Sea, which to recouer, hee entred a little Schiffe or Cock-boat, nothing foresecing the danger that immediately did ensue: for a sodaine tempest arising, carried the boat into the deepe, and droue him vpon the coast of Norffolke, where hee came to land at the Port called Rodham, and was no sooner seene, but hee was taken for a spie; and presently sent to Edmand, King then of that prouince, who in his answeres sufficiently clea∣red that suspition, when also declaring his birth & misfortune, he was honourably entertained in the Court of the East-Angles: whom the King much esteemed for his other good parts; but for his dexterity and expertnesse in hawking, held him in a speciall regard; insomuch that the Kings Falconer named Bericke, conceiued both such secret enuie and deadly hatred thereat, that hauiug him alone in a wood, he cowardly murthered him, & hid his dead body in a Bush. (8) Lothbroke in the Kings presence and Court was soone mist and diligent inquisition made could not bee found vntill his Spaniell, which would not forsake his dead Masters corps, came fawninglie Murther will out. vnto the King, as seeming to begge reuenge on so bloody an Act, which he did more then once, & at length being obserued, and followed by the trace, the dead body was found; and Bericke conuicted for the murther, his iudgement was to bee put into Loth∣brokes boat, and that without either tackle or Oare, as he therein arriued, and so left to the'seas mercy to be saued by destiny, or swallowed vp by iust desert. But behold the euent; the Boat returned to the same place, and vpon the same coast arriued from whence it had beene driuen, euen in Denmarke, where Bericke being known, and hands laid on hm, to free himselfe from the punishment of his butcherly fact, he added treason to murther, laying it to the charge of innocent King Edmund. (9) In reuenge whereof, and likewise in Gode∣ricks quarrell, Inguar and Hubba, sons to the mur∣thered Prince, being now made Generals of the Army of the Danes, first arriuing at Holdernesse, burnt vp the Country, and without mercy massa∣cred all before them, sparing neither sexe, nor cal∣ling, nor age; and surprizing Yorke, which Osbright had taken for his refuge, there slew that lustfull Prince with all his forces, and possessed that City; and afterwards bursting into Norfolke, sent this mes∣sage vnto King Edmund. That Inguar the most vi∣ctorious Prince, dread both by sea and land, hauing sub∣dued diuers Countries vnto his subiection, and now ar∣riued in those parts where hee meant to winter, charged Edmund to diuide with him his riches, and to become his vassaile and seruant. The King astonied at this strange and vnexpected Ambassage, consulted with his Councell, where one of his Bishops (then his Secretary, and a princi∣pall man) vsed perswasions to him to yeeld, for pre∣uenting greater mischiefe; who notwithstanding re∣turned this answere: Goe tell your Lord, that Edmund the Christian King, for the loue of this temporall life, will not subiect himselfe to a Heathen and Pagan Duke. Whereupon Inguar and Hubba, with the furious Rob. Fabian. cap. 169. Polycr. li. 5. ca. 3 . Abbas Floria∣censis. troupes of their Danes, pursued the King to Thet∣ford; and (as Fabian saith) to Framingham, others to Halesdon; where he pittying the terrible slaughter of his people, yeelded himselfe to their persecutions; and for that hee would not deny Christ, and his Christian faith, was bound to a tree or Stake, and with their arrowes so shot to death: whose body was afterward there buried, and thereupon tooke the name of S. Edmunds-bury; as wee haue formerly touched in his raigne, Lib. 7. cap. 11. (10) Whether these were the very true causes, or some other, which drew these Danes hither, most certaine it is and too lamentable experience shew∣ed, that hither they came (by Writers account) about the yeere of Christ eight hundred, and in the daies of King Brightrick. Neither want there Au∣thors who ascribe certain predictions to haue fore∣runne the yeere 800. made vnfortunate by their first attempts; fore-shewed seuen yeeres before, by showers of bloud falling from heauen, and bloudy Crosses markt therewith vpon the garments of men, reported by the learned Alcuinus, who was in∣structor Alcuinus. to Charles the Great, and borne in the coun∣ty of Yorke, where this wonder happened: which himselfe saw & testified vnto Ethelbert King of that Prouince, as Malmsbury hath written, and was Wil. Malmsb. Roger Houed. Ran. Higden. Rob. Fabian. thought by Houeden, Higdon, Fabian and others, to haue beene sent for signes before their bloudy as∣saults, which beganne at the day-spring of the Sax∣ons Monarchy, when it promised a most faire as∣cent to their heires succeeding, but mounted to the highest, againe declined as the setting Sunne, and fell vnder the cloudes of their owne ruines, so car∣ried by the iust reuenging hand of God: for those Saxons hauing by bloud and warre vnseated the Bri∣taines of their land and right, by bloud and warre, were by these Pagan-Danes so vncessantly molested, that no place was freed from their tyranny, nor any state sure, long to hold that, which they enioyed, nor their liues secured from a daily expectation of their Bloud reuenged with bloud. sauage swords. (11) Whose many inuasions and cruell procee∣dings against this land and nation, are already shewed in the raignes of these Saxon Kings, who then felt their heauy strokes in warre, hauing nothing almost memorable otherwise, to enlarge their fames and stories with, besides these their valours in resisting so mighty and almost vnrepugnable an enemie. Therefore omitting to repeat such things as in their successions are handled, we will fall neerer the time of the wished haruest of their full Conquests: some what remembring the Reader here, of those bloudie affaires, which the English at seuerall times felt and en∣dured. (12) Such was the murther of holy Edmund King of the East-Angles, with Danish arrowes martyred to death as hee stoode bound vnto a stake, euer-calling on the name of Iesus: Of Ella and Osbright Gouer∣nours of Northumberland by them slaine, and that Prouince for a long time after by them enioied, and made subiect to their furies: Of Burdred King of Mercia, by them expulsed, who with his Queene Ethelswith, were forced to abandon their Kingdome, leauing it to the possession of these Pagan intruders, and to seeke their securities in forreine Countries, where at Rome in Italy hee died, and at Padua his wife, as hath beene said: Of Ethelred King of the West-Saxons, that in one yeeres continuance fought nine bloudie battles against them; in the last whereof at Merton hee receiued his deaths wound, and this Kingdome an vncurable blow: Of Elfred that most famous and learned King of the West-Saxons also, dri∣uen by them to such distresse, that hee was forced to leaue his Princely Court, and to remaine secret in a poore Cow-heards house vnknowne and disguised, in the Isle of Ethelingsey in the County of Sommerset, and thence to aduenture himselfe among the Danish host, as a base Minstrell and Contemptiblemake∣sport, Henry Hunt. . Angl. . 15. Rand. Hig till hee had perfectly learned their secrets, and after with his sword through the thickest of those Enemies, made a way to his owne most glorious Monarchie. (13) To speake nothing of the desolations left in euerie Prouince, Towne, and Place, where they came, laying all leauell with the ground, as prints of their foote-steppes where they had troden: Their cruell and mercilesse dealings towards holy and reli∣gious persons, with the ruination of Churches, and other places for Oratorie, is most lamentable to bee rehearsed or remembred: and among many others, the faire & beautifull Monasteries of Bradney, Crow∣land, Iohn Stow. Flores bister. Peterborow, Ely, and Coldingham, were made subiect to their desolations: In the last whereof, Lady Ebbe with her chast Nunnes, to auoid their sa∣uage and filthie pollutions, cutte off their owne no∣ses and vpper-lippes, least the baite of their beauties should prooue the bane of their honours & honestie. The most greeuous tribute and exactions laied Some say forty eight thousand. Languet saith fifty. vpon the poore Inhabitants in generall, and great sums of money, paied in such afflicted & vnseasona∣ble times, imposed by the name of Dane-gilt, did from ten thousand, arise to forty thousand pounds, yeerely gathered for them in England. Their stur∣dy behauiour and Lord-like carriage against the Eng∣lish, in all places where euer they soiourned, was with such subiection of the poore Owners, that they abu∣sed both wife, daughter, and maide, and were of all called the Lord-Dane, till lastly they were Lords in∣deede of the Land, and swaied the Scepter at their owne pleasures; which how it was attained vnto, wee haue before declared, and how it was worne and continued, wee are now presently to speake. CANVTVS THE FIRST DANISH KING RAIGNING INENGLAND AND THE THIRTIE FOVRTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISH-MEN, HIS ACTS, RAIGNE, WIVES, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER III. T He sailes of the Danes thus ouer-filled with the gales of their swelling for∣tunes, An. D. 1017. and themselues ar∣riued at the Port of their long sought soueraignety, cast anker as it were at the hauen of their wished de∣sire, and prepared them∣selues to a setled rest: for Canutus possest of halfe the Kingdome by compositi∣on with Edmund, now after his death seazed vpon the whole; and that all things (as was pretended) Polychr. li. 6. c. 18. might proceed with iustice, and concord, he called a Counsell of the English Nobility at London; wherein was propounded, whether, in the agreement betwixt Edmund and him, any claime of title to the Crowne, had beene reserued, for King Edmunds brethren or sonnes. The English that had paid a very deere rate for their ouerbold resistance before, not daring now to buy, with too late repentance, the wrath of this Dane, absolutely answered, No; and hauing learned Feare makes flatterers. to appease Princes with flattery, offered their swords against any such claimes, and tooke themselues the Oath of alleagiance vnto Canutus; who beeing a very wise and politike Prince, thought neuer the better of them for such their doings; whose truths thus failing towards their naturall Princes, could neuer (hee well knew) stand firme for him or his forreine po∣steritie. (2) But being thus cleered of all other opposites, hee prepared with great roialty for his Coronation, which was performed at London, by the hands of Ly∣uingus surnamed Elstane, Archbishop of Canterburie, in the yeere of Christ Iesus 1017. beeing the second King of Denmarks of that Name, the first of England, and the thirty fourth Monarch of this Land. His first designes for the establishment of the Crowne to Canutus eare and policies to his Crowne. himselfe and Danish issue, was a care to preuent o∣thers neere vnto the claime, and therefore, taking counsell with Edrike, banished Edwin, who for his melancholy and regardlesse deportment, was com∣monly called, the King of Charles, son of King Ethel∣red, and brother of Edmund; notwithstanding, hee was guilefully recalled, and treacherously murthered by his owne men, whose bodie they buried at Taue∣stocke in Deuon-shire. (3) One cloud thus ouer-blowne, two others ap∣peared, far more dangerous in Canutus sight; name∣ly Edward and Edmund the sonnes of the Iron-side, whom albeit their yongue yeeres might haue freed from suspition of conspiracies, and their gentle dis∣positions from enuying his glory, yet the bright raies of a Diadem so dazeled his ielous eie, that euer he saw (to his owne seeming) the reflection thereof shine from their faces: but ashamed (saith Higden) to lay hand on them himselfe, sent them to his halfe bro∣ther of Sweden, to be made away, as we haue said. In Booke 7. cap. 44. sect. 20. the doubtfull times betweene Edmund and Canute, when the scale of warre was held of either hands a∣like, Queene Emma had sent Edward, and Alfred (her Wil. Malms. Henry Hunt. . Fabian. sonnes by King Ethelred) vnto her brother Duke Ri∣chard of Normandy; whereby (wee see) the Land was emptied of the English bloud Roiall, and the Crowne left for the Dane without competition. (4) Who now seeking to hold fast the Scepter thus grasped, sought the alliance of the Norman Duke Canutus marrieth Queene Emma. by the espousing of his sister, faire Emma; a suite sounding but harshely in the eares of the English, yea and most of all vnto her selfe, as deeming the linke of loue verie slender, that might bee broken by the same hand, which was the death of her Husband: Not∣withstanding, after good deliberation, knowing him childlesse of any lawfull successor, vpon couenants agreed, that the issue of her body by him, should inherite the English Crowne: the suit was granted, Emma a very prudent Lady. hoping also, if that failed betwixt them, to establish her other sonnes by King Ethelred. This prouident respect so pleased the subiects, that it both drew the hearts of the English vnto Ca∣nutus, and their loue vnto Emma in a surpassing measure, as the booke penned to her praise, and writ∣ten in that age, intituled Encomium Emmae, sufficient∣ly doth shew. (5) Neither was her louing care limitted onlie to her sonnes, but further extended towards the Matth. West. Common-wealth, being much pestred then with his Danes, that lay lazie and idle as drones in the hiue: who at her instigations were sent into Denmarke; & lest they should through discontents make any stirres either here or there, had a largesse (to buy their con∣tentment) of fourescore and two thousand pounds. (6) Canutus his next care for the maintenance of his owne safety, and the continuance of his new got Empire, was the establishment of good lawes (which if duly executed, are the very sinewes and strongest guards of all States) to be administred and practi∣sed A Parliament at Oxford. both on the English and Dane alike: wherefore calling a Parliament of his Peeres vnto Oxford, there established many wholsom Acts both for the Clergy and Laitie to obserue; some of which were diuul∣ged Wil. Lambert. by the praise-worthy care of a studious Antiqua∣rie, and a few as touching Religion, as a relish of the rest, we thinke it not amisse to giue the Reader a tast of. Canutus his god∣lie Lawes. (7) And first, for the celebration of Gods most diuine seruice it was ordained, that all decent cere∣monies tending to the encrease of reuerence and de∣uotion, should be vsed, as need required. That vpon the Lords Sabbath, publike Faires, Markets, Synods, Conuenticles, Huntings, & all secu∣lar actions should not bee exercised, vnlesse some weighty and vrgent necessity required it. That euery Christian should thrice in the yeere addresse himselfe to the receiuing of the blessed sa∣crament of the Lords Supper. That if a Minister of the Altar killed a man, or else committed any notorious crime, hee should be depriued both from his order and dignity. That the married woman conuicted for adultery should haue her nose and eares cut off. That a widow marying within the space of twelue moneths after her husbands decease should lose her iointer. (8) These & many other were made, wherby sinne was much restrained, and this realme peaceably and iustly gouerned. As likewise sundry other Coun∣tries were by his godly and roiall care; as in especiall is recorded of a yong Gentleman of the Danish roiall bloud, named Odi , whom King Canute brought o∣uer with him into England, to be here trained vp in learning, where he profited so well, as also by his trauaile through France (whereby hee much . encreased both his knowledge and experience) that he attained the surname of Sapient, and the Philoso∣pher, and therefore was called Odin-char, for the deere esteeme wherein all men held him. This man by his preaching in Finland, Zeland, Scandia, and Sweu∣land, conuerted great multitudes to the faith of Christ. (9) But in Denmarke things proceeded not so wel; for in the absence of Canutus, and yeer of Christs hu∣manity An. D. 1019. 1019. the Vandals sore annoied his subiects: hee therefore, in the third of his raigne, with a Wil. Malmsbury. great host of the English passed ouer the seas, and bad Mat. Westminster. his enemies battaile, which, as Mathew of Westmin∣ster writeth, went sore against him the first day; and preparing againe for the next, Earle Goodwine, Earle Goodwins good seruice to Canutus. who was Generall of the English, attempted a great enterprize: for in the dead of the night, hee with his souldiers set vpon the Campe of the Vandals, and with a great slaughter of their souldiers, made the two Princes, Vlfus and Anla e to flie the field. Canute ignorant of this acted enterprise had notice in the morning that the English were fled, for that their station was left, and not a man found: wher∣fore following the tract, euen to the enemies campe, by streames of bloud, and dead bodies of the Van∣dals; Henry Hunting. . Fabian. hee saw the great ouerthrow that the English had giuen them, for which he euer after held them in great estimation. (10) Albertus Krantius, the Danish historian, repor∣teth that Olanus King of Sweyden, hauing assisted Ca∣nute Alb. Krantius. against Edmund the Ironside, and seeing himselfe to be neglected in the composition betwixt them, moued such stirres in Denmarke, that Canutus was forced thither againe; where by the prowesse of his English hee repulsed Olanus, who lastly was slaine by his owne subiects. (11) William of Malmesbury and Mathew of Westminster record, that in the yeere 1032. he vnder∣tooke An. D. 1028. Wil. malmsbury. Mat. Westminster an expedition into Scotland, with prosperous successe against Malcolme the King thereof, with two other Princes called Melbeath and Ieohmare. But be∣ing at length ouerburdened as it were with his own greatnesse, and surfeited with glory, which somtimes he had so greedily desired (as euen the greatest earth∣ly delights haue their fulnes) hee resolued on a more placable course of life, and to affect a higher and heauenly glory, which hath neuer satiety or end. And therefore his deuotion being great vnto God∣ward, on a zealous intent, (such a zeale as S. Paul Rom. 10. 2. commended in the deuout Israelites) hee tooke a iourney to Rome, to visite the sepulchres of S. Peter and Paul in the fifteenth yeere of his raign; & thence sent his letters to his English Bishops and Nobility, beginning thus. (12) Canute King of all England, Denmarke, Nor∣way and Sweyden, to Ailnothus Metropolitan, &c. Wil. Malmsb. Wherein hauing first set downe the reason of his pilgrimage to Rome, which was especially to honour S. Peter, as hee had beene taught by Wisemen, that S. Peter had receiued from Christ the great power of binding and loosing, and was also the Key-bearer of heauen-gates, for which cause (left S. Peter should not open the same vnto him when hee should come thi∣ther) he held it most behouefull for him to procure his Patronage more then all the rest of Saints; then making relation of his honourable entertainement with the Emperour, Pope, and other forreine Prin∣ces, sheweth what complaint hee had made against Canutus complai∣neth of the Pope extortions in England. the excessiue exactions and huge summes of money extorted by the Pope from the English Arch-Bishops, at such time as they receiued their Palles from Rome; for redresse whereof, and of other abuses, the Pope in a solemn assembly of foure Arch-Bishops, twenty Bishops, and an innumerable multitude of Princes and Nobles obliged himselfe: And thence proceedeth in vowing the whole remainder of his life and reigne, His godly reso∣lution touching his own actions▪ to the onely seruice of God, and due administration of Iustice to his people; to which end, hee first giues command to his Counsellours, that thence forward Touching his Counsellours. they dare not, for whatsoeuer respect, to giue way or conniuence to any the least iniustice in his Kingdom; and next to his Officers of Iustice, that as they ten∣der his roiall fauour and their own liues, they swerue Touching his Iudges and Iusti∣tiaries. not from Equity in execution of their places, in re∣spect of any man whosoeuer, no not, for the enrich∣ing of the Kings owne Cophers, because (saith hee) I hold it not needefull, that treasure should bee heaped to∣gether for mee, by any vniust exactions: and so con∣cludeth Touching his Treasure. with a strict charge to all his Bishops and Iusti∣ces, vpon their allegiance both to God and himselfe, to take order in his absence, that Gods Church, and his Ministers, bee not defrauded of their Tithes and Touching God Church. rights, whereof he vowes at his returne to take a most seuere account. (13) By this his great care of his owne saluation, and his peoples tranquillity, we may see the zeale of those darke daies, to haue beene accompanied with the workes of true pietie; whose carnall applications of the spirituall texts, may well condemne these clee∣rer times, and daies of more brightnes, wherein wee know, that this Key-keeper of heauen, is no other but Apocal. 3. 7. the verie Christ, who hath the Key of Dauid, which o∣peneth and no man shutteth, and shutteth and no man ope∣neth. And that this Kings zeale might bee further seene, by his magnificke workes, he beganne to ma∣nifest it euen at Rome, where giuing many large gifts His Munificence vnto S. Peters Church, hee also made free the Saxons Schoole from all tributes. (14) In Essex hee built the Church of Ashdon, where hee had the victory against King Edmund. In His magnificent buildings, &c. Norfolke the Abbey of S. Benets, which Saint he great∣ly reuerenced; and in Suffolke with an especiall deuotion built and endowed the Monastery of S. Edmund, which Saint he most dreadly feared: for it is reported, that the seeming-ghost of Edmund of∣ten affrighted him; for which cause, as also to ex∣piate Iosselin. de Br k∣lond. the sinnes of his father, who had done great dammage to his possession, hee inuerged the same with a deepe ditch, and offered vp his Crowne vpon the Martyrs Tombe. Most rich and roiall Iewels hee gaue the Church of Winchester, wherof one, is recorded to bee a Crosse, worth as∣much as the whole reuenew of England amounted to in one yeare: vnto Couentry hee gaue the Arme of S. Augustines arme at a high rate. S. Augustine the great Doctor; which he bought at Papia in his returne from Rome, and for which hee paid an hundred talents of siluer, and one of gold. (15) The magnificent greatnes of this glorious King, so ouerflowed in the mouthes of his flatte∣rers, Canutus his flat∣terers. that they extolled him, with Alexander, Cyrus, and Caesar, and to be possessed with power, more then humane: to conuict these his fawning ouer∣prizers, being then at Southampton, he commanded (saith Henry of Huntington) that his chaire should be set on the shore, when the sea beganne to flow, and then in the presence of his many attendants; spake Henry Hunt. thus to that Element. Thou art part of my do∣minion, and the ground whereon I sit is mine, nei∣ther was there euer any that durst disobey my com∣maund, or breaking it, escaped vnpunished; I charge thee therfore presume not into my land, nei∣ther wet thou these robes of thy Lord: but the Mat. . 16. 17. Exod. 14. 21. Sea (which obeyeth only one Lord) giuing no heed to his threates, kept on the vsuall course of tide, first wetting his skirts; and after his thighes; when sud∣dainely rising to giue way for the still approching waues, he thus spake in the hearing of all: Let the His h ility. worlds inhabitants know, that vaine and weake is the power of their Kings; and that none is worthy the name of King, but he that keepes both heauen, earth and sea in obedience, and bindeth them in the euerlasting law of subiection. After which time he would neuer suffer the Crowne to bee set vpon his head, but presently crowned therewith, the picture of our Sauiour on the Crosse at Winchester: vnto such strong illusions were those godly Princes lead, by the guides that euer made gaine of their deuoti∣ons. (16) From the example of this Canutus (saith Pe∣ter Pictaniensis Chancellor of Paris) arose the custom to hang vp the Armor of worthy men in Churches, Peter Pictan. as offerings consecrated vnto Him, in whose battails they had purchased renowne, either by victory and life, or in their Countries seruice attained to an ho∣nourable death. And surely, howsoeuer this King is taxed of ambition, pride and vaine-glory, for which some haue not stucke to say, that he made his iourney to Rome, rather to shew his pompe and ri∣ches, then for any humble deuotion or religious in∣tent, Iohn Castor. yet by many his intercurrent actions and lawes of piety enacted, hee may iustly bee cleared of that imputation; as also by the testimony of Simon Monk of Durham, who reporteth his humility to be such, Simon Dun. that with his owne hands he did helpe to remoue the body of S. Aelphegus at the translation of it from London vnto Canterbury, whom the Danes (notwith∣standing his Archiepiscopall & sacred calling) before had martyred at Greenwich: and by the testimony of Guido, Polydore, Lanquet, and others, he was a Prince Polydor hist. Angl. lib . Lanquet. of such temperance and iustice, that no other in this West of the World was so highly renowned, or might bee compared vnto him in heroicall vertues, or true humility. (17) Saxo Crammaticus, & Albertus Krantius the Writers of the Danish histories, deduce Canutus by a Saxo Gramma∣ticus. Alber. Crantius. lineall succession through the line of their Kings in this manner: Hee was (say they) the sonne of King Swaine (surnamed Tingskeg) by Sigred his wife, the widow of Erick, by whom she had Olafe Scotconning King of Sweyden: vnto which Sweyne she bare al∣so Ostrid a daughter, the mother of Thira, the mo∣ther Aimundus. Bremensis. of King Sweyne the yonger. The elder Sweyne was the sonne of King Harold, surnamed Blaatand, by Gonhild his Queene, who bare him also Iring King of Northumberland, and Gonhild Queene of North-Wales. The father of Harold was King Gor∣mo d, whose Queene was Thira the daughter of King Ethelred, the twenty third Monarch of Eng∣land, who bare vnto him the said Harold, and ano∣ther Canute both most valiant Princes; which two Gallants inuading this land, were (for their braue re∣solutions) by their Grandfather proclaimed heires apparant to all his dominions: the credite of which relations I leaue to my forenamed Authors; but Ca∣nute (the elder brother) died very soone after, being deadly wounded in the siege of Dublin in Ireland; Holinsh. inuasion of Ireland. where perceiuing death at hand, hee gaue strict charge to his attendants, to keepe the same verie secret till the City were taken, that so neither his owne Army should bee daunted, nor the enemy en∣couraged by the losse of the Generall. Gurmo, his aged Father, (to digresse but in a word) so incredi∣bly loued him, that hee had vowed to kill with his owne hands any person whosoeuer that should tell him the newes of his sonnes death: which when Thi∣ra his mother now heard of, shee vsed this policie to make it known to the King her husband. Shee prepared mourning apparrell for him, and all other things fitting for funerall exequies, laying aside all Regall robes, and ceremonies of princely state, with∣out intimating any cause of this sad solemnity; which the old King no sooner perceiued, but he lamentably cried out, woe is me, I know my sonne is dead; and with excessiue griefe he presently died. But to re∣turne from that Canutus, to close vp the raigne of this our Monarch in hand. (18) In whom the Danish glories hauing ascen∣ded to the highest, beganne now againe to decline towards their wane by the death of this great King; who, after hee had in great glory raigned aboue nineteen yeeres, deceased at Shaftesbury in the coun∣ty of Dorset the twelfth of Nouember, the yeere of Christs Incarnation, 1035, and was buried in the Church of the old Monastery at Winchester, which be∣ing after new built, his bones with many other Eng∣lish Saxon Kings were taken vp, and are preserued in guilt coffers fixed vpon the wals os the Quire in that Cathedrall Church. His Wiues. (19) Algiue, by most writers, a concubine to King Canutus, was the daughter of a Mercian Duke na∣med Albert. Cram . Elfhelme, who is said to haue beene Earle of Northampton; and her Mothers name was Vl∣frune, Inheritrix of the Towne Hampton in Stafford-shire, from her called Vlfrun-Hampton, now Woller-hampton: This Lady Alfgiue to make Canutus more firme to her loue, her selfe being barren, is reported to haue fained Child-birth and to haue laid in her bed the sonne of a Priest, whom Canute tooke to be his owne, and named him Swaine; him afterwards hee created King of Nor∣way, which lately hee had conquered from Olaffe cal∣led the Martyr. The like policie, saith Higden and others, shee vsed in bringing forth Harold her second sonne, who was (say they) the sonne of a Sowter; notwithstanding I thinke the condition of the mo∣ther, who liued in disdaine, and died in disgrace, rather caused this report to be blazed, then any such basenes of birth in the sonnes. (20) Emma, the second wife of King Canute, was the widow of King Ethelred the Vnready; and from the time of her first marriage was called in England, Elfgiue, after the name of most of the former Queens, which had succeeded Saint Elfgiue. Shee was mar∣ried vnto him in the moneth of Iuly, and yeere of Christ Iesus one thousand and seuenteene, beeing Polychr. the first yeere of his raigne: whose wife shee was eighteene yeeres, and suruiuing, kept still at Winche∣ster, vnto which Church shee gaue nine Manours, according to the number of those firy Plow-shares Ran. Higden. lib. . cap. 23. Wil. Malmsb. that shee was forced to goe vpon, for her purgation, in the raigne of Edward her sonne, as shall bee said. This Church shee adorned with many goodly ve∣stures, and verie rich Iewelles: and deceasing in this City the sixt of March, the yeere of Grace one thou∣sand fiftie and two and ninth of her sonne King Ed∣wards raigne, was buried in the Church of S. Swithine neere vnto Canutus her husband. His Issue. (21) Sweyn, the eldest sonne of Canute by Lady Alfgiue, was borne before his father was King of Albert. Crant. England, and before his fathers death, was constitu∣ted King of Norway, lately conquered from King Olafe the Martyr; where hee beganne his Raigne; in the yeere of mans saluation one thousand thirty and fiue, beeing the eighteenth of his fathers Raigne in England; and after he had with dislikes ruled that Realme, the space of fiue yeeres, hee was reiected of the Norwegians his subiects, and deceasing with∣out heire of his body, left the Kingdome to the na∣tiue heire, Magnus, the sonne of Olaffe, who had beene wrongfully dispossessed by Canute. (22) Harold, the second sonne of King Canute and of Lady Alfgiue, was also born before his father ob∣tained the English Crown, & for his exceeding swift∣nes was surnamed Hare-foote: He remained with his father in England, after he had disposed of Denmark to Hardi-canute, and Norway to Sweyne, his brethren, expecting something in reuersion. But perceiuing at his fathers death, that England was also appointed to his brother Hardi-canute, hee tooke the aduantage of his absence, and assumed the Soueraignety of this Kingdome to himselfe. (23) Hardi-Canute, the third sonne of King Ca∣nute, and his first by Queene Emma his wife, was borne about the beginning of his fathers Raigne, and towards the end of the same, was constituted King of the Danes, and designed to succeede him af∣ter his death in the Kingdome of England: But beeing absent then in Denmark, was disappointed by his brother Harold, who succeeded his father, after whose death he also succeeded him. (24) Gunhilda, the daughter of King Canute, and of Emma his Queene, was the first wife of Henrie the Third, Romane Emperour, sonne of the Emperour Wil. Malmsb. de . Augs. cap. 2. Conrad, the second of that name surnamed Salike: shee was a Lady of a surpassing beauty, which ei∣ther mooued her husbands mind vnto ielousie, or the ouer-lauish report thereof to breede surmize of incontinencie; for accused shee was of adulterie, and to defend her cause by combat, none could be found, till lastly her Page, brought with her from England, seeing no other would aduenture for her innocencie, entred the list, himselfe but a youth, in regard of the other Combatant beeing a Giant-like man; yet in fight at one blow, cutting the sinewes of his enemies legge, with another he feld him to the ground, where Ran. Higden. in Polycr. lib. 6. ca. . presently with his sword, hee tooke his head from the shoulders, and so redeemed his Ladies life. After which hard vsage, the Empresse Gunhilda forsooke her husbands bed, and by no meanes could bee brought againe vnto the same, but tooke the holy vaile of a Nunne in the Town of Burges in Flanders; where she spent the rest of her life, and after her Henry Hunt. lib. 6. Marian Scot. Rob. Fabian. death was buried in the Collegiate Church of S. Donatian, being the principall of that town, where her Monument remaineth besides the north dore of the same Church vnto this day. (25) Another Lady of the like sanctity, is repor∣ted to be the daughter of King Canut, and the second wife of Godescalke Prince of the Vandals, by whom he had Henry King of that Nation. They both are said to haue suffered Martyrdome for the faith of Christ; he first at the City of Lenzim, and she after at Michelenburg, being most cruelly tortured to death with whips. This Lady vpon sundry strong induce∣ments cannot be reputed legitimate, which moued Andrew Velley, a Danish Writer in our time, to be ther∣in of a diuers opinion from Adam of Breme, and Hel∣moldus who liued fiue hundred yeeres before him. HAROLD, THE SECOND DANISH KING RAIGNING INENGLAND, AND THE THIRTIE FIFT MONARCH OF THE LAND, HIS RAIGNE, AND ACTS. CHAPTER IIII. C ANVTVS being dead, & Hardicanute his sonne by An. D. 1036. Queene Emma then in Denmarke; Harold his Mat. Westminster. elder (but base brother) foreslowed not the op∣portunity Wil. Malms. offered; for see∣ing himselfe in his fathers life time neglected, and by will at his death, Eng∣land with that of Denmarke heaped vpon Hardicanut: as quicke in apprehension, as hee was of footman∣shippe Peter de Iohan. (whereof arose the surname Hare-foot,) made strong his side by the Londoners, and Danes, Merci∣ans, & Northumbrians very many, yea and some great Personages amongst them, affecting his claime: but Goodwin of Kent who had the Queene and her treasure in keeping, stood in his way, pretending Henry Hunt. himself Guardian of her Children, & the will of Ca∣nutus, who appointed his sonne by her to succeede. (2) The opposition grew strong, and the facti∣ons ripened, euen ready to seede, onely the linge∣ring of Hardicanute gaue leaue vnto Harold to bet∣ter his side by daily supplies, and the feares of ciuill sedition moued the Nobility to argue with wordes and not weapons, the title depending betwixt these two brethren. At Oxford they met, where the presence of the one, downe-peized the absence of the other, so that their voices went onely with Ha∣rold, and presently proclaimed and consecrated him King. (3) He beganne his raigne the yeere of Christs Floriacensis. humanity, 1036. and was very solemnly crowned at Oxford by Elnothus Archbishoppe of Canterbury, though for a time, hee was very vnwilling to per∣forme that seruice; for it is reported, that hee ha∣uing the regall scepter and Crowne in his custody, with an oath refused to consecrate any other for King, so long as the Queenes children were liuing; For (said he) Canutus committed them to my trust and assurance, and to them will I giue my faith and allegi∣ance. This Scepter and Crowne therefore I here lay downe vpon this Altar; neither doe I denie, nor deliuer them to you; but I require by the Apostolike authority, all Bishops, that none of them presume to take the same a∣way, neither therewith that they consecrate you for King: as for your selfe if you dare, you may vsurpe that which I haue committed to God on this his Table. Notwithstanding that great thunder clappe was allai∣ed with the showres of golden promises, of his iust and religious Gouernment intended, though present experience manifested the contrary. (4) For saith the auncient Writer of the booke called Encomium Emmae: Harold no sooner was esta∣blished Encom. Emma. King, but that he sought means how to rid Queen Emma out of the way, and that secretly, for openly hee durst not attempt any thing against her: Shee in silence kept her selfe quiet, looking for the issue of his designes. But Harold malitiously purposing, tooke counsell how hee might traine into his Haye the sonnes of Queene Emma, that so all occasion of dangers against him might at once for all bee cut off: many proiects propounded, this lastly tooke effect; that a letter should be counterfeited in Queen Emma's name, vnto her sonnes Edward and Alfred, to instigate them to attempt the crowne vsurped by Harold, a∣gainst their right, the tenure whereof we haue thought good here to insert. (5) Emma, Queene onely in name, to Edward and Alfred her sonnes, sendeth motherly gree∣tings. Whilest seuerally wee bewaile the death of our Soueraigne, my Lord and your Father, and your selues (deare sonnes) still more and more dis∣possessed from the Kingdome, your lawfull inhe∣ritance; I greatly maruaile what you determine to doe, sith you know, that the delay of attempts giues the vsurper more leasure to lay his foun∣dation, and more safely to set thereon his in∣tended buildings; for incessantly hee posteth from towne to towne, and from City to Ci∣ty, to make the Lords and Rulers thereof his, either by threates, prayers, or present rewards. But this in priuate they signifie, that they had ra∣ther one of you their Natiues should raigne ouer them, then this vsurper & Danish stranger. Wher∣fore my desire is, that either of you secretly, and with all speed come vnto mee, whereby wee may aduise together what is to be done in this so great an enterprise: then whose good successe, I desire nothing more. Faile not therefore to send word by this my messenger, how you meane to proceed: and so fare yee well, my deerest bowels, & very inwards of my heart. (6) These letters thus carried and cunningly de∣liuered, were digested as sauouring of no falshood; and by the bringers, others returned, that Alfred should come shortly ouer to attend his mothers designes: these, brought vnto Harold, the coastes were fore-laid, and longing expectation attended the prey. Alfred as forward to set on his voyage, made Baldwin Earle of Flanders his; and some few . . Bullogners increasing his Fleet, hee tooke the seas for England: where comming to shore, Earle Good∣win met him, and binding his assurance with his corporall oath, became his liege-man, and guide to Queene Emma; but being wrought firme for Ha∣rold, trecherously led these strangers a contrary way, and at Guilford lodged them in seuerall com∣panies, making knowne to the King what he had done: who forthwith apprehended them euen in their beds, and in the morning as chained prisoners, committing them to slaughter, contrary to the wonted manner of military decimation, did spare and exempt onely euery teath man for seruice or sale: Prince Alfred himselfe was sent prisoner to Rand Higden, Polychr. . . cap. 21. the Isle of Ely, where hauing his eyes inhumanely put out, liued not long after in torment and griefe. (7) Some adde vnto the former, an other, much more horrible kind of cruelty, as that his belly was opened, and one end of his bowels drawn . . out, and fastned to a stake, his body pricked with sharpe needles, or poinards, was forced about till all his entrails were extracted, in which most sauage torture hee ended his innocent life. (8) Harold thus freed from one, the other hee thought would no further attempt; and therefore Henry Hunting. the more boldly set himselfe against their mother Queene Emma, whose goods he confiscated, and ba∣nished her out of the Realme: who thus distressed, was honourably receiued, and for three yeeres space maintained by Baldwin Earle of Flanders. (9) The Dane then seeing his hazards thus pre∣uented, sought so to secure himselfe, and with sixe∣teene shippes of the Danish Fleete kept the seas, which continued euer in a readinesse, and waffed from Port to Port; to the maintenance whereof, he charged the English with great paimēts, to their no lit∣tle grudge & repining; wherby he lost the loue of his subiects before it had well taken root in their hearts. 10) Neither yet held hee on long in these dis∣roiall courses, for that his speedy death did cut off the infamy of a longer life; and is said to haue died Malmsb. Hen Hunting. Stow. at Oxford in the moneth of Aprill, the yeer of Christ Iesus, 1040, after hee had raigned foure yeeres & some moneths: whose body was at first interred at Westminster, hauing beene neither in warres so har∣dy, nor in gouernment so prosperous, as his Father Canut before him had beene, not left behind him ey∣ther wife or children, to suruiue his person, or reuiue his name. HARDICANVTE, THE THIRD DA∣NISH KING THAT RAIGNED IN Monarch 36 Hardi-Canut. ENGLAND, AND THE THIRTIE SIXT MONARCH OF THE ENGLISH-MEN, HIS RAIGNE, AND DEATH. CHAPTER V. T He States of the land, as∣well English as Danes, that had stood for Harold, both An. D. 1040. in obtaining and keeping Simon D nel. the Crowne, now seeing Mat. West . him fallen, thought it best to make way for their peace, before Hardicanut by his sword should pur∣chase their subiection; therefore with all hast they sent into Denmarke, with proffers of the scepter, and their forward allegi∣ance only vnto him. Those parts beyond seas, were not then so subiectiue, as to build his hopes there vpon any sure ground; for the Norwegians had thrust out his halfe-brother Sweyne, and had elected Mag∣nus the son of Olaffe for their King; so that small assu∣rance could he perceiue of any quiet common-weale among them: and therefore fore-slowing not the offer, immediately imbarked his men of warre, and with so fauourable a wind tooke seas, that he arri∣ued vpon the coast of Kent, the sixt day after hee had set saile out of Denmarke; and with great pompe conueied to London, was there proclaimed Englands King. (2) Hee beganne his Raigne in the yeere of Grace one thousand and forty, and was crowned in London by Elnothus Arch-bishoppe of Canterbury, beeing the thirty sixt Monarch of the English-men: his raigne was spent in doing nothing, vnlesse you will say, in doing euill hee did something. (3) For no sooner had he a power to command, but he forthwith commanded the body of his halfe-brother the deceased King, to bee digged vp, and with spitefull disgrace to bee throwne into Thamisis, where it remained vntill a Fisherman found it, and buried it in the Church-yard of S. Clement without Temple-Barre, commonly called Saint Clement-Danes, for that (saith Stow) it was the burying place Iohn Stow. in his Suruey of London of the Danes: this crueltie shewed, was pretended for the hard vsage of Queene Emma his mother, though partly spiced with reuenge for his vsurpati∣on of the Crowne against him. (4) Yet is worthily to bee commended, for the reuerent regard hee bare to his Mother, and louing affection to his Brother; for no sooner was hee risen out of the throne of his Coronation, but that hee sent honorable Embassage vnto Earle Baldwine, with many thankes to him, for her princely vsage, and for her to returne into England to her former estate, and place of Queene. His brother Prince Edward comming ouer to visite them both, was most honou∣rably receiued; retained, and dismissed; and these are the vertues regardable in this King. (5) But his vices were more, and concerned more personnes; for a great Epicure hee was, and giuen much vnto Cuppes, whereby he trained the body to belly cheere, and sense to bee subiect to sloth and drunkennesse; foure times euery day were his tables spred, and plenteously with all Cates furnished, euer . commanding that his courtiers, guests, and seruants, Wil. . d . Aug. R . . Polyer. . . . . should rather leaue, for superfluity, then call, for lack: which howsoeuer it was in him accounted for Roiall bounty, yet it caused in the people (who vse to praise the Soueraignes vertues, but imitate his vices) a rio∣tous loosenesse, and the Common-weale to lie sicke of consumptions, bred by such excesse of those grosse humours in her body. (6) This wrought in him a carelesse neglect of gouernment in State, so that he whole managing thereof was committed to his mother Queene Em∣ma, a woman extreamely couetous, and to Goodwin, the rich and politicke Earle of Kent; who seeing the Wil. Mal bury. present state carried wholy away with present plea∣sures, thought that a fitte subiect for him to worke vpon; for the King not married (vnlesse it were to his lewd will) and Edward likely to succeede, of an ouer soft temperature; hee thought these both might proue aduantageous to his ambition, and therfore bethought him, how the crowne might bee worne by him or his. (7) Therefore, to separate the hearts of the sub∣iects from the Prince (then which, there can bee no Goodwins diue∣lish policy. greater a wound vnto both,) hee caused the King to impose heauy tributes vpon the English, onely to pay the Danes in his Fleete, appointing euerie Henry Hunt. Wil. Malmsbury. Mat. Westminster Simon Dun. common Souldier and Mariner, to receiue eight markes in money, & euery officer and Master twelue; which amounted to the summe of thirty two thou∣sand, one hundred forty seuen pounds: for the pay∣ment whereof, there was so great a grudge, that two of the Collectors, Thurstane and Feader were slaine by the Citizens of Worcester; which caused their Ci∣ty to be burnt, and part of the country spoiled by the Kings commaund, and their Bishop Alfred ex∣pulsed the See, till with money hee had purchased his peace. This Bishops hands (as was said) were deepe in the murther of Prince Alfred, the Kings half brother, whom we spake of; yea, and Goodwin him∣selfe was put to his purgation by oath, for the clea∣ring of his suspitions in that treacherous and brutish fact: which oath was the lighter vrged, and the ea∣sier receiued for his rich and bounteous gifts, imme∣diately before presented to the King, and that was a shippe, whose sterne was of gold, with fourescore Goodwins gifts. souldiers therein placed, all vniformely and richlie suited. On their heads they al wore guilt Burgenets, and on their bodies a triple guilt habergion, a sword with guilt hilts girded to their wastes, a battaile-axe (after the manner of the Danes) on their left shoul∣ders, a target with guilt bosses borne in their left hands, a dart in the right, their armes bound about with two bracelets of gold, containing sixeteene oun∣ces in weight. (8) Aimundus Bremensis writing the Stories of those times; sheweth, that the three sonnes of Canute Aimundus Bremensis, M. S. cap. 108. were possessed of the three Kingdomes, England, Den∣marke, and Norway, though the father by Will, had disposed of the first otherwise; which moued Hardi-Canute much to maligne the roialtie of Harold, whose Crowne by birth and couenant belonged to him; and therfore with great preparation, intending to recouer his right, hee entred the Sea, and came into Flanders, where hauing notice of the vsurpers death, his rage was staied, and he peaceably came in, and re∣ceiued the Crowne. (9) And that Swein (called the Younger) King of Denmarke, to assist his vncle Hardi-Canute against Harold the vsurper of Englands Crowne, with a great Armie prepared thitherward; and taking the Seas, were by tempest driuen vpon the coasts of Hadel , where his Armie doing some hurt, was set vpon and discomfited by the souldiers of the Arch-bishoppe: Idem. cap. 109. himselfe amongst them beeing taken prisoner, and brought into the presence of the Arch-bishop, was by him most honourably receiued, and conueied vn∣to Breme, who there entered a league with him, and with gifts and other complements, after a few daies; suffered him to depart; who likewise hearing of the death of King Harold, returned backe to his owne Countrey, where shortly after he was much molested by Magnus the sonne of Olaf, then raigning King ouer the Norwegians. (10) Hardi-Canute in England, hearing of those stirres, thought it his part to aid his Nephew King Idem. . Sweyn, against the inuasions of Magnus: and there∣fore hee sent one Sueno his kinsman, with an Armie of the English, to reestablish King Sweyn in his Throne. These entred Norway, and the Field a∣gainst the Norwegians, but by them were so ouerlaied, that hee left Magnus the vanquisher, and returned againe for England; but before hee could arriue the Shore, King Hardi-Canute was dead, with whom dy∣ed the issue of that warre; whose death was suddaine, and after this manner. (11) At the celebration of a great marriage, con∣tracted Si D . Matth. West. betwixt a Daenish Lord, called Canut-Pru∣dan, and Lady Githa, the daughter of a Noble-man, whose name was Osgot Clappa; in a solemne assem∣bly, & banquet at Lambeth the eight of Iune, reuelling and carousing amidst his cups, hee suddainly feldown without speech or breath: whose losse was the lesse lamented for his excesse, riotousnesse, and vnwon∣ted exactions: but chiefly because a much better was then to succeede him; hauing himselfe had nei∣ther wife nor child that is read off. Yea, so farre were all sorts from bewailing him, that in regard of Lambert. . in . the freedome from the Danish yoke, which they at∣tained by his decease, euer since among the com∣mon people; the day of his death is annually cele∣brated with open pastimes in the streetes (as the old Romanes kept their fugalia; for chasing out of their Kings,) which time is now called Hoctide or Hucx∣tide, signifying a time of scorning or contempt, which fell vpon the Danes by his death. His body with all due obsequies was interred at Winehester by his fathers, after hee had voluptuou∣sly raigned two yeeres lacking ten daies, and depar∣ted his life and kingdome the yeere of Christ Iesus, 1042. (12) With the death of this King died all rule of the Danes in this land, and the sacred sparke of the Saxons fire (through three of their successions) bu∣ried in their owne ashes, beganne now to take flame and to burne most bright, which was Prince Edward (now commonly called the Confessor) the sonne of King Ethelred; and albeit there were others betwixt him and the crowne, as namely, Edward and Ed∣mund the sonnes of the Iron-side, yet the one dying in Hungar without issue of body, the other there li∣uing as a banished man (by surname the Out-law) was neither so well regarded, nor thought so worthy of book 7. cap. 44. . . gouernement, as this other Edward was, whom ther∣fore they sent for, and with so great applause and acclamations proclaimed, that the present ioy see∣med to prognosticate a perpetuall happinesse to the English, who had beene most miserably afflicted by the Daenes, for the space of two hundred forty two yeeres; though this line againe failed, before it was well begunne. EDVVARD THE CONFESSOR, SONNE OF KING ETHELRED, THE THIRTIE SEVENTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN: HIS RAIGNE, VER∣TVES, AND MAR∣RIAGE. CHAPTER VI. E Dward, the Third of that Name before the Con∣quest, An. D. 1042. Henry Hunting. halfe-brother to the deceased Hardi-Canute, and sonne to King Ethel∣red by Queene Emma his wife, was by the prouident care of a Mothers affecti∣on, (when the variable successe of Warre, doubt∣fully depended betwixt Edmund the English, and Canutus the Dane) sent into Normandy to Duke Ri∣chard Polydor. her Brother, there to bee secured from all do∣mesticall stirres: and now, before the dead corps Rand. Higden. could be enterred, wi generall consent of the No∣bles was elected their King. (2) I know well that in the legend of this holy mans life, more things are recorded, then with safetie Legend. Aur. in vit. S. Edward. of truth may be either beleeued, or deliuered; as that he was chosen King by consent of Parliament, when as yet he was in his mothers wombe, Ethelred his Fa∣ther at the same time hauing many other sonnes aliue; as also when the destroying Danes had extinguished by their warres almost the whole Royall issue of the English, the holy Monke Brightwold, of Glastenbury de∣ploring their losse, and the Lands miserable estate, had Wil. Malmsbury. Henry Hunt. lib. . Polycr. li. 6. ca. 18. in vision this Edward, then an Exile, presented vnto him by the Apostle S. Peter himselfe, who then an∣nointing him King in his sight, telling him that his Raigne should be peaceable, and twenty three yeeres for continuance; Brightwold yet vnsatisfied who should next succeed, demanded the resolution, and was answered by Peter, that the Kingdome of England was Gods owne Kingdome; for whose successors him∣selfe would prouide. With such vaine predictions our otherwise true Stories are ouer-charged; which mo∣ued Comineus the worthy French Historian, to tax the Philip . English with ouer much credulitie that way. (3) But most true it is, that the English Nobilitie disclaiming all Danish subiection, presently vpon the death of King Harold, enacted, That none of their bloud should any more raigne ouer them: putting this their decree in execution by cassiering all Danes from the Castles, Forts, and Garrison Townes throughout all the Land, whence some euen of their Bloud Roy∣all were forced to depart. Then sending securitie into Normandy, with proffer of the Crowne vnto Prince Edward, had his consent, and assistance of Duke Wil∣liam his cosen germane. (4) This Edward (as elsewhere hath been said) was borne at Islip neere vnto Oxford, and tenderly educa∣ted by Queene Emma his Mother; and after his Fa∣thers death, for safety sent into France; where, by his sweet conuersation hee gained the loue of all, and as much himselfe affected those strangers, which was some blemish of policie in the face of his gouernment, when he had got the Diadem, as being of disposition ouer-soft, and euer too pliant (an imperfection in a Soueraigne) to take the impresse of any stampe. In which mould, the aspiring Goodwin Earle of Kent, doth cast the fabrick of his owne designes; who had made away Alfred, his younger, but of a more reso∣lute spirit, that so the basis of his owne piller (whose top in time he hoped to crowne) might be set, if not vpon, yet with the neerest to the Throne. (5) Hee therefore, the formost both in will and power, vsed both to establish Prince Edward in his Rand. Higden. Marian. Scotus. right, being seconded by Leofrick Earle of Chester, and Lyuingus Bishop of Worcester, and indeed with the generall assistance of all the English; who now were so iealous of all forraine powers, that they forbad an ouergreat traine of Normans, (though comming for his aid) to attend their new-chosen King. (6) His Coronation was at Winchester, with great concourse of people, and the celebration performed Alfred Beuerel. Iohn Rouse. by Edsine, Archbishop of Canterbury, vpon the very day of Christ his resurrection, (being also a new∣rising day to the English Nation) the yeere of grace 1042. himselfe being aged then towards forty, and was in number the thirty seuenth Monarch of Eng∣land, where he raigned with such Iustice & Piety, that he obtained the venerable name of Saint, and vnto posterities is distinguished from the other Edwards, by the adiunct Confessor. (7) In the entrance of his gouernement, to witnes his loue to his people, hee sought euery way the fur∣therance Rand. Higden, in Polychr. lib. 6. cap. 24. of their wealth, and afterwards remitted the most heauy Tribute of forty thousand pounds year∣ly gathered by the name of Dane-gilt, which had bin imposed by his Father, and payed for forty years con∣tinuance, out of the lands of all, except only the Cler∣gie, because, (say our ancient lawes,) the Kings repo∣sed more confidence in the prayers of holy Church, then in the power of Armies. Then, from the diuers Lawes of Cambd. Britan. de Danis. the Mercians, West-Saxons, Danes, and Northumbri∣ans, he selected the best, and made of them one body certaine, and written in Latin, (that all men of anie learning might know wheron to rely) to be the touch of his Common-wealths Pleas, and the squire by which he would haue euery right to be measured; be∣ing (in a sort) the fountaine of those, which at this day we terme the Common Lawes, though the formes of pleading & processe therein, were afterward brought in by the Conquest. (8) The raigne of this King by most writers records, was more spent in peace & works of true piety, thē in warres, and bloud, though some dissensions happe∣ned both domesticall, and forreine: for about the yeare one thousand forty fiue, and third of his Raign, a royal Nauy was rigged in Sandwich hauen, against Magnus King of Norway, who then intended to in∣uade England, and indeed had so done, if the wars of Sweyn king of Denmark had not diuerted his purpose. (9) This Sweyn was the sonne of Duke Wolfe by Ostryd his Duchesse, sister to Hardi-Canut, who as I find Albert. Crantius, written in the manuscript of Aimundus Bremensis, be∣ing in possession of two kingdomes, prepared his Na∣uy Aimund Bremensis. for the conquest of England also. But, (saith hee) King Edward gouerning that Kingdome with great Iustice and Loue, chose rather his peace with proffers of Tribute, and promises that after his death the Crowne should be his, yea though himselfe should haue children: how beit this seemeth not to sound for truth; For Sweyn sending his Ambassadors vnto Edward to craue ayde against Magnus (his grieuous and mortall Enemy,) could ob∣tain none; and Harold Harfager, the successor of Mag∣nus, and enemy to Sweyn, presently thereupon sent vnto Edward for a league of amity, which was ratified firmely betwixt them. (10) Neither may wee thinke that euer hee meant his Crowne that way; for that besides the decree e∣nacted against all Danish claims, his desire to establish it in the English bloud is most manifest, by sending for Edward his Nephew, the sonne of Edmund Iron∣side, remaining in Hungary, and that so long out of Matth West. England that hee was called the Outlawe; who com∣ming ouer, brought with him his wife Agatha, and children, Edgar a sonne, and Margaret and Christian his daughters; him Edward meant to haue made King Edward de signeth the Eng sh-man. heire to the Crowne, had he not beene preuented by hasty death, whereupon the King designed young Edgar, his sonne, the heire apparent, and gaue him the surname of Adeling, a name of great honor appropria∣ted to the Princes of the blood, and men capable of the Crowne. (11) Besides these former attempts, certaine Da∣nish Pirates entred the Port of Sandwich, which with all the Sea-Coasts of Essex they spoiled, and in Flaun∣ders made Marchandize of their prey. The Irish like∣wise with thirty sixe shippes entred Seuern, and with the assistance of Griffith king of South-Wales burnt or flew all that they found; against whom Alfred Bi∣shop of Worcester went and fought, but with such suc∣cesse, that many of his Souldiers were slaine, and the rest put to flight, which made the Welshmen far more bold, and Rese, the brother of Griffith, make many in∣cursions An. D. 1053. Mat. Westmin er. Chron. of Wales. to fetch preyes out of England, till at length he was slaine at Bulerden, and his head presented to king Edward at Gloucester. (12) His domesticall molestations, were chieflie by Earle Goodwin and his sonnes; and those first springing vpon this following occasion. Eustace the elder, Earle of Bulloigne, who had married Gods, si∣ster Wil. Malmsbury. by the fathers side to King Edward, came into England to visite him then lying at Gloucester, and re∣turning homeward, at Canterbury his Herbinger dea∣ling roughlie with a Burgesse for lodgings, caused his owne death; which when his Lord heard of, thir∣sting Rand. Hig. for reuenge, he slew eighteene Citizens in the heat of his furie: the Canterburians in as great a rage gotte them to armour, and slew twenty of his reti∣new, wounding many more, and made the Earle to recoile; whose greeuous complaint comming to the King, he commanded Goodwin to see execution done vpon the offenders. Earle Goodwin not hastie to follow his commission, aduised the King to examine the cause before he massacred his true subiects at the instigation of Strangers; whereat King Edward was highly offended, and Goodwin thereby gained great loue of the Commons. This occasioned Robert Gemeticensis a Norman, first made Bishop of London, and after Arch-bishop of Canterbury, to spred the Curtaine of disfauour betwixt Goodwin and the King, vrging his refusall as an Act of Contempt, wherein more dangers might lie hid then were to be suffered; whereupon Edward called an assembly of Estates, appointing a day of meeting at Gloucester. (13) The Commons (whose common guise is, deadly to hate all strangers, though many times well Malmsb. deseruing) now seeing Earle Goodwin in danger for their good, were easily drawne to assist him and his cause, and in warlike manner garded his person, at Beuerstane not farre from the King. The Estates assembled, and Goodwin sent for, he refused to come, pretending seruice against the Welsh, then ready to make inroades, and that his presence was more need∣full there, then at Court; albeit the Welsh-men cleared themselues by sending their Ambassadors vnto the King. The suspitions increasing, great preparation on both sides was made; to assist the King came Leofricke the worthy Earle of Chester, Siward the stoute Earle of Northumberland, and Rodulfe Earle of Hereford his sister Godas sonne, by her first husband Walter de Maigne. (14) To Goodwin repaired his people of Southe∣rie and Kent, and to him were brought by Swaine his Rand. Higden. Matt. West. Si on Dun. sonne, the men of Oxford, Sommerset, Hereford, Glou∣cester, and Berk-shires; vnto whom, Harold his other sonne, ioined those of Essex, Norfolke, Suffolke, Cam∣bridge, and Huntingdon-shires, so that his host was ex∣ceedingly great, and his mind thereby so inflated, that from Langton, where hee lay, hee sent a bold and Traiterous demand to the King, to haue Earle Eu∣stace of Bulloigne with all his French and Normans (that kept then in the Castle of Douer) to bee deli∣uered vnto him, and his sonnes: which beeing (as good reason was) refused, the Battle was prepared, and brought to the verie point of hazard and ruine of all: For in that quarrell were assembled the grea∣test Peeres, and Lords of the Land, the Kings loue swaying very much with many, but yet the hatred towards Strangers possessing the hearts of more. The beginning thus doubtfull, and the end like to prooue dangerous; the matter both with great fore∣sight and prouidence was referred vnto Parliament, to bee holden at London with all conuenient hast, whereunto pledges were both giuen and receiued on either parts. (15) King Edward strongly guarded with an Ar∣my of the Mercians and Northumbrians, entred Lon∣don, and Goodwin with his sonnes in warlike manner came into Southwarke to his owne house. But his Ar∣my wauering, and (as bad causes & consciences make men doe) suspecting the worst, by little and little shrunke away from him; which knowne to the King, he presently pronounced sentence of banishment vn∣to Goodwin and his fiue sonnes, without further pro∣ceeding by way of Parliament, as was determined. Goodwin therefore with great riches and his three sonnes, Swaine, Tostie, and Girth, sailed into Flanders, and Harold with his brother Leofwine, from Bristow passed into Ireland; who were no sooner gone, but the King proclaimed them Out-lawes, and gaue the Earl∣dome of Harold vnto Algar, the son of Leofrick, Earle of Chester. This Leofricke is he, which at his Countes∣ses request freed the Citie Couentrie of their impor∣table tribute imposed, as we haue elsewhere said. Booke 1. chap. 27. (16) In the second yeere of Goodwins banishment, both himselfe and those his sonnes with him, hauing Henry Hun . gotten ships conuenient for warre, in manner of Pi∣rats came vpon the coasts of Kent and Sussex, doing much harme, and returning with spoiles: the like did Harold and Leofwin from Scotland, vpon the westerne coasts of Sommerset and Deuonshires, who thence coa∣sting about the point of Cornwall, ioined their Fleet with their Fathers, in the Ile of Wight. Simon Dunel. (17) Against them King Edward prepared, & him∣selfe, though aged, with a Nauie of sixtie ships well furnished for warre, meant to haue made an end of that businesse, by the destruction of his aduersaries: but the Nauies ready to ioine battell, God tooke the cause into his owne hand, and with a thicke fogge so ouer-spread the seas, that one Fleet could not there∣by see another; in which, Goodwin and his complices by contrary windes were driuen to the place from whence they came. King Edward still in iealousie of Goodwins returne, rigged forth forty tall ships to se∣cure the seas, which kept not so strong a watch, but that Goodwin got by them, solliciting the people of Kent, Sussex, and Surrey vnto his aid, and entring Tha∣mesis, did the like vnto them in London, who accepted of his arriuage, though King Edward lay there: so that without disturbance his Nauie fell vp with the tide, through the south Arch of the Bridge, & a mighty ar∣my to his aid mustered vpō the same side of the riuer. (18) The Nobilitie then seeing side against side, and all of them meere English, ready to hazard their bloud in the quarrels of strangers, wrought so with Edward and Goodwin, that they came vnto peace, and pledges were againe deliuered for the performance, whereof Wilmot the sonne of Earle Goodwin, and Ha∣cun the sonne of Swaine his eldest, were sent to Duke William of Normandy; so great a trust he euer reposed in strangers. This Swaine, vpon a remorse of consci∣ence Wil. Malmsbury. Ran. Higden. Mat. Westminster. Simon Dun. for the bloud he had spilt, and especially for the slaughter of Beorne his cosen & intercessor, who sued to the King for his peace, vndertooke a pilgrimage to Ierusalem, and in his returne died in Licia, whether through an extremity of cold, or by the hands of Sa∣racens, that spoiled all they met, it is vncertaine. (19) Goodwin now restored, and in great credit with the King, cast the eye of disdaine vpon the Arch-Bishop Robert (as commonly fauorits emulate each o∣thers,) and himselfe being a man eloquent and poli∣ticke, so possessed the King both against him and his Normans, that he requited his owne banishment, with al theirs out of England, some few excepted, that were fauoured by the English: and now promising him∣selfe much honour and authority; was suddainly cut off by the stroake of death, surprizing him as hee sate at Table with the King vpon Monday in the Easter weeke, but died not till the Thursday following, which happened at Winchester, where hee was bu∣ried. (20) Besides these former forraine and ciuil mole∣stations, other calamities happened to the land; for in Ran. Higden. the yeare of Grace 1047. and moneth of Ianuary, there fell so great a Snow, which couered the ground vnto the middle of March, that Cattle & Fowles pe∣rished abundantly: and on the first day of that Month the yere following, a strange and terrible Earth-quake happened, which seemed to rent the ground asunder, and withall such Lightnings, as burnt vp the Corne, growing in the fields, wherby an excessiue Dearth fol∣lowed: so that his raigne was neither so peaceable nor prosperous, as Brightwold the Monke dreamed it should be. But as all these were scourges sent from God vpon the Land for sin, so both Prince, Pastors, and people, had all seuerally their part thereof, as be∣ing iointly the causers of the same. (21) For the King, in case of these Strangers, put the Land more then once in danger to bee lost: and himselfe refraining the bed of his vertuous wife com∣mitted thereby the offence forbidden by the Apo∣stle, and caused her his Queene, either to commit or be accused to haue committed adultery. The Cler∣gie 1. Cor. 7. 5. likewise altogether vnlearned, wanton, and vici∣ous: for the Prelats neglecting the offices of Episco∣pall function, which was to tender the affaires of the Church, and to feede the flocke of Christ, li∣ued themselues idle, and couetous, addicted wholly to the pomp of the world, and voluptuous life, little caring for the Churches & soules committed to their charge: and if any told them (saith Higden) that their Holinsh. Rand. Higden in Polycr. lib. 6. ca. 2 . liues ought to be holy, & their conuersation without Couetousnes, according to the sacred prescript, and vertuous examples of their Elders, they would scof∣fingly put them off with, Nunc aliud tempus, alii pro tempore mores; Times haue mutations, So must mens fashi∣ons: and thus, (saith he,) they plained the roughnes of their doings with smoothnes of their answers. Brief∣ly, the whole people were so loose and riotous, that as Geruasius Dorobornensis recordeth, they fell so fast to Geruasius of Can∣turbury. commit wickednes, as to bee ignorant of sinfull crimes, was then held to be a great crime it selfe. And by the te∣stimony of Malmesbury, the sinnes of those times e∣uidently foreshewed a generall destruction: for the Wil. Malm b. Englishmen (saith hee) transformed themselues into the strange manners of the French, and that not onely in speech and behauiour, but in their deeds, and Charters: their vse was then to goe fantastically appointed, their garments rea∣ching but to the mid knee, their heads shorne, and their beards shauen all but the vpper lippe, which grew with long mustaches; continually wearing massie bracelets of gold a∣bout their armes, carrying markes vpon their skinne poun∣ced in of sundry Colours; and the Clergi contenting them∣selues with triuiall literature, could scarcely hacke and hew out the words of the Sacrament. These then were Eng∣lands dolorous times both of blindnesse & lewdriesse, drawing downe Gods wrath for their destruction. (22) But howsoeuer this King is reported to bee louing and facile towards strangers, (which in it selfe is a princely vertue if it be opportunely and warily v∣sed:) yet to his owne Mother, and Wife, vnnaturally ouer rigorous, imprisoning and bereauing them both of all Prince-like honor. Against Queene Emma, his Mother, were instigators Robert Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury, and Earle Goodwin of Kent, the two greatest fauorites of the King. The causes obiected were, her marriage with Canut the Capitall enemy of England; her regardlesnesse of succouring himself and his bro∣ther Polycr. li. . ca. 4. Scal. Chron. in their exiles, whom (as was alleaged) shee con∣triued to haue made away; and that vnder colour of priuate deuotions, she had vsed the company of Al∣wine Bishop of Winchester ouer familiarly, to her great dishonour and the Kings disgrace: for these and the like, hee tooke away all her Iewels, and other sub∣stance, and committed her to safe custody in the Ab∣bey of Werwell. (23) Indeed Malmsbury doth tax her to haue been insatiably couetous, and that shee was more tenderly Wil. Malms. affectionate to her Danish, then English children, whereby her loue was measured to their fathers. But for the imputation of her incontinencie, she washed it off with as sharpe a triall as any that is recorded for truth, by vndergoing that ouer-hard law Ordalium, Ordalium, a triall of offenders by fire. when in presence of the King her Son, & many of his Peeres, she passed ouer betweene nine plough-shares glowing red hot, bare-footed & blind-folded, without any hurt; vsing this speech to her leaders, as not knowing shee was past all danger, O Lord when shall I come to the place of my purgation: but hauing her eyes Rand. Higd. vncouered and seeing her selfe cleerely escaped, fell vpon her knees, and with teares gaue thanks to her Deliuerer, whereby she recouered, both the loue and her former estate of the King, with the good esteeme and applause of the people: in memory whereof shee gaue nine Mannors (according to the number of plough-shares) to the Minster of Winchester, (wherin she had that triall,) and adorned the same with many rich ornaments; as likewise the King repenting the wrong he did her, bestowed on the same place the I∣land (so then it was) called Portland in Dorsetshire, be∣ing about seuen miles in compasse: for so the chance, in those daies, was set, that whosoeuer lost, the monks did winne. (24) Neither were this Kings proceedings bet∣ter Wil. Malmsb. vita Edwardi. Marian. Scot. 1. Cor. 7. 5. Egitha some call her. with his owne Wife, howsoeuer some haue cloa∣ked that Fraud (so the Apostle tearmes it) vnder the faire robe of Chastity. For hee marrying Editha, a Lady incomparable both for beauty and vertue, in whose brest (saith Malmesburie) there was a Schoole of all Liber all Sciences, refused her Bed: but whether it were for his debility, or hatred to Goodwin her fa∣ther, or loue of Virginity, I determine not; but am fully perswaded, that the accusation of Adultery wherewith Robert the Arch-bishop did charge her, Chr . W l. was more vpon enuy to her father, then truth of so foule a fact in her, whose vertues were so many, and so memorable, by report of Authors, that were eie∣witnesses themselues; for Ingulphus that had often∣times conference with her, doth thus of her relate. There was giuen (saith hee) vnto King Edward for his Queene and Wife, the daughter of Goodwin, a most Ingulphus in hist. beautifull Damosell, Egitha by name, excellent well lear∣ned; in her demeanure, and whole course of life a Virgine most chast, humble, and vnfeinedly holy, no way sauou∣ring of her Fathers, or Brethrens barbarousnesse, but mild, modest, faithfull, and innocent, nor euer hurtfull to any; insomuch, that this verse was applied to her: Sicut Spina Rosam, genuit Godwinus Egitham. From prickled stalke, as sweetest Rose: So Egith faire, from Godwin growes. All these notwithstanding, the King expulsed her W l. Melm b. his Court and Bed, and that with no little disgrace; for taking all her goods from her, euen to the vtter∣most farthing, committed her prisoner to the Mona∣sterie of Wilton, attended onely with one maid, where shee, for a whole yeeres space almost, in teares and praiers expected the day of her release and comfort: All which vnprincelie, and vn-Spouslike vsage, as the King pretended, and said, was, because shee onely should not liue in comfort, when as her Parents and Brethren were banished the Realme: an vniust sentence surely, and vn∣befitting a Saint, thus to punish the sinnes of the fa∣thers vpon their children, contrary to the prescript rule of God, who by his Prophet complaineth against such iniustice, and regulateth it with this iust verdict, That soule that sinneth shall die: and for her pure and vn∣uiolated Ezek. 1 . 4. chastity, himselfe on his death-bed spake, saying, that openly she was his wife, but in secret imbra∣cings Edwardi vitae. as his owne sister. (25) Yet behold the blindnesse, and partiality of those times, wherein for this his only refusall of nup∣tiall duties, the penciles of those that should haue shewed his true face to posterities, haue so enbelli∣shed the portraiture and lineaments, that vnto the be∣holder he seemeth now no mortall creature; his mi∣racles and foresayings answerable to most of the Pro∣phets. Which here to insert in so worthy a subiect and holy Kings life, were both to fill vp with a needlesse surcharge, whole leaues of Times waste abuses, and to breed a suspicion of those other things in him, which we know for sound truth; as was his gift from God, through his holy inuocations, and touch of the place affected, to cure the disease called Struma, now the Kings Euill, which vnto this day in his successors, hath been experienced vpon many such healings, by the touch of those gracious hands who haue held the Scepter, as Gods Vicegerents of this most blessed and happy Kingdome. That he had the spirit of Prophe∣cie, many haue thought, as also the notice of his owne death, some constantly affirme; by a Ring sent him from Ierusalem, the same that hee long time before had giuen to a pilgrime: but these with his other mi∣raculous cures, his sight of the Danes destruction, and the Seuen Sleepers in the Mount Cellion besides Ephe∣sus, Edwardi legend. eiusdem vit M. S. with infinite others, I leaue to his Legend-wri∣ters, and Aluredus Riualensis to relate, who haue writ∣ten his many miracles with no sparing pen. Most true it is that of a little Monastery dedicated to S. Peter in the west of London by the riuer of Thames, he made a Saint Peter him∣selfe came down from heauen to the first dedica∣tion of that place, if the fore∣said M. S. er not, T. Cliff rd. most beautifull and faire Church, where he likewise prouided for his owne Sepulcher; and another dedi∣cated to S. Margaret, standing without the Abbey: this of Westminster he endowed with very rich reue∣newes, and confirmed their Charters vnder his Broad Seale, being the first of the Kings of England, who vsed that large and stately impression in their Royall Charters and Patents: the very true form wherof, ac∣cording to the rude sculpture of those elder times, we haue portraited in the front of this Chapter, as we in∣tend likewise to doe in the rest succeeding; whereof this vse at least, (if no other) may bee made, that by benefit of those paterns, men may know from what Princes they first receiued the Charters of their anci∣ent possessions, and Patents of their honours, which the Princes stile (many beeing of one name) cannot sufficiently make knowne. The said Church of Westminster he built for the dis∣charge of his vowed pilgrimage to Ierusalem, & that in Simon D n. such sumptuous maner, that it was in those daies the Patern to all other statelie buildings. He founded also the Colledge of S. Mary Oterie in the county of Deuon, King Edward the founder of S. Mary Otery Colledge. S w 124. and gaue vnto it the Village of Otereg, and remoued the Bishoppes See from Cridington to Excester, as a place of farre more dignity; where the King taking the right hand, and the Queene the l , led Leofricke from the high Altar, and installed him the first Bishop of that See: Finally, when he had reigned the sp e of twentie yeeres, six moneths, and twenty seuen daies; hee died the fourth of Ianuary, the yeere of Christ Iesus one thousand sixtie six, and was with great lamentations and solemnitie buried in his Church at Westminster, the morrow after the feast of the Epiphanie. Hee was of person well proportioned, of coun∣tenance sober, and of complexion faire; naturally courteous and gentle to all (and thereby too prone and credulous to suggestions) louing to his subiects, and ouer-louing vnto Strangers. A Prince of much vertue and integritie of life, notwithstanding which, had it not beene vailed vnder the faire-shew of Cha∣stitie, he had not so easily been canonized for a Saint; wherein yet the seeming wisest taxed his wisdome, whilest vnder a goodly pretext of Religion and vow∣ed Virginity; hee cast off all care of hauing issue, and exposed the kingdom for a prey to the greedy desires of ambitious humours. His wife. Editha, the wife of King Edward, was the daugh∣ter of Goodwin, Duke of the West-Saxons, and Earle of Kent: her mother was Gith the sister of Sweyne the yonger, King of Denmarke; she was married vn∣to him the yeere of Christs humanity, 1045. and fourth of his raigne. She was his wife eighteene yeeres; and suruiuing him liued a widow eight more, and in the eight yeere of King William the Conquerours raigne, died in December, the yeere of Christs birth, 1074, and was buried by her husband in S. Peters Church at Westminster. HAROLD THE SECOND OF THAT NAME, THE SONNE OF EARLE GOOD∣WINE, AND THIRTIE EIGHT MONARCH OF THE ENGLISHMEN, HIS LIFE, RAIGNE, ACTS, WIVES, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER VII. T He people sorrowing for the death of their King, and the States-men per∣plexed for choice of a new, Edgar Athelings title was worthy of more vn∣partiall respect then it found: for him they held too young for gouern∣ment: besides, a stranger borne, scarce speaking English: and withall, the pro∣phecies of Edward touching the alienation of the Crowne, the Interest of the Danes, and the claim that . Duke William made, (both by gift and consanguini∣ty,) bred great distraction of desires, and opinions; but nothing concluded for setling the State; no man either assuming or profering the Monarchiall dia∣deme, because none had the power, or right to a∣dorne therewith his owne head. In this Calme confe∣rence a sudden gale arose, which blew all the sailes Mat. W st. Polyd r. spred for that winde into one Port. And that was Harold sonne to Earle Goodwine, a man (duly prizing his many worthy parts) not vnmeet for a kingdom, who first succeeding his father in his Dukedome, and next Edward (his brother in Law) in his Kingdom, in Vit. S. Edward. patience, clemency, & affability bare himselfe most approuedly towards the vertuous, but with a Lions courage, and fierce countenance chastised the disor∣dered, and indeede became another Maccabeus vnto the distressed Land. Whose kingly state before wee touch, it shall not bee amisse to lengthen his short raigne with his Acts and Life, as hee was a Subiect, both with, and against his Lord and Predecessor. (2) That hee tooke part with his Father against Eustace of Bulloigne, and King Edwards hasty commis∣sion, wee haue shewed; himselfe then enioying the Earledom of Oxford, and so affected by those of Essex, Suffolke and Norfolke, Cambridge & Huntington-shires, that they sided in his cause against the King; But these designes failing, (as commonly it is seene all attempts of Subiects against their Soueraignes doe) hee learned by banishment, what was the losse of true honour, and by forbearance of battle (when halfe the Kingdome stood for him,) his dutie obliged vnto the Common-wealth. And growne a∣gaine into fauour with the King, carried himselfe an∣swerably vnto both. (3) Some iealousy conceiued, Edward without a∣ny cause, banished Algar the son of Leofrike Earle of An. D. 1055 Matth. West. Simon Dun. Chester, who with the helpe of the Irish and Welchmen, vnder the conduct of Gruffith ap Llewelyn Prince of North-Wales (who had married his daughter,) did much hurt to the English, putting Rodulph Earle of Hereford to flight, with the slaughter of fiue hun∣dred men, spoiled the City, burnt the Minster and became Masters of mis-rule in those parts. Against these was Harold sent, and with such manhood pursu∣ed his flying enemies, that passing through North-Wales, vpon the Snow-downes he pitched his Field: The Earle, and Prince Gruffith, not daring to abide his presence, fled thence vnto South-Wales, and again tooke into Hereford; whereof Harold hauing intelli∣gence hasted thitherward (leauing sufficient in the Snow-downes to mate the Welsh), and recouering the City, with a deepe trench and high rampire fortified it about, where for the sauing of more bloud (and not vngratefull to Algar, who without grudge had resig∣ned to him his Earldome, and whole Reuenewes at his returne from exile) a peace was concluded, and at Harolds request, Earle Algar and Prince Gruffith were pardoned. (4) But Algar being again accused, & again aided by his old associate Gruffith, recouered his Earledome by An. D. 1058 force, whereat King Edward was highly displeased, but most against Gruffith, who euer was ready to as∣sist Simon Dun. any against him: whereupon Harold the second time appointed Generall, with a great host entred North-Wales, without sight of enemy, where he only burnt downe the stately Palace of Prince Gruffith, & so returned to the King. But long the Welsh were not quiet, nor the Prince pleased of the harms to him An. D. 1063. done. Wherefore making his forces verie strong he again molested the English. (5) To restraine whom once more was Harold set foorth, who with such terrour burst into Wales, that Mat. West. Prince Gruffith, in secret stole from his Campe, lea∣uing his Souldiers (if they would) to fight for them∣selues, whereupon his whole army yeelded them∣selues Chro. Wal. to Harolds mercy, and hauing Prince Gruffith in their hands, cut off his head, and sent it to Ha∣rold, giuing him pledges for assurance of p ce, and the paiment of the ancient tribute which for a time had beene reteined: yet euer after hee carried so heauy a hand on the Welsh, that as Iohn of Salisburie in his Policraticon writeth, he ordained a law, that what Welsh-man soeuer, should with weapon passe o∣uer Offaes ditch, should haue hi right hand cutte off by the Kings officer. (6) All now in quiet, and Harold withdrawne to his Mannor of Boseham vpon the riuage of the sea Wil. Malms. Mat. Westminst r. in the confines of Sussex, there for his recreation, one day hee tooke into a Fishers boate with small atten∣dants, neither those very skilfull Mariners, when no sooner were they lanched into the deepe, but a con∣trary wind came about, and droue the boat vpon the coast of Ponthieu in France, where hee was taken by the Country people, and presented to Guido their Earle, who a while retained him his prisoner, in hope of gaine by his ransom, but Duke William requiring it, he was conueied into Normandy, where he cunningly perswaded the Duke, that his secret comming out Matthew Paris, in Will. Hen. Hunting. of England, was purposely to enter a league of amity with him. The Duke then hauing present wars with the Britaines in France, tooke this his new friend and guest with him for his companion at Armes; whose ready policies followed with forward practise, wan him great estimation with the Duke; whereupon be∣twixt Rand. Higd. them a couenant was made for the reseruati∣on of the English Crowne to the Norman, if it chan∣ced King Edward to die without children; and the same ratified by Harolds corporall oath, with the affiancing of Lady Adeliza, the Dukes fift daugh∣ter, Gemeticensis. then a child and Harold a widower; which af∣terwards fell to his owne destruction, and the lands subuersion, as shall bee said. (7) His last imploiment by holy King Edward, was against the tumultuous Northumbrians which Wil. Malmsbury. had expulsed Tosto their Earle, and Harolds owne brother, where a peace was concluded without shed∣ding blood, but with condition that Tosto should lose his Earledom: whereupō in great displeasure, he with his wife & children fled into Flanders, and euer after hated the person, and emulated the glory of Harold. The originall of these two brethrens quarrels be∣ganne at Windsor, where in the presence of the King they fell from words vnto blowes, and that in such manner, as if rescue had not come, Tosto had di∣ed; for which disgrace, hee secretly hied him in∣to Mat. Westminst. the Marches of Wales, and neere the City Here∣ford at Portaflyth, where Harold had a house, then in Marian. Scotus. Mat. Westminster. preparing to entertaine the King, he slew all his bro∣thers seruants, and them cutting peecemeale into gobbets, salted some of their limmes, and cast the rest into vessels of the meath and wines, sending his brother word, that hee had furnished him with poudred meats against the Kings comming thither; which barbarous act caused deseruedly his name to be odious vnto his Northumbrians, and was lastly re∣payed with his owne death. (8) Now albeit some Heralds make Harold by M. Thom Mille in Harold. birth but a Gentleman of one, and the first descent, which, were it so, should no whit blemish him who was more truely enobled with princely vertues; yet therein also it may seeme hee is mis-esteemed, seeing his Father was Goodwin a Duke by degree, the son of Wolnoth, and he the sonne of Egelmar, who was the sonne of Egelricke, surnamed Leofwine, and brother of Edrick Duke of Mercia, that married the daughter of King Ethelred of England, of whom wee haue spo∣ken. The mother of Harold was Githa the daughter of Duke Wolfe, and sister to Sweyne the yonger, King of Denmarke, by Estrich his wife, who was sister to Canute the great King of England; and himselfe the second sonne of her borne; whose elder brother was Sweyne, that died on pilgrimage in his returne from Ierusalem; and his yonger were Tosto, Wilnod, Grith, and Leofrick. (9) A former wife Earle Goodwin had, whose Wil. Malmsb. name was Thira, the sister of Canute, a woman sold vnto wickednesse for making marchandize of Eng∣lands beauteous virgins into Denmarke; shee solde them there at deare rates, to satisfie her owne vnsati∣ate auarice, and the lusts of the lasciuious Danes, till a iust reward of Gods wrath fell on her by a thunder∣bolt falling from heauen, wherewith shee was slaine, Rand. Higden, in Polychr. lib. 6. cap. 25. to the great terrour of the beholders. One sonne by her Earle Goodwin had, who when hee was past childs age, riding vpon a horse (the gift of his Grandfather the King,) proudly giuing him the reine and spurre, was violently borne into the riuer Thamesis, and so sodainely drowned. Thus much being premised of Harold before hee was King; his raigne, life and death, wee will now addresse to de∣clare. (10) Edwards life ended, and nothing determi∣ned touching his successor, Harold the second day Alur. Ri l. after, being the day of his buriall, made himselfe King, none of the Nobility disliking what hee had done; for courteous hee was of specch and beha∣uiour, and in martiall prowesse the onely man, as Wales well witnessed, more then once; friended by affinity with many of the Nobles, and by his new marriage with Edgitha the daughter of Algar (sister Ran. Higden. Polyer. lib. 6. ca. 29 of the Earles Morc r and Edwin, and late wife to Gruffith ap Lhewelyn Prince of Wales) hee expected to bee both sided and assisted, if his cause came either to triall or voice. (11) And the time hee well saw fitted his en∣trance; for Sweyne King of Denmarke (most dread by the English) was entangled with the Sweden wars; and William the Norman (that made claime from King Edward) at variance with Philip the French King; the friends of Edgar in Hungarie, and him∣selfe a stranger, ouer young for rule: all which concurrents made Harold, without deliberati∣on, or order from the State, to set the Crowne on his owne head, regardlesse of all ceremony and so∣lemne celebration; for which his act, as a violator Matth. W st. of holy rites, hee too too much offended the Cler∣gy. (12) The day of his Coronation was vpon Fri∣day, the fifth of Ianuary, being the feast of the Epiphany, and yeere of Saluation 1066: none either greatly applauding, or disapprouing his presump∣tion, except onely for the omission of manner and forme; to redeeme which, and to re-gaine the good will of all; no sooner attained hee the seate roiall, but he remitted or diminished the grieuous Si D . Hol sh. customes and tributes which his predecessors had raised, a course euer powerfull to winne the hearts of the Commons; to Church-men hee was verie munificent and carefull of their aduancements; and to grow more deepely into their venerable esteeme, hee repaired their Monasteries; but most especially that at Waltham in Essex, which hee most sumptuou∣sly new built, and richly endowed, giuing it the name of Holy Crosse; vpon occasion that such a Crosse found farre westward, was brought thither by mira∣cle, vt tradunt: and therefore hee chose out this place to powre forth his supplications, before hee Camb. Brit. marched to meete Duke William in the field. More∣ouer, to satisfie such Nobles as affected young Ed∣gars iuster title, he created him Earle of Oxford, and held him in speciall fauour: in briefe, vnto the poore, his hand was euer open, vnto the oppressed he ministred iustice, and vnto all men was affable, and meeke: and all to hold that vpright which on his head he had set with an vn-euen hand: and de∣priued him of, vnto whom hee was Protector. (13) Three seuerall reports are affirmed of Ed∣wards dispose of the Crowne: the first was to the Norman Duke, who made that the anker-hold of Alfred Benerl y. Spec Histor. Rich. C st. Flor Histor. his claime; the second was to young Edgar, vnto whom hee was great vncle; and the last vnto this Harold himselfe: for so saith Edmerus, and also Ma∣rianus, who liued at the very same time, and wri∣teth Ed . Maria . Polyer. . . ca. 2 . that Harold thereupon was sacred and crowned by Aldredus Archbishop of Yorke; so that hereby hee is freed by some from the imputation of intru∣sion and wrong. (14) His State thus standing, and his subiects contentment day y increasing, presently it was som∣what perplexed by an Ambassage sent from the Norman, putting him in mind of his couenant, and oath, aswell for the custody of the Crowne to his behoofe, as for the solemnazion of the mariage contracted betwixt his daughter and him. (15) Harold, who thought himselfe now surely seated in the hearts of his Subiects, and therefore also sure in his Kingdome, answered the Ambassadors, Subiects loue the Soueraignes strength. That he held their Masters demaund vniust, for that an oath extorted in time of extremity, cannot bind the ma∣ker in conscience to performe it, for that were to ioyne one sinne with another; and that this oath was taken for feare of death or imprisonment, the Duke himselfe well knew: but admit it was voluntarily, and without feare; could I (said he) then a subiect, without the allowance of the King, and the whole State, giue away the Crownes succession to the preiudice of both? surely a Kingdome is of a better account then to bee so determined in priuate onely betwixt two. With which kind of answeres he sent the messengers away. (16) The Norman, who till then thought Eng∣land sure to be his, and had deuoted his hopes from a Duke to a King, stormed to see himselfe thus fru∣strated on the sudden, and in stead of a Crown to haue scornes heaped on his head; therefore nothing contented with this sleight answere, returned his Ambassadors againe vnto Harold, by whom hee laid his claime more at large; as that King Edward in the Court of France had faithfully promised the suc∣cession vnto him, and againe afterwards ratified the Rand. Higden in Polyc. lib. 6. cap. 29 same to him at his being in England, and that not done without consent of the State, but confirmed by Stigan∣dus Archbishoppe of Canterbury, the Earles Goodwin and Syward, yea and by Harold himselfe, and so firme∣ly assured that his Brother and Nephew were deliuered for pledges, and to that end sent vnto him into Nor∣mandy: that hee had no way beene constrained, hee ap∣pealed to Harolds owne conscience, who besides his vo∣luntary offer to sweare, contracted himselfe to Adeliza his daughter (then but young, and now departed life) vp∣on Gemeticensi . which foundation the oath was willingly taken. (17) But Harold who thought his owne head as fit for a crowne as any others, meant nothing lesse then to lay it downe vpon parley; and therefore told them flatly, that howsoeuer Edward and he had tampered for the Kingdome, yet Edward himselfe com∣ming in by election, and not by any title of inheritance, his promise was of no validity; for how could hee giue that whereof he was not interessed, nor in the Danes time was euer like to be? And tell your Duke (said he) that our kingdome is now brought to a setled estate, and with such loue and liking of the English, as that they will neuer admit any more a stranger to rule ouer them. And as touching the contract with his yonger daughter, hee well seeth, that God hath taken away that occasion of aliena∣ting the Crowne; and surely his Law hath likewise proui∣ded remedy against such rash v ws; whose precepts I mean to follow: and therefore (said he) will your Duke to weigh my estate with his own, both his and mine now in quiet, & sufficient for two, and either of them, employment e∣nough for one mans Gouernment, and therefore both of them too much to bee well gouerned by one, seeing that God himselfe had set a sea betwixt them. With these and the like speeches hee shifted off the Dukes Ambassa∣dors; without all princely entertainements, or cour∣teous regard. (18) The messengers returned, and Harolds an∣sweres declared, William lion-like enraged, casteth his thoughts about plotting reuenge, and making some oddes euen that might impeach his designes, prepared all things for open warre. Harold likewise not sleeping his businesse, made ready his Fleete, mustered his souldiers, and planted his Garris s a∣long the Sea-coast. But in these his procee gs, Bishop of . behold great and fearefull Comete appeared (sel∣dom a figne to Princes of fortunate successe) vpon Roger Ho d. Si Mo t of Dur am. lter Co . the twenty fourth of Aprill, and lasted onely seuen dayes, which drew the minds of the English, into great suspense, now ready to enter into a double warre. (19) For as the Norman for his part clay∣med England by gift; so Harfager the Da e did by succession; the rumors of both which, greatly ter∣rified the heartes of the inhabitants: and yet be∣hold, a third terrour vnexpected, contrary to na∣ture, and most mens opinions, suddainely arose: for Tosto the cruell Earle of Northumberland, and bro∣ther to Harold, expulsed by his people, and pro∣scribed by King Edward, fled into France, where by the instigations of William, whose wiues sister hee had married (both of them the daughters of Balwine Earle of Flanders,) he got for his reuenge a Fleet fur∣nished Mat. Westminster. with men at Armes; and thus prepared, his first fury was shewed in spoiling the Ile of Wight; then coasting the shore, shrewdly endammaged Ran. Higden. Kent, whence hois ng saile, fell foule vpon Lin∣colnshire; where Morcar and Edwine Earles of Che∣ster and Yorkeshire, aided with the Kings Nauie, droue him from thence, though with some losse of their Wil. Malmsb. men. (20) Tosto for more succour fled into Scotland, where of King Malcolme he had but cold comfort, himselfe being busied with ciuill broiles; but how∣soeuer his expectation there failed, yet his purposes Mat. Westm. Simon Dunel. were continued with the assistance of Harold Har∣fager (that is, the Faire-lockes) King of Denmarke, who with three hundred shippes had entred the riuer Tyne for Englands inuasion, after his conquest of the Iles of Orknes. Tosto therefore ioining his Fleet to these Danes, in warlike brauerie, both of them en∣ter the mouth of Humber, and drawing vp the riuer Ouse, at Richhall landed their men, making spoile of the Country wheresoeuer they came. To meet with these, the foresaid Earles Edwin and Morcar, in a tumultuous hast raised their powers, but were so o∣uerlaid by the Norwegians, that many were slaine, and more drowned, in passing ouer that riuer. (21) The enemy grown proud by this late victory, hasted towards Yorke, the chiefe Citie of the North; where planting his siege, it was presently yeelded vp, and hostages deliuered vpon both parts for the per∣formance of couenants. The Danes thus prospering, had most strongly encamped themselues; for backed they were with the German Ocean, flanked on the left hand with the riuer Humber, wherein also their Fleete rid at Anker, and had on their right hand and afront the riuer Derwent; so that it seemed impossi∣ble to raise this siege. (22) But Harold thinking the coasts cleere from all danger, the Equinoctiall at hand, and Nauigation now past, the victuals in his Fleet spent, and notice from Earle Balwin of Flanders, that Duke William meant not his voiage that yeere, was about to dis∣band his Army. When this sudden newes from the North pierced his eare, no need it was then to bid him make haste thither, the case standing so neere him as it did. Therefore recalling his Army, posted to Yorke, and from thence marched against the Norwe∣gians, who lay secured with such aduantage, as wee haue said. Notwithstanding Harold couragiously or∣dered his battell, and assaied to passe the Bridge cal∣led Wil. Malmsb. Henry Hunting. Mat. Westminster. Stamford, built ouer Derwent, which one onely Dane made good for a time against his whole host, and with his Ax slew forty of his men, till lastly this Dane was slaine with a dart. (23) The Bridge gotten, and the English reduced into their rankes, Harold most boldly set vpon his enemies euen in their Campe; where the battaile with equall valour and fortune, was maintained a time, till lastly the Norwegians disarraied and scat∣tered, were slaine outright; and among them the two Chieftaines, Harfager and Tosto, with may others of worth and account, lost their liues. Olane the sonne of this Harfager, and Paul Earle of Orkeney, who kept their Fleet & Seas, whilest his Father and followers fought vpon land, were brought to King Harold, and to haue their liues spared, abiured the Land, and thenceforth to attempt no hostilitie against the Eng∣lish peace; and with twenty small vessels to cary a∣way their slaine and hurt, were suffered to depart, Simon Dun. bringing heauy newes into Denmarke of the losse of their King, and ouerthrow of his Army. Mat. Westm. (24) By this victory thus happily obtained, fell vnto Harold an exceeding rich booty, both of gold and siluer, besides the great Armado of Tosto and Harfager; whereby his mind was soone set aloft, and he began to grow both proud, and odious vnto his Army, the rather; for that he diuided not the spoiles vnto them that had deserued it; a wrong that the common Souldier doth continually murmure at, and commonly endure. (25) Now in this current of King Harolds for∣tunes, William the Norman had the more leasure to strengthen his owne, and often conferring with his Cambd. Brit. Captaines about Englands inuasions, found them e∣uer resolute and cheerefull that way; the difficultie onely rested, how to prouide money enough, the very sinewes whereby the vast body of an Army must be knit, & strengthned: for a subsidy being pro∣pounded vnto the assembly of the Norman States, it was answered, that a former warre against the French had empouerished much of their wealth, that if new wars were now raised, & therein their substance spent to gain other parts, it would be thereby so wasted, as that hardly it would be sufficient to defēd their own; that they thought it more safety to hold what he had, then on hazard of their own to inuade the territories of others; & that this war intēded, iust though it were, yet seemed not necessary, but exceeding dāgerous; be∣sides (said they) the Normans were not by their alle∣giance bound to Military seruices in forrein parts, & therefore such paiments could not bee assessed vpon them. And although William Fitz-Osberne, a man in high fauour with the Duke, and as gratious among the people, endeauoured by all meanes to effect it, yea, and (to draw on others by his example) prof∣fered to set out forty tall Ships vpon his owne Char∣ges towards this warre; yet would it not bee: There∣fore Duke William bethought him on another way. (26) The wealthiest men among all his People he sent for, and seuerally one by one conferred with, shewing them his right and hopes of England, wherin preferment lay euē to the meanest amongst them, on∣ly money was the want, which they might spare; nei∣ther should that be giuen, nor lent without a plenti∣ful increase: with such fair words he drew them so on, that they stroue who should giue most, and by this policy hee gathered such a masse of money, as was sufficient to defray the warre. Then went hee to his neighbour Princes, namely to the Earles of Anion, Poictou, Mayne, and Bulloigne, promising them faire possessions in England; yea and vnto Philip the French King, in case he would aide him, hee voluntarily offe∣red to become his vassall and Leige-man, and to hold England by oath and fealty vnder him. But it beeing thought nothing good for the State of France, that the Duke of Normandy, who already was not so plia∣ble to the French King as was wished, should bee bet∣tered in his estate by the addition of so mighty a Kingdome (the power of Neighbour Potentates be∣ing euer suspected of Princes) so farre was the King from yeelding any helpe, that he secretly maligned, & openly disswaded this his attempt of inuading Eng∣land. This French iealousy, the Norman soone per∣ceiued, which made him to cast about yet another way. (27) For making his claime knowne vnto Alex∣ander the second, then Pope of Rome, with the wrongs done vnto Robert Arch-bishop of Canterbury, by Ha∣rold and his Father, (a text that might not bee read Henry H . without a glosse,) he was so fauoured of his Holinesse (whose See was euer glad to interest it self in disposing of Crowns, that he both allowed well of his enter∣prize, and sent him a consecrated Banner, (Saint Peter himselfe had none such in his Boate) to bee borne in Fox. Acts and Monumenta. the Ship, wherein himselfe in that expedition should take saile for England; and accursed al them that shold oppose themselues against him: for euen then the Popes had began to vsurpe authority ouer Princes, & with their leaden blades to hacke into the iron swords of Emperours. (28) Thus furnished on all sides, he assembled his forces, and with a mighty Nauy came to the Towne of Saint Valeries; which standeth vpon the mouth of the Riuer Some: where a long time he lay wind bound to his great discontentment, and with many vowes importunating the fauour of that locall Saint, hea∣ped Rand. Higden. daily a number of gifts and oblations vpon his Altar; till lastly his desire was obtayned, and then with three hundred Ships fraught full of his Nor∣mans, Flemings, Frenchmen, & Britaignes, waighed An∣chor, and with a gentle gale of wind arriued at Peuen∣sey in Sussex, vpon the twenty eight day of September, where Landing his men, to cut off all occasion or hope of returne, he fired his owne fleete, and vpon the Shoare erected a Fortresse to bee if neede were, retiring place for his Souldiers. (29) At his arriuage from Sea, our Historians Rand. Higden in Polycbr. li. 6. c. 29. report, his foot chaunced to slippe, so that not able to recouer himselfe, he fell into the mud, and all to be∣mired his hands; which accident was presently con∣strued for a lucky presage: for now (said a Captaine) O Duke, thou hast taken possession, and holdest that land in thy hand, whereof shortly thou shalt become King: As Caesar is said to haue done, when hee entred into in vita Caesar. Africa, who from ship-board at his landing fell in∣to the sands, and merily said, I doe now take possessi∣on of thee, O Africa. (30) From Peuensey Duke William departed to∣wards Hasting, where raising another fortification, diuulged to all the causes of his comming, as pre∣tending to reuenge both the death of his Normans, slain by the treachery of Goodwin & Harold, and the wrongs and banishment of Robert Gemeticus Archbi∣shop of Canterbury, pretenses very slender, and en∣forced out of season: but surely had not a third sate neerer his heart, the two former would haue passed without the spleene of reuenge; namely, the donation of King Edward deceased, whereon he built his claime to the English Crowne. And there also by his Edict, he straitely charged his souldiers not in hostile manner, to wrong any of their per∣sons, who shortly were to become his Subiects. (31) Harold in the North hearing of these news, hasted with his Armie (whose Armour yet reaked with the bloud of the Norwegians) towards the south and with such power as possible hee could make, entreth London, where immediately a messenger frō Duke William was presented vnto him, demaunding no lesse then the Kingdome, and Harolds vassalage; vrging the same with such instant boldnesse, that Harolds furious indignation could hardly forbeare, against the law of Armes, to lay violent hands vpon the Ambassador; so great a pride and confident hope had entred the heart of this late Victor: to shew both, with very great boldnesse, he dispatch∣eth his Ambassadors to William, and by way of ire∣full checkes menaceth him, vnlesse forthwith hee departed backe into Normandy: when presently mu∣stering his men at London, hee found them much Wil. Malmsb. lessened by his battaile against the Norwegians; not∣withstanding, many Nobles, Gentlemen, and o∣thers, whom the loue of their natiue Country in∣flamed, did ingage themselues for the field, against his common and dangerous enemy. He therfore with an vndaunted courage, led forth his Armie into Sussex (against the importunate suite of his mo∣ther, who sought by all meanes to stay him) where on a large and faire plaine, scarse seuen miles from the enemy, he pitched downe his battailes, and sent forth his Espials to descry his power. (32) These comming into danger, were caught by the Normans, and presented to their Duke, who commanded them forth with to bee led from Tent to Tent, to be feasted, and dismissed, without any harme or dishonour done. These returning to Harold Mat. Westminst. Rand. Higden. told what they had seene, commending the Duke in his Martiall Prouisions, and his clemency to them∣ward, only said they, his Souldiers seem to be Priests, for their faces were all shauen, whereas the vse of the English was then to reserue onely the vpper lippe vn∣cut, retaining or renewing the old manner of the an∣cient Britaines so described by Caesar: but King Ha∣rold, who had bin in that country, wel knowing their Caesar in Cōment. errour, replied that they were men of great valour & stout Souldiers in fight. Vpon which speech, Girth, his younger brother, a man much renowned for mar∣tiall exploits, tooke occasion to aduise the King from being present at the danger of the Field: for (said he) it stands not with the rule of policy, to hazard all in the triall of one battell, nor to depend vpon the euent of war, which euer is doubtful, victory being as oftē gotten by fortune, as valor; mature delibera∣tiō doth oftē produce the safest issues, & a prouidēt delay is held to be the greatest furtherer of martial proiects; neither will any thing strike greater terror. into the Normans, then thou to be leuying, & enrol∣ling a new Army, whereby they may euer expect, and feare succeeding Battails. Againe (said he) thou best knowest what oath thine owne mouth hath made vnto William; if lawfull, and willingly, then withdraw thy selfe from field, lest for that thy sinne the whole Host perish; for there can bee no power against God. I am free from such guilt, and therefore may the bolder fight, and either defeate this dangerous enemy, or more cheerefully dye in the defence of my countrey; & if thou wilt commit the fortune of Battaile into my Gouernance, assure thy selfe I will perform to thee the part of a louing Brother, and to my Countrimen of a valiant Cap∣taine. (33) This wise aduice notwithstanding, destiny so driuing him, he gaine-stood, imputing it a part of di∣shonour, and not befitting a Souldiour, (as he alwaies had beene,) to leaue the field Coward-like, when greatest glory was to be wonne, or in case of fortunate successe, to be depriued of a part, and therefore re∣prooued his brother for making this motion, and with disdainefull speeches, vnderualued and embased the worth of the Normans. (34) Duke William now entred the field, & both the hosts standing ready for fight, the Norman, to spare the effusion of Christian bloud, vpon a pious affe∣ction sent a Monke as a Mediator for peace, with offers to Harold of these conditions, either wholy to resigne the Kingdome vnto him, and from thence forth to acknowledge the Duke for his Soueraigne: or else in single combat to trie the quarrel with him, in sight of the Armies; or lastly, to stand to the ar∣bitrement of the Pope, touching the possession and wearing of the English Crowne. But Harold, as one whom the heauens would depresse, accepting neither domesticke counsell, nor the Normans of∣fers, referred the deciding of the matter vnto the Tribunall of God, and answered, that it should bee tried the next day with more swordes then one. (35) That next day was the 14. of October, which vpon a credulous errour, hee held euer to bee for∣tunate, because it was the day of his Natiui∣ty, and with hopefull assurance, desired greatly the approch of the same: His souldiers likewise as men whose heads were to bee crowned with the Laurels of victory, gaue themselues to licentious re∣uels, and in riotous banquets, with clamour, and noi∣ses, spent the night; whereas contrariwise, the Nor∣mans, more wisely, and seriously weighing the busi∣nesse in hand, bestowed the time in prayers and vowes, for the safety of their Armie, and vi∣ctorious successe: neither had the morning sooner spread it selfe but their battell was ordered, and pre∣pared for fight. (36) Harold also with the like forwardnes, marshal∣led his battaile, placing in the Vant-guard the Kentish Tho. Ni s. men (who by an ancient custome had the front of the battaile belonging to them) with their heauy axes, or halberts. The Middlesex-men & the Londoners were in that squadron, whereof himselfe with his brother had the leading. 37 His enemies Vanward was led by Roger of Mount∣gomery, and William Fitz-Osberne, the same consisting of Horsemen out of Anion, Perch, and little Brittaine. Their Maine-Battaile consisted of Poictouins and Ger∣mans, Geffrey Martell, and a Germane Pensioner com∣manding them: In the Rere-guard was the Duke him∣selfe with the whole manhood of Normans, and the flower of his Nobility & Gentry; all which battalliōs were intermingled with companies of Archers. (38) The Normans without any confused, or disorderly shout; sounded the battaile, and aduan∣ced forward, discharging a fierce volley of arrowes like a tempestuous haile, a kind of fight both strange, and terrible vnto the English, who supposed their e∣nemy had beene already euen in the middest a∣mongst them; when presently a furious charge was giuen to the Va-ward of the English, who resolutely had determined to couer the place with their bodies rather then to giue one foot of ground, and bending all their forces, kept themselues close together, wher∣by they valiantly, and with the slaughter of many, put backe the enemy: which was so farre from daun∣ting the Normans, that by it they were more whet∣ted to re-enforce themselues vpon them: when with an horrible noise, the battailes of both sides gaue the stroke; and now come foote to foot, and man to man, coped together in a most cruell fight. The English standing thicke, and close, as if they had beene stucke one to another, abode the brunt, and charge of the Normans, and with such welcomes, that after many a bloudy wound receiued, they were at point to recoile, had not Duke William, whose crown lay now at stake, both brauely performed the part of a Leader, and with his presence, and authority restrai∣ned them. The fight thus continuing, the Normans horsemen brake into the troupes of the English, and sore distressed the Souldiers on foot, yet not∣withstanding they still held out, and kept their array vnbroken: for Harold (no lesse carefull to keepe, then the other to gaine a diadem,) as a most valiant Cap∣taine bare himself worthily euery where. The Duke well perceiuing that with fine force, and true va∣lour, no good end could bee got, betooke himselfe to a stratageme, and commaunded his men to sound Wil. Malmsb. Henry Hunting. the retreat, but kept them still in such order of ar∣ray, that they gaue backe in as good discipline as they came on. (39) The English supposing the Normans to haue fled, and themselues the masters of the field, began in eager pursuit carelesly to vntwist, and display their rancks; when on the sodaine, the Normans hauing their wished opportunity, and winding about, char∣ged the enemy a fresh; who now being scatteringly disranked, and out of all order, were slaine down on all sides, not able to recouer their battaile: many thus borne downe, and slaine, none by flight sought to escape the field, but rather to maintaine their ho∣nour in Armes, cast themselues into a round, choo∣sing there to die in the cause of their Country, then cowardly to forsake the Standard of their King: and therefore with bold resolutions encouraging one an other, they turne head and resist a long time: but showers of arrowes like a stormy tempest falling thicke among them, one, most fatall, and vnlucky Chron. de . Wil. Ge . for the English, wounded Harold into the braines through the left eye; so that falling from his horse to the ground, was vnder his owne standard slaine. Mat. Westminster. (40) And yet Giraldus Cambrensis (I know not by what inducement,) relates the issue of this Battaile somwhat otherwise, affirming, that Harold with losse Giral. Cambr. of his Eye, but not of his life, from the field fled to the City of Westchester, and there long after led a holie life, and made a godly end, as an Anchoret in the Cell of Saint Iames, fast by the church of S. Io . With Ha∣rold died his Brethren Gyth, and Leofwin, with most of the English Nobility, besides the slaughter of sixty seuen thousand, nine hundred seuenty foure of their Io n le Tai in his history of . . Bre∣mensis. cap. 169. Maria . Souldiers: Bremensis saith an hundred Thousand. (41) Duke William in this Battail had three horses slain vnder him; God (saith Marianus) so defending his person, that though multitude of darts were thrown against him, yet not a drop of his blood was spilt by the Enemy, and this Battaile wonne with the losse onely of sixe thousand, and thirteene of his men. Whose wodden bowes (as Iohn Rouse is of opinion) gained the Normans that great victory; for the Ar∣rowes I : Rest. shot leuell, or directly forward, wounded the English that stood in the front, and vpright; the other shot on high, galled at the fal, those that were more re∣mote, and the backs of such as stooped to shunne the danger. (42) This battle was fought in Sussex 7. miles from Hastings, vpon Saturday the fourteenth of October, and yere of Grace 1066. Wherin the dolefull destru∣ction of the English fell, and the glorious Sun of the Normans euen in the shutting of the day did arise; when perished the Royall blood of the Saxons, whose Kings first had made this Kingdome into Se∣uen, Math. Par . and afterward of them so glorious a Monarchy, that it was not inferiour to any in Europe, and her Monarchs so renowned for princely magnanimity, as that many of them were ranked with the best in the world: But now the all-ordering hand of God (vnto whose becke not onely this Ball of the Earth, and the Rulers thereof, but euen the Heauens themselues, and all the powers thereof must bow) either for the sinnes of the English which were many, and great, or to graffe one more fair and lōger-continuing bud vp∣on this dried, and decayed stock, brought that forrein ofspring into this his nursery of Britaine, whose branches, as the vine, haue spread both fruitfull and farre; and whose rootes are fastned as the trees of Liba∣non: the Kings thereof, euen from the loines of this Great Conquerour, holding on a royall succession for the space of these fiue hundred forty fiue yeares, their Host. 14. 6. issues topped with the highest Cedars of the world, & their branches spread thorowout al Christendom, which wee pray may still proceede and continue, whilest the Sun and Moone haue their being. (43) This victory thus obtained, Duke William wholly ascribed vnto God, and by way of a solemne supplication or procession gaue him the thanks; and pitching for that night his Pauiliō among the bodies of the dead, the next day returned to Hastings, there to consult vpon his great, and most prosperously be∣gun enterprise, giuing first commandement for the buriall of his slaine Souldiers. (44) But Morcar, and Edwin, the vnfortunate Queenes Brethren, by night escaping the battel, came vnto London, where with the rest of the Peeres, they began to lay the foundation of some fresh hopes, po∣sting thence their messenger o raise a new supply, & to comfort the English (who through all the Land were stricken into a fearfull astonishment with this vnexpected newes) from a despairing feare, shewing the chance of warre to be mutable, their number ma∣ny, and Captaines sufficient to try another Field. Al∣fred, Arch-bishop of Yorke, there present, and Presi∣dent of the Assembly, stoutly, and prudently gaue his counsell forthwith to consecrate, and crowne young Edgar Atheling (the true heire) for their King; to whom consented likewise both the Sea-Captaines, and the Londoners. But the Earles of Yorkshire and Cheshire, Edwin & Morcar (whom this fearfull state of their country could not disswade from dissoyaltie and ambition) plotting secretly to get the Crowne to themselues, hindered that wise and noble designe. In which while, the sorrowfull Queene their sister was conueied to West-chester, where, without state or ti∣tle of a Queene▪ she led a solitary and quiet life. (45) other of the slaine King did not so well moderate womanly passions, as to receiue either comfort, or counsell of her friends: the dead body of her so e she greatly desired, and to that end sent to the Conquer two sage Brethren of his Ab∣bey at Walt who had accompanied him in his vn∣fortunate . Their names (as I finde them In the of the learned Knight, Sir . recorded in n Manuscript were Os god and A ∣rie, whose to the Conquer not without a∣bundance of teares, and feare, is there set downe in the tenor as followeth. (46) Noble Duke, and ere ong to be a most great and mightie King; we thy most humble seruants, destitute of all comfort, (as wee would we were also of life) are come to thee as sent from our brethren, whom this dead King hath placed in the Monasterie of Waltham, to at∣tend the issue of this late dreadfull battell; (wherein God fauouring thy quarrell, he is now taken away, and dead, which was our greatest Comforter, and by whose only bountifull goodnesse, wee were releeued and maintai∣ned, whom hee had placed to serue God in that Church. Wherfore we most humbly request thee (now our dread Lord) by that gracious fauour which the Lord of Lords hath shewed vnto thee, and for the rel ife of all their soules, who in this quarrell haue ended their daies, that it may b e lawfull for vs by thy good leaue, safely to take and carry away with vs the dead body of the King, the Founder and builder of our Church and Monasterie: as also the bodies of such others, as who, for the reuerence of him, and for his sake, desired also to be buried with vs, that the state of our Church, by their helpe strengthened, may bee the stronger, and indure the firmer. With whose so humble a request, and abundant teares, the victorious and worthy Duke moued, answered. (47) Your King (said he) vnmindfull of his faith, although hee haue for the present endured the worthy pu∣nishment of his fault, yet hath he not therefore deserued to want the honour of a Sepulcher, or to lie vnburied: were it but that he died a King, howsoeuer hee came by the Kingdome, my purpose is for the reuerence of him, and for the health of them, who hauing left their wiues and possessions, haue here in my quarrell lost their li es, to build here a Church and a Monastery, with an hundred Monks in it to pray for them for euer; and in the same Church to bury your King aboue the rest, with all ho∣nour vnto so great a Prince, and for his sake to endow the same with great reuenewes. (48) With which his courteous speech and pro∣mises, the two religious Fathers comforted, and en∣couraged, againe replied. (49) Not so, noble Duke, but grant this thy seruants most humble request, that we may, for God, by thy leaue, receiue the dead body of our Founder, and to bury it in the place which himselfe in his life time appointed; that we cheered with the presence of his body, may thereof take comfort, and that his Tombe may be vnto our Suc∣cessors, a perpetuall Monument of his remembrance. (50) The Duke, as he was of disposition gracious, and inclined to mercy, forthwith granted their de∣sires: whereupon they drew out store of gold to pre∣sent him in way of gratulation; which he not only vt∣terly refused, but also offered them plenty to supply whatsoeuer should be needfull for the pompe of his funerall, as also for their costs in trauell to and fro; giuing strait commandement that none of his Soul∣diers should presume to molest them in this their bu∣sinesse, or in their returne. Then went they in haste to the quarry of the dead, but by no meanes could finde the body of the King, for that the countenances of all men greatly alter by death; but being maimed and imbrued with bloud, they are not knowne to be the men they were. As for his other regall Ornaments, which might haue shewed him for their King, his dead corps was despoiled of them, either through the greedy desire of prey, (as the manner of the Field is) or to be the first bringer of such happy newes, in hope of a Princely reward; vpon which purpose ma∣ny times the body is both mangled and dismembred: and so was this King after his death by a base Soul∣dire, gasht and hackt into the legge, whom Duke Wil∣liam rewarded for so vnsouldier like a deed, casshie∣ring him for euer out of his wages and wars. So that Harold lying stript, wounded, bemangled, and goa∣red in his bloud, could not be found or known, till they sent for a woman named Editha, (for her pas∣sing beauty surnamed Swan-shals, that is, Swans-necke, whom he entertained in secret loue before he was King, who by some secret marks of his body to her well knowne, found him out; and then put into a coffine, was by diuers of the Norman Nobility ho∣nourably brought vnto the place, afterward called Battle-bridge, where it was met by the Nobles of Eng∣land, and so conueied to Waltham, was there solemn∣ly, and with great lamentation of his mother, roial∣ly interred, with this rude Epitaph, well beseeming the time, though not the person. Heu cadis hoste fero, Rex à Duce Rege futuro, Par paris in gladio, milite & valido. Firmini iusti lux est tibi, lucc Calixti; Pronior hinc super as, h c superatus eras. Ergo tibi requiem deposcat vtrumque perennem: Sicque precetur eum, quod colit omne Deum. A fierce foe thee slew; thou'a King, he King in view; Both peeres, both peerelesse, both feard, and both fearles; That sad day was mixt, by Firmin and Calixt, Th'one help thee to vanquish, t'other made thee lāguish; Both now for thee pray, and thy Requiem say; So let good men all, to God for thee call. (51) This Kings raigne was not so ful of dayes as of great troubles: being but the space of nine months Sigebertus Wil. Gemitticen G lt. Couen. . Woodbridge. and nine dayes, in whom was completed the Period of the Saxons Empire in Britaine, after they had con∣tinued from their first erected kingdome by Hengist in Kent, the space of sixe hundred and tenne yeeres, without any reuersement or interruption sauing the small Inter-Raignes of these three Danish Kings, of whom we haue spoken. And although Aimund of Breme, in the fauour of his Danes, sharply taxeth this Aimund. Brem. chap. 1 9. Harold as being an impious man, and for that by v∣surpation he aspired to the Crowne, yet doth Ealred the Abbot of Riuanxe, (the Legender of S. Edwards life) much commend him for his courteous affabi∣lity, Allured Ri l∣le . gentle deportment, and Iustice, and for his warlike prowesse none matchable vnto him; and was reputed (saith hee) verily a man passing well furnished with all vertues befitting a Soueraigne commander, and borne euen to repaire the decaied state of England; had he not, in the haughtinesse and opinion of his own valour and pru∣dence, so much addicted himselfe to his owne resolu∣tions, and too much neglected the wise deliberations of his best friends and counsellers. His Wiues. (52) The first wife of Harold, whom he had maried and buried before he was King, I find not named by any of our writers; but that he had such a one, appea∣reth, where it is recorded that hee was a Widower, what time he contracted the Conquerors daughter; and that also he had children of such age, that they made warres against King William in the second of his Raigne; which it is probable, he had not by Editha, his Swannes neck, but were legitimat, and by this law∣full, though namelesse Mother. (53) Algith, the second wife to King Harold, was the widow of Gruffith ap Lhewelyn King of North-Wales, the sister of Edwine and Morcar Earles of Yorkeshire, and Chester, and daughter of Algar sonne of Leofrick, son of Leofwine, all Earles of Chester, Lei∣cester and Lincolne: She was married vnto him beeing then but Duke, in the last yeare of Edward Confessors raigne, and of Grace 1065. neither did shee long en∣ioy him, or her Queenly title, after his aspiring to the Crowne; for being resident in London when hee was slaine, from thence shee was conueyed by her bre∣thren to Westchester, where she remained in meane e∣state, and in good quiet (which vsually most attends the meanest) without any princely shew or name, du∣ring the rest of her life, which lasted a great part of the Conquerors raigne. His Issue. (54) Goodwine the eldest sonne of King Harold, be∣ing growne to some ripenesse of yeares in the life of his Father, after his death and ouerthrow by the Con∣querour, tooke his brother with him, and fled ouer in∣to Ireland: from whence he returned, and landed in Sommersetshire, slew Ednoth (a Baron sometime of his Fathers) that encountred him, and taking great preyes in Deuon-shire and Cornewall, departed till the next yeare. When comming againe, hee fought with Beorn an Earle of Cornwall, and after retired into Ire∣land, and thence went into Denmarke to King Swayn his Cosen-German, where he spent the rest of his life (55) Edmund, the second sonne to King Harold, went with his Brother into Ireland, returned with him into England, and was at the slaughter and ouerthrow of Ednoth, and his power in Sommer∣setshire; at the spoiles committed in Cornwall and Deuonshire; at the conflict with the Cornish Earle Be∣orn; passed and repassed with him in all his voiages, inuasions and warres, by sea and by land, in England and Ireland; and at the last departed with him from Ireland to Denmarke; tooke part with him of all plea∣sure and calamity whatsoeuer, and attending and de∣pending wholly vpon him, liued and died with him in that Country. (56) Magnus the third son of King Harold, went with his brothers into Ireland; and returned with them the first time into England, and is neuer after M▪ Ferres Ca b. in Sussex. that mentioned amongst them, nor elsewhere, vn∣lesse, (as some doe coniecture)) he be that Magnus who seeing the mutability of humane affairs, became an Anchoret, whose Epitaph pointing to his Danish originall, the learned Clarenciaux discouered in a little desolate Church at Lewes in Sussex, where in the gaping chinks of an Arch in the wall, in a rude and ouerworne Character, certaine old imperfect verses were found, which hee supposeth should bee thus read; Clauditur hic Miles Danorum regia proles, Magnus nomen ei, magnae nota Progenici. Deponens Magnum, prudentior induit agnum▪ Pr pete pr vita, fit paruulus Anachorita. H re lies a Knight of Danish regal ; He Gr . Magnus hight; great name note of great place: But Magnus left, an A . Agnus mild he prou de, From world bereft, an Anchorite belou'd. (57) Wolfe the fourth sonne of King Harold, see∣meth to bee borne of Queene Algith his second wife for that hee was neuer mentioned among his other brethren, and hauing better friends by his mothers side, was left in England, whereas they were forced thence; neither is he spoken of, during all the raign of the Conquerour, and therefore at his entrance may probably be thought to haue beene but an In∣fant: yet after his death he is named among his pri∣soners with Earle Morcar (his vncle, if Queen Algith were his mother) and was by King William Rufus re∣leased, and honoured by him with the Order of Knighthood. (58) Gunhild a daughter of King Harold is men∣tioned by Iohn Capgraue (the Writer of the English Iohn Capgraue. Saints) in the life of Wolstan Bishop of Worcester, re∣porting her to haue beene a Nunne in a Monastery of England; who, among the many miracles done by the said Wolstan, (which hee numbreth by tale, accor∣ding to the superstitious manner of the time where∣in he liued) declareth, how he restored this Lady to her perfect eye-sight, whereof by a dangerous infirmity, she was almost wholly, and in most mens opinions, vncurably depriued. (58) Another daughter of King Harold not named by any Story-writer of our own nation, is mentioned by Saxo Grāmaticus in his Danish history, to haue come Saxo Gram ati∣cus lib. 11. into Denmarke, with her two brethren; to haue been very honorably intertained by King Swaine the yon∣ger, her kinsman: and afterwards to haue been as ho∣norably placed in marriage with Gereslef, called in La∣tine Iarislaues, and of the Danes Waldemar, King of the Russians: and by him to haue had a daughter, that was the mother of Waldemar, the first of that name King of Denmarke, from whom all the Danish Kings for many ages after succeeded. The end of the eighth Booke. A CATALOGVE OF THE ENGLISH MONARCHES FROM WILLIAM THE CONQVEROVR, VN∣TO KING IAMES, NOVV SO LE MO∣NARCH OF GREAT BRITAINE, WHOSE ACTS ARE ENTREATED OF IN THIS ENSVING HISTORIE. KINGS. BEGINNINGS. RAIGNE. DEATH. BVRIALL. Yeeres Months Daies yeers months daies Yeeres Months Daies WILLIAM I. 1066. Oct. 14. Sat. 20 10 26 1087 Sept. 9 Thurs. Cane. WILLIAM II. 1087. Sept. 9. Thurs. 12 10 22 1100 Aug. 1 Wedn. Winchester. HENRY I. 1100. Aug. 1. Wedns. 35 3 1 1135 Decem. 2 Mon. Reading. STEPHEN. 1135 Dec. 2 Monday 18 9 17 1154 Octob. 25 Mon. Feuersham. HENRY II. 1154 Oct. 25. Mon. 34 8 12 1189 Iuly 6 Thur. Fonteuerard. RICHARD I. 1189 Iuly 6 Thursd. 9 8 00 1199 Aprill 6 Tues. Fonteuerard. IOHN. 1199 Apr. 6 Tuesd. 17 7 13 1216 Octob. 19 Wedn. Worcester. HENRY III. 1216 Oct. 19. Wedn. 56 0 27 1272 Nou. 16 Wedn. Westminster. EDWARD I. 1272 Nou. 16. Wedn. 34 7 21 1307 Iuly 7 Frida. Westminster. EDWARD II. 1307 Iuly 7 Friday 19 6 15 1326 depo. Ian. 22. Sa. Glocester. EDWARD III. 1326 Ian. 25 Satur. 50 4 27 1377 Inne 21 Sund. Westminster. RICHARD II. 1377 Iune 21 Sunday 22 2 7 1399 dep. Sep. 29. . Westminster. HENRY IIII. 1399 Sept. 29 Mond. 13 5 21 1412 March 20 Sund. Feuersh m. HENRY V. 1412 Mar. 20 Sund. 9 4 11 1422 Aug. 31 Mun. Westminster. HENRY VI. 1422 Aug. 31. Mon. 38 6 4 1460 deposed. Mar. 4 Windsore. EDWARD IIII. 1460 Mar. 4. 22 1 5 1483 Aprill 9 Windsore. EDWARD V. 1483 April 9 00 1 12 1483 thered. Tower of Lond. RICHARD III. 1483 Iune 22. 2 1 0 1485 slain Au. 29 Mo. Leicester. HENRY VII. 1485 Aug. 22 Mon. 23 7 0 1509 Aprill 22 Sund. Westminster. HENRY VIII. 1509. April 22 Sund. 37 9 5 1546 Ian. 28 Thur. Windsore. EDWAD VI. 1546 Ian. 28. Thurs. 6 5 9 1553 Iuly 6 Thur. Westminster. MARY. 1553 Iuly 6 Thursd. 5 4 11 1558 Noue. 17 Thur. Westminster. ELIZABETH. 1558 Nou. 17. Thur. 44 4 6 1602 March 24 Thur. Westminster. IAMES. 1602 Mar. 24. Thur. NOS, T FLORENTE, BEATI. THE SVCCESSION OF ENGLANDS MONARCHES FROM THE ENTRANCE OF THE NORMANS VNDER WILLIAM THE CONQVEROR: VNTILL THE REGALL RIGHTS OF THE WHOLE ILAND WERE BY GODS PROVIDENCE VNITED VNDER ONE IMPERIALL DIADEME, IN THE PERSON OF OVR PRE∣SENT SOVERAIGNE KING IAMES, SOLE MONARCH OF GREAT BRITAINE: THEIR SEVERALL ACTS, ISSVES, RAIGNES, ARMES, SEALES, AND COINES. CHAPTER I. W Hat hath beene spoken touching the Originals, Lawes, and Customes of the Saxons, and Danes, the ancient Conquerours, and possessors of this our Iland, may in like sort bee said of the Normans (being abrāch from the same roote) of whom wee are now to write, sauing only that the name is not so ancient, and therfore their Manners may bee thought more ciuill. Through the misty-darke times of which Stories, to∣gether with that of the Romans, and of our Britaines, (wherein no brighter Sun did shine vnto vs) by the assistance of the all-seeing power which bringeth light out of darknes, I am lastly approched to these times of 2. Cor. 4. 6. more light, and vnto affaires of more certaine truth: whose Current to my seeming is made now Nauiga∣ble, by the many writers that haue emptied their full channels into this Sea: wherein, though in respect of my owne defects, and that so many Master-Pilotes haue sailed before me, it may seeme but presumption for me to direct another course, with a purpose to better what they haue so well performed: yet to make a complete History from the first to the last▪ giue me leaue to continue, as I haue begunne. (2) These Normans then, being anciently a mixt Na∣tion with the warlike Norwegians, Swedens, & Danes, tooke their Name of that Northern Climate from whence they came first, which was that Coast of ∣many, anciently called Cimbrica Chersonesus, Nor-way, for that it tendeth in respect of situation farre Northward; and from hence, and the part ∣jacent, the Saxons, Iutes, Angles, and lately e D s, made their incursions into this Land. (3) This Tract therfore as the wombe of cōception, by the dispose of the Omnipotent, after it had produ∣ced those Nations which formerly made Cōquests of Brita , now againe brought forth (as it were) her last∣borne Beniamin, who deuouring the pray in the morning, hath diuided the spoile in the Euening, and hitherto con∣tinued Gen. 49. 7. their glorious fame atchieued; which I pray, may extend to the last period of Times being: For these Normans first by force got footing in France with the Dominion, and Stile of a Duke, and next the Diadem of this faire Empire, the last and most fa∣mous Monarches of the same. (4) These, formerly practizing Piracies vpon the Coasts of Belgia, Frizia, England, Ireland, and France, proceeded in their hardy courses euen to the Mediter∣ranean Sea: insomuch that Charles the Great seeing their roauing tall Ships, and considering the bold at∣tempts they vndertkooke, with a deepe sigh, and a∣bundance of teares, is reported to haue said: Heauie am I at the very heart, that in my owne life time, these Pi∣rates dare to come vpon my Coasts, whereby I foresee what mischiefe they will worke vpon my Posteritie. Which in∣deede proued so great, that in their publike Processi∣ons, and Letanies of the Church, this Petition was added, From the rage of the Normans, Good Lord deliuer vs. This feare, and praier notwithstanding, they C bd. Brit. dra e the French to such extremitie, that King Charlet the Bald was forced to giue vnto Hasting a Norman, Arch-pirate, the Earledome of Ch ters, for to as∣swage his furie exercised vpon his People; and againe; King Charles the Grosse, granted vnto Godfrey the Nor∣mane part of Neustria, with his Daughter in mariage: Yet all this sufficed not, but that the Normans by force of Armes seated themselues neere vnto the mouth of Sein, taking all for their owne that lay com∣prised betwixt that Riuer and the Riuer Loyre: which * Countrey afterwards tooke the name of ▪ de Nor . frō these Northern Guests, at what time King Charles the Simple, confirmed it vnto Rollo their Captaine. (5) This Rollo, as say the Danish Historians, was the son of Guion, a great Lord in Denmark, who with Ro . Albert Krant. his brother Gouri were appointed to depart the Country (according to the Danish customes) to seeke their aduentures abroad, and leaue more roome for the rest at home; but these refusing the order made Polyer. lib. 6. . 1. vpon the King, in which, both Guion the Father and Gourin the sonne, were slaine, and Rollo forced to fly for safeguard of his life, with whom went a num∣ber of Gallants to seeke Fortunes Court, and not a few misdoers or out-lawedmen: whose Acts in England registred by Albertus Kranti s, seeing they vary from our owne historians in circumstances of times; and es, I haue chosen in this place to insert, leauing the credit therof to him the Reporter. (6) Rollo, a Nobleman of Denmarke, (saith he) and too powerfull in his Kings eye, was forced with a Nauy to aduenture his Fortunes into forreine p ts, whose first arriuage, as he saith, was in England, where many of the Danish nobility had formerly tried their valours, and some of them attained to the Scepter, not of the whole, yet of a great part of that ngdom. Indeed, (saith he) England from the begi g was gouerned by one King, as now it is, for the Angle-Saxons had their prouince, and the Mercians theirs, both gouerned by Prouinciall Deputies, but the Northumbrians had a King; as the Scots and Picts also, in the same Iland, had kept their own limits vnder the like Gouernment. Amongst these Northumbrians the Danes had their cheefest abiding, and in this Prouince Rollo the Dane brought first his men on Land, where making warre vpon that Nation, he built both Castles and Fortresses to fortifie himselfe, his Nauy lying vpon the Seas: and proceeding forward into the Con∣tinent, tooke great booties both of men, cattle, and other spoiles, lading their ships as they lay at Anchor: the Inha∣bitants of the Country making head against him, had still the worst. (7) Rollo yet doubtful and in suspence what to doe, desired indeed to returne to his Country, but that the Kings indignation was an obstacle that way: next hee affected to try his Fortunes in France, yet feared the issue would be dangerous, the People being exas∣perated against him, for the harms he had done them: but chiefely the Diademe of England ran most in his minde, though hee knew the hazard was great, to match his small Forces with an host of a King: in which perplexed thoughts, it chanced him (saith my Author) to fall into a sweet slumber, and in his sleepe hee seemed to sit in the Kingdome of France, vpon a high hil, Rollo his dream. bending his headforward to a Riuer which issued from the top of a mountaine, at the foote whereof beneath him, hee Alb. Crantius. saw many kindes of Birds, which washed their ruddy left wings in the same water, where they all fed together, flew a∣bout, built their nests, and at times appointed, brought forth their yong. (8) Rollo awaking from his pleasing dream, imparted the same vnto his consorts, desiring their iudgements for interpretation; which no way satisfying him, hee called a Christian of his English Captiues, a man indu∣strious, and of great Capacity, and of whose deep vn∣derstanding he had a great opinion: this captiue then boldened, (and willing in likelihood, to diuert Rollo from infesting England) told him, that his dreame was significant and good, and did prognosticate the happy successe of himselfe and whole Nation: for by The dreame ex∣pounded by an English Christi an Captiue. this he saw that he was shortly to receiue a quiet pos∣session, and a land of great renown in the Continent of France, and that himselfe should be cleansed in the Lauer of Baptisme, wherein also the ruddy sins of his People should be washed away, as the water had done the wings of the Birds. (9) This interpretation pleased Rollo well, and he easily beleeued that which he most affected, as in the like kinde dreamers commonly doe: therfore proui∣ding all things for France, he set his countenance only that way; yet because he had alredy performed great matters in England, he thought to follow Fortune for his best Leader, and before he departed from so fair a Rollo sendeth to sound King Alstan. land, intended to sound the King by an Ambassage, that so, if he might find him inclinable to a league, he might haue a refuge against future chaunces; if not, then was he resolute to go forward with his iourney: therfore making choice of certaine actiue persons, sent them to the English king Alstan, a Prince of a spe∣ciall religion and holines of life: these hauing audi∣ence, vttered their message as followeth. (10) Wee being men distressed, and driuen from our Country, sought out in banishment an habitation to restin, and going forth, very many followed vs, who incouraged vs to seeke and winne a land by Conquest, supplying vs with strength, and giuing vs great hope of victory: which thing when wee resolued to take in hand, a Tempest of weather draue vs (O King) into these English Ports, where staying a fit season to put againe forth, the Winter withheld vs, and our wants made vs to seeke further into the Land: where∣upon our men, euermore brought vp to the warre, beeing e∣uill intreated of those inhabitants, where moued by such iniu∣ries to prouide for their owne defence; wherein some small skirmishes haue passed betwixt them. Our Prince therefore and Generall Rollo doth humbly require peace of thee, and to be permitted to soiourne in thy Land for a time, and to relieue his company with things necessary, wee paying suf∣ficiently for it: these things when thou shalt grant, hee shall rest content and pacified, vntill the next spring, at which time he meanes to take his intended voyage. (11) Alstenus, not ignorant of the Danish cruel∣ty, and with how great Armies they might oppresse the English shoares, did readily grant what they requi∣red: And also added a further curtesie, saying withall, I doe greatly desire to see your Duke himselfe: and let him not thinke much to repaire to our mansions, for he shall find none amongst vs but his most louing friends. When this Rollo commeth to Alstans Court was signified to Rollo, choosing out the tallest and goodliest persons of his company, and such as were of greatest wisedom, with them he very ioyfully mee∣teth the King, is entertained, presents him with great gifts, but receiueth greater: Then sitting downe to talke and commune: (12) I am (saith King Alstenus) right gladde, most worthy Duke Rollo, to see you in this my Court. The re∣nowne of your Nation hath beene related to mee, a Martiall kind of Peopleyee are, and infight vnconquerable. And you your selfe also for your prowesse, are not vnnoted among the rest of your famous Worthies: your valiant exploits are well knowne vnto vs: It is right pleasing vnto vs to enter Will. Gemetic. lib. 2. cap. 6. Alstans bounty to Rollo. with such men into amitie. Behold our whole kingdome is before you, choose out a seate for your selfe, and your people wheresoeur you best like, for wee will haue an euerlasting league between vs. (13) Rollo, glad of so faire promises, replied: Most worthy and renowmed King, I highly esteem of your boun∣tifull and most liberall proffers: God grant a happy suc∣cesse of our affaires. I doe thinke myselfe most bounden & deuoted to your worthines; and if destinie euer answer to our desires, we will not be vnthankfull for this your so great benignity. To seate ourselues in your kingdome, though in∣deede we are very willing, and your Royall proffers do much more incite vs, yet Fate doth not permit it. I haue determi∣ned (and will certainly performe,) to goe into France. For your gifts bestowed on me, I esteeme them in the highest de∣gree: and right well content I am to haue a perpetuall League with you, that the like Fortune may betide vs both, the one to be a safeguard to the other. This I both offer, and accept of. I his League God grant may to vs both proue hap∣py and fortunate. (14) With such like interchanges the time much spent, and night drawing on, they were brought to banquet: And early the next morning, comming forth of their lodgings, most louingly embraced each other, when each gaue & receiued presents best suting with their estates and occasions. Neither doth Krant∣zius stay his penne there, but proceedeth to particu∣lar affaires betwixt these two Princes, without the concurrence of any of our owne writers. (15) As how the English rose in Armes against Alste∣nus their King, taking oportunity of the time, for that Rollo (whom they knew to bee ioined in a most strait confederacy with their Soueraigne) beeing then im∣ployed in the warres of France, could not come or send to his aide: Alstenus therefore oppressed with a tumultuous kingdome, remembred Rollo his faithful friend, and sending Ambassadors declared vnto him Alstane faith to his friend. what distresse he was in; who not vnmindfull of the firme league betwixt them, left his French wars, and prepared for England with all his Forces; where en∣tring the Iland, he easily quieted the tumultuous re∣bels, ransacking their Cities, curbing their wildenes, and so reducing them at last to an orderly subiection. For which his great loue, care, & pains, the King not vnthankful, resolued to requite him with the halfe of his kingdom, appointing the Cities and limiting the bounds, which each of them should rule and go∣uerne as their owne possessions. (16) Rollo in the meane time, as carefull of the pea∣ces continuance, as regardlesse of so great remunera∣tions, taketh pledges of the Rebels for securing their loialtie to the King, and peaceable bearing towards himselfe; vpon accomplishment whereof, repairing to Alstenus he thus bespake him. (17) Seeing (King Alstenus) you haue so highly re∣warded me, both with princely entertainment, and boun∣tifull presents, I can doe no lesse, then willingly bestow vpon you these my paines for your safetie: it i no more then your deserts doe challenge; neither will I accept, or seeme so vn∣courteous as to expect, for my paines, any part of your do∣minion. Your selfe now may well gouerne it; for France calles for my presence: keepe therefore those your Pledges, brought to you by your Subiects, and there is no doubt but you shall hence-forward gouerne your Kingdome in a set∣led and contentfull quietnesse. (18) The King could not containe those his eies, which now beheld in a stranger so strange and vnex∣empled kindnes, from resoluing into teares: giuing him both hearty thanks, and rich gifts, seeing hee could not fasten on him any portion of his King∣dome: of whom, all that Rollo desired was this, that he would giue licence to such voluntary Souldiers as would goe with him into France: whereto Alsten, rea∣dy in all things to gratifie his desire, gladly conde∣scended, and furnished him with attendants. (19) But leauing Krantius the Dane, as likewise Geme∣ticensis the Norman, to fauour their Country, & these their reports, to the best liking of the iudicious; most certaine it is, that the French King Charles, commonly called the Simple, gaue the Duchie of Normandy with his daughter Gilla (whose mother was Aeguina, the Rollo the first Duke of Nor∣mandy. Angiers Records. M. S. daughter of Edward the Elder, King of England) vnto Rollo the Dane, as is recorded in an old manuscript belonging to the Monastery of Angiers. And when Rollo was baptized, Charles receiuing him for his God-sonne at the Font, he was there required to doe homage for his Dukedome receiued, and inioined Rand. Higden. lib. 6. cap. 1. therein to kisse the Kings foot, which hee did, but with some disgrace to King Charles, and bound it with an oath that hee did not receiue it vpon cour∣tesie. (20) This Rollo by his second wife Popee, (for Gilla died childlesse) daughter to the Earle of Bessin and Baileulx, had a sonne named William, surnamed Long∣espee, and a daughter called Girl ta, who was after∣wards married to the Duke of Guyan. (21) William Long-espee (so called of the Long Sword William Longe∣spee, second Duke of Nor∣mandy. he vsually wore) the second Danish Duke of Nor∣mandy, took vnto wife Sp rta the daughter of Hubert, Earle of Se tlis, by whom hee had onely Richard his sonne: this William receiuing baptisme, receiued therewith a new name, and was thenceforth called Robert, who hauing gouerned his Dukedome with great moderation the space of twenty yeeres, was guilefully murthered by the working of Lewes King of France, to the great griefe of his people, who so far followed the reuenge, that they intercepted Lewes in the Citie Roth mage, and deteined him their prisoner, Polycr. till he agreed to these Articles: That young Richard should succeed his slaine Father in the foresaid Duke∣dome; and that thenceforth when the King & Duke should conferre together, the Duke should bee girt with his Sword, and the King disabled either of Sword or knife: to which Lewes yeelded vpon his corporall oth. (22) Richard thus established, gouerned his Richard I. the third Duke of Normandy. Dukedome the space of fifty two yeeres. Hee was a man of an admirable fortitude, and therefore was called Richard the Hardy. His first wife was Emma. Wal g. Ypodig. Neust. Agnes, daughter to Hughle Grand, Earle of Paris, Lord Ab∣bat of Germans, and Father to Hugh Capet of France; but she dying issuelesse, he secondly married G or, a Gentlewoman of the Danish bloud, (whom he had kept his Concubine before) by whom he had three sonnes and three daughters: the first was Richard that succeeded in his dominions; the second was Robert Archbishop of Roan; and the third was called Mali∣ger: his daughters were Hawisa, the wife of Geffrey Earle of Britaine, and mother to Alane and Or, , Wals. ibi. Guye his sonnes. Mand espoused Or, . ibi. Euldes Earle of Chartiers and Blois: and Emma called the Flower of Normandy, was Queene of England, both by the English King Ethelred, and Canutus the Dane, to both which shee was married. (23) Richard the second, surnamed the Good, was Richard . the fourth Duke of Normandy. Ran. Higden callth him Ri∣chard the third. the fourth Duke of Normandy, and ruled the same for twenty foure yeeres: In whose time the Normans began to be great, and gracious in England, the mar∣riage of his Sister making their way: his first wife was Iudith the Sister of Geffrey Earle of Britaigne, by whom he had issue, Richard, the first Duke of Nor∣mandy, and Robert the sixt, William a Monke, and Ni∣cholas Abbot of S. Andrewes: his daughters by her were, Alice, that died yong, and another of the same name maried to Reinold, Earle of Burgoine, and Elea∣nor espoused to Baldwin the fourth Earle of Flanders, who bare vnto him Baldwin the fifth, father of Maud that was Queene of England, and wife to the Conque∣rour. (24) The second wife to Duke Richard the second; was Estrike, Sister to Canute King of England, from whom he purchased a Diuorce, without any issue be∣gotten on her body; and then taking for his thrid wife a faire Gentlewoman named Pauia, had issue by her William Earle of Arques, and Mauger Archbishop of Roane. (25) Richard the third of that name, and fifth Richard 3. the fifth Duke of Normandy. Duke of Normandy, in the second yeere of his Duke∣dome died an vntimely death, not without suspition of Poyson, ministred by Robert his younger brother, who presently was inuested in the Dutchie, for that he left no issue of his body to succeed. (26) This Robert (Duke Richards Brother) was a man of a magnanimous spirit, and of such bounte∣ous Robert . the sixt Duke of Nor∣mandy. liberality as is vncredible. Hee comming to the City Phalesya in Normandy, chanced to see a most goodly and beautifull damosell, dancing among o∣thers of her familiar consorts; her name was Arlet, of meane parentage (the daughter of a Skinner, saith Ran. Higden. in Polycr. lib. 6. c. . Higden) whose pleasing feature and comely grace so pleased the Duke, that taking her to his bed, he be∣got on her, William his onely sonne, (who proued the onely man of the Normans blood) and after vpon a remorse of conscience, vndertooke a pilgrimage vn∣to Ierusalem, from whence hee neuer againe re∣turned. Arlet in Roberts life time was married to Herlaine a Norman Gentleman, but of meane sub∣stance; to whom he bare Odo Bishop of Baion, by his halfe-brother William created Earle of Kent; and Ro∣bert created Earle of Mortaigne, a man of a dull and grosse wit; & a daughter named Emma, wife to Richard Wil. of Roan. count of Auranches, (a Prouince in Normandy,) the mother of Hugh Lupus Earle Palatine of Chester. And thus farre bre ly I haue thought good to prosecute the Line of the Normans, for the better illustration of our English Stories. (27) Duke Robert intending his pious pilgri∣mage vnto the holy land, assembled all his Nobility Wil. Malmsb. li. 3. ca. 1. vnto the City Fiscan, where he caused them to sweare fealty vnto sonne William, being then but seuen yeares old, committing him to the Gouernance of one Gilbert, an Earle of much integrity and prudence, and the defence of that Gouernment vnto Henry the French King, and so in the eight yeare of his Duke∣dome, set on his voyage for Ierusalem; who entring Iurye, and not able to trauaile, was born in a litter vp∣on the Saracens shoulders, and neere vnto the Citie, meeting a returning Pilgrime, desired him to report Rand. Higden Polyc. lib. . cap. in his Country what he there saw, which is, (said hee) that I am carried to Heauen vpon the Diuels b cke: but so farre was he borne that he neuer returned, be∣ing preuented by death: which the Norman Peeres hearing, made vse thereof for their owne ambitious ends, without any regard of young William their Pu∣pill and Soueraigne, and grown into factions, great∣ly troubled the Peace of their Country, wherein Earle G bert the Protector was slaine, by Randulphus the young Dukes Cosen-Germane. (28) The beginner of these stirres was another of Wil. Malmsb. lib. 3. his kinsmen, euen of , the sonne of Duke Richards daughter, brought vp with Willam in his youth, and euer in his most especial esteeme; who, vp∣on a vaine hope to aspire to an Earldome, got the aide of the Vicounts, Nigell, and Randulph, but tooke such a fall before he could ascend the highest step, that in losing his footing he lost therewith his head. (29) Strife also arose betwixt yong William, and his Vnckle William the base-borne Earle of Archis. Whereupon King Henry of France, who till then had held this Wolfe by the eare, fearing some hazzard to himselfe, if he should now let him go, thought it best to aid the Earle in his cause, and therefore sent him supplie vnder the leading of some men of note; but William so begirt his Castle with strait siege, that hee caused the Earle by famishment to yeeld vp his Fort, and droue the French with disgrace out of the field: where, with such successe he still prospered, that Hen∣ry now, to secure his own Confines, sent Odo his bro∣ther for Prefect, into those Parts, that lay betwixt the Riuers Reyn and the Seyn. (30) William as watchfull as the French King was jealous, sent against Odo, Robert Count Aucensis, Hugh Gornacensis, Hugh Mountfort, and William Crispine, all of them stout Souldiers, which so brauely bare themselues, that Odo was the first man that made a∣way, and the restof the French saued themselues by flight. (31) William that had sworne a league with King Henry, and in his Minority had euer found him his gracious Guardian, was loth to endanger the breach of his Oath, or the duty that loue and deserts had ob∣liged him vnto; and therefore by this Stratagem hee sought to dislodge the French. In the silence of Night when in the Kings Campe all were at rest, he caused to be cried aloud, the flight of Odo, and his discomfi∣ture, with no lesse terrour then it was; which rang so shrill in the eares of the French, that Henry thought best to be gone: leauing William the absolute Lord of Normandie. (32) Which he valiantly defended, and vprightly gouerned all the daies of King Henry: whose death presently caused an alteration of State; for he leauing Baldwine surnamed the Gentle, and fifth Earle of Flaunders, Tutor to his yong Sonne Philip, the quar∣rell betwixt those two Princes had an end; Baldwine on the one side so working his Pupill, and on the o∣ther the Normane, (who was his sonne in law) that a most firme League was ratified betwixt them, and kept vnuiolated so long as William was a Duke: where wee will leaue him in prosperitie and peace, and proceed in our intendment, as he did in his Conquest here in England. VVILLIAM SVRNAMED THE Monarch 39. CONQVEROVR, THE THIRTIE William the Conquerour. NINTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISH-MEN: AND FIRST OF THE NORMANS: HIS LIFE, RAIGNE, ACTS, WIFE, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER II. B Attle Field wonne with the losse of little lesse then sixty eight thousand men, An. D. 1066 and Harold in Souldier∣like exequies borne vnto Waltham in Essex, & there honourably enterred, as we haue said: William the Conqueror, (for so now may wee stile him) retur∣ned to Hasting, and thence set forward with spoile of the Country, ouer Thamesis towards London. Simon D . (2) Where Edwine and Morcar, the Brethren of the Queen, were in working the English, that one of them should be King, or rather, saith Simon of Dur∣ham, to crowne Edgar Etheling, the rightfull heire, in such esteeme with the People, that he was common∣ly called Englands Darling; vnto whose side most of Lib. . . the Nobles a ered, with the Citizens of London, and the Nauall forces; to which part also ioined Al∣dred Archbishop of Yorke, though presently he fel off and stuckt to the stronger; for the Prelates, though The Pope pow∣erfull to . secretly affecting the right claime, yet terrified with the flashing thunderbolts of the Papall curse, durst not goe forward with their purpose (so powerful was the Pope, euen then to defeat the rightfull heires of kingdomes) but refused to side with the Lords, . . whereupon all their designements were suddainely quashed. (3) For William hauing wasted through Kent, Sussex, Surrey, Hampshire, and Barkshire, came vnto Wallingford, and crossing there the Thamesis, passed through the Counties of Oxford, Buckingham and Hertford, where staying at Berkhamsted, Aldred Wil. . Archbishop of Yorke, Wolstane Bishop of Worce∣ster▪ Walter Bishop of Hereford, with the Earles Ed∣ and Morcar, yea and Edgar himself, yeelded their allegiance vnto the Duke: This curse so preuailing, farre engaged William to the Pope. (4) William intending for London, being on his Trees cut downe to hinder Willi∣am passage. way, found the passage stopt vp with multitudes of great trees, which by the policy of Frethericke Ab∣bot of S. Albanes, (a man descended from the Saxons noble bloud, as likewise from Canutus the Dane) to secure his Monasterie from the destruction of the Normans, were so cut downe: whereat the Duke both wondring and fretting, sent for the Abbot, vn∣der his assurance of safe returne, and demanding the cause why his woods were so cut; Frethericke answe∣red very stoutly, I haue done (said he) the duety both of my birth and profession; and if others of my ranke had Iohn Stow. performed the like (as they well might and ought) it had not beene in thy power to haue pierced the land thus farre. (5) W lliam hearing the bold answere of this Pre∣late, and knowing it was now a time fitter to pacifie, then exulcerate the English spirits, gaue way to the present necessity, and withall hastned (as good poli∣cy required) his coronation, which at Westminster was solemnized vpon Monday, being the day of Christs Natiuity, and yeere of saluation, 1066. where King Williams Coronation. he receiued the crowne at the hands of Aldred Arch∣bishop of Yorke; causing the Bishops and Barons to take the oath of allegiance vnto him; and himselfe likewise at the altar of S. Peters, tooke a solemne oath to defend the rights of the Church, to esta∣blish good lawes, and to see iustice vprightly admi∣nistred, as became a good King; and thereupon chose for his counsell, such men as he knew to bee of great wisedome and experience: next, applying his thoughts for the security of his new gotten Em∣pire; fortified such: places as lay open to danger, William fortifieth against inuasions. bestowed strong Garrisons vpon the coasts, & ships to ride in those Harbours which were most exposed to inuasion. (6) And the better to assure the south of the land (best seruing his purpose, if any new troubles should arise) hee tooke his way towards Douer, the Polydor. locke and key of the Kingdome, as Mathew Paris terms it; that so hee might commaund the seas from his enemies arriuage, and ouer-awe the Kentish a most Math. Paris. strong and populous Prouince. When Stigand ther∣fore Archbishop of Canterbury, and Eglesine the Po∣liticke Abbot of Saint Augustines (being the chiefest Iohn Stow. Lords and Gouernours of Kent) vnderstoode of his approch, they assembled the Commons at Canterbu∣ry, laying forth the perils of the Prouince, the mise∣ries of their neighbours, the pride of the Normans, and the wronges of the Church; all which now were too apparantly seene: the English till then, (they sayd,) were borne free, and the name of Archbishop Sti∣gands perswasion of the Kentish. bond-men not heard of among them; but now ser∣uitude only attend vs, if wee yeeld (sayd they) to the insolency of this griping enemy: These two Prelates therefore, after the example of the vndaun∣ted Machabees, offered themselues to die in the de∣fence of their Country; whose forwardnesse drew the people vnto the like resolution, which by their aduertisements were assigned to meet at a day, the place was Swanscombe, two miles west from Graues end. (7) Where accordingly conuening, and keeping secret in the woods, they waited the comming of Thom. Sprot. the Conquerour, all iointly agreeing, for that no way lay open saue onely a front, to carry in their The Kentish po∣licie against King William. hands great branches of trees, wherewith they might both keepe themselues from discouery, and (if need were) impeach the passage of the Normans: which deuice tooke so strange an effect, that it daunted the Duke euen with the sight at his approch; who being, as he thought, free from the enemy, was now suddainly beset on all sides with woods, whereof see∣ing some before him to moue, he knew not but that all the other vast woods were of like nature, neither had hee leasure to auoide the danger. The Kentish inclosing his Army about, displaied their banners, cast downe their boughes, and with bowes bent pre∣pared for battle; so that hee which euen now had the Realme to his seeming in his fist, stood in de∣spaire of his owne life; of which his sodaine amaze∣ment, the reuerend Prelates Stigand and Eglesine ta∣king notice, & also aduantage, presented themselues before him, and in the behalfe of the Kentish thus spake. (8) Most noble Duke, behold here the Commons Stigands Oration of Kent are comeforth to meete and receiue you as their Soueraigne, requiring your Peace, their own free con∣dition of estate, and their ancient lawes formerly vsed: if these be denied, they are here presently to abide the veraite of battaile, fully resolued rather to die, then to depart with their lawes, or to liue seruile in bondage; which name and nature is, and euer shall be strange vn∣to vs, and not to be endured. The Conquerour driuen into this strait, and loath to hazard all on so nice a point, their demaunds be∣ing not vnreasonable, more wisely then willinglie Wil. Thorne. granted their desires; and pledges on both parts gi∣uen for performance, Kent yeeldeth her Earledome; and Castle of Douer to their new King William. (9) All things established for Englands securitie, and subiection now to the Normans; hee ordained his halfe brother by the surer side, Odo Bishop of Simon Dun. Odo Bishop of Bayeux made Earle and gouer∣nour of Kent. of Bayeux, (whom he created Earle of Kent) and his cosen William-Fitz-Osburne (by him made Earle of Hereford) to bee Gouernours in his absence ouer the Realme; and in the Lent following sailed into Normandy, leading with him many pledges for their fidelity, besides other Nobles, especially such as he feared to be too potent; amongst whom, Stigand Henry Hunt. Poly r. the Archbishop of Canterbury, the two great Earles Edwin and Morcar, Edgar surnamed Etheling, Frethe∣rik Abbot of S. Albans, Agelnothus Abbot of Gla∣stenbury, Walteof the sonne of the warlike Siward Ypodigma Neu . Earle of Northumberland, Roger Earle of Hertford, Rainulph Earle of Cambridge, and Gospatricke Earle Mari us. of Cumberland, were the men of greatest note; yet was hee no sooner gone, but that Edrick surnamed Syl∣uaticus (sonne to Alfrick, the brother of Edrick Stre∣ona, the treacherous Earle of Mercia,) a man of great spirit, and of no little power, aided by the Welshmen, tooke vp armes and denied subiection to the Nor∣mans, The Welshmen tooke Armes a∣gainst William. so that by either partie (as in ciuill discords it euer falleth out) great spoiles were made in many places; but most of all in Herefordshire, where Ro∣bert Fitz-Scroope left to man the Castle, did much hurt vpon the Tenants of Edricke, and he to requite him with the like, calling to his aide Blethyn and Ry∣walhon Kings of Wales, wasted all to the mouth of Matth. West. lib. 2. Wye. (10) These stirres in England called William out of Normandy, and were so distastful to his great, but An. D. 1067 ill digesting stomacke, that hee began to hold the reine straiter, and harder to curbe the head-strong English, giuing the possessions of their Nobles vnto his Normans, and laying vnwonted taxes & heauie subsidies vpon the Commons, then which nothing bred him more hatred, in so much, that many of The lands of the English giuen to the Normans. them, to enioy a barren liberty, forsooke their fruit∣full inheritance, and with their Wiues & Children, as outlawes, liued in the Woods, preferring that naked name of freedome, before a sufficient mainte∣nance possest vnder the thraldome & tyranny of their Conquerors: but in short time, to sustaine their wants, (easily conceiued, but hardly indured) they so fell to spoyle and robbe, that the high waies Warres euen in peace. lay vntrod from towne to towne, yea and priuate houses euery where so guarded with bowes, billes, polaxes, swords and clubs, as if they had been not harbours of peace, but fortresses of warre; when praies were made at the shutting in, and opening of their dores, as in times of open hostilitie. On the o∣ther side, such as preferred vassalage with some hope of tollerable (yea, or vntollerable) vsage, they to curry fauour with the Normans, seeming to forget Mat. Paris. who they were, became as strangers themselues, and did shaue their beards, round their haire, and in arment, behauiour, and diet, a ltogether vnfashio∣ned themselues to imitate them: it being a shame in those daies, euen amongst Englishmen, to bee an The English be∣came strangers. Englishman. (11) Vnto these Malecontents, and voluntarie Out-lawes, ioined Morcar and Edwine, the stout Earles of Chester and Yorkeshire, setting vp again for their Captaine Edgar Etheling (which if in due time at first they had done, might haue proued successefull) who with their complices right va∣liantly for a time resisted the Normans, and in their proceedings put many of them to the sword. King Many Nobles▪ flie out of England. William as carefull and sedulous to preuent further mischiefe, collecting his forces, and not without danger of his life, dissolued their power, so that e∣uery man sought how to saue himselfe by escape: a∣mong whom Edwin and Morcar, Welthersus and Mat. Paris. Mat. Westm. Merther, with some of the Bishops and Clergie went into Scotland. Marleswin, and Gospatrick, Noble-men of Northumberland went into Denmarke: Edgar Atheling, with his mother Agatha, and his sisters Christian and Margaret, tooke the seas for Hungarie; but by contrary winds were driuen into Scotland, where they were most courteously entertained by Malcolme (surnamed Cammor) King of that Coun∣try, who so affected the person and qualities of King Malcolme Lady Margaret. Lady Margaret, that hee entred with her a Nupti∣all contract, and the rather in respect of her pos∣sibility and neerenesse to the English crowne; whose marriage was solemnized about the feast of Easter, in the second of King Williams raigne, whereby Scotland became a sanctuary to the English, which daily fledde thither from the pressures of the Nor∣mans. (12) The Conquerour now perceiuing the oc∣casion of new stirres, sent vnto King Malcolme for the deliuerie of Edgar his enemie; which if he re∣fused, King William sen∣deth for Edgar out of Scotland. hee threatened to denounce open warre a∣gainst Scotland. But Malcolme minding more his owne honour, then King VVilliams threats, retur∣ned this answere, That he held it an vniust thing, yea and (in a Prince) a wicked part, to betray him to his enemy, that came vnto his Court for protection, as Prince Edgar was forced for feare of his life; whose innocency and demeanour toward William, his greatest aduersarie, could not touch with the least suspect: alleadging further (besides the respect of An honourable saying. ordinary humanity, in this case euer religiously to be obserued) the straight bands of their neere al∣liance, which required him to tender the afflicted The loue of al∣liance. estate of his most louing wiues, most loued brother, comming vnder his Canopie, as it were for de∣fence. (13) William thus frustrate of all hope from king Malcolme, and daily perplexed at the flight of the English vnto his kingdome, feared a reuolt & dan∣gerous rebellion; to preuent which, hee caused foure strong castles to bee built, one at Hasting, another at Lincolne, the third at Nottingham, & the fourth at Yorke, wherein he bestowed strong Garisons: and disarming the English of armour, commaunded e∣uery house-holder to put out both fire and candle at eight of the clocke at night; at which houre, in e∣uery Fire and candle forbid at certain houres vnto the English. City, Towne and Village, he caused a bell to be rung, of the French then called Couerfew (that is, Couer-fire) partly yet in practise, and in name verie neer, commonly called Curfue: to preuent nightly tumults that might happily be done. (14) All this his circumspection notwithstan∣ding, could not preuent the troubles that presently M . Westminster arose; for Goodwin and Edmund, the sonnes of the late King Harold, comming with some forces out of Ireland, and landing in Sommersetshire, fought Goowin and Edmund out of freland inuade England. with Adnothus, (sometime master of their fathers horse, but now a Normanist) whom they slew with many others, and taking great booties both in Cornwall and Deuonshire, departed againe for Ire∣land. Excester likewise, seeking to shake off the fetters of the Normans bondage, as also Northumberland, to recouer their former liberties, tooke Armes against whom, King William in all hast possible; sent Robert Cumin, and went himselfe strongly prepared against Excester, which he most straitly beleaguered; at which time the Citizens thought it not enough to shutte their gates against him, but contemptuously taun∣ted and flouted him, vntill a great peece of the wall Ca d D . falling downe by the especiall hand of God, (as the Historians of that age report) they immediately set Excester yeelded to King W liam open their gates, and submitted themselues to his mercy. The chiefe instigator to their disloialty was Githa the mother of King Harold, and sister to Swain King of Denmarke, with others siding against the Normans; who now seeing the yeelding vp of that Citie, shifted themselues out of danger, and got o∣uer vnto Flanders. (15) But fortune to Cumin was not so fauou∣rable An. D. 1068 in the North, nor himselfe so circumspect as va iant; for lying securely, as hee thought in the City Durham, hee was on the sodaine surprised in the night by Edgar Atheling and his followers, where The Normans slaine in the north. Robert and seuen hundred of his Normans were slain, one onely escaping, who brought the bloody news thereof to King William, which hapned in the third Polydor. of his raigne, the twenty eight of Ianuary, and yeere of Christ, 1068. The depth of Winter notwithstan∣ding, he posted into the north; whose only terror dan∣ted all further attempts, so that taking some of the Authors of this rebellion, he cut off their hands and some of their heads, conceiuing hereupon more ha∣tred against the English, and in that spleene of displea∣sure returned to London. (16) Whiles these insurrections were on foot in England, the fugitiue English in Denmarke so far pre∣uailed An. D. 1069 with King Swaine, that they procured his aid to recouer their rights, and the rather, as they allead∣ged, for that the Crowne of England was his, descen∣ding from those that had before made conquest ther∣of: M b. Paris. Mat. Westm. lib. 2. hee therefore sent a puissant Nauie of three hun∣dred saile well fraught with souldiers, vnder the con∣duct of Osburne his brother, and Harold and Canute The Danes with English fugitiues inuade England. his sonnes,: who arrining in Humber, landed their men for Yorke, and wasted the Country all the way as they went; vnto whom shortly ioined Edgar and his associates out of Scotland, so that their Army was exceedingly strong. Whose approch so terrified the Lib. bor. M. 5. Yorkers, that for very griefe thereof their Archbi∣shop Aldred, (who was wholly become the Nor∣mans fauourite) died, and the Norman Garrisons that there kept, lest the enemy should haue any Yorke set on fire by her owne souldiers. shelter or succour, set their suburbs on fire; the flame whereof carried with an ouer-high wind, soone con∣sumed a great part of the City it selfe, and therein, the faire Cathedrall Church of S. Peters, with a fa∣mous Library thereto adioining. (17) The Citizens, and Souldiers thus beset with sodaine flames, thinking to secure their liues frō the fire, did enhazard them on the fury of the sword; for comming vnawares vpon these hardy and well appointed Danes, were forced to come to a disorde∣red The Danes victors ouer the English. fight, wherein though for a time they behaued themselues most valiantly, yet being ouerlaid, were discomfited with the slaughter of three thousand of their men. The Danes, swelling with this prospe∣rous successe tooke into Northumberland, bringing all to their obeisance where they came; and the two yong gallants were therby so fleshed, & incouraged, that they intended to haue marched to London, had not the extremity of winter (enemy to all warlike en∣terprise s) hindred them; yea and William as wil∣lingly would haue beene doing, if the same cause Willims policy to weaken the English. had not kept him backe: but when the time of the yeare was fit for warre, hee gathered a great host, whereof the English were chiefe, this being his poli∣cy, to vse their weapons each against others, wher∣by their strengths might bee lessened, that so who∣soeuer lost, his Normans might winne: these ioi∣ning Wil. Malmsb. battaile with the enemy, fought it out manful∣ly; and lastly, making a breach into a wing of the Danish army therewith so daunted the rest, that all of them gaue backe and fled; Harold and Canute to their ships, & Edgar Atheling by swift horse into Scotland. Earle Waltheof, who with his owne hands had slaine many a Norman that day, was reconciled to King William, now left conquerour of the field; whose wrath was so kindled against these Northerne disturbers, that he wasted all the faire Country be∣twixt Yorke and Durham, leauing al desolate for three∣score miles space, which nine yeares after lay vntil∣led The North mise∣rably wasted. & without any inhabitant; when grew so great a famine, that these Northerns were forced to eate the flesh of men. (18) The Conquerour after these troubles bare An. D. 1070 Polydor. more hatred vnto the English, whose inconstancie (so he accounted their vnquenched desire of liberty) he daily dreaded, especially the Nobles, and men of power; whereupon hee beganne to deale yet more roughly for light causes, thrusting out some of them into exile, and depriuing more of their lands and goods, seizing most part of euery mans reuenews into his owne possession, as gained by a lawful con∣quest, The English ha∣ted and banished causing them to redeeme them againe at his hands, and yet retained a propriety thereof vnto himselfe, by receiuing an annuall rent, and other prouisions and seruices, whereof if they failed, their lands were vtterly excheated to the crown; neither spared hee the Corporations of Cities, Townes, Monasteries, or Episcopall Sees; but tooke from them their ancient liberties and priuiledges, whose redemptions set at what rate it pleased himselfe, soon weakened their estates, which was the onely thing hee aimed at, and therefore often blamed Canutus for his ouermuch gentlenes extended towards those, whom he had conquered, whose steps therein hee ment not to tread. (19) He charged the Clergy with armour, horse Math. Paris. and money, for the maintenance of his wars, wherin the Bishops and Abbots were taxed at very great summes, which hee caused to bee registred and laid vp in his treasury: so that hee did not onely be∣reaue their Abbies and Monasteries of all their gold and siluer, but, by the report of Roger Windouer, Roger Wind. laid hands vpon their Chalices and rich shrines, and for their further vndoing established by decree, that no English Scholler should come to promotion. In which respect also, whereas King Alfred had for the Wil. Malmsb. maintenance of many learned Diuines, (which might in∣struct Ex Archi . Colleg. Vniuersit. Oxen. Tun. Apol. l. 2. his people in the Faith, in their owne vulgar tong) founded a goodly Colledge in Oxford, to be maintained wholly at the Kings charges, which was accordingly per∣formed, and roially continued in all his successors raigns: King William, desiring vtterly to destroy the English tongue, and preaching therein; decreed, that the said annuall expence, should neuer after bee allowed out of the Kings Exchequer, to the great impairing both of learning and religion. To further all which procee∣dings, his holy Father Pope Alexander the second, Wil. Thorne. set in a foote, sending two Cardinals, and a Bishop from the See Apostolike, who in a Councell degra∣ded Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, Egelwine Bi∣shop Marianus. of the East-Angles, besides diuers other Bi∣shops and Abbots of the English nation; depriued for Gerua. Doraber. no euident cause, but onlie to giue place to the Nor∣mans in fauour of the King. (20) The ancient lawes of the land he abrogated for the most part, ordaining new, nothing so equall M. Mils in Will. Conq. nor so easie to bee kept; which his lawes although they neerly concerned the English & therefore ought of them to haue beene familiariy knowne, were not∣withstanding Mard lawes im∣posed vpon the English. written in the harsh Norman tongue, which they vnderstood not; so that many persons, partly by the iniquitie of the law it selfe, partly by ignorance in misconstruction, & often also by the sleightes of Pleaders and Iudges, who might pretend for law what they list, were wrongfully condemned, in forfeiture of goods, lands, yea and also of life, and generally so intangled with their vnknowne in∣terpretation, and tortured with their delaies, tur∣moiles and trauerses, that they rather chose to giue ouer their suites, then to follow them with their endlesse vexations. He caused likewise his Broad seale, wherewith he confirmed his Deeds and Charters, to be inscribed on the one side, to acknowledge him for the Nor∣mans Patron, and on the other, for the English King, as in the sculpture thereof, at the entrance of his hi∣story King William his Seale. is seene, which beareth this sense; This Signe doth VVilliam, Normans Patron show: By this the English him their King doe know. (21) These snares of his lawes accounted the fet∣ters of the Natiues, were by the Nobility sought to An. D. 1072 Wil. Malms. be cast off: for Edwin and Morcar, (the two stout Earles so often mentioned) fainedly reconciled to the King not long before, combining with Frethe∣rike, the bold and rich Abbot of S. Albanes, set vp Edgar Atheling their Generall once againe, and fell into a new conspiracy: William Lion-like storming at the loose, and regardlesse allegiance of these vnsuf∣ferable subiects, daily with fresh attempts so distur∣bing his peace, with a mighty power hastened a∣gainst them, and armed aswell with the spirituall sword of Lanfranck, (then aduanced to bee Archbi∣shop of Canterbury) as with maile of Iron, or coats of steele, laied all barren wheresoeuer hee came: his op∣posites for their parts knowing his purpose, as des∣perately The English rise against William. maintained what they had begunne, and ful∣ly were resolued to make the sword their Iudge. (22) The King by his Spials hearing the en∣crease of their power, and knowing to his restlesse trouble, the vnwilling subiection of the English, en∣tred consultation with his Archbishop; who as Rhe∣hoboams Sag s, gaue him counsell somewhat to beare with their abuses, rather then to hazard the ruine 1. King. 12. 6. of all in fight; and so farre preuailed in this his ad∣uice, that an assembly was appointed to meet at Berkhamsted in the County of Hertford, where the King entring parley with the English Nobility; so far did wind himselfe into their good opinions, (being a very politike, and faire-spoken Prince) that they all forth with laid down their weapons. (23) And hee for his part fearing to lose the crown with shame, which he had gotten by the effu∣sion King William sworn vnto King Edwards lawes. of so much bloud, gaue his oath vpon the ho∣ly Euangelists, and the reliques of Saint Albane the Martyr, (the same being ministred vnto him by Ab∣bot Fretherik) swearing to obserue, and inuiolably to keep the ancient laws of this land; & most especially those compiled by King Edward the Confessor, though (as the euent soone shewed) hee little ment to doe as hee pretended. (24) Peace thus established, among other con∣ferences beseeming such estates, it chaunced King William to demand the reason how it came to passe, that his fortune should bee in one daies battaile to subdue the English, which the Danes before him could not doe in many; to which question whilst each Lib. S. Alban. M. S. in vita Frethe∣ric. stood looking on others, expecting what to an∣swere, the stout Abbot Fretherick stept forth and said: (25) The reason thereof may easily bee giuen, if the occasion bee well weighed; for wontedly the land was de∣fended by dint of swords, vntill that their warlike wea∣rers A good speech ill taken. vpon their godly deuotions, laid them from their sides vpon the Altars of Orisons, which through ouerlong rest are growne very rustie, and their edges too dull now for the field: for, (said hee) the maintenance of martiall men, with a great part of this lands reuenewes, are daily conuerted to pious imploiments, to maintaine and defend these holy votaries, whose praiers pierce more dee∣per then the sword: and therefore thou art obliged ô King, to maintaine their peace, that haue beene the cause of thy so easie purchase. (26) But William before the words were well out of his mouth replied and said, Is the Clergy so rich and so strengthned that the land thereby weakened of her men at Armes, and to keepe onely the religious in safet shall the Laitie lie exposed to the of the Danes, King Williams angry answere. and other forreine Enemies? surely out of your owne mouthes I will iudge you, and for redresse will first begin Lib. S. Alban. with thee: whereupon hee tooke from the Abbey of Saint Albanes all the lands and reuenewes that lay betwixt Barnet and London-Stone. Abbot Fretherick, whose ouerbold answers had now offended the King, without delay called a chapter of his brethren, shew∣ing them their approaching dangers, and to auoid the present storme, went himselfe to Ely, where hee de∣sisted not from his wonted machinations against the Conquerour. (26) This conference ended, and the Kings oath receiued, the English Armies disband themselues, as dreaming they had now good Fortune by the foot and hoping the greatest stormes of their dangers were past; which presently proued but a Vaine surmise: for King William hauing compounded with Simon Dun. Math. Paris. the Danes that lay all this last Winter in Northumber∣land, and paid them a great summe for their de∣parture, beganne extreamely to hate the rebels, and with full resolution of their destruction, suddainely King William worketh vpon aduantage. set vpon them apart, which he durst not attempt, when they were vnited, so that slaying many, im∣prisoning others, and prosecuting all of them with fire & sword, wel was he that could be first gone. (27) Edgar Etheling got again into Scotland, and Edwin Earle of Yorkeshire following with the like in∣tent, was slaine in the way by his owne souldiers; Ran. Higden. Henry Hunt. Math. Paris. Egelwin Bishop of Durham, Morcar Earle of Che∣ster, Siward surnamed Bran, and Hereward (a verie valiant Knight) got into the Ile of Ely, relying wholly The Ile of Ely fortified against William. on the aduantage of the place. This Hereward had receiued a hallowed sword, and benediction of his vnckle the Abbot of Peterbo∣row, and had most valiantly defended his owne in∣heritance against the Normans, and with no lesse Ingulphus. couragewithstood the Conquerour, being made cap∣taine of those now assembled. (28) But the King lest delay should giue them ad∣uantage, and harbor more of such his vnbrideled subiects, with a great power hasted thitherward, & stopping vp the East passage from all flight, or re∣liefe, King William as∣saulteth the Ile of Ely. drew a causy on the west through the deepe Fennes, euen two miles of length, where likewise he then built the Castle of Wisbech: against which, Roger Wind. they in the Ile raised another of timber and turffes, and called it according to the name of their Cap∣taine, Hereward: at which place, many assaultes & bickerings being made, but yet no entrance gotten, Morcar by boat escaped out of the Ile, and in Scotland obtained by price, what these distressed could not by praier; so that Malcolme the King, in rescue & reuenge of them, inuaded Cumberland, and forraged all Theis∣dale: Hereward also went out of the Ile, and got a The Scots in∣uade Cumber∣land gallant crew of choise and youthfull souldiers, which stood most stoutly for the defence of their liberties. (29) In the meane while, the Monkes, oppressed with miseries, sued for mercy vnto the King, & Thur∣stan the Abbot repairing to Warwick, where William then lay, offered him entrance vnto the Ile, if hee The Abbot would hold his, howso∣euer the rest fa∣red. would restore to their Abbey the ancient possessions: the King then reioicing, to obtaine that by wit, which Canutus could not do by maine strength, ac∣corded to the request, and in great hast, but no little difficulty, got into the Ile, where slaying a thou∣sand of the Common sort, hec vsed great cruelty a∣gainst the better, imprisoning many, and dismem∣bring others, some of their hands, some of their eies and some of their feete. Egelwine Bishop of Durham hee imprisoned, first at Abington, then at VVestmin∣ster, whose diet was either so sparing, or stomack so great in forbearance, or both (for both are repor∣ted) that ere long he died of hunger. (30) Howsoeuer the Monkes of Ely kept their promise with William for betraying of the Ile; he con∣trariwise brake his for their preseruation and peace; Iohn Stow. for by no means their praiers would enter his eares, t l the sound of seuen hundred markes had opened the way; to collect which, they were forced to f ll A small peece of made more pa . both the iewels and ornaments of their Church: which being brought to his receiuers, there wanted (whether by error or deceit) a groat in weight (form those daies greater summes passed by weight, not by tale,) whereof when the King vnderstood, hee in greate (but captious) rage, denied them all com∣position for peace, whereupon with much suite he was entreated to accept of a thousand Markes more, to raise which, they disfurnished their Monastery euen of things of necessary vse. (31) But the English Fugitiues, who had gotten the Scots to stick to them, were not yet pacified, but entring into Cumberland, they wasted the Coun∣try before them vnto the Territories of Saint Cuth∣bert, & city of Durham; to meet whom, King Wi am sent Gospatrick, who lately reconciled to his fauour▪ and created Earle of Northumberland, shewed the like measure of cruelty vpon the Scotish Abetters, they had done against the English. The Conqueror The English en∣ter into land with small successe. therefore not a little moued against King Malcolme, for that his Country was a receptacle of his Rebelli∣ous Subiects, and himselfe now the cheife Leader of the Male-contents into his Kingdome, hasted into Scotland with a desire and purpose, to haue done much more then hee was able to accomplish: for entring Galloway, hee more wearied his Souldi∣ers Polydor. in passing the Marish grounds and mountaines, then with encounter or pursuite of the Enemy, so that hee was forced to giue ouer his enterprize, and then drew his forces towards Lothiam, where King Malcolme and his English late, being fully resolued, there to end by battaile, either his troubles; or his life. (32) But Malcolme wisely considering the euent of warre and that the occasion thereof was not for his Matth. Par . own subiects, but for a sort of forraine fugitiues, be∣ganne to thinke, that the wrongs therein done to another hee could hardly brooke himselfe, and sent therefore to William proffers of peace; whereunto Henry Hunt. Gemeticensis. lastly the English King inclined and hostages deliue∣red vpon further Conferences, what time (as I take it) vpon Stane-more, not far from an homely hostile∣rie A stone Cross erected for a Meere marke to both the Kingdomes. called the Spittle, a Stone-Crosse (on the one side of whose shaft stood the picture, and armes of the King of England, and on the other the Image & armes of the King and Kingdome of Scotland, vp∣on Hector Boetius. that occasion called the Roi-crosse) was ere∣cted, * That is, Kings. Crosse. to shew the Limits of either kingdome; some ruines of which Metre-marke are yet appearing; for King William, granting Cumberland vnto Malcolme, to hold the same from him, conditionally that the Cambden Brit. Scots should not attempt any thing preiudiciall to the Crowne of England, (for which King Malcolme did him homage, saith Hector Boetius the Scotish writer) and the English being reconciled to his fauour, af∣ter Hector oet. lib. 12. Cap. 10. hee had built the Castle of Durham, returned as cleared from all Northren troubles. (33) But his Norman Dukedome, stirred som∣what vnto rebellion, called King William into those An. D. 1074 parts, where, by the prowesse of the English, hee soone brought all things to peace, and returned for England, better conceiting of that Nation, especially of Edgar Etheling, whom he courteously receiued and Wil. Malms. Math. Paris. honorably maintained in is Court, allowing him a pound waight of Silu euery day to spend; a rare The bounty of King William towards Edgar Etheling. example of a victorious Conquerour shewed vpon a man so vnconstant, (who twice had broken his oath of fidelity) and dangerous to be so neere vnto his per∣son, being, as he was, a Competitor of his Crowne. (34) Whiles the King was in Normandy, Ralph de Ware Earle of Suffolke and Norfolke, tooke to wife Emma the daughter of William Fitz-Osberne, and sister to Roger Earle of Hereford cosen to King William, and that without his consent; by whose affinity he con∣ceiued no small pride, and euen on the wedding day, when wine had well intoxicated the braine, with a long circumstance perswaded his Guests vnto a Re∣bellion; vnto whom yeelded oger Earle of Hereford, his Brides brother, and Waltheof Earle of North-ham∣pton, I n Stow. with many other Barons, Abbats and Bishops: But the next morning, when Earle Waltheof had con∣sulted A conspiracy intended and reuealed. with his Pillow and awaked his wits to per∣ceiue the danger whereunto he was drawne, repaired straightwaies to Archbishop Lanfranke, who was left Gouernour of the Land in King Williams absence, re∣uealing vnto him their Conference and Treasons in∣tended, by whose aduice he went ouer into Norman∣die, and there with submissiue repentance, shewed the King what these Lords and himselfe had intended. (35) The Earles therefore of Norfolke and Here∣ford, whose state now lay open to chaunce, as despe∣rate men tooke themselues to Arms, & sought how to vnite their two powers into one. This sudden sound of warre soone roused the Subiects, so that Wolstane Bishop of VVorcester, and Egelwine Abbat of Mat. Westm. Henry Hunt. Simon D . Euesham hauing called to their aide Walter Lacie, and Vrse the Sheriffe of Worcester, so manfully withstood Earle Roger that he with his Army could not passe o∣uer Seuerne to joine with his brother Norfolke: And he againe was so sore laide at, by Odo Bishop of Bay∣eux, and Geffrey Bishop of Constance, (who had assem∣bled Iohn Pike. a mighty Army both of English and Normans) that they constrained him first to Norwich, where, in the Castle he bestowed his Countesse, and thence fled himselfe into Little Britaine, whither shortly shee followed. (36) William now returned from Normandy and some reliques of Rebellion remaining in the West, he An. D. 1075 hasted thitherward, where, with small adoe hee got William retur∣ning vseth seue∣rity against the English. Earle Roger into his hands, and condemned him to perpetuall prison; the Welsh his Aiders (of whom also were many at the said Marriage) he vsed with great seuerity; for of some he put out the eies, of others he cut off the hands, hanged some vpon gibbets, and he that scaped best, went into banishment; neither Earle Waltheof, notwithstanding hee reuealed the con∣spiracie, escaped vnpunished; for after that the King had taxed him with ingratitude (he hauing formerly restored the Earledome vnto him) he caused his head to be chopt off at Winchester, (although he had before promised his pardon and life) his great possessions be Wil. Malmsb. ing his greatest Enemies; for he is reported to haue been Earle of Northampton, Northumberland and Hun∣tington, thought by the King to be fitter dignities for Henry Hunt. the Normans his followers; and the desire of a new Marriage, moued Iudith his wife not a little to set forward and hasten his death. A kinde-hearted Wife. (37) These beginnings against the Welsh, King William prosecuted farther, entering into Wales with An. D. 1076 Mat. Paris. Matth. West. a strong Armie, as purposing a finall end of those Domesticall warres, hauing so replenished England with his Normans, that hee now promised himselfe security and happinesse of State: To him therefore the Princes of Walles vnable to resist, performed their The Princes of Wales doe ho∣mage to William Homages at Saint Dauids, and with their Hostages he returned as a victorious Conquerour. But the Seas of these troubles now growne quiet and calme, and he at some leasure to thinke on future successe, all on the sudden a cloud arose in the North, which hastily came on and threatned a storme. (38) For Swaine King of Denmarke, whose title Math. Paris. Henry Hunt. Simon Dun. (to his seeming) stood firme for the Crowne, manned forth two hundred tall Ships, whereof his sonne Ca∣nute and Earle Hacon were Generals; for his brother Osborne he had banished Denmarke, that basely tooke money to depart England some few yeeres before, notwithstanding his claime he made still, though for money, still stopped by his Danes: For so saith their owne writer Adam Bremensis, that continuall contention was betwixt Swaine and the bastard, although (saith h ) Will. Malmes. Math. Paris. Polydor. our Bishops by bribes would haue perswaded peace betwixt the two Kings: Yea and Malmesbury, our writer, af∣firmeth, that William gaue bribes to Earle Hacon to begone; though Paris and Polydor report, that when these Danes heard that their fauourites heere were vanquished they turned their Sailes for Flanders, and durst not fight with King William. (39) But now a lesse suspected, but much more An D. 1077 vnnaturall warre arose; for Robert, his eldest sonne, (set on by Philip King of France, who did greatly dread Robert warreth for Normandy. this so hastie grouth of the Conquerour) claimed Normandy by gift of his father, promised to him im∣mediatly after his Conquest of England; a Noble Gentleman surely, but of an ambitious and hasty na∣ture, prodigally spending and maintaining his fol∣lowers aboue the compasse of his priuate estate; him Philip, & his own ill-nurtured Ambition, thrust for∣ward, Will. Malmes. & Q. Maud his mother supplied vnder hād, out of her own Coffers, and King Williams Reuennewes, so that with banners displaied hee entred Normandy in hostile maner, and there by force seised vpon di∣uers places to his owne vse, and so without respect of dutifull patience gained by force the free-gift of his father. (40) King William hearing of his sonne Roberts proceedings, was not (as great cause there was) a little offended thereat, and with a powerfull Army hasted Mat. Paris. Simon Dun. to Normandy▪ where neere vnto the Castle of Gerbory, at a place called Archenbraye, he ioined battle with his sonne; where the fight was sore and dangerous on both sides, the Generals being such men as they were: but in the heat of the foot battels that fought it out resolutely, Robert commanded a power of horse to breake in vpon the Rereward of his ene∣mies, and himselfe valiantly following, chanced to light against his owne Father, and with his lance King William wounded and vnhorsed. thrust him through the Arme, bearing him off his horse to the ground. King William thus wounded & falne, called for helpe to be remounted, storming to see his bloud spilt in his owne land, and against his owne sonne, which neuer had beene in battailes of o∣ther countries, nor drawne by the weapons of for∣raine enemies, and in great rage threatned the re∣uenge: Robert that knew his Father by his voice, hastily alighted, and in his Armes tooke him from the earth, humbly desiring his pardon for this vn∣known fact, and forgiuenes of his ouer-hastie at∣tempt; then mounting him vpon his owne horse, brought him in safetie out of the presse; who ha∣uing escaped so great a danger, and seeing himselfe He bandeth his sonne. for the present too weake to withstand the enemie, left the honour of the field vnto Robert, with the losse of many his souldiers, slaine there both in the battaile and chase, besides a great number that were hurt & wounded; among whom, William Rufus his second Will. Malmes. sonne was one, a man of a better temper, and more filiall regard to his parents, and therefore more de∣seruedly and tenderly beloued then Robert; for which dishonour now done to his Father, and disloialty for his vnnaturall armes, hee bitterly cursed him, and execrated the time wherein he begate him: how beit, others doe write, that for his most vndaunted cou∣rage at that time, issuing and ending in such dutiful and tender care of his fathers safety, hee presently forgaue his former offences, and euer after had him in better respect. (41) These stirres thus qualified, and King Willi∣am returned, he went forward with his former de∣termination; for setling a further assurance to him∣selfe and successors of the English crowne; to which An. D. 1708 The Tower of London built. Iohn Stow. Regist Epist. Ro . end, first on the east side of London (the mother Ci∣ty of the land) he laid the foundation of a stately & strongly fenced Castle, or Magazine of warlike mu∣nitions, intrenched with a large and deepe ditch, now called the Tower of London; the surueyor of which worke, was Gundulphus Bishop of Rochester; about the twelfth yeare of the Conquerours raigne, so much is lessened the antiquity of that Citadell, & credite of such, as would haue it founded by Iulius Caesar; vnlesse (perhaps) we would thinke that King Stephenide. William did onely adde some new fort to the former; being built (saith Fitz-Stephen) with morter tempe∣red with the bloud of beasts. (42) Then to enrich his owne coffers (for hee is Will. Malmes. taxed by Malmesbury to be exceeding couetous) he laid great subsidies vpon the land: and that the same might amount to his great benefite (though with Florentius Wigor. England. Sur∣uaie and gene∣rall Iudgement. the greatest grieuance of the people) hee caused an exact suruey to be taken of the whole kingdome, yea and of euery particular part and commodity ther∣of; so that there was not an hide of land, lake, wa∣ter, or wast, but he knew the valuation, the owners, and possessors, together with the rents, and profits thereof, as also of all Cities, Townes, Villages, Hamlets, Monasteries, and Religious houses; causing also all the people England to bee numbred, their names to bee taken, with notice, what euery one might dispend by yeere; their substance, money & Ingulfus. bondmen recorded: how many yokes of oxen, and plough-lands were in the Realme, and what serui∣ces they owed, who held of him in Fee; all which was certified vpon the oathes of Commissioners. This done, he exacted sixe shillings to be paid him for euery hide of land; which amounted to an huge masse of money. The Booke thus made of euerie Higden. seuerall suruey, was commonly called the rowle of Winchester, (as being there at first kept) but for the ge∣nerality, Stow calleth that booke, Do us Dei. and ineuitable censure thereof, is by Au∣thors named Liber Iudiciarius, by the English, Domesday Ingulfus booke, kept to this day in the Kings Exchequer at Westminster: of which collection Robert, a Poet at Glou∣cester Geruasius Tilbu∣riens. Robert Gloce∣strens. in ancient time, and ryme wrote thus: The King William, vor to wite the worth of his lond, Let enqueri stretlich thoru all Engelond, How moni Plou-lond, and hou moni Hiden also, Were in euerich sire, and wat hij were wurth yereto: And the rents of each toun, and of the waters echone, The wurth, and of woods eke; that there ne liued none, But that be wist wat hii were wurth of all Engelond, And wite all clene, that wurth thereof ich vnderstand, And let it write clene inou, and that scrit dude iwis; In the Tresorie at Westminster, there it yut is, So that vre Kings suth, when hii ransome toke, Yrede wat folc might yiue, hii fond there in yor boke. (43) This exaction was gathered with such ex∣tremity, Englands ex∣actions. & paid with such impouerishing of the Eng∣lish, that they greeuously groned vnder their misera∣ble estate, whereby more hatred grew dailie to the King, and his Normans; whose loue againe to them∣ward was so little, that hee sought by ail means to Iohn Castor. Iohn Rowse. Englishmens re∣proch. bring the English name, and Nation to ruine: for it is noted by Castor, and Rouse, that no English man was permitted to beare any office of Credit, or Countenance in Mat. Paris in G d. Conq. this Conquerours daies, and accounted it was a great shame to bee called an Englishman, or to marry into their blood. (44) These greeuances seeming vnsufferable, the English incited Malcolme King of Scotland once more Simon Dunel. Malcolme inua∣deth England. to enter King Williams confines, wasting all before him vnto the Riuer Tyne; against whom the Conque∣rour sent Robert his sonne, surnamed Courtoise, who marching with a mighty Army, made shew of doing much more then he did; this onely being memora∣ble, that neere to the mouth of Tyne he laid the foun∣dation of a Castle, whereof the towne of New-Castle did afterward take both her beginning, and Name; though long before that time there was a place called Monk-Chester, because (as it should seeme) it had been Cambden in Otta∣ . either the habitation, or possession of some Religi∣ous Order. (45) Neither was Swaine, King of Denmarke, so quailed by his former expeditions, but that he had Simon Dun. Danes prepare against William. a minde once more to graspe at the English Crowne, preparing a mighty Armado that way, as was con∣stantly reported and beleeued; King William therfore Mat. the ance of in ame reteined a great power of French Souldiers with o∣thers, which he had lately brought with him from Normandy, to disburden himselfe of whose Charges, he appointed them to bee maintained at the costs of the English, both for their wages, and other proui∣sions, which was an other great burden vnto the Eng∣lish, though it long lasted not; for that the Danish King better aduising himselfe, gaue ouer the enter∣prise, and thereupon these Souldiers were dischar∣ged. King Williams depopulations. (46) Another griefe and offence he ministred a∣gainst both God and man, for the fruitfull Countrey lying South from Sarisbury vnto the Sea, hee dispeo∣pled, pulling downe Townes, and Villages, with 36. Mother-churches, from mans vse, & Gods diuine ser∣uice; Cambd in Hant∣shire. & for 30. miles, laid open the country some say out of policie, to haue safe ariuage from Normandy in time of need: others say, for beasts, & for his own game in hunting, or to vse the words of Gualter Mapes, who liued immediatly after, to dedicate the same vnto wild Beasts and Dogs-game; which place called anciently Ytene, was euer since named the New Forrest: impo∣sing Gualter M great penalties both pecuniary, and corporall on all such as offended in hunting his Game: in so much that he was then called the Father of wild Beasts, King William the father or wild Beasts. more fauouring them then the People his Subiects. But Gods iust iudgement not long after followed this so vnreasonable, and cruel act: for in this Forest, Richard his second sonne being goared by a Deare, (others say, blasted with a pestilent Ayre) was vntimely slaine: And Rufus his other sonne mistaken Iudgements of God n King Williams in New Forest Cambden. for a Deare was by chaunce shot thorow with an Ar∣row, by Walter Tyrell. Henry likewise his Grand-child by Robert Curtoise, whilest he hotly pursued the chase, was strucken by a bough into the lawes, and as Ab solon left hanging vntill he died. Thus, no doubt, God punished his sinnes (euen on his children, and childrens children) who had both taken away the places, and vse of his seruice, and also disherited multitudes of Christian people to their ex∣treme pouerty, for his vnsaciat and superfluous plea∣sure: so that (as some then thought) the Earth it selfe also seemed to cry Reuenge, when as vpon the sixt of Aprill, and fifteenth of King Williams Raigne, Matth. Paris. a most fearefull Earthquake, with a warring noise, did shake the ground. (47) Other great calamities are noted to haue Calamities fall∣ing on the Land. hapned vpon his people, as burning feuers strangely consuming the people: Murrens deuouring infinit numbers of Cattle; abundance of raine, and con∣course of water-flouds beyond credit, whereby the hilles were so softned to the very foundations, that some of them fell, and ouerwhelmed the villages which were in their way: most of the principall Cities of England much endamaged by fire, and London especially, where the Cathedrall Church of Saint Paul (as much as was combustible) was consu∣med to ashes; and if that may also be noted (which All things dege∣nerate caused not the least wonder) tame, and domesticke fowles, as hennes, geese, peacockes, and the like fled into the forrests, and woods, and became ve∣ry wild, in imitation of men, degenerating then in∣to Roger Wendouer. sauages: for in those times euen the Churchmen (and therefore lesse maruaile of others) became vn∣like Marianus. themselues: Walter Bishop of Durham, bought of King William the Earledome of Northumberland, maintained murtherers, and was murthered him∣selfe. Odo, another Bishop, and Earle also, to reuenge his death, made Northumberland desolate, behea∣ding and dismembring the poorer sort, and at great Pope Gregories Buls against ma∣ried Priests. ransomes fining the rich, and Pope Gregory for his part plaid Rex in this land, sending hither his Buls with damning curses against the married Clergie: commanding that none should heare their Masses: which how it was disgested, either by God, or man, Matth Paris. in G . Conq. let vs heare Paris an ancient Monke (and therefore herein no partiall man) speake his mind. (48) Pope Gregory in a generall Synode excluded the married Priests from execution of their holie Inhibiting of married Priests a new deuice, and inconsiderate. offices, and forbad the Lay-men to heare their Masses; a president new, and proceeding (as it seemed to many) out of inconsiderate iudgement, contrary to the sentence of the holy Fathers: which haue written, that the Sacraments of the church by the inuisible operation of the holy Ghost, haue their due effect, whether they are dispensed by men good or bad, &c. By which fact so grieuous Popish Conti∣nency hypocri∣ticall. a scandall is arisen, that holy Church was neuer rent with a greater schisme in the time of any he∣resie whatsoeuer; whiles some stand for the right, and others striue against it. Moreouer, whereas few obserue this chastitie enioined (for that though some for gaine, or vaine-glory, doe hypo∣critically pretend it; yet many doe heape vp in∣continency with periury, and manifold adulteries) by this occasion the Lay-men shake off all due re∣spect to sacred orders and ecclesiasticall gouerne∣ment; they prophane the holy mysteries, they baptize Infants, annointing them with the sordid humor of their ears in stead of holy oile, they burn the tithes due to the Priests; our Lords body con∣secrated by a married priest they tread vnder their feet, and often doe wilfully cast forth the bloud of our Lord vpon the ground. (49) This Gregory (before called Hildebrand) sate in Peters chaire with such pranks of impietie, that his gouernment was odious to the Romans, who wi∣shed an end of his raigne and life, so that certaine South saiers imploied in that busines gaue forth, that after Gregory, Odo should be Pope. Odo, our said Odo King willi∣ams brother, af∣fecteth the Pa∣pacy. Earle, the Conquerours brother, fed with ful hope that hee was the man, sendeth to Rome to buy him a Pallace, adorning it with stately and ouer-lauish trimmings; Salutes the Senators with great gifts & complements, stuffeth bagges with money, and let∣ters to such as might doe much in the election, and prouides honourable personages to attend him to Rome. Among the which for chiefe, was Hugh Earle of Chester, with many great men and Knights of the land: for the Normans variable, and desirous to see forraine Countries, were contented to forsake their faire lands in the west climate, to accompany this proud Prelate ouer the riuer Poo. This iolly traine was set forward into the Isle of Wight, and there in great pompe ready to set saile into Normandy, when on the sodain King William vn∣looked for, was euen among them, and in his great Hall in presence of his Nobles thus spake: (50) Excellent Peeres, I beseech you hearken to my words, and giue me your counsell: at my sai∣ling King william condemneth his brothers Ambitions. into Normandy, I commended England to the gouernment of Odo my brother Bishop. In Normandy many forraine foes haue risen vp a∣gainst me, yea and inward friends I may say, haue inuaded me: for Robert my sonne, and other yonglings whom I haue brought vp, and giuen Armes, haue rebelled; vnto whom my false Clients, and other bordering enemies haue giuen their assistance: but they haue not prospered, God (whose seruant I am) euer defending mee? neither haue they gotten any thing of mine, be∣sides iron in their wounds: They of Aniou pre∣pared against me, whom with the onely feare of warre I haue pacified. These businesses you know haue drawn me into Normandy, where I haue staied long and imploied my painfull endeuours on pub∣like behoofes. But in the meane time, my brother hath greatly oppressed England, spoiling the Chur∣ches of Lands and Rents, hath made them naked of Ornaments giuen by our Predecessors, and hath seduced my Knightes, with purpose to traine them ouer the Alpes, who ought to defend the His sacrileges. Land against the inuasions of the Danes, Irish, and other Enemies ouer strong for me; but my greatest dolour is for the Church of God, which he hath af∣flicted, and vnto which the Christian Kings that raigned before me, haue giuen many gifts, and with their loues honored, for which now (as we beleeue) they rest, reioicing with a happy retribution in a pleasant State: Ethelbert, Edward, Saint Oswald, Al∣thulph, Aefred, Edward the Elder, Edgar, and my co∣sen and most deere Lord Edward, haue giuen Riches to the Church, the spouse of God: But my Brother to whom I committed the whole Kingdome, vio∣lently plucketh away their goods, cruelly grindeth the poore, and with a vaine hope stealeth away my His Oppressions. Knights from me, and by oppression hath exaspe∣rated the whole Land with vniust taxations; con∣sider thereof, most Noble Lords, and giue mee (I pray you) your aduice, what is heerein to bee done. (51) At which pause when all stood mute, as fearing to giue their opinions in so weighty a point, concerning so great a Person, the King thus continu∣ed his speech. Hurtfull rashnesse is euer vnsufferable, and must at length be repressed. This man hath oftentimes His Trecheries. banded himselfe against his owne father, and vp∣on a stomacke, blowne vp with pride and folly, hath fallen off to the King of France: therefore lest with ouermuch lenity, we buy too late a repentance, he shall remaine Prisoner, yet not as a Bishop, whose name I both honour and reuerence, but as an Earle, subiect to the Lawes and Censure of his King. His imprison∣ment. Which accordingly was done; vpon seizure of whose estate, this Prelate was found so well lined in purse, that the heapes of yellow mettall did moue ad∣miration to the beholders, and many of his bags were His Auarice. taken vp out of the bottome of Riuers, where they were hidden full of gold ground into powder. (52) Soone after, some displeasure hauing arisen betwixt King William, and Philip King of France, hee hauing first generally caused to be taken the Oath of English Alleageance to himselfe and successors, with a mighty masse of money (fitted for some great at∣tempts) Wil. Malmsb. Matth. Paris. departed to Normandy; where falling sicke, and keeping his Bed more then his wont, the French King hearing that his disease was in his belly, gaue him this frumpe; Our Cosen William (said he) is laid Some write King William tooke Physicke to take downe his great fat belly. Higden. now in Child-bed: Oh what a number of Candels must I offer at his going to Church? surely I thinke a hundred thousand will not suffice. King William hearing thereof, is said to make this answere; Well, our cosen of France I trust shall be at no such cost; but after this my child-birth, at my going to Church (swearing by the resurrection and brightnes William Malmes. King Williams Oath. of God) I will (said he) find him one thousand candles, and light them my selfe. And accordingly towards August following, when both the trees, fruites, corn, and ground, was most flourishing, hee en∣tred France with a mighty Army, spoiling all the west parts thereof before him; and lastly, set the City Meux or Mauntz on fire, wherein he consu∣med the faire Church of our Lady, in the wals wher∣of was enclosed an Anchoret, who might, but would not escape, holding it a breach of his religious Stow saith two Anchorits. vow to forsake his Cell in that distresse. The King busied in these attempts cheered his men to feede the fire, and came himselfe so neere the flames, that with the heat of his harnesse, he got a sicknesse, and the same encreased by the leape of his horse, that burst the inward rimme of his belly, and cost him his life. (53) At which time feeling death to approach, he deferred not to addresse his last Will, wherein hee King Williams last Will and Testa∣ment. commanded all his Treasure to bee distributed to Churches, Gods Ministers, and the Poore, limiting to each their seuerall portion and quantity, which he caused to be ingrossed in writing by Notaries before him: Amongst which, he bequethed to the Church and Monkes of Saint Stephens at Cane in Normandy, Ex Libro Cado∣mensis Monast. two Mannors in Dorsetshire, one Mannor in Deuon∣shire, another in Essex, much Lands in Barke-shire, some in Norfolke, a Mansion house in Woodstreet of London, with many Aduowsions of Churches; yea, which is to be wondred at, hee gaue his Crowne, and Regall Ornaments thereto belonging to the said Church; being of his owne foundation; for the redemption whereof, King Henry his sonne, gaue the Mannor of Brideton in Dorsetshire, to preuent any danger that thereof might arise; and vnto the Churches by fire destroied in Meuxe, he gaue great summes of money to repaire them: and so preparing him∣selfe for God, briefly ranne ouer the carriage of his former life; the summe whereof (as much as best fitteth this place) we will declare as he spake it to them that were present. (54) Being laden with many and grieuous sins, (O Christ) I now tremble, who am ready to bee His last Speec on point of death. taken hence, and to be tried by the seuere, but iust examinatiō of God. I that haue alwais bin brought vp in warres, and am polluted with the effusion of bloud, am now vtterly ignorant what to doe; for I cannot number my offences, they are so in∣finite, Of his Sinnes. and haue been committed by me now these sixty foure yeeres: for which, without any delay I must render an account to that most vpright Iudge. From my tender infancy and age of eight yeares, I haue hitherto sustained the weight and charge of Armes to defend my Dukedome, go∣uerned by me now almost fifty sixe, both in pre∣uenting Of his Norman troubles. those snares that haue beene laid for my life, and in vanquishing those conspirers which would haue vsurped my right: a stiffe nec∣ked people I may say, my arme hath still ma∣naged; I meane the Normans, who with an hard hand, if they bee curbed, are most valiant, and in hazardous attempts inuincible: for, as they ex∣cell Of his Normans qualities. all men in strength, so doe they contend to ouercome all men by valour. But if the reine bee once let loose, and laid in their necks, they will teare and consume one another; for they are euer seditious, and desirous of new stirrings; experi∣ence whereof sufficiently I haue had, not only of my confederates and allies; but euen of mine own kindred, denouncing me to bee a bastard, degene∣rate Of his friends & Kindreds vn∣kindnesse. and vnworthy of gouernment: against whom, I haue beene forced to put on armour, before I was by age ripe to weild it: all which I haue van∣quished, and some of them captiuated, God so preseruing me, that they neuer had their desires. A roiall Diademe, which none of my predecessors Of his English Conquest. euer ware, I haue gotten, not by right of inheri∣tance, but by heauenly grace. What labours and conflicts I haue sustained against those of Excester, Chester, Northumberlands, Scots, Gauls, Norwegi∣ans, Danes, and others, who haue endeuoured to take the crowne from me, is hard to declare; in all which the lot of victory fell euer on my side: which worldly triumphes, howsoeuer they may please the sense & outward man, yet they leaue an inward horror, and fearefull care which pricketh Outward tri∣umphes leaue inward horr s. mee; when I consider, that cruell rashnes, was as much followed, as was the iust prosecution of the cause. Wherefore I most humbly beseech you, O yee Priests and Ministers of Christ, that you in your praiers will commend mee to God, that hee will mitigate my heauy sinnes, vnder whose burden I lie pressed, and by his vnspeake∣able mercy make me safe among his elect. Nine Abbeis of Monkes, and one of Nunnes which my His workes of deuotion. Ancesters founded in Normandy, I haue enrich∣ed and augmented; and in the time of my gouern∣ment, seauenteene Monasteries of Monkes, and sixe of holy Nunnes, haue beene founded by my self & my Nobility; whose Charters I haue freely confirmed, and doe by princely authority con∣firme against all emulations and troubles; in them God is serued, and for his sake many poore peo∣ple releeued; with such Camps both England and Normandy is defended, and in these Forts let all younglings learne to fight against the Diuell and vices of the flesh. These were the studies that I followed from my first yeeres, and these I leaue vnto my heires to be preserued and kept. In this then (my children) follow me, that here and for euer you may be honoured before God and Men: And chiefly, O you my very bowels, I warne you to frequent & follow the company and coun∣sell His Counsell to his Children. of good and wise men, and gouerne your selues accordingly, so shall yee long and happi∣ly prosper. Doe iustice to all without partiall af∣fection; for it is a true wisedom indeed that can discerne betwixt good and euill, right and wrong. Shunne wickednesse, relieue the poore, succour the weake, but suppresse the proud, and bridle the troublesome. Frequent the Church, honour the religious, and without wearinesse bee obedient vnto the law of God. The Dukedome of Nor∣mandy, The dispose of his States. before I fought against Harold in the vale Senla , I granted vnto my sonne Robert, for that he Of Normandy. is my first begotten, and hath already receiued ho∣mage of all the Barons almost of his Country: that honour giuen cannot againe be vndone; but yet without doubt, I know it will bee a miserable regi∣on, which is subiect to the rule of his gouernment; for he is a foolish proud knaue, and is to bee puni∣shed with cruell fortune. I constitute no Heire to the Realme of England, but doe commend it to the Of England. euerlasting Creator whose I am; for I possesse not that honour by any title of inheritance, but by the instinct of God, the effusion of bloud, and the per∣iurie of Harold; whose life bereaued, and his fa∣uourers vanquished, I made it subiect to my do∣minion. The Natiues of the realme I hated, the Nobles I dishonoured, the vulgar I cruelly vexed, and many vniustly I disherited. In the Countie of Yorke, and sundry other places, an innumerable sort with hunger and sword I slew: and thus that beautifull Land and noble Nation I made de∣solate with the deaths of many thousands, (woe worth the griefe.) These then my sinnes being so great, I dare not giue the offices of that land to any other then to God, lest after my death they yet be made worse by my occasion. Yet Wil∣liam my sonne, whose loue and obedience from his youth I haue seen, I wish (if so be the will of God) may flourish in the throne of that Kingdome, with a long life and happy raigne. (55) Henry his yongest sonne, surnamed Beau∣clerke, hearing himself vtterly neglected in his Fathers distribution, with teares said to the King: And what King Williams Legacie to his sonne Henry. Father doe you giue me? to whom hee answered, fiue thousand pounds of siluer out of my treasurie I gi thee. But what shall I doe with treasure, said Henry, if I shal haue no dwelling place or habitation? His Father re∣plied, Bee patient my sonne, and comfort thy selfe in God, suffer quietly thy elder brother to goe before thee: Robert shall haue Normandy, and William England: but thou in time shalt intirely haue all the honour that I haue gotten, and shalt excell thy Brethren in riches and power. After which speeches, he presently called his son William, to whom he deliuered a letter signed with He writeth into England. his owne seale, written vnto Lanfrank Archbishop of Canterbury, and commaunded him therewith to hast for England, lest in that spatious Kingdom some suddaine troubles should arise; and so with a kisse blessed him in Christ. His prisoners he commaun∣ded to be et at liberty, affirming that he had done Earle Morcar much wrong, whom as hee then con∣fessed, hee had imprisoned more for feare then for fault; onely his halfe brother Odo he would haue had to remaine a perpetuall prisoner, but that by the im∣portunate intercession of friends hee was released. (56) The period of this Great Conquerour now come neere to his last, when this Sunne so gloriously raised to the height of his course, must now of force set in the West, the dying King (for Kings must die) King Williams death. hauing raised his weake body vpon the Pillowes, heard the sound of the great Bell in the Metropoli∣tane Church of Saint Geruis neere Roan, and deman∣ding the cause, one replied that it did then ring prime to o Lady; whereupon with great deuotion lifting his eies towards heauen, and spreading abroad his hands, I commend my selfe (said he) to that blessed La∣die, Mary, Mother of God, that shee by her holy praiers With such do∣ctrine was good deuotion abused contrary to the prescript of God Isai. Chap. 33. 16. may reconcile me to her most deare Sonne our Lord Iesus Christ; and with the words yeelded vp his Ghost, vp∣on Thursday the ninth of Septemper, the fifty sixth of his Dutchie, the twenty one of his Kingdome, the sixty foure of his age, and yeere of Christ Iesus 1087. (57) Wherein; as we see the instability, both of Mans life, and Glory, (a point fitting for great Prin∣ces euer to thinke on;) so by the sequell wee shal per∣ceiue, how ill-rooted and vngrounded the friendship Princes friends. is, which attends the greatnesse of Soueragnes, whose Fauourites chiefe or onely ends are their own Ambi∣tion and Gaine, the fewell whereof once beginning to decay, the fire of their seeming-deuotion will bee quickly cold. For no sooner had this late-glorious Princes Soule bidden farewell to his Body, but his dead Corps was presently abandoned by his follow∣ers His Corps for∣saken of all sorts. of neerest place, and best meanes, who posted homewards apace to defend their owne; and by the meaner and his inferiour seruants, he was dispoiled of Armour, Vessels, Apparell, and all Princely fur∣niture, The qualities of Court-Kites. euen so farre from al wonted and due respect, as that they left his dead Body naked vpon the floore; like true Kites, praying whilest any thing was to be had. The sudden fame of his death stroke such feare in∣to the Commons harts as was admirable, euery man shifting for one, but all neglecting the funerall rites of their King, vntill that one Harluins a poore Coun∣trey Knight, vndertooke the Cariage of his Corps vnto Cane, and at his owne cost, both by Sea and Land, vnto Saint Stephens Church, which this dead King had formerly founded. At his entrance into Cane, the Couent of Monks came foorth to meet him, and to celebrate the buri∣all with all Ceremonies beseeming; but behold euen at that instant, a sudden chance of fire happened, His Hearse also abandoned of al. which presently inuaded a great part of the Towne, that, as his Corps before, so now his Hearse was of all forsaken, whiles they addressed themselues to re∣presse that furious Element: which done, and the Funerall Sermon ended, the Stone-Coffin set in the earth, in the Chancell betwixt the Chorale and the Altar, and the body ready to be laid therein, one A∣scelinus Fitz-Arthur, a man of some Note, stood vp and forbade the buriall: This very place (said he) was His buriall place denied him. the floore of my Fathers house, which this dead Duke vio∣lently tooke from him, and heere vpon part of my inheri∣tance founded this Church: This ground therfore I chal∣lenge, and in Gods behalfe forbid that the Body of my di∣spoiler, be couered in my Earth, neither shall it be interred in the precinctes of my right. Whereupon they were enforced to compound with him for a present sum of money then deliuered, and with consent of his sonne Henry, for a hundred pound weight of siluer after to be paid, and so the Exequies went forward; when, behold again the Corps laid into the Tombe, was with the largest, which being pressed, the belly Annoiance at his funerall. (not bowelled) brake, & with an intollerable stench so annoied the by-standers, that neither Gummes, Hence Stowe notes their re∣port for fabu∣lous, who wrot that his Body was found vn∣corrupt 500. yeeres after his death. nor spices fuming from the Censures, could be any whit sensible to relieue them, insomuch that all with great amazement hastning away, they left the Monks to shuffle vp the buriall, and they were soone glad to get them to their cels. (58) This then was the life and death of this great Monarch, the Conquerour of Men, but not of Death, nor suruiuing Enuie; a bright example of the dimme glory of man, who in life had the pos∣sessions of Kingdomes and Dukedomes, men at Armes, riches and honour, and all things thereto adhering; but after his death, neither Ornaments, nor Attendants, nor place of buriall, till it were bought; all which, priuate men seldome want: so vaine is the pompe of this world, and so vncertaine the state of her darlings. (59) He was for stature indifferent, of counte∣nance sterne, his fore-head high, and haire verie thinne, fat and corpulent of body, with his bellie His description for lineaments and qualities. Will. Malmes. bearing out, so strong of ioints and armes, that few could bend his bow; of witte ready, and very poli∣ticke, in speech eloquent, resolute in attempts, in hazards valiant, a great souldier, and as great in suc∣cesse; Rand. Higden Polyc. lib. 7. cap. 4. rough and couetous towards the English, in his taxes, lawes, and in giuing to his Normans their lands; whose Charters were of a farre other tenour, forme, & breuity, then those tedious and perplexed conuey∣ances, since in vse, as by these few inserted may ap∣peare. I William King, the third yere of my raigne, Stow ex libro Richmond. King Williams Charter to Hunter. Giue to thee Norman Hunter, to me that art both leefe and Decre, The Hop and the Hopton, and all the bounds vp and downe, Vnder the Earth to Hell, aboue the Earth to Heauen, From me and mine, to thee and to thine, As good and as faire, as euer they mine were, To witnesse that this is sooth, I bite the white waxe with my tooth, Before Ingge, Maude, and Margery, and my yongest sonne Herry: For a bow and a broad arrowe, when I come to hunt vpon yarrow: (60) At the suite of William Bishop of London, he granted the City (whose chiefe Magistrate was then Lambert. Peramb. called the Portreue) their first Charter written in the Saxon tongue, confirmed with greene waxe, whereas the Saxons before vsed onely to signe with guilt cros∣ses, Ingulfus, and such like markes: the Copy thereof is this: William Cyng greit William Biscop. & Godfreges Portgerefan & calle the Burhwaren the on Lunden be∣on, &c. William King, greeteth William Bishop, Hollins. Lamb. Peramb. and Godfrey Portreue, and all the Burgesses that in London be, French & English, friendly. And I doe you to wit, that I will, that you enioy all the law which you did in the daies of Edward King. And I will that each Child bee his Fathers inheri∣tour after his Fathers daies. And I will not suffer that any man you any wrong offer. God you keepe. (61) In the like Charter, granted to his Nephew Iohn Leland. Alane Earle of Britaine for lands in Yorkeshire, hee writeth himselfe William surnamed Bastard; and yet it seemeth, hee was offended at Guy of Burgundy for tearming him Nothus; perhaps, because that word signifieth such a one, whose Father is vn∣known, whereas King Williams was not only known, but renowned also. (62) Howsoeuer hee was sterne and hard to the English, yet to his Normans hee was facile and too indulgent, much deuoted to Religion, and frequen∣ting the Church, both morning, and euening; The Clergie that liued according to their rule and pro∣fession, hee both honoured and richly endowed; but to the licentious was very rough and hard han∣ded: Wil. Malms. his vncle Malgerius Archbishop of * Rote∣mage, for his dissolute life hee disgraded: his brother Roane. Odo Bishop of Baieux, he imprisoned, and many of the English depriued, as we haue heard. (63) Besides his many other stately buildings, both for fortification and deuotion, three Abbies of chiefe note he is said to haue raised, and endowed with large priuiledges and rich possessions. The Bartel-Abbay so called of a battell there sought a∣gainst Harold. first was at Battle in Sussex, where hee wonne the Diadem of England, in the valley of Sangue-lac, so called in French, for the streames of bloud therein spilt: but William of Newberie deceiued in the soile Will. Newbery. it selfe, which after raine sheweth to bee red; af∣firmeth, that after any small showre of raine, the earth sweateth forth very fresh bloud, as by the euident sight thereof (saith hee) doth as yet plain∣ly declare, that the voice of so much Christian bloud there shed, doth still crie from the earth to the Lord. (64) But most certaine it is, that in the very same place where King Harolds Standard was pitched, & vnder which himselfe was slaine, there William the Conquerour laid that Foundation, dedicating it to the Holy Trinity, and to Saint Martine, that there the Monks might pray for the soules of Harold and the rest Math. Paris in Will. Conq. that were slaine in that place: whose Priuiledges were so large, that they, and others of the like condition, were afterwards dissolued by Act of Parliament, when it was found by experience, that the feare of punishment being once taken away, desperate bold∣nes, and a daring will to commit wickednesse, grew still to a greater head: for it was enfranchised with many freedomes; and among others, to vse the words of the Charter; were these: If any Thiefe, Murtherer or Felon, for feare of death, flie and come to Charta de Bello. this Church, let him haue no harme, but let him be dismis∣sed, and sent away free from all punishment. Be it law∣full also for the Abbot of the same Church to deliuer from the Gallowes any thiefe or robber wheresoeuer, if he chance to come by, where any such execution is in hand. The Standard it selfe curiously wrought all of gold and pretious stones, made in forme like an armed man, Duke William presently vpon his vi∣ctory, with great complements of curtesie, sent to Pope Alexander the second; as good reason it was, the Popes transcendent pleasure and power, being the strongest part of the Dukes title to the Crowne, and his cursing thunderbolts the best weapons whereby he attained to weare it. (65) At Selby also in Yorkeshire, where his yon∣gest sonne Henry was borne, he founded the Abbey Selby Abbay. of Saint Germans: at Excester, the Priorie of Saint Nicholas; and to the Church and Colledge of Saint Martins le grand in London, hee gaue both large pri∣uiledges, and much land, extending from the cor∣ner Exeter Priory. of the City wall, by Saint Giles Church with∣out Iohn Stow. Criplegate, vnto the common Sewer, receiuing the waters; running then from the More, and now More-fields. (66) At Cane in Normandie, lie founded the Mo∣nastery Saint Stephens in Cane. of Sant Stephen the first Christian Martyr, adorning it with most sumptuous buildings, and en∣dowing it with rich reuenewes; where his Queene Maud had erected a Nunnerie for the societie of vai∣led Virgines, vnto the honour of the blessed virgine Mary. Thus much of his Acts, and now of his mar∣riage and issue. His Wife. (67) Maud the wife of King William, was the daughter of Baldwine the fifth, surnamed the Gentle, Earle of Flaunders; her mother was Alice, daugh∣ter of Robert King of France, the sonne of Hugh Ca∣pet: Shee was married vnto him when hee was a Duke, at the Castle of Angi in Normandy, and in the second yeare of his raigne ouer England, she was crowned Queene vpon Whit-sunday, the yeere of Grace, 1068. And although she maintained Robert in his quarrell for Normandy, and out of her owne coffers paid the charges of warre against his Father, and her owne Husband; yet, because it did proceed but from a motherly indulgence for aduancing her William Malmes. sonne, it was taken as a cause rather of displeasure, then of hatred, by King William, as himselfe would often auouch, holding it an insufficient cause to di∣minish King William re∣gardfull of ma∣trimonial agree∣ment. the loue, that was linked with the sacred band of a matrimoniall knot. Shee departed this life the second day of Nouember, the sixteenth yeere of his raigne, and of Christs humanity, 1083. for whom he often lamented with teares, and most ho∣nourably enterred her at Cane in Normandy, in the Church of S. Maries, within the Monasterie of Nuns, which she had there founded. His Issue. (68) Robert, the eldest sonne of King William, and of Queene Maude his wife, was surnamed Curtuoise, Robert. signifying in the old Norman-French, Short-Bootes: he succeeded his father onely in the Duchie of Nor∣mandy, and that also he lost afterwards to his brother Henry King of England; at the battell of Ednarchbray (in that Dukedome) the yeere of our Lord 1106. where he was taken prisoner, and hauing his eies put A cruell reuenge of one brother on another. out (an vnbrotherly punishment) was committed to the Castle of Cardiffe in South-Wales; and after twen∣ty eight yeeres imprisonment, there deceased, the yeere before the death of his said brother, Anno 1134 and was buried at Glocester, in the midst of the Quier of Saint Peters Church; where remaineth a Tombe with his Carued Image at this day. Hee had two wiues, the first, Margaret daughter of Herbert, Earle of Maygne, both married in their Child-hood, and shee died before they came to yeeres of consent: The o∣ther was Sibyll, daughter of Geffrey, and sister to Willi∣am, Earles of Conuersana in Italy, and Neece of Robert Guiscard, Duke of Apulia: By her he had two sonnes William and Heny; this Henry was he that was slaine Henry slaine let his Grādrathers New-forest. by mischance, as he was hunting in the New-Forest in Hampshire. William the Elder, surnamed in Latine Miser, was Earle of Flanders, in right of Queene Maude his Grand-mother, succeeding Charles of Denmarke in that Earledome; he also had two wiues, the first Sibyll, (whose Mother, called also Sibyll, was the daughter of Fowlke Earle of Anion) after diuorced from him, and remarried to Terry of Alsac, his Successour; the second was Ioan, the daughter of Humbert Earle of Morien, now called Sauoy, sister of Queene Alice of France, wife of King Lewis the Grosse: hee died sixe yeeres before his father, of a wound receiued at the Siege of the Castle of Angi in Normandy, the 27. of Iuly, in the 28. yeere of the Raigne of King Henrie his vncle, and of our Lord, 1128. hee was buried at Saint Omers in the Monastery of Saint Bertin, and left no issue behinde him. (69) Richard the second sonne of King William and Queene Maude, was born in Normandy, and after his Richard. Father had attained the Crowne came into England, where, being then verie yong, as hee was hunting in the New-Forest of Hampshire, he came to a violent & Richard slaine his fathers New-Fo est. sudden death, by the goring of a Stagge; (others say, by a pestilentayre,) and is noted to bee the first man that died in that place, the iustice of God punishing on him his Fathers dispeopling of that Countrey: his body was thence conueied to Winchester, and there buried on the Southside of the Quire of the Cathedrall Church, where there remaineth a monu∣ment of him with an inscription entitling him a Duke, and some suppose of Bologne. (70) William, the third Son of King William and Queene Maud, was borne in Normandy, in the 21. William Rufus, or, the , yere of his Fathers Dukedom, ten yeeres before he was King, 1159. hee was surnamed of the Red co∣lour of his haire, in French Rows, in Latine Rufus; he was brought vp vnder Lanefranke the learned Lumbard, who was Archbishoppe of Canterbury, of whom he receiued both instructions of knowledge, and the order of Knighthood; he serued vnder his Father at the battaile of Gerbereth in Normandy; 1079, wherein hee was wounded: and hee alwaies framed his actions so pleasing to his Fathers humor, as that hee thought him much worthier then his el∣der brother to succeed in his Kingdome. (71) Henry, the fourth, and yongest sonne of King William and Queene Maud his wife, was borne in Henry England at Selby in Yorkeshire, the third yeere of his Fathers raigne, and of our Lord God, 1070, his childhood was trained vp in learning, at Cambridge saith Caius; but the ancient Annales of Saint Austins . in Canterbury, say, he was Philosophiâ peregrè informa∣tus, instructed beyond Sea in Philosophy; where for his Annales S. Augu∣stus Cant ar. M. S. notable knowledge in the Liberall Sciences, he was surnamed by the French, Beauclerk, that is, the fine Scholler. Vpon his return he was made Knight, being 16. yeers old, by his Father at Westminster, in Whitson∣tide, the nineteenth yeer of his Raign, Anno 1086. and thogh at his Fathers death he had nothing be∣queathed him but Treasure, yet afterward he succee∣ded his Brothers, both in the Kingdome of England and Dutchie of Normandy. (72) Cecilie, the Eldest daughter of King William and Queene Maude his wife, was borne in Normandy, Cecily. brought vp in England, and carried againe into Nor∣mandy, where in the ninth yeere of the Kings Raigne, and the yeere of our Lord 1075. shee was by her Fa∣ther on Ester day, with great Solemnity offered vp in the Church of Feschampe, & vailed to be a Nunne in the Monastery there; but was afterward elected by She is vailed a Nunne. the Nunnes of our Lady at Cane, to be Abbesse of their Monasterie, founded by her Mother, which she go∣uerned, and where she died, and was enterred. (73) Constance, the second daughter of King Constan William, and Queene Maud, was the first wife of Allayne Earle of little Britaigne, surnamed in the British, Fergent; in English, Red. In regard of which marriage, and his seruice done at the conquest of England, his Father in law gaue him all the lands of Earle Edwine, whereon he built the Castle, and wher∣of he made the Earledome of Richmond, which long The Earldome of Richmond e∣rected. after, belonged to the Earles and Dukes of Britaigne his Successors; although he had his children by an other wife; for she died very yong and without is∣sue; and was buried in the Abbey of Saint Edmunds∣bury in Suffolke. (74) Alice, the third daughter of King William & Queen Maud, was married to Stephen Earle of Alice. Bloys in France, and had issue by him William an In∣nocent, Thibaud surnamed the Great, Earle of Blois, and Champain, Stephen Earle of Mortain and Boleine, (who was King of England) Henry a Monke of Clu∣ny, after Abbot of Glastenbury, and Bishop of Win∣chester, Mary married to Richard Earle of Chester, and Emme, wife of one Harbert, an Earle of France, and Saint William Archbishop of Yorke. mother of Saint William Archbishop of Yorke: Shee suruiued Earle Stephen her husband, and in her wi∣dowhood tooke vpon her the profession of Religi∣on in the Priorie of Nunnes at Marciguy in France, where she ended her life. (75) Gundred, the fourth daughter of King Wil∣liam, Gundred. and of Queene Maud, was married to Willi∣am of Warrein, a Nobleman of Normandy, who was the first Earle of Surrey in England; by whom shee had issue William the second Earle, Progenitors of the Earles that followed; and Rainold of Warren, her second sonne, who had also Issue. Shee died in Child-bed, three yeeres before her husband, at Castleaker in Norfolke the 27. of May, in the 20. yere of her fathers raigne, being the yeere of our Lord, 1085. and is buried in the Chapter-house of Saint Pancrase Church within the Priory, at the town of Lews, in the County of Sussex. (76) Ela, the fifth daughter of King William, and his Queen Maud, in her Child-hood was contracted Ela. in marriage to Duke Harald, when he was in Nor∣mandy, being then a yong Widower. Notwithstan∣ding, hee refusing her tooke an other wife, and vsur∣ped the Kingdom of England, after the death of King Edward, whereby hee occasioned his owne ruine, and Conquest of his Country, which afterward ensued when her Father sought reuenge: so much (as some write) to the discontentment of this Lady, that for griefe of these mischances, shee euer after refused marriage, and led a single and solitarie life; though others vpon better warrant collect, that shee died yong, and before William her Father set forth for England; Harald himselfe pleading, that hee was free from all couenants and promises to Duke Wil∣liam, by reason of the death of this his daughter. (77) Margaret, the sixth and yongest daughter of Margaret. King William and Queene Maud, was in her child∣hood giuen in marriage to Alphonso King of Gallicia in Spaine, that afterward was so renowned for the Con∣quest of the City Lysbon, for his victories against the Mores, and for the slaughter of their fiue Kings, and was the founder of the Kingdome of Portugall, the first King thereof, and the first bearer of the fiue Shields of the said fiue Kinges, which are to this day the Armes of the same. But this Lady being thus contracted, deceased before those things hap∣ned, and before shee came to yeeres of lawfull con∣sent to the marriage. VVILLIAM THE SECOND SVR∣NAMED William Rufus. Monarch 40 R VFVS, THE FORTIETH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISH: HIS ACTS, RAIGNE, AND VNTIMELY DEATH. CHAPTER III. W Illiam posting for England, & Archbishop Lanfrank his An. D. 1087 William Rufus comes into England. earnest soliciter by liberall gifts giuen, and promises made to abrogate the ouer hard lawes of his Father, had the readier passage in∣to the opinions of them that could doe most: and the more to notifie his in∣tended mild gouernment, with other his noble in∣clinations to princely vertues, as eye-witnesses of his fauours towards the English, hee brought with him Ypodigma. Neustria. from Normandy, Morcar, the stout Earle of Chester, and Wilnoth the sonne of King Harold, both of them released out of prison, and then held in especiall fa∣uour Simon Dunel. with him. But most of the States standing for The Peeres wish well to his Elder brother. Mat. Paris. Ypodigm. Robert Curtoise his elder Brother (a man deemed of a more liberall disposition, and better temperature to∣wards the Subiects) their titles had beene tried by Lanfranke and Wulstane sway the Peeres for Rufus. swords, had not Lanfrank and Wulstan, both wise & reuerend Prelates, by their Counsels and Mediations staied their hands. William Gemit. Matth. Paris. His Coronation. (2) Consent thus gotten, and all voices giuen for William, he was crowned their King at Westmin∣ster, vpon Sunday the twenty sixt day of September, and yeere of Saluation, 1087. by the hands of Lan∣frank Archbishop of Canterbury; vnder whom he had beene educated euen from his Child-hood, and by His disposition. him made fit both for Warre and Gouernment, had not the variable inclination of his owne mind car∣ried his actions past the limits of any staied com∣passe. (3) Robert vpon discontents that Normandy was An. D. 1088 Rand. Higden. in Polychr. lib. 7. cap. 5 Robert possessed of Normandy. still detained, before his Fathers sicknesse, was gone into Germany, to solicite their assistance for his right to that Duchie: but hearing of his death, hasteth into the Prouince, and was there peaceably recei∣ued, and made their Duke: which title notwith∣standing, seemed to him dishonourable; his yonger brother being inuested to a Kingdome, and himselfe disinherited; no other cause mouing, but his ouer-much His disposition. gentlenes, being by nature composed no∣thing so rough, as was Rufus. (4) The like emulation incited Odo, Bishoppe of Baieux (his vncle) against Lanfranck the Archbishop, Odoes emulation against Lanfrank. who now ruled all, and had worn him out of fauour with the Conquerour his halfe brother, whom hee Polyc. lib. 7. cap. 5. taught the distinction of imprisoning Odo, as an Earle, not as a Bishop: now therefore seemed the time most fitting for a iust reuenge: & albeit that Rufus brought him from Normandy, where he had beene captiuated, and restored him his honours & dignities in England; yet hee, vngratefull man, enuying that Lanfranck should goe before him, complotted the downefal aswell of the one, as of the other. And drawing in∣to this conspiracy, Robert Earle of Mortaigne and He conspireth a∣gainst the King. Hereford his brother, with many other of the Eng∣lish Nobility, wrote his letters into Normandy vnto Inuireth Robert to try for the Crowne. his Nephew, hastning him to repaire into England, and recouer his right, which by his meanes hee promised should soone bee effected. (5) The busines thus wrought to Duke Roberts hand, and the English resorting daily into Norman∣dy, Duke Roberts hopes for Eng∣land. assured his hopes of a happy successe, onely the hinderance was want of money, and that very much as the world then went with him, hauing euer borne himselfe no lesse then his birth, nor euer had made his bagges his summum bonum. In these extremes, he His wants. well saw the lesse was to bee followed, and to set a Dukedom at stake to cast at a Kingdome, he thought it ods sufficient, though the chance were doubtfull: Therfore to his younger brother Henry, who had store of gold, and wanted land, hee morgaged the Countie of Constantine, a Prouince in Normandy, & His supply by morgage of his Land. then sent to Odo, that he should expect his landing on the West-coast of England by a day prefixed. (6) The Bishop now growne bold vpon Duke Roberts great power, shewed himselfe the first in the Odo the ringlea∣leader for Duke Robert. Action; and fortifying Rochester, beganne to mo∣lest the peace of Kent, sending to his complices a∣broad to doe the like, which was not long in per∣forming: Rob. Mowbray and other his associates. Wil. Malms. Simon Dun. for in the West, Robert de Mowbrey Earle of Northumberland, assisted by Geffrey Bishoppe of Constance, sacked Bath, and Berkley, with a great part of Wilt-shire, and strongly fortified the Castle of Bri∣stow against King William: In Norfolke, Roger By∣god, Bristow fortified. against King William. in Leicestershire, Hugh Grentemeisnil did shrewd∣ly wast those Countries: Roger Mountgomery Earle of Shrewsburie with his Welshmen, assisted by William Bishop of Durham (the Kings domesticall Chaplain) Henry Hunt. Barnard of Newmerch, Roger Lacie, and Ralph Morti∣mer (all of them Normans or French-men) with fire and sword past through the Country of Worcester: Duke Robert ve∣rie faire for the Kingdome. Wil. Genetic. and surely, the stirres were so great, and Duke Ro∣bert so fauoured, that by the iudgement of Gemiti∣censis, had he hasted his arriuage, or followed the occasion, the Crowne of England had easily been set vpon his head. (7) All in an vprore, and Rufus thus turmoiled, he appointed his Nauie to scowre the seas, and to im∣peach King William promiseth to mollifie his Laws. his brothers arriuage: then gathering his forces, and knowing well how to please the vulgar, promiseth againe to abolish their ouer-hard lawes, & presently to put down all vniust Imposts and Tax∣ations, whereby the People were soone drawne to stand in his defence; and among them Roger Mount∣gomery He waxeth strong. was reconciled to the King. Thus now growne strong, & his enemies decrea∣sed, he led his Armie into Kent where the sedition first beganne, the Castles of Tunbridge and Horne he recouered, as likewise Pemsey, wherein his vncle O∣do had strongly immured himselfe, whose lacke of victuall, by King Williams strait siege, allaied the Odo his great heart taken downe. pride of that great-hearted man; so that hee not one∣ly surrendred the same, but promised the deliuerie of Rochester also strongly manned, with Eustace Earle Simon Dun. of Boloigne, and a sort of other gallant Gentlemen, e∣uen the flower of Normandy and Flanders. (8) Odo comming to Rochester for the deliuerie of An. D. 1089 the This Castle some lay was built by Odo, but it appears to haue been built by William Con∣querour. Domesday-book. Will. Gemet. Castle according to his promise, was by them surprised, and laid in strait prison, whether in displea∣sure, or vnder colour, and with consent of Odo, I will not say; but certaine it is, that the King tooke the matter so to heart, that he sent forth his Proclamati∣on through England, commaunding that euery man should repaire to that siege, whosoeuer would not be reputed a Niding, a word of such disgrace, and Niding a word of Reproch. Camb. in Kent. so distastiue vnto the English, that multitudes seemed rather to flie, then runne to that seruice; where∣upon the Castle was surrendred, and Odo banished Matth. Paris. Odo leaues En∣gland. into Normandy, lost all his liuings and honours in England. (9) Whilest these things were in acting betwixt King William and his Barons, Duke Robert with his Normans was landed at Southampton, hauing passed Rufus pretendeth submissiuenesse to his brother. some conflict with the Kings ships at the sea: whom Rufus so feared (if mine Author say true) that he sent Messengers vnto him in most submissiue maner, pro∣testing Polychr. lib. 7. c. 3. that hee tooke not the crowne as his own by any right; but rather to supply the time in his ab∣sence: neither did hee account himselfe King, but as his substitute to hold the crown vnder him; yet see∣ing the matter had beene so farre passed, and the Emperiall Crowne set on his head; hee most hum∣bly desired that it might so rest, proffering to pay him three thousand Markes by yeere, and to resigne it to him at his death: whereat Duke Robert shaking his head (belike he saw no other remedy) easily con∣sented, and returned forth with into Normandy. (10) And, if we compare this with the Monke Math. Paris. William Rufus, a cunning Time∣seruer. of Saint Albans report, wee may well beleeue, that William was forward enough in his offers, though e∣uer as vnready in performance; for the Barons then being vp, and he not able to allay them, did that by his word, which he could not by his sword, protesting to them that he was willing to resigne the Kingdom, and would be content either with Money or Posses∣sions, Faire words ap∣pease fooles, and often deceiue the wise. if those that were his Fathers Ouer-seers should thinke it meete; and for any Ordinances touching the affaires of the Common weale, he would referre it wholly to themselues, prouided alwaies his owne honour should not thereby be impeached. But when the Cloudes of these feares were altogether ouer-blowne, no budde once appeared from these faire planted grafts. (11) For Lanfrank deceased, and both King de∣priued Lanfranke dieth. of a politike director, and Common-welth of a principall Statist, he presently shewed the bent of his inclination, lauishly giuing where no deserts had engaged, and exacting extreame tributes, when no Necessity required; alwaies couetous, yet neuer thrifty, and still gathering, yet neuer enriching his King William an ill manager of Ecclesiasticall promotions. G rn, Dor. Coffers: All Ecclesiasticall promotions then vacant he assumed into his owne hands, and kept the See of Canterbury without an Archbishop aboue foure yeeres, setting to sale the free-rights of the Church, and he that would giue most came soonest to prefer∣ment, wherby both the Lands and good esteeme of the Clergy was daily diminished. These greeuances were complained of vnto Pope Pope Vrb not at leasure then to remedy Church wrongs. Vrban, but he ouer. busied to forward an expedition of Christian Princes for the winning of Ierusalem, had no leasure seriously to thinke vpon their estates, or else lesse minde to diuert Kings out of their owne by∣as, whose persōs he meant to reserue for his own gain. (12) The Storme thus clecred without any An. D. 1090 thunder; King Rufus set the eye of desire vpon Duke Roberts dominions, who lately had done the like with Ypodigma Neu∣stria. King William en∣ters Normandy. his; and suddenly burst into Normandy, as Scipio did into Africke, pretending reuenge of injuries done to his Kingdome; first therefore surprizing the Castles of Saint Valery and Albemarle, hee stored them with his owne Souldiers; then piercing forward did great spoile in the Countrie. Robert destitute of meanes and knowing his Normans euer vnfaithfull, sent to Philip the French King, desiring his assistance against this Brother-Enemy; who preparing towards Normandy, was stopped with such golden showres from King William that he could not passe, so that Duke Robert Peace made be∣twixt the King and Duke. was constrained to make a peace with his brother, though for himselfe a very sorry one, as saith Geme∣ticensis; which, as Paris reporteth, was effected by Will Gemet. Matth. Paris. twelue Princes vpon either part, and the conditions as followeth: that King William should retaine and enioy the County of Ewe with Fescampe, the Abba∣cie of Mount Saint-Michael, and all the Castles he had gotten in Normandy: for the Duke it was agreed, that his brother King William should aide and as∣sist him, to recouer thoselands & territories beyond the seas, which had beene belonging to their Father; That all such Normans as had lost their liuings in Ypodig. Neust. Math. Paris. England, in taking part with Duke Robert, should be restored: and lastly, whether of them should die first; the suruiuer should be his heire. (13) Peace thus established, and both their pow∣ers vnited, they bent altogether against Henry their Both Brethren oppugne Henry the younger brother. yongest brother, who fearing after-claps, had strong∣ly fortified the Castle of Mount Saint-Michael, situa∣ted vpon the confines of Normandie and Britaine: him, whom they ought to haue prouided for, (saith Gemeticensis) they went about to expell, and all the Willi. Gemet. Lent long laid siege aginst him. It chanced one day as his men sallied out, & made a brauado in the face of their beleaguers; King Willi∣am alone, more bold then wise, rode against them, King William endangered in a Siege. thinking none so hardy as to encounter him single; but presently a Knight slew his horse vnder him, & his foot entangled in the stirrupe hee was ouer-throwne; his enemy therefore with drawn sword, was ready to haue slaine him, had hee not reuealed himselfe by his voice: the armed men with great reuerence then tooke him vp, and brought him an∣other horse; when the King not staying for the stir∣rup, sprang into the saddle, and with an angry coun∣tenance demanded, who it was that ouerthrew him? King William pre∣ferres him that ouerthrew him. the Knight as boldly answered, and shewed himselfe who he was; by Lukes face, quoth William (for that was his oath) thou shalt bee my Knight, and be en∣rolled Williams Oath. Edmerus saith, his oath was, By Gods face. in my Checke, with a Fee answerable to thy worth. (14) During this seige, Prince Henry being sore distressed for water, and knowing Duke Robert to be An. D. 1091 Ran. Higden in Polychr. lib. 7. c. 5. of the milder temperature, sent him word of his want, desiring to haue that permitted, which God had made common, and giuen euen to brute beasts, A friendly Ene∣mie. aswell as to men; Duke Robert therefore comman∣ded him to be supplied, whereat William was wroth, telling his Brother he wanted discretion, & policy in warre, which allowed all aduantages to surprise the Enemy: And dost thou (said Robert) esteeme An vn-brother∣lie Brother. more of water, which is euery where to be got, then of a Brother, hauing no more but him and me? In which dissension, Earle Henry got thence; and by po∣licy tooke a very strong towne called Danford, where Will. Gemet. The three bre∣then reconciled. Ypodigm, Neustr. presently was a reconciliation made amongst these three brethren, who thereupon forthwith tooke the Seas together for England. (15) About this time, in the yeere of Grace, Chron. Wallia. 1091, and fourth of King Rufus his raigne, one E∣neon the sonne of Cadinor Lord of Dyuet, mouing Warre bewixt Rise Prince of Southwales, and . rebellion against Rees ap Tewdor Prince of Southwales, drew to his side Iestyn Lord of Glamorgan, vpon promise to become his sonne in law by the marri∣age of his daughter: Iestyn notwithstanding, iud∣ging their faction too weake, sent Eneon into Eng∣land, where hee was well acquainted, to procure aide against Rees: who entring conference of his businesse with Robert Fitz-hamon a worthy Knight of the Kings Priuie-Chamber, wrought so far with Rob. Fiftz-ham∣mon ides . him, being a man easily drawne to the exercise of warre, that for a Salarie hee vndertooke the seruice, and with twelue Knights, and a competent num∣ber of Souldiers went into Wales, where ioining with Iestin, in battle slew Prince Rees ap Tewdor, with Co∣nan his sonne. Robert Fitzhamon, now minding to return, demanded his pay according to couenants, Rob. Fitz. ham∣mon and his fol∣lowers possesi∣ons in Walles. which Iestine in some part denied, alledging that Eneon had gone beyond his commission: where∣upon such discord arose, that these friends fell out, and Eneon thus touched in his reputation, sided with the English against his owne Country-men; where∣upon a battaile was fought, and Iustin with most of his Welsh slaine, so that Robert with his followers obtained a fruitfull possession in those parts, (which by their posterties are enioied euen to this day) whose names, as they are found written in a British record, were as followeth. NAMES. POSSESSION. 1 William de Londres. Ogmor. The Knighs who attended Fitz hammon; 2 Richard de Grana Villa; Neth. 3 Pagan de Turberuile. Coity. 4 Robert de S. Quintin. Lhan Blethyan, 5 Richard de Syward. Talauan. 6 Gilbert de Humfreuile. Penmarke. 7 Roger de Beckrolles. East Orchard. 8 Raynald de Sully. Sully. 9 Peter de Score. Peterton. 10 Iohn Le Fleming. Saint George. 11 Oliuer de Saint Iohn. Fonmon. 12 William de Estirling. Saint Donats. (16) As these things were commenced betwixt An. D. 1092 Gemet. Malcolme King of Scotland en∣ters England with a power. England, Normandy, and Walles, Malcolme King of Scotland entred into the English Marches as farre as to Chester in the Streete, doing much harme; whose far∣ther outrage to preuent, William incontinently ha∣sted, sending by sea a great Nauie of Shippes, and by land his brother Robert, though with much losse of either: for his Fleet was torne by tempest, and his horsemen through hunger & cold perished in those barren parts: at length the Kings come to an Inter∣uiew, King William Malcolme meete, & enter League, where by the meanes of Edgar Atheling, a peace was concluded to both their contents: for William restored vnto Malcolme twelue Villages, which he Ypodigm ∣stria. had held in England vnder his Father, and gaue him yeerly twelue Markes in gold: And King Malcolme for his part promised to keepe true peace with him, as hee had done with the Conquerour, whereunto Mat. Paris. hee gaue him his Oath, as saith Mathew Paris. (17) But as these two Kings of Enemies were King William and Duke Robert at variance again . made friends, so the two Brethren of reconciled friends became againe enemies: for Duke Robert well perceiuing, that King VVilliam meant nothing lesse then performance of couenants, (protracting time vpon some secret purposes, as his iealous head con∣ceiued) in great displeasure returned into Norman∣dy, taking with him Edgar Atheling, whom he held in an especiall account. (18) King VVilliam then repairing those Castles which the Scots had destroied, new built in Cumber∣land the City Carleil, which two hundred yeares be∣fore Carleil reedified. had beene spoiled by the Danes; and hauing defenced it with walles, built there the Castle, Chur∣ches, Peopled with a Southerne Co∣lony. Endowed with large Privilegio. and Houses, wherein hee placed a Colonie of Southerne Souldiers, with their wines and chil∣dren, granting large priuiledges to the place, which the City enioieth euen vnto this day. (19) And hauing setled his affaires thus in the North, returneth with triumph into the South, An. D. 109; where immediately hee fell dangerously sicke, King William fal∣leth sicke and voweth . in the sixth yeere of his Raigne, at the Citie of Gloucester; whose sinnes beganne to sit so neere his heart, (not looking to continue to commit many more) that hee sore repented him of the same, ma∣king many promises to amend his life, if God would be pleased to giue him longer life: the hard lawes a∣gainst Matth Paris. Henry Hunt. the English, he vowed to reforme, as also his owne vices, and to settle peace and good order in the Church, then farre out of frame, almost all the Monkes in England, liued rather like Consuls, being Hunters, Hawkers, Dicers, & great Drinkers Polychron. lib. 7. p. 6. (saith Higden) little regarding the rules of their pro∣fession. Those Bishopricks & Monasteries that were vacant, and in his owne hand, hee forthwith, and (much against his wont) freely bestowed: the Arch∣bishopricke of Canterbury vpon Anselme a learned Ger. Dorob. Norman Abbot: the See of Lincolne hee gaue to Robert Bluet his Chancellour, a man of meane lear∣ning, Godwin in his Catalogue of Bishops. Hic hum lis, di∣ues: (res mira) potens, paus vl∣tor, Compatiens i∣tis, cum pateretur, erat. Ypodig . Neustri. King William re∣gaineth his health, and lo∣seth his good purposes. Goodwin in the life of Anselme. and some other touches, but otherwise of ma∣ny singular parts. (20) But the danger past, and health recouered, hee beganne to bee more sicke in mind, soon repen∣ting him of his too-soone Repentance: for as in spending his owne wealth, hee was very prodigall, so was hee very diligent to enter into other mens e∣states, and to gaine from them what he could, and therefore tampereth with Anselme, perswading him, that the trouble of the Archbishops place was very burthenous, especially for a man wholly brought vp within the walles of a Monastery, deuoted to contemplation, and vnexperienced in the mannage of great affaires of State. But all this Art could not induce him to let goe his hold-fast of the Kings absolutely passed promise, nor yet to satisfie his Polychron. lib. 7. cap. 7. great desire with mony, and therefore the King paid himselfe out of his Lands. Likewise from Roger of Lincolne hee exacted fiue thousand pounds; and the Commons hee fined for transgression of his pe∣nall Rand. Higd. lawes; and in truth molested all for money: None were rich but Treasurers and Collectors, none in fauour but vnconscionable Lawyers, and none re∣warded but Promoters: so that his ouer-haled sub∣iects fled daily out of the Realme; against whom he published Proclamations, with an inhibition that King Malcolme commeth to Glocester. none should depart without his safe Conduct. (21) Soone after this, Malcolme King of Scot∣land came vnto Gloucester, to conferre with King Will. Gemet. William touching the Peace of both the Realmes; but conceiuing a grudge, for that hee was not en∣tertained according to the Maiesty of his estate, de∣parted Departeth dis∣content. William Malmes. Polydor. Raiseth a power. in displeasure without speech with the King; and immediately raising a power against England, destroied the Country vnto Alnewicke Castle. Robert Mowbray then Earle of Northumberland, a most valiant Souldier, seeing his Countrey thus o∣uerrunne, made head against him, not staying for di∣rections from his King; and lying in Ambush for his William Gemet. Is slaine with his son the Prince. Simon Dun. returne, so sore and suddenly distressed his forces, that both King Malcolme himselfe and his son Prince Edward were there slaine. (22) Heereupon Earle Mowbray growing proud and greatly suspected by King William, began to Earl Mowbraies greatnesse suspe∣cted by the King. fortifie the Kings Castles, with Munition for Armes against the like inuasion, and indeed against the Kings will; who sent him word somewhat roughly, to de∣sist from his doings, and presently to repaire to his Presence; which whilest hee lingered and neglected Math. Paris. to doe, King William sent his brother Henry to spoile Northumberland, and immediately followed after himselfe, where without much adoe, he tooke the Earle, and committed him prisoner to Wind∣sor Is taken and im∣prisoned. Castle. (23) These stirres in the North are diuersly re∣ported: for Walsingham in his Ypodigma Neustriae, saith, that Robert Moubray and William of Anco with Ypodigm. Neustr. others, conspired to depriue the King both of crown and life, and to haue set vp Stephen de Albamarle his Aunts sonne: the issue of which treason was pre∣uented by surprizing Mowbray, who died a Priso∣ner. William of Anco was punished with losse both of his eyes and his virility; and William Aluerie (the Kings Godfather, Kinsman and Sewer) cruelly whip∣ped, Hector B s lib. 12. cap. 12. and all naked goared in bloud, though guiltles, was hanged. Hector Boetius, the Scotish, Historian re∣lates somewhat otherwise of the death of King Mal∣colme; as that the English hauing gotten the Castle of Anwike, King Malcolme with a strong siege enuiro∣ned it about; when, the English distressed, and rea∣dy to surrender, a certaine Knight amongst them at∣tempted a very desperate enterprice, for mounted vpon a swift horse, vnarmed, excepting onely a light Speare in his hand, vpon the point whereof he bare the keyes of the Castle, he rod directly to the Scotish Campe, and was with great applause brought vnto their King, where couching his staffe, as though hee meant with submission to deliuer him the keyes, sud∣denly ranne him into the left eye, and through Malcolme slaine vnder shew of submission. swiftnes of his horse escaped, leauing the King there dead: for which act King William (saith he, though erroneously) changed the Knights name into Perce∣eye, whence that Noble Family is descended. The name of Percyes ancien∣ter thē Perceing of Malcolmes e e. Uide Cambd. in North m. Gemet icensis. Sa nt Margaret (Edgar Ethelings Sister) dieth for griefe of her hus∣bands death; few such Saint∣like wiues. Hector Boetius Math. Paris The English Mo∣narchs of Wales. Gultelmus Gemeticensis saith indeed, that it was re∣ported that King Malcolme was slaine by a guile, declaring not the manner, but by the hands of Mo∣rell, Nephew to Earle Mowbrey, where likewise died Prince Edward his sonne, and the greatest part of his Armie: with which dolefull newes (saith Hector) his Queene Margaret (called the Saint) within three daies after died of griefe. But Paris hath set it downe, as is said; and in the same yeer makes William the Conquerour of Wales; since which time the English Monarches haue beene accounted their chiefe Gouernors. (24) Grudges now grown betwixt King William and Duke Robert his brother, ech accusing other of breach An. D. 1094 Wil. Malmsb. Ran. Hagd. Simon Dun. of oath and of Couenants; William from Hastings set saile into Normandy, where some bickering fell be∣twixt the two Brethren, but by the mediating of certaine graue persons, their quarrels were compri∣mised, A breach againe betwixt the two Brethren, but made vp for a time. and Princes chosen to be their Arbitrators; which hearing indifferently all allegations, adiud∣ged King Rufus in the fault, who thereupon (as thinking nothing right, but what went with him) King William re∣fuseth the cen∣sure of his Arbi∣trators. was so farre from following their award, that being offended with their censure, he presently assaulted, and tooke the Castle of Burren; neither did Robert for his part sleepe the whiles, but surprised the Ca∣stle of Argenton, which was by former couenants giuen to King William, drawing likewise Philip the Bothparts a∣gaine in Armes. French King to his side, who with his Army entred Normandy for his assistance. (25) King VVilliam then waying into what dan∣ger hee had brought himselfe, (all approuing Duke Robert, and disallowing his Acts,) he sought to doe King William preuailes by mo∣ney. that by money, which he could not by sword. Ther∣fore to those souldiers, which in heat of his furie, he had commanded to bee sent him into Normandy, (euen twenty thousand, now in readinesse, and at Hastings staying for a wind) he sent a countermand, exacting of euery common souldier ten shillings in money for the release, and so without further trouble Math. Paris. to return to their homes; with which summe he so pa∣cified the French King, that hee now left Robert to The French King leaues his friend for money. looke to himselfe, who thus forsaken, was constrained to come to an vnreasonable peace. (26) And the more willingly, for that the holy wars for Ierusalem, deliberated of fiue yeares before, were now hotely pursued by Pope Vrbane the second, The warres for the Holy Land. (whome Bibliander blameth to be the causer of much Christian blood-shed) onely to set vp that, which Theod. Biblian. Christ by Prophesie had laid in desolation. Among these Christian valiant Captains Duke Robert would Duke Robert going to Ierusa∣lem morgageth his Dukedome. Henry Hunt. Will Thorne. Paul. Aemil. be one, but wanting money, (no newes at all to his coffers) hee sent to his brother King VVilliam to bee supplied, and for the summe of sixe thousand, sixe hundred, sixty sixe pound of siluer, (Paulus Aemilius saith, sixe thousand nine hundred thirty foure more) morgaged his Dutchy vnto him, giuing him the pos∣session Will. Gemet. thereof before his departure. (27) To make vp which summe, hee did not only oppresse and fleece his poore subiects, but rather (to King Williams ex∣treame exactions Math. Paris. vse the words of Paris) with importunate exactions did as it were flea off their skins; for the Churches and Monasteries, hauing sold away their Iewels and Not sparing Churches and Monasteries. Chalices to satisfie his appetite, and answering they could make no more; the King replied, with some scorne; And haue you not, I beseech you, Coffins of Gold and Siluer for dead mens bones? Accounting the money laid out vpon this holy Expedition, to be better imploied then to garnish the reliques of the dead. Aedmerus. An. D. 1095 (28) The King thus finding his fortune in all things pliable to his wishes, and his heart therewith greatly puffed vp, his purpose was now at his returne from Normandy, to make a full conquest of Wales; therefore redoubling his forces hee drew into the His expedition for Wales. Marches, where piching his Tents hee consulted with his Captaines what was best to bee done. The Welshmen finding themselues ouerweake, fled The Welsh fly to their Mountains. according to their accustomed manner, into the Woods and Mountaines, taking thereby such aduan∣tage against their pursuers, that the King returned without any notable deed done; and with the like An. D. 1096 successe he vndertooke an other Expedition against them the yeere following. (29) But bearing a minde still to subdue al Wales, he had first in his eie the Iland Anglesey, against which Anglesey inua∣ded. Mat. Paris. An. D. 1097 he sent Hugh Mountgomery Earle of Shrewesburie, and Hugh Lupus Earle of Chester, who there executed their Conquests with very great cruelties, cutting off the Noses, Hands, and Armes of their resisters, without Cruelty there vsed. Girald. Cambr. regard of age, or sexe, nor sparing either places or per∣sons, sacred or prophane. At which very time it chanced Magnus King of Norway, the sonne of Olanus, Norwegians as∣sault Anglesey. An. D. 1098 (the sonne of Harold Harfager) to haue made his Conquest of the Iles of Orkeney, and then wafting a∣long the Seas, sought to come on Land in Anglesey, whom to impeach, these Earles made all their pow∣ers: where Hugh Mountgomery armed at all parts, but onely the sight of his Beuer, was shot into his Mountgomery kild in the Eye. right eye, whereof hee died eight daies after. (30) The holy voyage now set forward, (vnto which Pope Vrbane was a chiefe instigator) thirty An. D 1099 Synodus Claro∣montana. The Holy voiage. Peter, an Her∣mite, the Cap∣taine. thousand Christians tooke the Signe of the Crosse, wearing it on their garments as the cognizance of their deuoted warfare: The chiefest Captaine of which Princely Army, was Peter a poore Hermit, who returning from Ierusalem, certified the Pope of the Christians great miserie vnder those mercilesse In∣fidels: but the good man more exercised in praiers The number of the Army. Math. Paris. The Generals of the Army. Henry Huns. lib. 7. (the weapons of Votaries) then expert to guide an Army, was soone entrapped among the Bulga∣res, and slaine with most of his souldiers. But yet the businesse still prosecuted, the number of all de∣grees and ages flocking to the seruice, is reported to haue amounted (a thing almost incredible) vnto seuen hundred thousand. In chiefe commaund of which huge Armie, were imploied many braue Princes of Christendome; as Godfrey the famous Duke of Loraine, with his brethren Eustace and Baldwin: Bohemund Duke of Naples, and his Nephew Tan∣credus: Robert Earle of Flanders; Hugh le grand, brother to Philip the French King; Raymund, Earle of S. Egidius; and besides many other great Princes, the foresaid Robert Duke of Normandy, not the last in esteeme for his renowned seruice; as his memora∣ble prowesse in that imploiment did afterwards Mat. Paris. make apparant vnto the world. All these mee∣ting at Constantinople (where Alexius was Em∣perour) passed ouer Hellespont, and proceeded with better successe then the Hermit had done, subduing Their fortunate successes. Cities and Countries before them, with the slaugh∣ter of an hundred thousand Infidels, and purchase of great spoiles: and lastly, tooke Ierusalem the ho∣ly Th. Lanquet. Ierusalem takē by Christians. City, in the thirty ninth day after the Siege thereof. But let vs from Iewrie returne into Eng∣land. (31) King William at rest whilst his Brother and the rest were in warres, thinking now both of fortify∣ing An. D. 1099 and beautifying his Kingdome, caused new walles to be built about the Tower of London, and at Westminster (* where before was the ancient Pa∣lace . of Saint Edward and his Ancestours) said new foundations of a most large and Princely Palace; the Hall whereof, by the testimony of Paris, should haue Math Paris. Stowes . extended (if he had liued to finish it) from the Riuer Thamesis euen vnto the common high way, as might Westminster Hall built. appeare by the first groundworks, at the time wherin Paris wrote: but that stately Building, which now we cal the Great Hall, he finished as it now standeth, con∣taining in length two hundred and seuenty foote, in breadth seuenty foure: yet (when some praised the The length and breadth thereof. largenesse thereof) hee found fault that it was not made bigger, accounting it scarse worthy the name of a Bed-Chamber, in respect of that which he inten∣ded Rand. Higden. to build. And certes, of a right magnanimous disposition was this Rufus, as appeared at such time, when sitting at dinner, purposing forthwith to take his pleasure in hunting, a messenger brought him sudden newes of the Siege of Mayne, a City in Normandy: whereto Mayne in Nor∣maney besieged. Henry Hunt. when the King answered, He would take aduice what to doe: But thy Subiects (replied the party) are in di∣stresse, and cannot be delaied; whereat the King swore The Kings rea∣dinesse to re∣leeue them. his wonted Oath, that if they could not, they should not, and that he would not turne his backe till he were with them; and thereupon commanded to breake downe the wall that he might goe forth the next way to the Sea, leauing straight Commission for his Nobles to Wil. Malms. follow him with all celerity. (32) But the winds being contrary, and thereby both the Sea and the King in a great rage; his Pilote misdoubting hazard of Shipwrake, desired him hum∣bly to expect a while, till those boisterous Elements were calmer, and passage more safe. Wherunto he an∣swered, as no whit daunted: Hast thou euer heard that any Yes King Pha∣rao was drowned, if the Pilot durst haue so replied. Wil. Genetic. King hath beene drowned? therefore hoise vp the Sailes, I charge thee and be gone. The City vpon this vnexpected speed of the King, was soone released, and Helias, Consull of Cinomannia, who did beleaguer it, being taken by a traine, was by King William iested at to his face, as a man neither of Martiall prowesse nor policie: at which indignity the Noble Helias disdainingly storming, with great boldnesse said vnto The courage of Helias a Prisoner Rufus: I am now thy Prisoner, not by thy prowesse, but by chance of warre, and my owne misfor∣tune: but were I at liberty, thou shouldest well know, I am not the man thus to be laughed at. The King well-li∣king the confidence of his spirit: Well then (said hee) King William re∣leateth him. I giue thee full liberty, goe thy waies, doe what in thee lieth; I am the man that euer will mate thee. (33) And surely, howsoeuer he might be blemi∣shed His great va∣lour. with many staines of bad Gouernment, yet for his valour and resolutions in wars he is greatly com∣mended; and so much by some, that, if it were not against the faith of Christianity, it might be thought Will Gemet. lib. 4. His praises much impaired by par∣tiall writers. (saith Malmesbury) that the Soule of Caesar had entred into the body of this Kufus, as that of Euphorbus is said to haue don into Pythagoras: yea, & those staines (we may well thinke) were no whit lessened by his story writers, who were dependants of the Romish See: for that he little fauoured their Holy Father, or any such as adhered vnto the See of Rome, against the His opposition to the Romish Church. Prerogatiue of his Crowne; as especially appeared in his Offence conceiued against Anselmus Archbishop of Canterbury, for his too Romish humor. There was at that time a Schisme in the Roman Church, which Monster-like had then two heads on one Body, the Two Popes of Rome. Mat. Paris. Emperour (who claimed that as his right) placing one, and the Roman Clergy abetting another, Vrbanus by name, with whom consorted Anselme, against the Kings command. The King alleged, that no Archbishop or Bishop No English B. subiect to the Pope. . Holinsh. The King of En∣land hath as great priuiledges as the Empe∣rour. of the kingdome should (or ought) be subiect to the Pope or Court of Rome, with whom they had nought to doe: that he and his Realme had as large franche∣sies, euer since the receiuing of the Christistian faith, as the Emperour had in his Empire; and that there∣fore none ought in his Realme to bee receiued for Pope, whom himselfe and his State should not first approue: that without his licence none should goe or appeale to Rome in any cause: that Anselme could not keepe his Allegeance to his Soueraigne, and also to the Pope. Vpon all which points the Prelates of Matth Paris alibi except also Ranulphus Cestrinsis Episc. England, excepting only Gundulphus B. of Rochester, as∣sented to the King against Anselmus, that he was guil∣ty of High Treason, for attempting to depriue the Crowne of these prerogatiues. (34) And because the King then vrged, that here∣in he did no more then his Father had done before Pope Gregory was iustly by all mens iudgemēts (saith Paris) de∣posed for Trea∣son against the Emperour. him, it shal not be impertinent to obserue heere, how that, as Vrbanus vsed Anselmus for his instrument to draw the King to his becke; so Pope Gregorie be∣fore him vsed Archbishop Lanfrancks helpe for vn∣dermining of William the Conquerour, and to subiect him and his State to the Papacie; which that it may appeare the better, I will here insert the Conquerors owne Letter to the Pope. To Gregory the most Excellent Pastor of Holy Church, William by the grace of God, King of England and Duke of Normandy, wisheth health and friendship. Amongst Lan∣franks Epistles, M. S. vetust. The Pope would haue William Conquerour to sweare him alle∣geance. Your Legat Hubert (Religious Father) came vnto me, ex∣horting me, in your name, to make Allegeance to you, and your Successors, and to take better order for the money wich my Predecessors were wont to send to the Church of Rome. The one I haue granted; of the other I haue not admitted. Fealtie to you, I neither would nor will make; for I neither promised you somuch, neither finde I that e∣uer my Antecessors did performe it to yours. The * mo∣ney hath beene negligently gathered, my selfe almost these This money was the Peter-pence or Romescot, which Edward Confessor calleth Eleemosynas, as giuen of Almes to the Church of Rome. three yeeres being in France; but being by Gods mercy re∣turned into my Kingdome, as much as is Collected is now sent by the said Legate: the rest shall be sent when it may conueniently, by the messengers of Lanfrancke our faith∣full seruant. Pray for vs, and for the good estate of our Kingdome; for I haue loued your Predecessors; and my de∣sire is aboue all others sincerely to loue you, and to heare you obediently. His Holinesse was then very wroth, that things did not cotten better to his desires in England. But Lanfranck cleared himselfe of the blame, shewing him how diligently (but indeed traiterously) hee Lanfranke coun∣selleth the King to subiect himself to the Pope. Epist. Lanfran. M. S. had bestirred himselfe, in counselling the King to yeeld to sweare obedience to the Pope: Suasi, sed non persuasi (saith he) I haue so aduised him, but I could not persuade him. (35) By which incredible pride and Popish in∣croachments, attempted by the meanes of these chie∣fest Prelates of the Kingdome, King William Rufus (no doubt) saw it was high time for him to preuent Will. Rufus pru∣dently treads his fathers steps. Eadmerus. He denieth the Popes power, Soluendi & Li∣gandi. Hodins. farther mischiefes to his State, by following his Fa∣thers steps in timely repressing such Papall intrusi∣ons: yea so farre was hee from yeelding his necke to that yoke, that hee auowed, that the Popes, though boasting of Peters Chaire, had not from him any power of binding or loosing, whose godly steppes they wholly neglected, following onely after Lucre and wordly Honours: that also it was but imposture to teach Intercession, and boot∣lesse Against praying to Saints. to vse Inuocation to Saints, euen to Saint Peter himselfe. And as for the rest of the Romish Clergie, who then gaue themselues strangely to wordly and fleshly pleasures, wearing their guilt girdles and Rand. in Polycbr. lib. 7. cap. 9. spurres, and trimming their bushie Locks; their loose liues the King much detested, and sought to punish; which most incensed their Choler: and these were the haires no doubt in those Monkish wri∣ters Pennes that euer blotted his faire name, vnder their fast-running, and vneuen hands. For so much may we gather from Gemeticensis the Recorder of his Gemet ic. l. 7. c. 8. life, who hauing reported many Acts of this Kings, seemeth lastly to checke himselfe for going so farre: where (he saith) These and many other like things wee could truely report of him, were it not we think it vnconve∣nient A very wise reason. largely to relate his actions, because he persecuted ve∣rie many of Gods seruants, and the holy Church not a lit∣tle, for which it is thought by the most part of wisemen, that he repented too late and vnprofitably. (36) And true it is, that some of them haue taxed him for great Pride and Couetousnesse, whereof yet Rob. of Glouc. Chron. S. Albans. some pregnant examples to the contrary are not wanting; as, (though the instance bee somewhat fa∣miliar) when his Chamberlane bringing him a paire An example of Will. Rufus his wonderfull Pride. Euery base knaue will now goe costlier. of new hoase, and he demanding the price, was an∣swered that they cost three shillings; Away base fel∣low (quoth he) are those beseeming a King? bring mee of a Marke price: his seruant went, but brought him an other paire of no greater cost, yet tolde him (as great Mens reckonings vsually are made) that they were of the rate appointed: wherewith the King was very well pleased, and disbursed that great Price to fulfill his owne pride. (37) His Couetousnesse what it was, may hence His auarice. Polydor Virg. appeare, that when two Monkes whose Abbat was lately dead, repaired to his Court, and each in large offers out-uied and ouerbad the other, to succeed in the Abbacie; a third Monke very sober, and poore in shew, accompanying them in their businesse, stood by; whom the King asked what he would giue to be made Abbat? Nothing, said the Monke; for I en∣tred Polych. lib. 7. c. 11. my profession to be poore, and hitherto haue beene, little esteeming the pompe or riches of the world. Then thou art the man (replied the King) and shalt be their Abbat, more worthy in thy pouer∣tie, A princely choice. I would all Si∣moniacks might so be serued. then they for their price; and so conferring on him that high honour, checked the others to their open infamy and reproach. As the like he also did to Hugh a Norman Knight, and Souldier by profession, who of a sincere deuoti∣on had entred the Monkish Order in the Monasterie A preferment bestowed vnloo∣ked for. of S. Augustines at Canterbury, and at the death of Vido the Abbat, was but a Probationer; when com∣ming with others to the King for the election of an∣other, was chosen himselfe (though sore against his will) without any request or proffer; whose peniten∣cy and vnfained humility so moued the King, that in this his Election he burst foorth into teares. (38) Other faults I grant hee is charged with, Of King Willi∣ams inconunen∣cy. wherein we haue not and cannot vtterly acquit him: as this besides others, that his chiefest Consorts were Effeminated persons, Ruffians and the like, and him∣selfe said to haue delighted continually in Adulteries, and the Company of Concubines, etiam coram Sole, Math. Paris. No Issue legi∣mate of his, knowne. shamelesse and in the sight of the Sunne; though none of them be named, nor any his illegitimate is∣sue knowne; and yet onely, or especially for his sins, many strange signes of Gods wrath are reported to haue happened in the time of his raigne. (39) For in his second yeere a terrible and most dreadful Earth-quake happened: And in his fourth, An. D. 1089 Strange acci∣dents of his time Earthquake. a vehement Lightning pierced the Steeple of the Abbey at Winscombe, rent the beames of the roofe, cast downe the Crucifixe, brake off his right legge, Lightning. and withall ouerthrew the Image of our Lady stan∣ding hard by, leauing such a stench in the Church, that neither incense, holy-water, nor the singing of the Monkes could allay it. And not long after, so great a tempest of winde happened, that in London it bare downe sixe hundred Houses, and blew off the Winde. roofe of Bow-Church, which with the Beames were borne into the Aire a great height; sixe whereof be∣ing twenty seuen foot long, with their fall were dri∣uen Iohn Stow. twenty three foote deepe into the ground, the streets of the City lying then vnpaued. In the ninth of his Raigne a blazing Starre appea∣red with two bushes, and other Starres seemed to An. D. 1096 Vncouth Stars. shoote darts each against others, to no little feare and amazement of the beholders. The last of his Raigne, Deluge. the Sea breaking ouer his limited banks, drowned an innumerable multitude of people in many Coun∣tries, and in Kent ouerwhelmed the lands that some∣time were Earle Goodwins, which as yet are called Goodwin Sands. Hector Boetius. Goodwins Sands, lying very dangerous for all Nauiga∣tors. But most fearefull was the Wel of blood, which A Well of bloud for fifteene daies rose vp out of the ground at Fin∣chamsted neere Abington in Barkeshire. His owne Wil. Malmesbury. Mat. Westm. Henry Hunt. Rand. Higd. dreame, wherein it seemed the veines of his Armes to be broken, and abundauce of his blood streaming on the floore; as likewise that Monks, who in his Presages of his death. sleepe saw the Crucifixe to spurne the King to the ground: these with many like, were held as presages of his death, which presently followed. Of al which, or the most part, what better censure can wee giue, then that which King William himselfe (when this last vision was told him) did deliuer; saying, Well, a Monke he is, and can dreame (Monachiliter) as Monkes Math. Paris ad An . 1100. vse to doe, onely for to gaine. Giue him an hundred shil∣lings, lest he should thinke he had dreamed bootelesse. (40) Whatsoeuer force those presages had, it is true, that vpon the second day of August, as he was hunting in the new Forrest, and in the place called Chorengham, all his Company being scattered from him, sauing onely a French Knight, whose name was Matth. Paris. Gemeticensis. Walter Tirrell, the King with his arrow strooke a Stag, which yet not greatly hurt ranne away; to marke therefore the course that it tooke, he held vp his hand betwixt his eie and the Sunne, when vnawares also Walter Tirrell so shot, that his Arrow glancing against a tree, strooke the King in his brest, who hastily brea∣king off so much as stucke out of his body, with one King William slaine with an Arrow in hun∣ting. onely groane fell downe and died. Of which sudden chance, his followers soone vnderstanding, most of them made away, but those few which remained, laid his body (basely God wot, but as necessity suffe∣red) into a Colliers Cart, which drawne with one sil∣ly leane Beast, through a very foule and filthy way, the Cart broke, and there lay the spectacle of worldly glory, both pittifully goared, and filthily bemired, Math. Paris. til afterward he was thence conuaied vnto Winchester, and buried vnder a plaine flat Marble stone in the Quire of Saint Swithens, the Cathedrall Church of the City, whose bones were since taken vp, and laid into a Coffer, with the bones of Canutus. Hee died Yeeres of his age and Raigne. after he had raigned twelue yeeres, eleuen moneths lacking eight daies, being the yeere of his age forty Will. Malmes. three, and of Christ Iesus, 1100. (41) He was of person indifferent, not of any His description of minde and body. great stature, yet very wel set, his belly (like his Fa∣thers) somewhat bearing out: of complexion Boetius thence surnames him Red-face. rud∣dy, whereof he tooke his surname, and his haire somewhat yellow, his forehead flat and square, and his Eies diuersely coloured; a stammering tongue, especially in his anger; gorgeous in apparell, and of no sparing diet; very bountifull to Souldiers, often hard to Churchmen, burdensome so his Sub∣iects, an expert Souldier, that could wel both endure labour of the Body, and put off cares of the minde; in his affaires circumspect, of his word stedfast, and in his warres no lesse diligent, then fortunate. He gaue His works of de∣uotion. to the Monkes called de Charitate, the great New-Church of Saint Sauiours of Barmondsey in Southwark, which he built, with his Mannor of Barmondsey it selfe, and all the appurtenances, together with the Towne of Charleton: confirming all that had beene Lib. Bermond. giuen them before. He also of an old Monastery in Yorke founded a new Hospitall, to the honour of Saint Peter, for the sustentation of poore men and women: dying as we haue said, without Wife or Issue, or with∣out respit of time for dispose of his Crowne, or other wordly affaires. HENRIE, THE FIRST OF THAT Monarch 41 Henry I. NAME, THE FORTIETH ONE MO∣NARCH OF THE ENGLISH-MEN: HIS ACTS, RAIGNE, WIVES, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER IIII. H Enry, the yongest sonne of the Conquerour and third An. D. 1100 Wil. Malms. Iohn Rowse. Annales S. Aug. Math. Paris. King of his race, was born heere in England, and brought vp in learning euē frō his child-hood, where∣by hee gained to himselfe the high honour very rare in those daies, especially in Princes, to be, and to bee stiled the Beauclerk: whose portion of Treasure was not a little, giuen him by his father, neither any whit spared by himselfe to purchase friends at the death of his Brother, This was the first Earle of War∣wicke from the Conquest, so to continue onely ad pla um. M. Th Miles. Th Rudborne. Henry of Newburgh the right Noble, vertuous and learned Earle of Warwicke, euer making his way both with the Clergy and Nobles, who A politicke but traiterous course of capitulating. Math. Paris. re∣fused to admit any King but with capitulation and couenants to their owne likings. (2) The steps then by which hee mounted the Throne of Maiesty, were the dislikes of Williams o∣uer-hard Henries helps to the Crowne. Will. Gemet. curbing of his Natiues, as he euer called the English: the rash and giddy head of his brother Robert; his absence in Syria, for whose returne to stay was dangerous, and whose election for King of Ierusalem, was likely to imploy his person there: his English-birth, Idem. hauing both a King and Queene to his Parents; his faire promises for reformation of bad and rigo∣rous Roger Houed. Lawes, imposed by his Father and Brother, the restoring of the Clergy from exile, and to their Church-Liuings; remission of Taxes exacted on the Subiects; and due punishments of such persons as Henry Hunt. were the chiefe Causers thereof, in which behalfe to satisfie the People hee committed Ralphe Bishop of Ralpe Bishop of Durham impri∣soned. Math. Paris. Durham to the Tower. Then promising by Oath to frame iust Lawes grounded on those of Saint Edward (then which nothing was more desired) did winde himselfe so farre into the loues of all, that with a ge∣nerall concurrence he was saluted King. (3) He began his raigne the second of August; His Coronation. Ger. Dorob. the sacred rites of whose Coronation were celebrated at Westminster, by Maurice Bishop of London (in the absence of Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury) the fifth day of the same moneth, the yeere of Christ 1100. When Henry the fourth possessed the Im∣periall William Malmes. Diadem, Philip the first swaied the Scepter of France, Edgar wore the Crowne of Scotland, and Pas∣chall The fortaine Princes raigning in his time. the second sate in the See of Rome. (4) His first businesse was to put in execution what he had promised; and because hee might be thought The reformati∣on of his Court. Rand. Hig. in Po∣lychr. lib. 7. ca. 12. vnfit to guide a large kingdome, who cannot reforme those who are euer at his elbow, began (as a good Prince ought) with his owne Court and Houshold (as knowing that to be the paterne and warrant of others enormities) whence he cashiered al Court-mi∣nions and nice or effeminate wantons, and enacting a decree against his Courtiers Rapines, Adulteries and Robberies, punished their Thefts with Houeden. Wigorniens. death, and Lechery with the Malmes. lib. 5. de Regibus. Publike Liber∣ties by him granted. Stowes Annales. losse of their Eies, and other parts peccant. Then he restored to the English the vse of Lights, which his father forbad by the ringing of a Bell, and had now continued for the space of thirty three yeeres, ordaining likewise many good Lawes, and common Liberties, exemplified at large in Mathew Paris, which summarily may be thus abridged. 1 The Freedome of the Church from oppressi∣ons, Math. Paris. or reseruation of their Possessions vp∣on vacancies. 2 That the Heires of his Nobility should pos∣sesse the Lands of their Fathers, without redemption from him, which fauour the Nobles likewise should afford to their Te∣nants. 3 That the Gentry might giue in Mariage their Daughters and Kinswomen without his licence, so it were not to his Enemy. 4 That the widow should haue her Iointer, and not be compelled to marry against her owne liking. 5 That the Mother or next of kindred, shall be Guardian of the Lands of her Children. 6 That Coiners of false money should bee * pu∣nished; and likewise ordained a measure By losse of right hand, saith Mal∣mes. Of Hand and Genitals, Gome∣ticons lib. 7. cap. 23. Of Eies and Ge∣nitals, Houeden. Malmes. lib. 5. Simon Dun. Wil. Malms. King Edwards Lawes reuiued againe. to the length of his * Arme to be a standard for Commerce among his People. 7 Then did he forgiue all debts to the Crowne before his owne time, and murthers com∣mitted before the day of his Coronation: with some other like indulgences: But, to the greatest content of the People, hee gaue power and strength vnto King Edwards Lawes. (5) To these his Ordinances he set his Name and Seale, with the subscription of sundry Peeres, com∣manding His Charters sent to be kept in Monasteries. Math. Paris. as many Copies as there were Counties in England to be transcribed and kept in the Monaste∣teries of euery Prouince. Then did he recall Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury forced out of the Land by Rufus, and bestowed all vacant. Church-liuings vpon Ger. Dor. the worthiest persons. But to ground his new plan∣ted affection more deepe in the hearts of the English, Ypodigma Neu∣stria. he became a suter to Edgar King of Scotland, to haue his sister to wife, which was Maude the daughter of Queen Margaret, Sister to Edgar Etheling and Grand-child of Edmund Ironside, whereby his issue might His Mariage in∣to the English blood Wil. Genetic. cap. 25. Math. Paris. meerely be both of the English blood and of the an∣cient English Kings. (6) Shee by report of some writers had vowed Virginity, and was brought vp in a house of Religi∣on at Winchester (hauing entred the profession of a a Votary. Nun vnder her Aunte Christian) whose sanctity and knowledge both in matters humane and diuine, with her mother Margarets, are highly commended (saith Gemetic. cap. 10. Gemeticensis) in a book written of their liues: Notwith∣standing others hold that she vailed her selfe but for a shift, to put off some vnworthy matches, which her father Malcolme would haue imposed her; and indeed Eadmerus. this scruple was such a Core in Anselm his mouth that Rand. Higden. in , lib. 7. cap. 16. he would not pronounce the words of Contract vntil her selfe had cleared the doubt by her open confes∣sion. (7) Duke Robert, who now had bin fiue yeres in the holy warres, and therin borne himselfe with such va∣lour Math. Paris. Duke Roberts no∣ble seruice in the Holy warres. that he of all the Christian Princes was thought the worthiest to bee annointed King of Ierusalem, had their voice and election standing in the Temple before the Altar, vpon Easter-Eue: and that the ra∣ther by a miracle of his Taper, which tooke light of Duke Robert e∣lected King of Hi salem. it selfe, or from Heauen (if wee will be so light to be∣leeue it:) but he hearing of the death of Rufus, refu∣sed that, in hope to haue England; for which his ne∣glect Ran. Hegden. in Polychr l. 7. c. 1 . Math. Paris. of Diuine appointment, it is said God neuer af∣ter prospered him: then returning from Syria into Normandy was there ioifully receiued, and assumed a∣again his Dukedome (which he had engaged to his bro∣ther He returnes into Normandy Will Gemet. cap. 12. His attempts for England. Math. Paris. Roger. Houed. William) without repaiment of any mony: where hearing that Henry his yonger, was stept into his throne of England, laid proiects in his minde how to defeate him. And to further these his designes, Ralphe Bishop of Durham, corrupting his keepers, brake out of the Tower of London & gat into Normandy, where he instigated Duke Robert against his brother of Eng∣land; others also delighting in alterations, solicited Wil. Malmsb. Henry Hunt. Robert to make into England, with promise of their assistance to recouer the Crowne. (8) King Henrie for his part resoluing to hold what he had got, neglected no meanes to keepe the King Henry strength eth himselfe against Duke Robert. Diadem as it was set, and therefore rigged forth his Nauie to secure the Seas, manned his fortresses, and with a great Army repaired towards the Coast, where neere vnto Hastings he lodged his Campe, relying more vpon his owne strength and valour of his Peo∣ple, then any iust title he had to the Kingdome. (9) Duke Robert by this time had taken the An D. 1101 An. Reg. 2. The English all off to Duke Ro∣bert. Seas, and was vpon the Kings fleete before they were aware, where preparing for Conflict, the most of the English fell to the Normans, either by the perswasion of the Duke or in hatred of Henry, that then began to tyrannize ouer them as they did imagine: By which meanes the Duke, had safe landing at Portesmouth, and Math. Paris. The Duke lan∣deth in England. Will. Gemet. cap. 12. did not a little reioice in this his fortunate beginning; threatning his brother to be reuēged for his wrongs, & blaming the Nobility for suffering him thus to be abused, whilst he for the common good of Christen∣dome, was imploied in the Holy-Lands warre. King Henry, as wise, as the other was valorous, wrought K. Henry labours for a peace. vnder hand for an agreement of peace; for hee very well saw, that the euent of warre hath commonly is∣sue from the first successe, and at one and the same time doth bolden and weaken the courage of the multitude; therefore certaine Noblemen on both sides so trauised the businesses, that the Brethren in short time became friends, and a composition made Henry . Agreement made betwixt the Brethren. to both their contents. The agreement was thus, that, because Henry was borne after his fathers Con∣quest of this Land, and stood now the Crowned King with common consent, hee should during his life, enioy the same, paying Duke Robert in way The covenant of Peace. of fealty three thousand Markes by yeere: and the suruiuour to be heire to his brother deceased, if hee died without a sonne. In which it was also conclu∣ded, that all, either English or Normans, which had Will . Matth. West. , Dor. taken part with the King or Duke, should be pardo∣ned of all offences, and their Liuings againe restored: for the Confirmation whereof, and the performance accordingly, twelue Princes vpon either parties took their Corporall Oathes; and the Armies presently dissolued. (11) The Norman Duke princely entertained the space of sixe months in the Court of King Henry, Duke R bert en∣tertained in King Henries court. Will Gemet. Cap. 13. shewed himself rather opē & credulous, then any way suspitious, in al his carriages, & so with much liking, & loue to his brother, departed vnto his own Country. But the Sunne-shine of these faire daies, began forth∣with to be ouercast, by the incitation of such as ende∣uoured to sow discord betwixt the two Brethren: and not onely those in Normandy, which euer buzd iealousies into Duke Roberts eares, but euē in England also, some fell in dislike of King Henry, and affecting alteration, with the malignant eie of enuy beheld the glory of his beauteous Crowne. (12) Amongst whom, Robert Beliasm Earle of Rob. Beliasme a∣gainst the King. An. D. 1102. Shrewsbery, the eldest sonne of Roger Mountgomery, strengthened the Towns and Castles of Shrewsburie, Bridgenorth, Tichile, and Arundell, with victualls, mu∣nition, and men, against the King; alluring likewise the Simon Dunel. An. Reg. 3. fickle Welshmen vnto his designes. Henry therefore in rage & hast, marched thitherward with a great power; Roger H uen. against Arundell Castle, hee raised another of wood▪ and tooke it; besieged Bridgenorth, which presentlie Matth. Paris. yeelded, and Shrewsbury sent him their keyes and pledges of their obeisance: when Beliasme with his brother Arnulfus, and Roger de Poytiers, were constrai∣ned Henry Hunt. to abiure the Land for euer, and thereupon went into Normandy, where they ceased not to raise more sparks from that brand which others before them had blowne. (13) Neither were those men busier to raise stirs abroad, then was Archbishop Anselmus to doe it at home; who being a man of a stiffe resolution, in a Math. Paris. Councell holden at London, drew on him the offence both of the King and Clergie: for therein, first, he ex∣communicated all married Priests, Goodwin in vita Anselmi. Eadmerus. halfe the Clergie of England at that time, being either maried or the sons of married Priests; next he inhibited all lay men to heare their masses. But this thing (saith Paris) howsoeuer it seemed good to some, yet vnto others very dangerous, lest while they affected after a purity which was aboue their strength, they might fal into impurity of a higher qua∣lity. Matth. Paris In this Councell also Anselme, peremptory vpon the Popes assistance, depriued many great Prelates Contention a∣bout inuestitures. of their promotions, because they had accepted their Inuestures from the King which was done by receiuing of a Pastorall staffe and a ring, an ancient rite, testifying that their donation was from their Soueraigne, (as S. Wulstan receiued his Staffe from S. Edward, and therefore professed hee would resigne it onely to him:) in which number were the Abbots of Math. Paris in Will. Ru . Ely, of Ramsey, of Perscors, of S. Edmunds, of Tauestock, Peterborrow, Burch, Bodiac, Middleton, and Stoke: for which his bold parts, and for refusing to consecrate certain Bishops, aduanced by the King, great conten∣tion fell betwixt him and the Archbishop, who ta∣king himselfe much wronged by the present ouer-bearing power, appealed vnto his Holy Father, Pope The Archbishop goes to Rome. Paschall, and soone after went in person to Rome vnto him. (14) Vnto whom likewise the King sent his Am∣bassadors, namely Herbert Bishop of Norwiche, with Robert Bishop of Lichfield, both of them of his priuie An. D. 1103 An. Reg. 4. Will. Thorne. Polydor. The King sends Ambassadors to Rome. Counsell, and William Warenast his procurator a Cler∣gy man, of a very bold spirit and speech, who in deba∣ting his Soueraigns cause before the Pope and cardi∣nals, with threatning language and countenance a∣uouched, that the King his Master would not lose his right in the Inuestitures of the Church, for the losse of his The King wil not loose his inue∣stures for his Kingdome. Math. Paris. Kingdome: whereto the Pope, (no Crauant to bee da∣red on his owne dunghill) as stoutly answered; If, as thou sayest, the King will not lose the donation of Chur∣ches, for the losse of his Kingdome; know thou for certaine The Pope will lose his head rather then suffer kings to haue in∣uestures. (before God I speake it) that I would not suffer him to en∣ioy them without punishment, no not for the sauing of my head: notwithstanding which braue words against the King, yet the degraded Abbots were restored throgh the Clemency of the Papall see, which is neuer wan∣ting Siluer and gold best mediators to the Pope. Pari nsis. to any, as long as the white and red, (to vse the very words of a Monke) make intercession for them. But from the Church to the State. (15) Robert Curtuoise, either to sound his brothers Duke Robert en∣tertained in Eng∣land. An. D. 1104. Will. Gemet. Henry Hunt. designes, or to congratulate him in a brotherly loue, came into England; where hee was so roially entertai∣ned, that all suspition was quenched, and himselfe so well contented, that at the onely motion and request of Queene Maud, he remitted the three thousand Marks, couenanted to bee paid yeerely vnto him, though he were lesse able to forbeare, then King Hen∣ry to giue. But when his wants told him of this his o∣uer He remits 3000. markes a yeer to K. Henry. An. Reg. 5. lauish releasement, he openly exclaimed against King Henry, that hee had craftily circumuented, and deceitfully cheated him; and now giuing open eare and credit to such as sought their disunion, gaue his Brother all occasions of enmity, who was ready e∣nough of himselfe, to make the least very great. For besides this present displeasure conceiued against Duke Robert, he added others, and this especially, that D. Roberts patri∣mony wasted. William Gemet. he had wilfully wasted the Inheritance which his fa∣ther had left him, to wit the Dukedom of Normandy, hauing nothing now almost in that Dominion be∣sides the City of Roane, which he would haue parted with also, had not the Cittizens thereto denied their consents. (16) Neither was it the least motiue to King Hen∣ries displeasure, that his traiterous subiects were so willingly receiued by his brother; for besides Robert Beliasme and others, William, Earle of Mortaigne in Normandy, and of Cornwall in England, the sonne of William Earle of Mortaign against the King. Ypodig. Neustri. Robert, halfe brother to the Conquerour, because the Earledome of Kent (which he made claime vnto, as heire to his vnkle Odo) was denied him, in a discontent got him into Normandy, where besides his valiant as∣saults of the Kings Castles, and Souldiers, hee much endangered the possessions of Richard Earl of Chester, Math. Paris. Rand. Higd. lib. 7. cap. 13. Wil. Malmsb. then a child and the Kings Warde: so that the flames of warre raised by these seditions, seemed to be blown from England vnto the parts beyond the Seas, and to fire the territories of the English there; neither is it ea∣sie to declare (saith Houeden) what misery (the meane while) by exactions the land felt here at home. Math. Paris. K. Henry allures the Normans to side with him. An. D. 1105 Rog. Houeden. An. Reg. 6. (17) For the King incited into Normandy vpon these occasions, by large distributions of money car∣ried out of England, wonne the Normane Nobility to reuolt from their Lord, and tooke the Towne and Castle of Cane by composition, and burnt Bayon with the beautifull Church of Saint Maries, whereupon Henry. Hunt. Forts of Norman∣dy yeelded to the King. the Priories of Normandy yeelded themselues vnto his Protection; by whose example the Britaines and those of Aniou did the like; so that their Castles and forts were filled with the Garrisons of King Henry, Duke Robert in no wise able to resist; which done Hen∣ry with triumph returned into England. (18) The Curtuoise by his Normans thus vncour∣teously An. D. 1106 Duke Robert leaues force and trusts to persiva∣sion. An. Reg. 7. Math. Paris. Henry Hunt. D. Roberts sub∣mission. dealt with, saw it was bootelesse against so great a streame to striue, and therefore thought best to lay away weapons, and to become himselfe a Mediatour for Peace. With which resolution ta∣king the seas, hee followed his brother vnto Nor∣thampton; where humbling himselfe in a more deie∣ctiue manner, then either his birth, or owne nature could well brooke, desired the Kings peace, both in respect of their brotherly vnion, and the regard of his owne accustomed clemency; willing him to consider, that warre was not only vnnaturall betwixt brethren, but that a reproch euer followes the cha∣riot of the Victor, desiring him not to triūmph in his ouerthrow, who was now ready to render all that he had into his hands: but King Henry muttering to K. Henry respects it not. himselfe, turned away from his brother without a∣ny answere. (19) For God (saith Paris) not pleased to giue the ef∣fect, though the Beau-clearke felt a remorse in consci∣ence, Math. Paris. for vsurping his Kingdome (being indeed very lear∣ned, K. Henry resists the counsell of his owne consci∣ence. and well vnderstanding the duties both of equity and law) and thereupon beganne both to feare some vio∣lent insurrection of the subiects, and also the reuenging wrath of God vpon him, for his trecherous and vniust dea∣lings towards his elder brother, to whom vndoubtedly the Kingdome by all right did appertaine: yet stood hee ra∣ther in feare of men then God (whose fauours he cunningly laboured to keepe) whom he meant to please another time by A presumptuous ground to defer repentance. building of an Abbey for his satisfaction. Duke Ro∣bert then seeing and detesting the Kings swolne pride, posted backe vnto Normandy to gather his powers. Henry also held it good policy, not to giue passage vnto Roberts wrath, knowing him a Souldi∣er, and well waying his desperate estate: and there∣fore King Henry wins his Nobles with faire words. calling his Lords vnto London, in an assembly tickled their eares with these delectable and smooth words. (20) My friends, and faithful Counsellors, and natiue Countrimen, you know by true report Mat. Paris. how my Brother Robert was elected, and by God himselfe called to be the fortunate King of Ierusa∣lem, and how vnfortunately, or rather insolently, he refused that sacred estate, whereby hee is now most iustly reprobated of God: you also know by many other experiments, his pride and arrogancy; for be∣ing a man of a warring humor, hee is not onely im∣patient of any peace, but also wilfully desireth to trample vpon you as men of abiect and contemp∣tible disposition, vpbraiding you for idle droanes, for belly-gods, and what not? But I your King, na∣turally inclined to bee both humble and peaceable, take delight in nothing more then to do you good, to maintaine your tranquillity and ancient liber∣ties, (as I haue often sworn vnto you,) and meeke∣ly and willingly to yeeld my selfe to your aduises, whereby I may circumspectly gouerne you as a clement Prince: and to that end euen now will I confirme (if your wisedomes so thinke fit) your ouer-worne and vndermined Charters, and will roborate them most firmely with a new oath and ratification. Meane while, all the lawes which the holy King Edward by Gods inspiring did esta∣blish, I doe here commaund to bee inuiolably obserued, hereby to moue you to adhere stedfastly vnto mee, in repulsing cheerefully, willingly, and powerfully, the wrongs offered me, by my brother shal I say? nay, by my most deadly enemy & yours, and of the whole English Nation: For if I bee guar∣ded with the valours and affections of Englishmen, I shall scorne the threates of him and his Nor∣mans, as forcelesse, and no whit to bee feared. And King Henries confidence of the English. with these faire promises (which yet afterwards hee vtterly neglected) hee so wonne the hearts of them all, that they would die with him, or for him, against any hostility whatsoeuer. (21) Duke Robert gone, and preparing for warre, Henry thus setled in his peoples affection, followed Math. Paris. King Henry in∣uades Normandy. him with all expedition, hauing in his company the choice Nobility of England, Normandy, Gaunt, and Britaine, so that hee was exceedingly strong. With Robert, for men of chiefe account, were Robert Be∣liasme, Earle of Shrewsburie, and William Earle of Mortaigne, in like displeasure with the King, and therefore armed with the like desperate boldnes. (22) Henry with his Army had pierced into Nor∣mandy, euen as farre as Yet he also long after was taken and cast into perpetuall pri∣son. Wil. Malmsbury. Mat. Paris saith, it was the . Ca∣end. Maij. Tenerthebray, a Castle of the Earle of Mortaigne, vsing all meanes possible to Wil. Ge surprise the same; for whose rescue, the Duke with these his Consorts, made all diligence to dissolue Mat Paris cals in Her ebray. the siege, and after some few skirmishes ioined a bloody battaile, brauely fought on each part, where at the first onset, the Kings power (though, much greater in number) went down; but by their mul∣titude A fierce battaile betwixt the Brethren and their forces. Mat. Paris. Duke Robers taken prisoner. Eadmerus. Mat. Paris. and manhood (especially through the * Kings example and encouragement) they soone preuailed; where Duke Robert, with Earle William, and sun∣dry others of good note, manfully fighting in the very presse of their enemies, were taken prisoners; but * Robert Beliasme escaped by flight. And thus (as Ma∣thew Paris obserued) Gods Iustice & Mercy tooke effect; his Iustice vpon Robert, for his refusall of Ieru∣salems title, and vnto Henry his fauour, according to the prophesie of King William his Father. This battaile was fought, and Normandy wonne, vpon Saturday, being the Vigill of S. Michael, euen the same day forty yeares that William the Bastard set foot on Normandy con∣quered. Will. Malmes. Englands Shoare for his Conquest; God so disposing (saith Malmsbury) that Normandy should be subiected to England that very day; wherein England was sub∣dued to Normandy. (23) Robert Curtuoise, that now vnfortunate Wil. Ge . Prince, and William Mortaigne, that valiant, but head∣strong Earle, were forthwith sent into England and imprisoned; the Earle in the Tower of London, and the Duke in Cardiffe Castle in Wales, after he had gouerned the Dutchy of Normandy nineteen yeeres; and was for esteeme in Chiualrie accounted among the best Captains that the world then afforded, had hee not beene (as commonly martiall spirits vse to be) too rash and vnstaied in his other enterprises; which headinesse did now draw vpon him a penance of twenty sixe yeeres continuance, in the afflicted state of a forlorne Captiue. And Henry now no Roberts rashnesse ouerthrew . longer as a brother, receiuing the keyes of Norman∣dy, as a Conquerour returned into England. (24) But long it was not ere Duke Robert, weary of this vnwonted duresse, sought to escape; and hauing An. D. 1107 liberty to walke in the Kings Meadowes, Forrests, Mat. West . and Parkes, brake from his Keepers without any Assisters, or meanes for security; who being mist, An. Reg. 8. was presentlie pursued, and taken in a quag-mire, Math. Paris. wherein his Horse lay fast: whereupon the King hearing of this his attempt, considering that woods were no walles to restraine the fierce Lyon, and that to play with his claw was to endanger a state, commanded him not onely a greater re∣straint and harder durance; but also (a thing vnfit for a brother to suffer, but most vnworthy for Beau∣clearke to act) both his eyes to bee put out, causing Duke Roberts pu out. Mat. Paris. his head to be held in a burning bason (to auoid the deformity of breaking the eye-bais) vntill the glassie tunicles had lost the office of retaining their light. (25) Hauing thus quieted all forraine opposi∣tions, King Henry set his minde to preuent Domes∣ticke; An. D. 1108 and therfore (about this time) those Flem∣mings Flemmings pla∣ced in Wales. whose Lands the Seas had deuoured some few yeeres before, and place was granted them in Cum∣berland, first by King Rufus, and afterwards by Hen∣ry; An. Reg. 9. were now by the King, vpon better aduisement, remoued into Wales, both to disburden his Inland of such guests, and that so they might bee a defence betwixt him and those euer-stirring people. Which proiect nothing deceiued his expectation; for by the testimony of Giraldus, They were a Colony stout and Giral. Ga b. strong, and continually endured the warres of the Welsh; a Nation most accustomed to seeke gaine by cloathing, by The co menda∣tion of the Flem∣mings. triffique also and Marchandize by Sea and Land, vnder∣taking any paines, or perils whatsoeuer. A people of very great power, and as time and place requireth, ready by turnes to take plough in hand and till the ground, as ready also to goe into the field and fight it out; and that I may adde thus much more (saith hee) a Nation most loially deuoted to the Kings of England, and as faithfull to the Englishmen. (26) By the which his policy, he attained that The Flemmings great helps for restraining the Welsh. which his brother Rufus could not, who many a time had but small successe in those parts though other∣wise, euer sped most fortunatly in all his aduentures of warres: But it is thought by some, that as the King Rufus had little successe in Wales. Mountanous cragginesse of the Country; and sharp∣nesse of the Aire, encouraged them in their rebelli∣on; so the same impeached Rufus his successe. But King Henrie (saith Malmesburie) who with many a warlike expedition went about to force the Welshmen, Will. Malmes. lib. 5. euer stirring vnto Rebellion, for to yeeld and to submit themselues; in the end resolued vpon this whole some poli∣cie; for to take down their pride, he brought thither all the Flemmings that dwelt in England: a great number of which Nation in those daies, in regard of his mothers kin∣dred by her Fathers side, flocking hither, were closely shrouded in England, in so much as they for their multi∣tude King Henry dis∣burden England of the Flemmings seemed burden some vnto the Realme: Wherefore he sent them all together with their substance, their Wines, and Children, vnto Rosse a Countrey in Wales, as it were into a common auoidance, thereby both to purge his own kingdome, and also to quatle and represse the desperate boldnesse of his Enemies. (27) And now being free from all feare of sub∣uerters, King Henry, growing disdainefull (saith Paris) refused to fulfil what he had so oftē promised to his Nobles, The King violats his promise to the Peeres. Math. Paris. heaping threats vpon threats; for God had bestowed on him three bounties, wisdome, victory, and riches, aboue any of his Predecessors: but for all these hee shewed himselfe to God most vnthankeful: And of his Clergy (wee may say) too regardlesse, in suffering Anselm, newly reconciled, to lay heauy punishmēts vpon the Ansel. stil molests maried Priests. married Priests, putting many from their places, be∣cause they denied to put away their Lawfull wiues, whereof great contention followed, and grieuous sinnes in short time committed, both against God and Nature. Eadmerus. (28) Among these proceedings in England, Philip King of France deceased, and his sonne Lewis King Philip of France dieth, and Lewis succee. deth. Polyder. King Henrie strengthens Normandy. surnamed Crassus succeeded in his gouernement, which how he stood affected to Henry was doubted, and therefore to make sure worke, the King sailed in∣to Normandy, furnishing his Townes, Castles, and Fortresses, with all habiliments of warre, with proui∣sions befitting such suspected times; and so retur∣ning, he found attending his comming, the Ambas∣sadors of Henrie the fourth Emperour, as suters from their Master to obtaine Lady Maud the Kings daugh∣ter An. D. 1109 His daughter married to the Emperour. An. Reg. 10. in Marriage, then not past fiue yeeres of age, which was willingly graunted, and the espousals by way of Proxy solemnized, with great feasts and mag∣nificent triumphes. (29) About which time the death of Arch∣bishop Anselme happening, gaue no small hope to the Clergy, as themselues conceited, againe to enioy Archbishop An∣selme dieth. An. D. 1110 the liberty of matrimoniall society; wherein they were not a little deceiued: for the King seemed wil∣ling that the Ecclesiasticall Ordinance before made should bee more neerely looked into; whereupon men for feare, and in the sight of men, carried them∣selues An. Reg. 11. accordingly, but if in secret they did worse (saith Eadmerus) let the charge light on their own heads, sith eue∣ry Appearing Cha∣stity did breed secret impurity. man shall beare his owne sinnes: for I know, (saith hee) that if Fornicators and Adulterers God will iudge, the abusers of their owne Cosens, (I will not say, their Eadmerus. own Sisters and Daughters) shal not surely escape his iudge∣ment. (30) The Kings peace, which seemed to be secu∣red An. D. 1111 by his new affinity with the Emperour, and his glory raised to the high, began now to bee enuied, and his brother Duke Roberts extremities greatly to be pitied, both by some English and also Normans. An. Reg. 12. For Foulke Earle of Aniou both threatned the re∣uenge, and by corrupting the inhabitants wanne the City of Constance, from his obeisance. To stay whose irruptions King Henry passed into Nor∣mandy, where hee vsed great extremity, and put to death Helia Earle of Cenomania, who held that King Henry goes into Normandy against Rebels. Math. Paris. County against him; for which cause Godfrey Earle of Gaunt tooke such displeasure that hee entred in∣to that Earledome, and marrying the said Helia his daughter, kept the County perforce against King Henries great power. But Robert de Beliasme Robert Reli sme an old Traitor taken. that had escaped at Duke Roberts ouerthrow, was then taken and committed prisoner to Warham Ca∣stle, too gentle a punishment for so blood-thirstie a man, whose nature was such, that he delighted him∣selfe onely in cruelty, an example whereof hee shew∣ed vpon his owne sonne, who being but a childe and A bloudy father and a cruell pa∣stime. playing withhim, the father for a pastime, put his thumbes in the boies eyes, and thrust out the balles thereof. (31) These warres somewhat asswaged, King Chro. Wallia. An. D. 1112 An. Reg. 13. Henry returned into England, where the people con∣ceiued much grudge at his importable taxes, and the Clergy no lesse at his reseruation of Church liuings in their vacancies, vnder pretence of keeping them for the worthiest; but how vnworthily he oftentimes bestowed thē, may be gathered by that prety reproof of Guymundus his Chaplain, who grieuing to see vn∣worthymen (for the most part) aduanced to Bishop∣rickes and other dignities; when on the Rogation day he celebrated diuine seruice in the Kings Chap∣pel, Regist. S. Frides. Wid . Oxon. being to read that lesson, out of Saint Iames 5. 17. Iames, it rained not on the earth III. yeares, and VI. moneths, hee purposely read it, it rained not, one, one, one, yeares, and fiue, one, monethes. All men either laughing or won∣dring at his reading; the King checkt him for it, and askt him the reason; marry (quoth he) I see you bestow your preferments onely on such, as can read so: which secret touch the King well weighing, did both presently preferre him to the gouernment of Saint Frideswides in the Vniuersity of Oxford, and afterward was more carefull in all other his choi∣ces. (32) The King had not beene long in England af∣ter his returne from Normandy, before the Welsh∣men An. D. 1114 Floren. Wigorn. Math. Paris. Mat. Westminst. Iohn Castor. Chron. Wallia. (then a restlesse people) were in Armes against such English, as had set footing in that Country, which were Gilbert Strangbowe Earle of Strygil, and others, whose lands in the south part Owen ap Cado∣gan sore molested and spoiled; the like did Gruffith ap Conan Prince of North-Wales vpon Hugh Earle of Chesters County, and both of them denied King Henry either seruice or tribute. These Earles so in∣censed the King, touching these and other outrages of the Welshmen, that in a rage he vowed not to leaue The King goes with a power a∣gainst the Welsh. one aliue in al North- Wales, nor in Powys-land; and straight repairing thitherward, diuided his Armie into 3. parts. The first was led by Earle Gilbert against South-wales; the second band by Alexander King of Scotland, and Hugh Earle of Chester against North-Wales; Henry Hunt. and the King himselfe lead the third, vnder whose Standard was the chiefe strength of middle England. But the Welsh seeing themselues far vna∣ble to withstand this present preparation, tooke in∣to Flor. Wigorn. the Mountaines and Woods, (their surest holds) where being followed, with great difficulty, many of them were slaine, and the rest yeelded to King The Welsh subdu∣ed. Henry; who now as a Conquerour in triumph re∣turned to London. (33) Whither immediately resorted vnto him, the Ambassadour of his sonne in law the Empe∣rour, to haue his wife Lady Maud now marri∣age-able, Math. Paris. Henry Hunt. to be sent vnto him; to which request the King most willingly condescended, and to furnish her forth accordingly, laid a Lawyers cal this Ayde a file mar∣rier, & Polydor. Hist. lib. 11. saith this was the first president: but falsely; for both this, and that o∣ther at knighting of the Kings chil∣dren, are menti∣oned in the graūd Cust mier of Nor∣mandy; and was in vse amongst the Romane Em∣perours: Sueto∣nius in Caligula. The English Kings Eldest Sonnes Dukes of Normandy. taxe vpon his Subiects, taking three shillings for euery Hide of land: wher∣upon shee was presently conducted by his greatest Peares into Germany, and at Mentz married to the Emperour Henry the fourth, being there consecra∣ted and crowned his Empresse. )34) Shortly after King Henry tooke the Seas for Normandy, and there created his sonne William (about the age of twelue yeeres (Houeden saith but eight) Duke of that Country, causing the people to sweare him fealty, whereof grew a custome that thenceforth the Kings of England made euermore their eldest sonnes Dukes of Normandy; which done, he returned, and nothing recorded of his next yeres aduentures, but onely that the Sea gaue place to the Sands, and by low Ebbes restored some part of her treasures that long had laien hid and buried in her depth; the riuers likewise forgat their wonted Will. Thorne. swiftnes; and as it were seemed vnwilling to pay their ancient tribute into that deiected Element, and a∣mong An. D. 1115 Math. Paris them Thamesis not the least, whose waters so failed for two daies, that betwixt London Bridge and the Tower she became passable and scarse two foot deepe. (35) King Henry free now from all forraine & An. D. 1116 Polydor. lib. 11. domesticall trouble (onely Gruffith ap Rees some∣what vnquiet in Wales) gaue his thoughts to assure the Crowne into his line, and to ordaine lawes for the well gouerning of his people; for calling an as∣sembly at Salisbury, caused the Estates both Spiritu∣all Ger. Dor. and Temporall, to sweare fealty to himselfe, and to his sonne Willam, the Hope of succession: then reforming many abuses, and ending certaine con∣tentions both of his Nobles and Prelates, laid here the first foundation of our High Court of Parlia∣ment: The beginnings of our Parlia∣ments. for the English Kings in elder times, ordered the affaires of the Common-wealth, by their Edicts, by their officers, and by the Gouernours of euerie The difference betwixt this and the Ancient v e of the State. Country, and seldome had the ioint aduice of their people; sauing onely at beginning of their gouern∣ment, and in time of warre; whereas now the Sub∣iect, best vnderstanding his owne grieuances, hath both liberty in choice of their Knights and Burges∣ses, as also free voice to complaine thereof in that honourable assembly. (36) At this time Theobald Earle of Blessis, Ne∣phew vnto King Henry, vpon occasion of displea∣sure Campaigne. rose vp in Armes against the French King, to whose aid King Henry sent; whereat Lewes found Henry Hunt. Offence and cause of debate betwixt King Henry and King Lewis of France. himselfe sore agrieued, and drew to his side Bald∣wine Earle of Flanders, and Foulke Earle of Aniou, who together tooke oath to dispossesse Henry of Normandy, and to make William the sonne of the Curtoise Duke thereof, to whom it belonged by right Attempts to dis∣possesse K. Henry of Normandy. and descent; to which also many of the Nobles of Normandy consented; pittying the wrong of the noble spirited Child, and the wretched captiuity of the blind, and ouer-borne Father. (37) Henry as wisely wrought against their de∣signes, Henry goeth to secure Norman∣dy. and leauying a great taxe vpon his Subiects, passeth therewith into Normandy, where vniting the aides of the foresaid Theobald, as also of the Earle of Britaine, with his English, hee made a great shew in the field: at which time King Lewes with the Earles of Flanders and Aniou being entred Normandy, and Math. Paris. hearing of King Henries approch and power, staid scarsly one night, but as mē without hart or courage returned, and left the Country for him: so that all things seemed well quieted for a yeare or two; no∣thing disturbing King Henries peace, excepting on∣ly the expectance of the Popes Legate, whom hee An D. 1117 prohibited to enter England, and the death of his Queene Maud, the very mirrour of piety, humi∣lity, Flor. Wigor. An. D. 1118 and princely bounty. (38) But coales of displeasure kindled betwixt King Henry and Lewes of France, were not quite ex∣tinct, An. D. 1119 A pitcht field be∣twixt the Kings of England and France. An. Reg. 20. Malmes. lib. 5. though they had laine for a while, as raked vp vnder cold ashes. For the next yeere following, and twentieth of his raigne, Lewes came into Norman∣dy as hote in rage to do somwhat, as before he depar∣ted thence calme and cold; where forthwith he began to molest the Country; which K. Henry for a while suffered, till his friends noted him of cowardize; to whom he replied; that he had learned of his Father, to break the foole hardines of the French, by patience, rather then by force: that they should not wonder, if he were loath to bee prodigall of their bloud, whom he found so fast friends vnto him: that he would not gladly winne a Kingdome with their deathes, whose liues hee still found deuoted to all hazards for his cause: that hee vsed this backwardnesse, onely to stay them, whom he saw so forward to te∣stifie their zeale voluntarily, euen with their blood: which to proceed from prouidence, and not from dastardlinesse, they should soone perceiue. This accordingly hee made good; and a pitched field was fought betwixt the Kings of England and France; whereof let vs heare the Monke Paris report. The Math. Paris. The Army of the French King. French King (saith hee) hauing ordered his Armie in∣to two Battalions, in the former of them placed Willi∣am the sonne of Duke Robert, the brother of King Henry; the other, Lewes himselfe led, consisting of his speciall and chiefest Souldiers. King Henry also dispo∣sed The Army of the English King. his forces into three Battailes, the first, consisting of his Peeres and men of Normandy:- In the second, him selfe kept among his owne guard, and dailie attendants: and in the third, he marshalled his sonnes with the maine strength of the Footemen. The Armies thus ordered, the troupes on both sides gaue assault, whereof the first Battalion of the French brake through the rankes of the Norman Nobles, ouerthrowing their Ho e-men, and forcing them to seatter; in which violence they likewise brake into King Henries battaile, and put it much out of order: but he taking courage, and comforting his men beganne a most bloody and bold const t: wherein him∣selfe was twice strooke vpon the head by William Cris∣pin Heny Hurt. The King dange∣rously assailed. County of Eureux (whom for his offences Henry had before banished) whose sword and strokes were so sure and so heauie, that albeit the Kings helmet was impe etrable, yet withfine force was it beaten stat to his head, insomuch that the bloud came forth in abundance▪ but Henry feeling himselfe to bee wounded, gathered with his rage more strength, and stroke the said Coun∣tyia such sort, that at one blow he ouerthrew both him Ypodig. Neustrl. and his horse, and tooke him prisoner; by which exam∣ple his Souldiers were led to fight like Iyons, and the And as brauely acquits himselfe. French to betake themselues vnto flight. In this bat∣taile died many thousands, and among them Bald∣wine Earle of Flanders slaine. Earle of Flanders: King Henry returning vi∣ctorious, was receiued triumphantly into Roan. (39) Foulke Earle of Aniou hauing lost Baldwine An. D. 1120 his martiall Companion, and seeing it was bootles to bandy against the Beanclarke, fell to an agree∣ment Ge . Dor. Prince William marrieth the Duke of Anious daughter. Roger. Houed. with him, which was confirmed by giuing his daughter vnto his sonne Prince William (now sea∣uenteene yeerts old) whom Henry made inheritor of all his Kingdomes, whereupon both France and Flanders became his reconciled friends, and William Prince William doth homage for Normandy. did homage to King Lewes for his Dutchie of Nor∣mandy. These things thus ordered King Henrie vpon the twentie fift of Nouember, loosed from land at Haresteer. Barfluit, and prosperously arriued in Eng∣land. (40) Prince William, who now wanted but onely Prince William puts to Sea. the name of a King, commanded another shippe to bee prepared for himselfe, his Brethren and Sisters, with many other Nobles and Gallants Courtiers, both of England and Normandy, who plying the Ma∣riners with pots and wine (therein being instruments of their owne calamity approaching) made them bragge to out-saile the Kings ship gone before; and in the night putting forth from land, with a mery gale made way ouer the dancing waues, as swift as an arrow: but (as if the Heauens would haue King Henries too great felicities allaid, and tempered with sense of Courtly variety, in the middest of their iol∣lity and singing, (alas they sang their last, and lit∣tle A most lamenta∣ble shipwrake. William Malmes. thought on death) for suddainely the shippe dashed against a Rocke, not very farre from the Shoare, at which fearefull disaster, a hideous cry arose, all of them shifting (and yet through ama∣zednesse not knowing how to shift) to saue them∣selues from the danger: For God repaying the re∣ward for sinne, suffered not those Sodomitic labe insects omnes, saith Paris. vnnaturall wantons (for such were many of them, saith Pa∣ris) to haue Christian Buriall, but were so swallowed vp of the Sea, when her waues were most calme. Prince Willi∣am got speedily into the Cocke-boate, and might Prince Williams pitty to his sister cost him his life. well haue escaped, had he not pittied his sister the Countesse of Perche, crying vnto him for helpe; when turning the boat to her aid, so many striued to get in (euery man in such a case esteeming his life as much as a Prince) that with their weight it pre∣sently suncke, and of so princely a Traine no one escaped to relate that dolefull tragedie, saue onely Malmsb lib. 5. de Reg. Onely one of all his traine esca∣peth. a base fellow (a Butcher some say) who swamme all the night vpon the Maine-maste, and got shoare in the morning with much danger of life. (41) This was the most vnfortunate Shipwracke that euer hapned in our Seas, bringing an incon∣ceiuable heauinesse to the King, and whole State: The chiefe of those who then perished. Math. Paris. Iohn Stow. Rand. Higden. for therein perished Prince William Duke of Nor∣mandy, the ioy of his Father, and hope of his Na∣tion; Richard his base Brother, his Sister Maud Countesse of Perch, Richard Earle of Chester, with his wife Lady Lucy, the Kings Niece by his Sister Adela, Otwell the Earles Brother, the yong Dukes Gouernour, diuers of the Kings chiefe Officers, and most of the Princes, Geffrey Riddle, Robert Manduit, William Bigod, Geffrey Arch-deacon of Hereford, Walter de Crucie, and many other of prime note and esteeme, to the number of one hundred and sixty persons, none of their bodies being found, though great search was made for them. (42) King Henry thus at once depriued of all his lawfull Posterity (onely Maude the Empresse An. D. 1121 Eadmerus. excepted) vpon the tenth of April and two and twentieth yeere of his Raigne, married his second wife Adel a, a Lady of surpassing beauty, the King Henry ma∣rieth againe. Gemiticensis. Geru. D ob. Henry. Hunt. Mat. Paris. daughter of Geffrey first Duke of Louain, in hope (though it proued otherwise) to haue repaired his late losses by issue of her; whose Coronation was appointed to be celebrated by Roger Bishop of Saris∣bury, the infirmity of Palsey so troubling Ralphe Arch-bishop of Canterbury, that himselfe could not performe Rand. Higd. in Polyc. lib. 7. ca. 15. it; yet because Roger was not appointed by him, he forbad his imploiment; and the King wearing his Crowne, saith the Monke of Chester, this testy old man could hardly bee entreated by the Lords, to with-hold his hands from striking the same from A Cholericke Prelate. the Kings head: of such Spirites then were those spirituall Prelates, and iealousie to loose their pom∣pous preheminence of honour: but his high top was somewhat born down by the boisterous blasts of Pope Calixt, from whose holy hand Thurstan Arch-bishop of Yorke (contrary to the Kings com∣maund, and his owne Math. Paris ad An. 1119. Oath) hauing receiued con∣secration, and thereupon forbidden by the King to Eadmerus. put foot againe within his Dominions, his holines commanded his New-Creature should be installed ( Polyc. lib. 7. c. 15. against all right and custom) without professing any subiection to the See of Canterbury; and threat∣ned with his curse to interdite both Prouinces till that was performed. The cause of the Popes indig∣nation against Ralph is supposed to bee, for that hee had receiued his Paris An. 1113. Roma sub Vrba∣no, Anno 1094. Inuestiture of the King, who con∣trary to the Canons of the late Romane Paris there cals it Their ancient Custome and An. 1112. it had con tinued 300. yeres and vnder 60. Popes. Synode, did still challenge and practise that, * Regall prero∣gatiue. (43 Whether it were about this contention of In∣uesting, Will. Malmes. or about a Fryer of the Holy Sepulchre, whom (as Malmsb. saith) the King had imprisoned, or a∣bout Thurstans hard vsage; certaine it is, that the Pope much desiring to haue priuate talke with the Goodwins Cata∣logue. King, came to him into Normandy, and so at Gisors conferred (saith Paris) the Great King and the high Math. Paris. Priest: but notwithstanding the Popes threates or intreates, Thurstan was kept in banishment full fiue yeares, and then for the Popes pleasure was restored. But at this meeting the King was so liberall of rich gifts to the Pope and his Cardinals, that therfore the Pope (saith a Monke) held him a most wise and eloquent Will. Malmes. perswader, and his actions very iustifiable; But it see∣meth the Cardinals were neither so eloquent nor learned as they should be, for that (saith hee) two youthes in the Kings Company, sonnes of the Earle of Mellent (learned both, and therefore fitte to be with Wil. Malmsb. Rand. Higden. that learned King) reasoning of some points with them, and disputing Scholler-like with Logicall Syllogismes, the G d Rabbies (vsed to other exercises at Rome, then stu∣dying) were quite grauelled, and had nought to say, but that more learning was in these Westerne parts, then they had thought. But as these Church-stirres did not a little disquiet the King, so also did new Welsh Cor . Walles tumults, raised by Meredith ap Blethyn, who with the three sonnes of Cadogin, Encon, Madoc, and Mor∣gan, sore troubled the Kings people and peace, by New attempts in Wales breaking into the Marches, and especially into Che∣shire, where they burned two Castles. The King An Army con∣ducted against them. therefore making towards them, had sent his maine Armie to conduct the Carriages, whilst himselfe with a small Company tooke a neerer way through the Mountaines and Straites; which being forelaid by the Enemy, was with great courage set vpon, and through the aduantage of the Place, many of his men slaine, and more hurt, by the Welsh Archers, whose showers of Arrowes rained thicke vpon them from the higher ground: amongst which, one was so le∣uelled at the King, that it strucke him on the breast, The King struck with an Arrow. yet being surely armed, did him no hurt; but hee therewith all wonderfully dismaied, and by like∣lihoode fearing some treason amongst his owne, (for, then hee swore by our Lords death, his vsuall oath, King Henries v∣suall Oath. Malmes. lib. 5. that no Welsh-man shotte that Arrow, but one of his owne Prouincials) and considering that by these his ouer-rash proceedings his glory purchased in more famous parts, might againe bee lost in this wild and rude Country; came to a Parley & Peace; A Peace conclu∣ded. receiuing of the King a thousand head of Cattle, and leauing Kord Fitzwarren Lieutenant of the Marches, returned to England, where hee held three Parlia∣ments Iohn Castor. Chron. Wallia. in the same yeare, one at Norwich, another at Northampton, and the third at London. (44) The Normans still repining at the Cap∣tiuity An. D. 1122 The Normans set vp Duke Roberts sonne. of Robert their late Duke; and standing well affected vnto his Sonne, thought now the time fit∣ting, (Prince William being dead) to raise the o∣ther William his Cosen Germane into his place: who, as the Monke of Chester affirmeth, married Sybil the other daughter of Foulke, Earle of Aniou, He marrieth Si∣byl daughter to the Earle of An∣iou. Rand. Higd. in Polyb . lib. 7. c. 16. with whom hee receiued the Earledome of Ceno∣mannia, vpon displeasure that King Henry with∣held the formers dowry in England. The chiefe in this action was Robert Earle of Mellent, who was lately fallen off from the King: Henry therefore hasting into Normandy, besieged his Castle Pont-Au∣domar, An. D. 1123 Roger Wind. Math. Paris. King Henry re∣paires the Ca∣stles of Norman∣die. and tooke it, and at that time built a large and high wall with many Bulwarkes about the Tower of Roan, repaired the Castles of Caen, Arches, Gisors, Faleise, Argenton, Damfort, Vernon, Ambres, and sundry others. (45) In the meane time, Earle Mellent desirous An. D. 1124 to bee reuenged vpon the King, associated Hugh Earle of Montfort and others vnto his aide, who entring Normandy with fire and sword, did much harme as they went, thinking to bring all to their obeisance: against whose outrages, William Tan∣keruile Henry Hunt. Math. Paris. Tankeruile takes the Traterous Earles in Nor∣mandy. the Kings Chamberlaine, and Lieutenant in those parts, addressed himselfe, and training them in∣to danger of an Ambush, laid for that purpose, af∣ter long fight tooke them both prisoners, and pre∣sented them to his Master, whereby the warres cea∣sed Mat. West . for a time in those parts. (46) In this the Kings absence, but yet with his licence, Iohannes Cremensis the Popes holy Cardinal, An. D. 1125 Cardinall Cre∣mensis, the Popes Legat to restrain Priests marriages came into England, sent by Honorius the Second, there to redresse the still continued sinne-seeming abuse of the Clergy, in retaining and vsing, accor∣ding to Gods owne Ordinance, the Society of their Polychr. lib. 7. cap. 16. wiues. This Pontificall Prelate was entertained by all the Bishops and Abbots with great and costly Presents, and afterward being solemnely set in a Councell at London, vpon the birth-day of the Blessed Virgine, made a soleme Oration in praise of Virgini∣tie Hen. Hunting. lib. 7. Houed. in He r. 5. and Chastity, with a terrible inuectiue against the maried Priests: and to amplifie their sinnes the more, hee shewed what extreme impiety it was, to rise from the bed of vnlawfull lust, (for so was their chaste Marriage termed) and with polluted hands to touch the Sacrament of the body of Christ: but the same night following he * hauing that very day consecrated Taken with a whore the same day hee celebra∣ted the Sacra∣ment. Mat. Paris. Huntingdon. Rog. Higden. that holy Sacrament, was himself taken with a Whore, the matter being so apparant, that it could not bee hid, (neither ought it to be silenced, saith Hunting∣don) to the great reproach of those most vnchaste boasters of Chastitie, as both Paris and Higden themselues doe confesse: and so hee returned to Rome with shame enough, but with little suc∣cesse in that intended businesse; till some few yeers after Viz. An. D. 1129. Polydor. Math. Paris. Huntingdon. Roger Houed. King Henrie, seeming very desirous to set∣tle his pretensed continency in the Clergy; in a Councel held at London, obtained (through sim∣plicity of the Archbishop of Canterbury, saith Paris) that himselfe shold haue the execution of iustice and punishments of the Priests, that offended either in keeping of their wiues, or vsing of Concubines, (for likely those that liked not the one, loued the other, as well as Cremensis;) but euen then also, the Kings end being onely to get in summes of money, which hee had still occasions to vse, euery man redeemed his liberty by his purse, and matters rather proued worse, then any whit reformed. (47) Whilest King Henry about his said affaires lay in Normandy, newes was brought him that Hen∣ry An. D. 1126 Emperour Hen∣rie (the Kings Sonne in law) dieth The Empresse comes into Eng∣land. The Peeres sweare fealty to Empresse Dow∣ager the Kings daughter. Malmes. Nouel. lib. 1. Huntingd. lib. 8. the Emperour his sonne in law was dead; where∣upon hee presently sent for his Daughter the Em∣presse; and with her he returned into England, where calling a Parliament, in the presence of himselfe, and of Dauid King of Scotland, hee caused the Nobles, (and first before all other, Stephen his Sisters Sonne who first did violate it,) to sweare fealty to her, as to his lawfull, and now onely heire, by whom they should againe come to bee gouerned by the ancient English Roiall bloud, from which he shewed her to bee descended: which Oath was this, that they should, as much as in them lay, after King Henries decease, (if hee died without Heire-Male) establish her Queene of the Monarchy of Great Britaine, now called England. But whether they did or no (saith Gemeticensis) belongs not to mee to tell: but this our Story shall hereafter relate, and make knowne. (48) Giraldus and Higden, and some ancient Ma∣nuscripts affirme (but with very little probability or Antiq. Manuscr. Giral. I iner. Polych. lib. 7. c. 16. Houed. in Hen. 1. Henry the Em∣perour supposed not to be dead. credite) that Henry the Emperour died not at this time (as was giuen forth;) but that rather vpon a Gemetic. p. 680. remorse of conscience, for imprisoning his owne naturall Father, Henry the third vnto death; and al∣so his Spirituall Father the Pope with his Cardinals; repenting these outrages, hee laid aside his Imperi∣all Roabe, and secretly fled into England, where at Westchester hee became an Hermite, changing his name vnto As being now called of God, saith Tre isa. Godscall, where he so liued the space of ten yeeres, and was buried in the Cathedrall Church of Saint Werburga the Virgine. Vpon which his sud∣daine flight and missing, the Empresse Maud Iohn Stow. The Empresse falsely suspected. some say, was suspected to bee guilty of his death, and for that cause was kept continually in the Queenes Chamber Indeed, that she abode still in Chamber with the Queene, Paris records; but hee giues a wiser Math. Paris. reason thereof, for that her Father did loue her excee∣dingly, as being now his sole Heire; and where should an Empresse rather liue then with a Queene? a Daughter, then with her Mother? a faire Lady, a Wi∣dow, and an Heire of so great a Kingdom, then where her Person might bee safest from danger, her mind from inueigling, and her carriage from suspition? But as for that other idle coniecture, it is razed out, both by those Writers, who record his Buriall, and Mo∣numentat Spire, (as Polyer. lib. 7. c. 16 Higden himself signifieth) and al∣so by the penne of William Gemeticensis, who repor∣teth her to be a woman generally well thought of, and approued among the greatest Princes of the Empire, for her prudent and gratious behauiour towards the Empe∣rour Will. Gemet. The good esteem of the Empresse. her husband; insomuch that they became suiters vn∣to her, seeking by all meanes to attaine her to gouerne them, and to that end attended her to King Henry in Normandy to solicite the same; to whom in no wise hee would giue his consent, meaning to make her his Suc∣cessor in the Kingdome: Whereunto Malmsbury (who then liued) accordeth; saying, shee was very vn∣willing Malmes. Nouel. lib. 1. to haue come out of those parts of the Em∣pire, where both her dowry and acquaintance lay, and that the Princes of those Countries came more then once into England, to haue her for their Em∣presse, but that the King would not part with the Heire of his Crowne. (49) But King Henrie afterwards desirous to bee free from the variances of these forraine Princes, An. D. 1127 and hearing that Foulke Earle of Anion had giuen his Earledome, with the territories of Gaunt and Turyn, vnto his Sonne Ieffrey Martell, surnamed Plantagenet, (himselfe minding to abide at Ierusalem, Matth. Paris. Will. Gemet. whereof he was King in right of his wife Milissent, the daughter of Baldwine de Burge lately deceased) thought him the fittest to be linked into his alliance, The Empresse married to the Earle of Anion. & therfore concluded a mariage betwixt the said Ief∣frey, and his onely lawfull daughter Lady Maude the Empresse, though partly against her liking, as both Gemeticensis and Geruasius of Canterbury doth declare; Gemeticensis. Ger. Dor. which was solemnized in Normandy the third of A∣prill accordingly. (50) That William, sonne to the Curtoise, was for∣merly fauoured by Earle Foulke, wee haue shewed, but now he was further followed with increase of William (sonne to Duke Robert) made Earle of Flanders. Fortune, and the French Kings aide, onely for a rub in King Henries way; for Charles Earle of Flanders, being traiterously murdered by his owne People Mat. Paris. without any his issue to succeed him, Lewis of France (to make William faster to him) set him in possessi∣on as the next heire in blood vnto that Larledome: William being the sonne of Duke Robert, and Robert the Eldest of Queene Maude (the wife of the Con∣querour) Williams title to Flanders. and she daughter to Earle Baldwin the fifth; whose issue Male now failing, the right was from her deriued vnto this her Grand-child William. (51) This Ground-worke vnto greatnesse King An. D. 1128 Henry disliked, least by his Nephewes height, him∣selfe might bee ouer topped, and his blind fathers wrongs the sooner redressed: therefore hauing by his daughters marriage made Aniou his, from Nor∣mandy King Henry inua∣ded France. he inuaded France, euen vnto Hespard, where for eight daies he remained as secure as in his owne Mat. Paris. Kingdome, and partly by feare, partly by faire pai∣ments, wrought Lewis to withdraw his aide from yong William: neither so ceased, but that hee in∣stigated William de Ypres to disturbe Williams state, He vseth meanes to disturbe Flan∣ders. and did also draw a cerraine Duke named Theodorick out of Germany with a band of Flemmings, who ent∣red Flanders in Hostile maner. (52) With these last, Earle William (a Prince for his age of imcomparable prowesse) soone met, and gi∣uing Earle Williams great valour. them battell, with an inuincible courage brake through the enemies troopes, in such sort that they were discomfited, and the Earle had the day; whence in this heate of bloud, hee marched vnto Angi, a Math. Paris. Castle of King Henries, which after a strong siege, being vpon the surrender, by a small wound which Earle William receiued in his hand, hee shortly died, but not without immortall fame, for magnanimi∣ty He dies of a smal wound in his hand. and valour. (53) Were it not reported by some Writers of note, I might here well passe ouer certaine presa∣ging Huntingdon. lib. 7. Will. Malmes. in Nouella Histo∣ria. Higden. dreames (as the Monkes interpreted them) which King Henry had, being ready now to goe into Normandy: for to his seeming he saw a sort of rusticke plough-men with their Instruments of husbandry; after them Souldiers with their wea∣pons of Warre: and lastly, the Bishops with their Crosiers staues, all of them angerly threatning, and attempting his death: wherewith hee was so per∣plexed, that leaping out of his bed, he called for helpe: but seeing it but a dreame, as a dreame he esteemed it, and passed ouer into Normandy: where long hee staied not, but that his Daughter Maud The Empresie departs from his husband vpon some displeasure departed from her husband, and came with her Father into England. Some write A. Do. 1131 Roger Houed. that she was the pro ker of certaine displeasures betwixt her husband and Father, which so affected his mind with Houeden. in Hen∣ric. 1. Huntingdon. Hist. lib. 7. Malmes. nouell. lib. 1. passions of wrath and griefe, that many thought it was a great hastning of his end; and indeede Malmsburie witnesseth, that the King vpon his death-bed pas∣sionately mentioned the wrongs and indignities wherewith her husband had disquieted his mind. The Empresse to her husband. Hen. Huntingdon. lib. 7. Howbeit soone after this her departure from him, by consent of the States, who met at Northam∣pton; shee was reconciled to her husband: sent An. D. 1131. vnto him vpon his intreaty: and bare him a sonne, whose name was Henry; for ioy whereof, King Hen∣ry Ger. Dor. assembled his Lords, and againe made his said Daughter, and the lawfull Heires of her body his Math. Paris. Successors in his Dominions. (54) And then preparing againe for his last and fatall passage into Normandy, tooke shipping vpon An. D. 1133 the Nones of August, (the very day wherein he first receiued the Crowne,) when hapned so wonder∣full Will. Malmes in nouel. lib. 1. an Eclipse of the Sunne, that Malmsbury the re∣porter faith, himselfe then saw the starres plain∣ly in the Firmament about the Sunne, and that two daies after, so great and fearefull an Earthquake The Kings last voiage into Normandy, pre∣saged to be fatal. hapned, that the house where in himselfe sate, was lifted vp with a double remoue; and others say, that out of riffes in the earth, burning flames arose, that could not be quenched, which diuers iudged to be fatall prodigies of the deathes of those Princes that Polychron. lib. 7. cap. 17. soone after ensued. (56) For Robert the Curtoise, after twenty sixe yeers An. D. 1134 Robert Curtoise dieth in prison. imprisonment and blindnesse, through griefe con∣ceiued at the putting on of a faire new roabe, (too little for the King, and therefore in kindnesse sent to Duke Robert to weare) grew weary of his life (as disdaining to bee mocked with his brothers cast cloathes,) and cursing the time of his vnfortunate Natiuity, resused thenceforth to take any sustenance, Math. Paris. Matth. West. and so pined himselfe to death. His body was bu∣ried at Gloucester in the Church of Saint Peter, and middle of the Quire, where to this day remaineth his Tombe, with a carued Image of his feature, as the monument of a most vnfortunate man. 57 And not long after K. Henry in Normandy com∣ming King Henry dieth in Normandy. scarse very well from Hunting in the Forrest of Lyons, and Towne of Saint Denys, made his re∣past of a dish of Lampreyes (which meat hee too wel loued, but could neuer well digest;) whereupon he fell more grieuously sicke, and the same still increa∣sing; Houeden. Wil. Malms. Math. Paris. after seuen daies sicknesse, vpon the first of December, the sixty fiue of his age, and yeare of Christ Iesus, 1135. when hee had raigned King of England, thirty fiue yeeres, foure moneths, lacking An. D. 1135 foure daies, & Duke of Normandy, twenty nine yeers and foure monethes: he died in the said towne of S. Denys, and from thence was conueied to Roan, Will. Gemet. Math. Paris. where his Bowels, Eyes and Braines were taken out, and buried; the body also sliced, and pow∣dred with much salt, was wrapped in a Buls hide Polychr. l. 7. c. 17. to auoide the stinch, beeing so intollerable, (a point fitting for such great Princes to thinke on, & Math. Paris. Henry Hunt. l. 8. in their great glory and pleasures to remember their fraile and humane condition,) that the Phy∣sitian who tooke out his braines was poisoned therewith, and presently died: wherupon some ob∣serued, that other Kings killed men in their life; but he also * after he was dead; thence was his Corps carried into England, and honourably buried vpon Mat. Westminst. Math. Paris. Simon Dun. the day of Christs Natiuity, at Reading in Barkeshire, in the Abbey that himselfe had there founded, and endowed with large possessions. (58) After his death (saith Huntington and Ho∣ueden) men spake their mind as freely of him, Huntingdon. l. 8. Houed . Rand. Hig. in Po∣lychr. lib. 7 ca. 17. as of any other dead man: some commending him for these three glorious felicities, His especiall preheminence. Wisedome, Victory, and Wealth: others condemning him for three es∣peciall vices, Couetousnesse, Cruelty, and Lechery; some * His especiall vices. instances of which wee haue touched in the relation of his life; the first three, in obtaining and keeping the Crowne: the last, in his most grieuous taxations, cruell handling and imprisoning his Brother; and his incontinency of life shall presently appeare, by his many illegitimate issues, the fruites of his wan∣tonnes, and witnesses of his shame: in that Princes who are to punish such sinnes in others, ought them∣selues especially to be free from them: for though their liuing fortunes stoppe mens tongues from vp∣braiding: yet after their death the tongues of the vulgar, and pennes of the learned, will make the in∣famy Princes vices come to light af∣ter their deaths. of their vices to bee immortall. (59) He was for personage of a reasonable sta∣ture, broad breasted, well iointed, and full of flesh: Description of his person and qualities. William Gemet. cap. 10. Math. West. amiable of countenance, sharpe and faire eyes, blacke of haire, and that somewhat carelesly hanging on his forehead; his mind was enriched with many vertues, a follower of Iustice, a louer of Religion, seuere against theeues, and all effeminate nicities; So that hee commanded mens long haire (which against God and Natures law was matchable at that 1. Cor. 11. 14. time with womens) to be cut off: temperate of di∣et, and neuer drinking but for thirst; valiant in bat∣taile, Higden. l. 7. c. 12. Malmes. lib. 5. yet very circumspect, seeking rather to win by wise care, then by effusion of bloud: and by the Will. Gem. cap. 22. report of most Writers excelled all the Princes of the World in his time, in Mercy, Wealth, and Bounty, vnto Monasteries: the land hee defen∣ded by Garrisons of Souldiers planted on the Confines of his neighbour Princes, building many Forts, Bulwarkes and Castles; besides twenty fiue Townes and Cities: whatsoeuer was wisely or ver∣tuously performed in his Gouernement, is chiefly ascribed to his yonger yeares institution in true Learning and Philosophy, which was Malmesb. lib. 5. in Hen. 1. the great fur∣nishment of him vnto the Science of Regality; being of∣ten heard to say, that hee esteemed an vnlearned King but a crowned Asse. In which regard (saith Rossus, that Pal∣lace he called Beau-mount, where afterward King Richard the the first was born Rossus, hee tooke chiefe pleasure to reside in his new Palace, which himselfe built at Oxford, both for the delight he had in learned men, himselfe being very lear∣ned, and for the vicinity of his new Parke at Woodstocke, which he had fraught with all kind of strange beasts, wherein he much delighted, as Lyons, Leopards, Lynces, Camells, Porcupins, and the like. His delight also in He built also the Castle at Wood∣stocke. works of deuotion, shewes it selfe both in the ere∣ction and indowment of the Collegiate and Paris. An. 1132 Episco∣pall Sees of Carlile, and Higden. l. 7. c. 14 Goodwine Cato∣logue of Bishops. Ely, as also of the Abbayes Malmes. lib. 5. of Hide, Circester, Reading, and the Priorie of Dun∣stable: His Wife Queene Maud founded the Pri∣orie of Holy Trinity within Algate, and the Hospital of Saint Giles in the Fields: so that by himselfe, his Queene, and other deuoted persons, twenty foure foundations to religious vses (if not more) were ere∣cted in the raigne of this King. His Wiues. (60) Maude the first Wife of King Henry, was the daughter of Malcolme the third, surnamed Great head. Can∣moir, His first Wife. King of Scotland: her mother was S. Marga∣ret, daughter to Edward, sonne of Edmund the Iron∣side King of England. She was married vnto him at London in the first yeare of his raigne, Anno 1100. by Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury: hauing former∣ly Malmes. lib. 5. vowed her selfe a Nunne, which some swore she did not for loue of single life, but to auoide some vnworthy matches, which her Father would haue imposed on her. Her Coronation was at Westmin∣ster by the same Anselme, on Sunday the eleuenth Wil. Malms. Ibidem. of Nouember in the same yeare. She was his wife seuenteene yeeres and more, famous for her lear∣ning, loue to learning, charity to the poore, and all vertuous dispositions; and deceased at Westminster the first of May, in the eighteenth yeere of his raign, and yeere of our Saluation, 1118. where shee was buried in S. Peters Church, on the right side of King Edward the Confessor. (61) Ad licia, or Alice, the second wife of King Henry, was the daughter of Godfrey the first Duke of His second Wife Louaine, by the daughter of the Emperour Henrie the fourth, and sister to Duke Godfrey, and Iocelin of Louain. Shee was married vnto him the nine and twentieth of Ianuary, in the twentie one of his raigne, and yeere of Christ, 1121. and was crow∣ned the morrow after being Sunday. Shee was his wife fifteene yeeres, but euer childlesse, and surui∣uing She was euer barren. him, was remarried to William Daubeny Earle of Arundel, and was mother of Earle William the second, Rayner, Godfrey, and Ioan, married to Iohn Earle of Augi, &c. His Issue. (62) William, the sonne of King Henry, and Queen Maud his first wife, was born the secōd of his Fathers Raigne, and of Christ, 1102. When he came to age of foureteene yeeres, the Nobility of England did him homage, and sware their fealties vnto him at Shrewsburie. The third yeere after, hee married the daughter of Foulk, Earle of Aniou; and the same yeere hee was made Duke of Normandy, doing his homage for the same to Lewes the Grosse, King of France; and receiued the homage and oathes of the Nobility of that Country: but in his returne for England, hee was vnfortunately drowned neere vn∣to Barbfleet vpon the twenty sixt of Nouember, the yeere of Grace 1120. and eighteenth of his owne age, without any issue, to the great griefe of his Father. (63) Maud the daughter of King Henry, and of Maud. Queene Maud his first wife, was borne the fourth yeere of her Fathers raigne. She was the second wife of the Emperour Henrie the fourth, espoused at sixe yeeres of age, and at eleuen with great solemnity was married and crowned his Empresse at Mentz in Germany, 6. Ianuary, Anno 1114. the ninth of her husbands, and foureteenth of her Fathers Raignes. Shee was his wife twelue yeeres, and suruiued him without any issue of him; & comming into England a widdowe, she had fealty sworne vnto her by the Nobility, and was remaried to Geffrey Plantaginet Earle of Aniou, sonne of Foulke King of Ierusalem, vpon the third of Aprill, and yeere of Grace 1127. by whom shee had issue, Henry, the Second, King of England, Geffery Earle of Nantes in Britanie, and Wil∣liam who was called Earle of Poyto: she was his wife twenty three yeeres, and suruiuing him also continu∣ed a widdowe the last seuenteene yeeres of her life, which she ended in the City of Roan the tenth of Sep∣tember, 1167. the foureteenth of the raigne of King Henry her sonne, and was buried in the Abbey of Bee in Normandy. (64) Richard a second sonne to King Henry, and Queene Maud, by the testimony of Geruasius the Richard. Monke of Canterbury, who maketh Maud their el∣dest Child, William the second; and lastly, Richard; and then (saith he) she left bearing: but Malmsbury saith, she had but two Children, one of each sexe. (65) Eufem also another daughter, and fourth Child (by Hector Boetius the Scottish Historian) is said Eufem. to be borne vnto the Beauclearke by Queene Maud; the credite of the two last, I leaue to the reporters, who onely thus name them without any further re∣lation. His Naturall Issue. (66) Robert, the naturall sonne of King Henry, was Earle of Gloucester, and married Ma l daugh∣ter Robert. and heire of Robert Fitzhamon Lord of Glamor∣gan, by whom hee had issue William Earle of Glouce∣ster, Richard Bishop of Bayon, Roger Bishop of Wor∣cester, and Maud the wife of Randolph Gernon, the mother of Hugh Keueliot Earle of Chester, and Rich∣ard his brother: Earle William married Auis daugh∣ter of Robert Bossu Earle of Leicester, and had issue three daughters and heires of that Earledome, which by Au s the second of them, in the end descended to Clare Earle of Hertford. This Earle Robert died the last of October, in the twelfth yeare of King Stephen, and was buried at Bristow in the Church of S. Iames, which hee had founded, and his body laide in the midst of the Quire; vnto him William Malmsbury dedicated his Booke called Historia Nouella. (67) Richard another naturall sonne of King Hen∣ry, Richard. was as it seemeth by an ancient Register of the Mo∣nastery at Abington, borne in the raigne of King Wil∣liam Rufus, of the widow of Anskill, a Nobleman of the Country adioining to the said Monastery; and it seemeth hee is that Richard that was drowned in the Norman Seas neere Barbfleet, among the rest of King Henries children. (68) Raynold the naturall sonne of King Henry, was borne of a daughter vnto Sir Robert Corbet, Lord of Alcester in Warwickeshire, by the gift of the King Raynold. in fauour of her, who was after married to Henry Fitz-herbert his Chamberlaine. This Raynold was created Earle of Cornwall, and Baron of Castle comb, with consent of King Stephen, and had issue foure Daughters, of whom haue sprung many faire branches. (69) Robert another of that name, was borne Robert, of Edith, the sister of Iue, sonne and daughter of Forne, the sonne of Sigewolfe, both of them great Barons in the North: which Edith afterwards King Henry gaue in marriage to Robert D lie, Baron of Hook-Norton in Oxfordshire; and with her gaue him the Mannor of Eleydon, in the County of Bucking∣ham, by whom he had issue Henry Doylie Baron of Hook-Norton, who oftentimes mentioneth this Robert in his Charters, euer calling him Robert his brother the Kings sonne. (70) Gilbert another naturall sonne of King Hen∣ry is named in the additions to the story of William Gilbert, Gemeticensis the Norman Monke, in the Chronicle of that country, written by Iohn Taylor being a Tran∣slator of that worke out of Latine into French; and lastly, in the Treaties betwixt England and France, written in the French tongue by Iohn Tillet, Secreta∣rie to their late King Henry the second, and yet in them, not any other mention is made, but only of his name. (71) William also a narurall sonne of Henry the King, had giuen vnto him the Towne of Tracie in William. Normandy; of which hee tooke his surname, and was called William of Tracie: But whether he were the Progenitot of the Tracies, sometime Barons in Deuonshire, or of them that now be of the same sur∣name; or whether Sir William Tracie, one of the foure Knights, that slew Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury, were any of his posterity, is not cer∣tainely reported: nor any thing else of him, more then that hee died a little after his Father, which was in the yeere of Christ, 1135. (72) Henry another naturall sonne of King Hen∣ry, was borne of the Lady Nesta, daughter of Rees Henry. ap Tewdor Prince of South-Wales, who was the Wife of Sir Gerald Windsor, and of Stephen, Con∣stables of the Castles of Pembrooke, and Abertinie in Wales, and Progenitors of the Families of the Fitz-geralds, and the Fitz-Stephens in Ireland; he was borne and breed, and liued, and married in Wales, ha∣uing issue two sonnes, namely, Meiler and Robert, of which Meiler the elder married the daughter of Hugh Lacie, Lord of Methe in Ireland; hee was at the conflict in the Ile of Anglesey, betweene Magnus the sonne of Harold, Harfager King of Norway, and Hugh of Mountgomery, Earle of Arundell and Shrewsbury, wherein hee was slain, as some say, with the said Earle, Anno, 1197. (73) Maude the Naturall daughter of King Henry was Countesse of Perche, and the first Maud. wife of Earle Rotroke the first of that name, sonne of Arnolfe de Hesding the first Earle of that County: Shee had issue by him one onely daughter named Magdalen wife to Garcy the fourth King of Nauarre mother of King Sanches, surnamed the wise, from whom all the Kings of Nauarre are descended: Shee died vpon Friday the twenty sixth of Nouember, in the twentith of her Fathers raign and yeere of Grace 1120. being drowned in the Sea with her brother Duke William. (74) Maude another of that name and naturall daughter of King Henrie, was married to Conan the Maud. first of that name surnamed the Grosse, Earle of little Britaine in France, sonne of Earle Alan by Er∣mengard his second wife; by Alan shee had issue Ho∣well, pronounced illegitimate, and disherited by his supposed father Constance, that died without issue, and Bertha the wife of Eudes Earle of P rohet, mo∣ther of Earle Conan the yonger, who by Margaret sister of William King of Scots had issue Constance ma∣ried to Geffrey sonne of King Henry the second. (75) Iulian likewise an other naturall daughter of King Henry was married to Eustace the illegiti∣mate Iulian. sonne of William Lord of Brete il in Normandy, who was the sonne and heire of William Fitz-Osborne and elder brother of Roger, both Earles of Hereford in England, and this Eustace had hee beene lawfully borne in wedlocke, had been heire to the Earledomes of Hereford and Iuerie: notwithstanding he had as small a part in that inheritance of the Town of Pacie from which he tooke his surname, being commonly called Eustace of Pacy, and had issue by this Iulian his wife, William and Roger of Pacy his sonnes. (76) A naturall daughter of King Henry recoun∣ted by the continuer of the History of William Geme∣ticensis, and by Iohn Tillet his follower, is reported by them to haue beene married to one William Goet a Norman; but in neither of these writers is any menti∣on made of her name, or of his estate, issue or other relation. (77) Another naturall daughter of King Henrie is without name, recited by the said Authors, and by them reported to be married to the Vicount of Beau∣mont, which is a Towne within the County of Maygne. Shee had issue by him, as Roger of Houeden writeth, Richard Vicount Beaumont, Father of Queen Ermengard the wife of King William of Scotland: and Robert the Abbot of Mount-Saint Michael mentio∣neth another of her sonnes, named Ralphe, who (as he saith) was Bishop of Angiers. (78) Another naturall daughter also of King Henry is recited by the Normane and French writers before auouched, and reported by them to be marri∣ed to Mathew of Mountmorancy, the sonne of Bouchard of Mountmarancy, from whom perhaps descended the House of Mountmorancy, who after came to be Earles and Dukes, being growne to be one of the greatest houses in France, next to the Princes of the bloud, for possessions, alliances, and honour. (79) Elizabeth the last naturall daughter of King Elizabeth. Henry recounted by the former Authors, was vnmar∣ried in the time of the one, and her husband vn∣knowne to the other; but both of them agree, that she was borne of Elizabeth the sister of Walleran Earle of Meulan, who was sister also of Robert Bossue Earle of Leicester, wife of Gilbert Earle of Pembrooke, and mother of Earle Richard Strangbow, the Conque∣rour of Ireland. STEPHEN THE TVVO AND Monarch 42. Stephen. FORTIETH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISH-MEN: HIS RAIGNE, ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER V. T Hough the Empresse Maud had fealty sworne vnto An. D. 1135 her, in the life time of her Father: and againe both King Henries Issue defeated of the Crowne by Stephen. her selfe, and issue ordai∣ned to be his successors in Englands Throne, as hath beene said; yet so power∣full is Ambition, where the obiect is a Diademe, and so weake are all assurances which are built on the wa∣uering Multitude, that King Henries prouidence, was soon defeated, and with his death al fealties reuersed, and that by him onely who had * contended to bee the formost of the Laitie in taking that oath, euen Malmes. Nouel. lib. 1. Wil. Walsingham. Floriacensis. King Stephen his descent. Stephen Earle of Mortaine and Bolloine; a man whose descent was very Noble, being the third sonne of Stephen Earle of Bloys and Champaigne, who was the sonne of Earle Eudes, and he of Earle Theobald, the sonne of Gerlon the Dane, the companion of Rollo Duke of Normandy; his mother was Some call her Adela, others Alice. Adelicia the third daughter of William the Conqueror by Queen Maude his wife: And himselfe was aduanced to bee Earle of Mortaigne by King Henry his vncle, whose Crown he now endeauoured to vsurpe, being other∣wise for his many princely parts, worthy to weild a Scepter, if his claime thereto had beene iust and warrantable. (2) For as soone as Natures course had brought Wil. Gem. King Henry, where Princes and poorest Subiects are all equall; forthwith hee was working to dis∣possesse his Issue, which onely now rested in Maud and her Children; in which attempt it hapned for∣tunately Stephens brother his chiefe Agent for him (if any thing may bee counted for∣tunate, which is ioined with impietie) that his yon∣ger Brother Henry was then Bishop of Winchester, & a very potent man in the State, who had industriously Malmsb. Nouel. lib. 1. Math. Paris. Henry Hunt. Archbishop of Canterbury Ste∣phens abettor stirred himselfe in making way to his entrance; and (vpon assurance of all liberties to the Church and Common-wealth) had drawne on also William Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, the very first man that had sworne vnto Maude the Empresse: by whose exam∣ple many others were winded into the like periurie, * traiterously auowing, that it was basenesse for so many, and so great P eers, to be subiect vnto a Wo∣man. A traiterous po∣sition. Rog. de Wendouer. Math Paris. Malmsb. Nouel. lib. 1. Idem. And to helpe forward those audacious begin∣nings, Roger Bishoppe of Salisbury, the late Kings Treasurer protested (Malmsburie, who reports it, him∣selfe heard it from him) that they were free from the oath made to the Empresse; for that without con sent of the Barons she had married out of the Realm; but that which wrought most, was the testimony of Hugh Bigot, O high Ste∣ward Mat. Paris. Tho. Wal. Ypodigma. Neustria. Senescall vnto King Henry departed, who comming ouer with Stephen, tooke his corpo∣rall oath, that the King on his death-bed, vpon some offence taken against his daughter Maude, disinheri∣ted her, and appointed this Stephen his nephew to be his successour. These colourable instigations so mo∣ued the Idem. Fealty sworne to Stephen. too credulous Archbishop and the Peeres, that they all swore fealty vnto him and became his Leigemen. (3) His first landing in England, (being at Whit∣sand-bay) by a tempest of thunder so wonderfull & Malmes. Nouel. lib. 1. Mat. Westm. terrible that the people thought verily the ende of all was at hand, did prognosticke the storms of troubles which his periurie brought with him; for euen then both Douer & Canterbury fortified themselues against him, though London gaue better leaue to his entrance, Stephens louely. qualities. whose Person and presence drew euer the affections of the beholder, being in all parts complete with Will. Malmes. Ibidem. natures endowments, of personage passing comely, of disposition louing, cheerefull, and affable to the meanest, alwaies very liberall; but now especially, knowing his Purse the best Lawyer to plead for his Ti∣tle; and in Martiall prowesse gaue place to none of that time wherein, though his whole raigne was continually spent, yet (by reason of King Henries great Treasure left) neuer burthened he the Com∣mons with any exactions, a thing that euer gaineth the loue of the common sort: neither is he taxed with any other obseruable crime, saue onely his per∣iurie against the Empresse Dowager and her sonne. (4) Hee entred his gouernement the yeare of Christ Iesus, 1135. the second day of December, and Rand. Higden. Roger Houed. was crowned at Westminster the twenty sixt of the same Moneth, being Saint Stephens day, by William Corbell Archbishop of Canterbury, who with the rest of the Prelates doing him homage, and knowing now hee would yeeld to any conditions (for perfor∣mance whereof his * Brother of Winchester did there engage himselfe for a pledge) they all tooke their Will. Malmes. lib. 1. nouel. oath of allegiāce conditionally, (traiterously, I might say) to obey him as their King, so long as he should preserue their Church Liberties, and the vigour of Allegeance sworne conditi∣onally to the King. Idem. Discipline: And that the Lay-Barons made vse al∣so of this policie, appeareth by Robert Earle of Glou∣cester, who sware to be true Liegeman to the King, as long as the King would preserue to him his digni∣ties, and keepe all Couenants, wherupon the King promised for the present, that he would speedily re∣forme the ouer-hard lawes of his Predecessors, and King Stephens faire promises. mollifie the extreames thereof to their owne li∣kings, vnder his Seale and Charter: and so thence hastening to meete the Corps of his deceased vncle, (which was now brought into England) he honou∣red Huntingdon. lib. 8. Houeden. that pompous funerall, with his owne, and all his great Prelates and Peeres, attendance at Reading; whence presently he went to Oxford, where he sea∣led Hen. Huntingdon his fore-promised Charter, of many indulgent fa∣uours: Malmes. nouell. lib. 1. Kings Stephens Charter. prefacing therein, that hee attained the Crowne by Election onely; and that Pope Inno∣centius confirmed the same; whereby may be con∣ceiued, that his Holinesse, either out of hatred to the Empresse, (whose husband This Henry im∣prisoned the Pope. Henry was no friend to the Papacie) or for some other holy ends, had no small hand in aduancing Stephens periured and disloiall intrusion. The Tenour of the Dated apud Ox∣enford. 1136 reg. 1 Charter it selfe is; That all Liberties, Customes, and Possessions graunted to the Church, should bee firme and inforce; that all Persons and Causes Ecclesiasticall should apper∣taine onely to Ecclesiasticall Iudicature: that none but Wl. Malmsbury. Huntingdon. Roger Houed. Clergy men should euer intermeddle with the vacancies of Churches, or any Church-mens goods; that all bad v∣sages in the Land touching for rests, exactions, &c. should be vtterly extirpate; the ancient Lawes restored, &c. As Stephen well knew, that they had chosen him their King, onely to make their vses of him, so these im∣munities he granted, rather to bleare their Eies, then Wil. Malmsb Houeden. * with any purpose to manacle his own hands with such Parchment-Chaines. (5) This his entrance was very peaceable (saith Ger∣uasius of Canterbury) but by little, and little ciuill dis∣cordincreased, Geruas. Dorob. to the lamentable destruction of men, and the land: whereto Robert Earle of Gloucester, Math. Paris. halfe-brother o the Empresse, whose wisedom and power King Stephen much feared, gaue a secret be∣ginning, Malmes. Nouel. lib. 1. when amongst them that swore him feal∣ty, hee concluded his (as we said) with this reser∣uation, that his owne authority should be nothing empaired, meaning no longer to respect him as his King, then the King should him as a Peere: and a generall sufferance, to erect Castles for strength Castles general∣ly raised in Eng∣land. throughout the land, was no security to his peace∣able estate. Intended indeed to strengthen the King∣dome against Maud the Empresse; but proued the bane of all subiectiue obedience: which was politick∣ly considered by Henry Fitz-Empresse, in the conclu∣sion VValsingham. Ypodig. ad Ann. 1151. of Peace betwixt King Stephen and him, when a thousand one hundred and fifteene Castles so rai∣sed, were againe razed and cast downe. (6) The first man that professedly set himselfe opposite to Stephens vsurpation, was Baldwin de Red∣uers, Excester first re∣sists King Stephē. who fortified the City and Castle of Excester against him; the Welshmen also, bearing in minde the harms that K. Henry had done them, desired reuenge, and made many slaughters vpon the Kings people: Against these, Stephen proceeded with his band of English and Flemmings, and after a strong and charge∣able siege, by famine drew foorth Baldwin, his wife, and children, all which hee disherited and expulsed the Land, vsing so great lenity towards all other of∣fenders there, that it gaue great encouragement to Hen. Hunting. lib. 8. Flor. Wigorn. others rebellions. But in Wales the businesse pro∣spered not so well, where at Cardigan a great battell was fought, with such slaughter and ouerbearing of the English, that the men by women were taken and led away Captiue, and so many drowned by the fall of a Brige ouer Temd, that a passage was made ouer the water with the dead Carcases therein heaped. (7) Neither thus onely, but some of the English also distasting King Stephen, secretly instigated Dauid Polydor. A. Do. 1138 Ypodigm. Neustr. King of Scotland, to reuenge the wrongs done to the Empresse Maud, a seruice as they vrged it very gratefull vnto her, and euen pleasing to God and Man. He therefore consenting, inuaded the bor∣ders, and tooke from the English both Carleile and Math. Paris. Newcastle, which he stuffed with Garrisons. Against these, King Stephen prepared, and with a great pow∣er came into those parts, where diuers accidents by diuers reporters are related, yet all agree that ere long peace was concluded, Carleil still enioied by King Dauid, and the Earledome of Huntington by Prince Henry his sonne; for which hee did homage at his fathers command, Dauid himselfe refusing so Will Gemet. to doe (as Hector Boetius the Scotish writer affir∣meth) for that he had giuen his faith before vnto Maud Hect. Boetius. lib. 12 cap. 17. the Empresse. (8) King Stephen returned, and all in good quiet, he suddenly fell sicke of a Lethargy, yea & in such dan∣ger of life that the common report gaue foorth hee Simon Dun. was dead, which stirred great troubles both in Eng∣land and else where, for thereby his friends were stricken into great feare, and the factious more bold to prepare for Queene Maude; for Hugh Bigot one of Math. Paris his chiefest and first raisers fortified himselfe in the Henry. Hunt. lib. 8. Castle of Norwich, and would not deliuer it vnto a∣ny saue onely to the King, yea and very vnwillingly also vnto him: and in Wales, Owen and Cadwalader the sonnes of Gruffith ap Conan Prince of that Coun∣try, carried great spoiles from the English, as of other Chron. Wall a. goods; so also of Horse and Armour, and habili∣ments Tumultuous at∣tempts in Nor∣mandy. Pari ensis. W lsingh. Tpodig. Malmb. Nouell. lib. 1. for warre; likewise in Normandy, Conspira∣cies began to bud forth; for Geffrey Earle of Aniou, who in right of his wife made claime vnto all, easily got the hearts and endeauours of many to adhere vnto the true heire; possessing himselfe of certaine Castles; but entring further on the Demaines of one Taleva , a man of note (proscribed for some of∣fence or displeasure by King Stephen) the Normans disliking that, and some other his doings, sent for Theobald Earle of Bloys (Stephens elder Brother) offe∣ring him both their Dukedome, and their swords, Stephens elder Brother laie claime. and liues to defend him in it; who comming to Luxonia, Robert Earle of Gloucester (not vnwilling a∣ny way to weaken King Stephen) deliuered vnto him vpon composition, the County of Falesia, himselfe carrying no small summe of money thence out of King Henries Treasurie, and very throughly, (though secretly) watching all opportunities to aduance the title and designes of the Empresse. Idem. (9) Stephen recouered, and hearing these stirres, Stephen goeth in∣to Normandy. Will. Newb. prepared himselfe first into Normandy, at whose ap∣proach, after some small attempts, the people (di∣stracted betwixt feare, and sense of their ducty) yeelded themselues vnto his power; surrendring their fenced Cities, and other strong holds. This Ger. Dorobor. good successe thus fortunately begunne, hee hoped further to prosecute, by meanes of a league, which He makes league with France. Huntingdon. lib. 8. Houeden. Math. Paris. His son E stace Duke of Nor∣mandy. hee lately had made with Lewis the seuenth King, of France: and heereupon created Eustace his eldest son liuing, Duke of Normandie, commanding him to do his homage for the same to Lewis. (10) Earle Theobald seeing himselfe thus defea∣ted of his hopes and purposes, stormed at the wrongs done by King Stephen; for hee, (his elder by birth, and Bloyses Earledomes lawfull heire) laide his title Stephen buieth his elder bro∣thers Title. Ypodigm. Neustr. Roger Wend. Houeden. Huntingdon. lib. 8. Mat. Paris. both for Normandie and England also, now vsurped by Stephen his yonger: notwithstanding (rage nought auailing without power) hee came to a composition, and remitted his Claime for two thousand markes annually to be paid. Geffrey of Aniou likewise, whose title by his Wife was better then them both, not able at the preset (being so far ouer-matched by the Kings power, wealth, & confederats) to do what he would, yeelded to necessity, and for fiue thousand markes He stoppeth the Empresses hus∣bands mouth with money. yeerely to be paid, suffered Stephen quietly to enioy the Crowne. (11) Hauing thus at once swept the two greatest rubbes out of his fortunes way, hee well hoped that An. D. 1138. all cloudes of displeasure, and opposition, were now Ann. Reg. 3. ouer-blowne, when vnexpectedly newes came, that England was intumults, the sparkes of conspiracie, Geru. Dorob. kindled secretlie before in the hearts of factious Peers, now openly breaking foorth, vpon aduantage England againe in tumults. of his absence in Normandie: therefore, hauing not al∣together cōposed his busines in those parts, he took King Stephen re∣turnes into Eng∣land. ship for England in the depth of the winter; and euen in the Vigill of Christs Natiuitie, besieged, and after tooke the Castle of Bedford, that was manned against Roger Houeden. him in the behalfe of the Scots; about which time Dauid their King hauing entred Northumberland in the quarrell of Queene Maude, the ruder sort of his Math. Paris. The King of Scots against King Stephen. Armie (as commonly the best gouerned is not emp∣tie of such) reuenged too tragically the wrongs of the Empresse, in ripping vp the wombes of women with Ypodig. Neustri. ed. in Steph. Huntingdon. lib. 8. child, and tossing their infants vpon the points of their speares, slaying the Priests at the Altar, and dismembring the slaine bodies in most vnhumane maner. (12) Against these, King Stephen made hastilie forward, affirming it no policie, to giue one houres rest The English No∣bles against King Stephen. Simon Dun. vnto the Enemie: and threatning more then hee ac∣complished, entred Scotland; whence after some small reuenge wrought, hee was hastily recalled; so many of his Nobles in England now in Armes against him, that hee was in a sort besette on euerie side. And what other could bee, a Vsurper, expect from them, but Treason, whom himselfe had formerly taught to be Traitors to their rightfull Soueraigne? But yet (as no Rebellion was euer without pretence of Reason and Iustice) they alledged, that hee had Huntingdon. 8. violated his Oath touching their Forrests, and other Immunities of Church and Common-wealth: but Church and Common-wealth, were but publike colours for pri∣uate Malmes. Nouel. l b. 2. pag. 105. grudges, (as Malmesburie, who then liued, well vnfouldeth) which the Great-Ones concerued a∣gainst their King, because he would not grant them such Castles, Commands, and Lordships, as them∣selues liked and expected of him, whom they Idem. li. 1. pa. 102. thought to be so obliged vnto them, that he ought denie them nothing. The endlesse and shamelesse importunities of these men, sometimes hee put off, alleadging thereby, the impaire of his Crownes reuc∣newes; Idem. sometimes hee was faine to satisfie, distrusting their fal ing from him: whose loialtie notwithstanding beeing built on so vn-noble grounds, was but colou∣red, and therefore could not long bee permanent. Earle Robert sends threats to King Stephen. Neither was it. For Robert of Glocester (the Empres∣ses halfe-brother, and now her chiefe Counsellor and Captaine) finding those particular dislikes apt to be wrought on, and made seruiceable for a common behoofe; whetted on with the touch of conscience, and counsells of religious learned men, (who vrged him, with the hazard both of his credit, and soule, for Idem. neglect of his first, and only-lawfull, Oath to the Empresse) sent threatning messages vnto King Stephen, charging Malmesb. No el. lib. 1. him with his Oath of Allegiance vnto Lady Maud his Soueraigne, against whom hee h shewed him∣selfe a most perfidious man, and had impiouslie drawne him with others to doe the like; and so de∣nouncing Stephen an open Enemie to the State, and himselfe vnto Stephen, made strong his faction with the assistance of many Nobles; among whom, Milo, a chiefe man of warre, and High Constable to King Geruas. Dorob. Wil. Malm b. Stephen, reuolted from him, and became a great help to their proceedings. (13) Earle Robert (whom estsoones the enraged King discharged of his honours and possessions in English Peeres fortific against the King. England) tooke into the Castle of Bristow, and made good also his Castle of Slede; his complices likewise did the like in other places: for William Talbot man∣ned Henry H t. lib. 8. Houeden. the Castle of Hereford, William Louell the Castle of Carie, Paganell the Castle of Ludlow, William de Mount the Castle of Dunestor, Robert de Nichol the Castle of Warram, Eustace Fitz-Iohn the Castle of De Malt na. Meltune, William Fitz-Alain the Castle of Shrews∣burie, and Walkelinus the Castle of Doure. And thus those forts which were erected to defend the Crowne, first offended the King, some few whereof as he recouered, he flatted to the ground, and wished the other no higher walls; still swearing by Gods Birth King Stephens vsuall Oath. Ma es. N el. lib. 1. (his vsuall Oath) hee would not so slightlie bee vn∣seated of his Crowne, and wondring what should mooue them, who had so readilie aduanced him, so speedily to vnstate him. One fresh motiue to these Noble-mens discontents was the Kings * seizing on some great men and their lands, on bare suspition of Melmesb. N l. libro secund . their loialtie; and on the other side, the extraordina∣rie fauour, which Stephen shewed to William de Ypre, and his Flemings (which they interpreted as a con∣tempt Ger. Dor. of themselues and their Nation) whose coun∣sells he generally followed, and chieflie relied vpon: In disdaine whereof, they sent word to the Empresse, that within fiue Monethes, shee should haue the An. D. 1139. Realme at command, according to their Oaths made to her Father. (14) These turmoiles thus working in the bow∣els of the Kingdome, Dauid King of Scotland had The King of Scotland his at∣tempts against Stephen. better opportunitie to assaile the sides and skirts thereof; and following what hee had begunne, with a very great Armie entring Northumberland, made great slaughter of the English, and destruction of their Countrey: Against whom the Northren Lords pre∣pared, at command of Thurstan Arch-bishop of Yorke ( King Stephen Lieutenant in those parts) Simon Dun. who beeing by sickenes kept from the Field, ap∣pointed Ralph Bishop of Durham his General; whose Inuectiue Oration before their ioyning of battaile, occasioned vpon the foresaid misdeameanors of Houeden. Wendouer. Hen. Hunting. some vndisciplined Scotish, is at large set down by Houedon, Huntingdon, Wendouer and others; in the close whereof, he absolueth from punishment of sin, all such of his side, as should die in this battaile: which made the English more desperate in fight, who so sorely pressed vpon their enemies, that they forsooke This field was fought in August An. 1138. neere the mouth of Humber. Mat. Paris. their King, he notwithstanding valiantly persisting, til his dearest friends ernestly vrged him to auoid. But his son Henry, esteeming more of glory thē life, rushed in amongst his retiring souldiers, and with vndaunted courage, perswading them to regard themselus and his presence, with threat of shamefull deaths to all such as fled, he held them in for a time; till at length The great valor of Prince Henry of Scotland. ouer-laid with the maine-battaile of the English, the magnanimous Prince Henry, likewise quitted the field, bitterly cursing the frowardnesse of Fortune, Mah. Paris. Houeden. & alij. Polyd. Uirgil. and the mischance that hapned that day. (15) With like fortunate successe, proceeded Stephen against his disobedient Barons, and wanne from them the Castles of Hereford, Gloucester, Webley, Bristow, Dudley and Shrewsbury, whereby hee weak∣ned Rand. Higden. Earle Robert leaues England. Earle Robert so much, that he was constrained to flie into France, and there instigated his sister the Em∣presse to come into England. (16) These domesticke opposites thus remoued out of his way, King Stephen re-addressed himselfe for the North, to prosecute that which Thurstan had begunne: first therfore winning the Castle of Leids, he went into Scotland, where by the persuasion & prowesse of Mars and Vulcan (saith Paris) a Peace A Peace betwixt the King of Eng∣land and Scotland. Math. Paris. Henry Hunt. was concluded betwixt the two Kings; and Stephen thence returning, brought Prince Henry (whom he created Earle of Huntingdon) with him into England, and at the siege of Ludlow Castle, the aduenturous Prince was almost surprised, where the besieged with Houeden. Henry. Hunt. an Iron Grapple pluckt him from his horse, and so had taken him, but that King Stephen himselfe, with great valour and honour recouered him: who ha∣uing wonne the Castle, went presently to Oxford, whither newes was brought him that the Empresse was preparing for England. (17) To make all sure as he went, Stephen thought it good to demolish, and race those Castles lately built, (hauing had experience to what troubles they A. Do. 1140 King Stephen pluckes downe the Castles. had brought him) and to preuent the building of new; and namely, that of the Diuise, now (as hee sur∣mised) in fortifying against him: hee therefore sent for Roger Bishop of Salisbury (the Founder both of that Castle, as also those other of Sherborn & Malms∣bury) a man who in a bad cause had stood King Ste∣phen in good stead, howsoeuer some enuying his greatnes, had incensed the King against him, and o∣ther Malmes. Nouel. lib. 2. Prelates, as if they were fallen from his side. The Bishop standing peremptorily on his innocencie, yet mistrusting the euent, craued the company of Henry Hun. Houeden. Alexander Bishop of Lincolne, and of Nigell Bishop of Ely; so with a great and well appointed traine, repaired to Oxford vnto the Court, where Stephen had summoned a Grand-Councell of the States. A great Councel at Oxford. (18) The King who expected of Church-men humility, seeing them now armed as men for the field, commanded his attendants to take armour Geruas. Dorob. likewise, and so entring communication of diuers matters with his Peeres and Prelates, their Souldi∣ers casually meeting, fell at variance, where the Bi∣shops Malmesb. loco citato. friends had the worse, so that many of them were wounded, and the rest forsaking their masters ranne away. This great assembly thus disturbed, the King required the Bishops to satisfie his Court The Kings vsage of his Prelats. for these outrages of their seruants, which satisfacti∣on should be, to deliuer the keyes of all their Castles to the King, as pledges of their fidelity, which they refu∣sing, Idem. the Bishops of Salisbury and Lincolne were laid hold of; but Ely escaped to the Castle of Diuise: A∣lexander was imprisoned, till hee had y ded him his Castles of New-werke, and I ford. Paris. Slaford; Roger the Castles of Sherborne, and the Deuises (accounted then one of the goodliest Castles of Europe) besides forty Wendouer. Paris. thousand Markes in siluer; (which losses the Bishop did not long suruiue). The King imployed the mo∣ney to purchase Lady Constance, sister to Lewis King Polychr. lib. 7. cap. 18. of France, to be wife vnto his sonne Eustace: all which was to strengthen himselfe against the Empresse Roger Houed. Maud, whose comming he continually feared, & now before his expectation she was landed in Eng∣land, The Empresse arriues in Eng∣land. Malmesb. Nouel. lib. 2. Huntingdon. Rog. de Wendouer. at a fitte time for her designes, when all the great Prelates (who formerly were his chiefest friends) were highly incensed against the King for such oppression of their Brethren. (19) The place of her arriuage was at the At Portsmouth saith Geruas. port of Arundell, into which Castle shee was ioyfully re∣ceiued by William de Albeny, who had married Queen Adeliza, the late wife to King Henry, whose Dowrie it was; from hence Earle Robert diuerting his course onely with tenne horse-men, and as many Archers, Math Paris Earle Robert brings but 140. men, to the win∣ning of the Crowne of Eng∣land. (for in all hee brought ouer but one hundred and forty with him for so great an exploit) passed throgh the Land vnto Wallingford and Gloucester, soliciting his Complices for the aid of his sister the Empresse. Malmesb. lib. 2. A man who then liued, holds him, in this bold at∣tempt with so small forces, no way inferiour to Iu∣lius Caesar, whom Liuie reports to haue begun his ciuill war, and to haue set himselfe against the whole world, onelie with fiue Cohorts of Souldiers. (20) King Stephen as then lay in siege of Marle∣burgh Castle, but hauing intelligence of this more dangerous an enemy, dislodged thence, and with all expedition made towards Arundell; whereat the Stephen ha es to the Empresse. Empresse, wanting her Counsellor, was wonderful∣ly perplext, yet wanted not a womans wit to helpe at need; insomuch that by the report of Geruasius, lest her dignity and right might any way be endammaged, Her politike ex∣cuse. Ger. Dor. shee tooke an oath, that none of these the Kings enemies by her aduice or consent had entred the land, but with condition to carry themselues orderly without impeach∣ment of the honour and allegiance due to the King; by which policy (to giue it no worse name) she so satis∣fied Roger. Houed. Henry Hunt. King Stephen (whom al do censure for too much credulity and facility towards his foes) that hee cau∣sed her to bee conuaied honourably vnto Bristow, where she remained the space of two monethes, and then got thence vnto Wallingford. (21) Earle Robert in the meane while dispersed the newes of the Empresses approch, vnto whose aid The Empresses power increaseth Geruasius. so many gathered, that the same Monke reporteth, no man was able to set downe their multitudes in con∣text of historie, much lesse by way of Computation: then beganne (saith he) both labour and dolour, which brought the whole Realme to a most grieuous diuision, and in a ma∣ner to an vtter ruine: for those that fauoured the King, what euill soeuer could be wrought or imagined, they did against them, that tooke part with the Empresse: and contrariwise, Earle Robert, whose power daily encrea∣sed, tortured with cruelties all those that stood for the King; and to augment a more mischiefe, the Flemings Flemings came to King Stephens aide. left their owne Country, and came ouer by multitudes, like vnto a Company of hunger-starued Wolues, seeking to bring the Lands felicity vnto nothing. (22) Stephen, whose head was now ful of troubles, delaid no time to forward his Fortunes, but straight∣waies King Stephen be∣sieges Wallinford Castle. Geru. Dor. besieged Maud and her brother in Wallingford Castle; notwithstanding, wearied with long labour and profiting little, hee caused a Tower of wood to be there erected, which he strongly fortified with mē and munition, and then remooued to the siege of Malmesbury. His brother also of Winchester, a stout and politicke Prelate indeede, bestirred all his wilie wittes in Stephens behalfe; for inuiting certaine No∣ble-men to his Palace at Winchester, retained them The Bishop of Winchester en∣traps the Nobles Math. Paris. prisoners, till hee had compelled them there, to re∣signe their Castles to the King. In the meane while Earle Robert subdued and spoiled Worcester: Ralph Painell, in the Empresses fauour, burned Nottingham; and Ranulph Earle of Chester, ioining in wishes with Robert (whose daughter hee maried) shewed himselfe not vnwilling to annoy King Stephen, though he had receiued great honours at his hands. The Empresse her selfe, the better to secure her owne person, and to giue accesse vnto her fauourites, tooke into Lincolne, where she meant to make her abode, storing the City with all prouisions necessarie. (23) King Stephen, as vigilant as the other was politick, made straight-waies thitherward, and begirt Simon D n. Roger Houed. the Citie with a straite siege, where hee had surpri∣sed his greatest Enemie, had shee not found meanes thence to escape: & so possessing himself of the City, setled it, & the whole Countrey in verie good quiet. Soone after whose departure, Ranulph Earle of Che∣ster, with his Countesse, and Brother, comming to Lincolne, to keepe their Christmas; the Citizenes knowing the Kings iealousies, and desirous to currie fa∣uour with him, sent secret intelligence, that if he would surprize both those Brethren, he had now the fittest Malmsb. Nouel. lib. 2. aduantage: whereto the King giuing eare, came thi∣ther with great expedition; and whiles they, thus circumuented, stood on their guard in the Castle, the Earle escaped foorth, and went to craue aid of the Empresse, for rescue of his wife and brother whom hee left besieged. Earle Robert, hearing the newes, and glad of so faire an opportunity, ioined with Ranulph, and they both gathered all their po∣wers both of Welsh and English, for the releefe of their friends in Lincolne: where, resolutelie first wading through the Riuer, (which parted them from the Kings Armie, and was then deepe) vpon Candlemas day and yeere of Christ Iesus one thousand one hun∣dred fortie one, they pitched their Tents, and in the Niger. Polydor. Nie. Tri . King Stephen and his aduersaries pitch their Battle Kings sight ordered their Battaile: One Squadrone whereof, was lead by Earle Ranulph: the Disherited were the Guiders of another; in the third was Earle Robert himselfe; and the Welsh-men serued for the Wing. Their troopes thus marshalled, Ranulph ap∣pointed in rich Armor, and full of braue resolution, spake thus to his followers, in the presence of Robert R n. Higden. of Glocester. (24) I yeeld you vnfained thanks, (Inuincible Captaine, and you, our companions in Armes) which heere so resolutelie witnesse your loues vn∣to Ranulphs Oration before the Battle Roger Houeden. mee, vpon my sole request, euen to the hazard of your owne liues. Sith then, I am the chiefe cause of this your perill, it well befits me, that I my selfe be formost in the hazard, and giue the first onsette of battaile against this faithlesse King; who made vs a shew of truce, onelie to take aduantage for our ruines; and therefore both mine owne courage, and the Kings vniust dealing, giue mee cause to hope, that I shall foorthwith breake asunder the strongest array of his Armie, and make my way through their midst, by dint of this my sword. It shall be argument of your prowesse, to follow me, leading you the way, and to imitate mee, giuing you example. My thoughts alreadie tell mee, that euen now I am breaking through his Battles, trampling on the neckes of his Chieftaines, and piercing with this my sword the very sides of the King himselfe. His speech though short and head∣die, as more fitting a Souldier then an Orator, yet well suited with the time, and was seconded with great applause of the Souldiers: Whereupon Ro∣bert Earle of Glocester, stept foorth and said. (25) It is not against right, most Noble Earle, that the honor of this daies seruice, and first assault, Henrie Hunt. Earle Roberts Oration before the Battle. Roger Houeden. Henry Hunt. Polychron. should bee permitted vnto you, in regard of the greatnes both of your descent, and your martiall achieuement; but yet, if Descent bee stood on, I my selfe am both the sonne, and nephew, of a Mightie King; if Valour, heere now are many of choisest worth, of whom none liuing can challenge precedence for prowesse. But other reason ought now to sway. For sith the King, contrarie to his Oath made to my Sister, impiously vsurped the Kingdome, he hath made a confusion of all things, both in causing the bloud of many thousands to bee spilt, and in making many Owners (as him∣selfe was) of that which was not their owne, by de∣priuing other of their rightfull inheritance: These therefore thus disherized, ought of right (in assu∣rance of helpe from their righteous Iudge and re∣uenger) giue first assault on their vnrighteous op∣pressor; and God who iustly iudgeth his people, will (doubtlesse) looke downe from his heauenly habitation, and will not leaue vs succourlesse, whiles in a iust cause, wee impugne a most vniust Intruder. But one thing, (most resolued Cap∣taines and souldiers) I would haue you through lie to consider, that through these Fennes (which with so much a doe you haue passed) there is no way fit for escape: heere must wee either vanquish, or leaue our liues, for hope of flight is none at all, nor is there any other way, left vs now to goe, but by our swords into the Citie: and (if I gesse a∣right) euen this, that wee haue no meanes to flie, will bee to vs the meanes (by diuine assistance) to get the Victorie; because they must needes trust to their Manhood, who see no hope to thriue by their Cowardize. Indeed, the Citizenes of Lin∣colne keepe nigh to their houses, and in the brunt of the Battle, there will their mindes bee, and thither will their heeles follow, whiles you victoriouslie shall keepe the field. And consider farther with mee, what kinde of Captaines they haue: First A∣laine Duke of Britaine, he comes armed, not against you, but God himselfe, a furious person, spotted Alain Duke of Britane. with all filth of sinne, in malice vnmatchable, who thinks it his greatest dishonour, to see any man ex∣cell him in crueltie: with him commeth the trea∣cherous Earle Robert Mellent, the very craftes-ma∣ster of fraud, in whose heart dwells impiety, guile Robert Mellent. in his mouth, cowardize in his actions; high of minde, vaineglorious in words, degenerous in per∣formance; last in the fight, first in the flight. Next, comes Hugh By-god, his name neerelie sounding his periurie; who thought it not sufficient to breake Hugh Bi-god. his oath with the Empresse, but that hee must be once againe forsworn (as all the world doth know) that Henry at his death bequeathed the Crowne vnto Stephen, to the preiudice of his owne daugh∣ter; a man (in a word) who accounts Treacherie a Vertue, and Periurie a courtly quality. Among Earle Albemarle. these Gallants marcheth the Earle Albemarle, a man of a singular constancy in euill; very ready to at∣tempt, & very loath to leaue any mischiefe; whose wife, through irkesomnes of his vnsufferable filthy qualities, is gone from him; & the Earle that keeps her, hee commeth against vs too, a notorious a∣dulterer, and the Non-pareill of impurity, a true Souldier of Bacchus, a stranger to Mars; to whom the sight of all bloud, except of the Grape, is ve∣rie fearefull. Then setteth forth Simon Earle of Hampton, whose deeds consist altogether in words, Earle Simon. and whose liberality onely in promises; for when he hath said, he hath done, and yee get no more. Lastly, you see here gathered a knot of Peeres, all like to their Prince, accustomed to robberies, en∣riched with rapines, fatned with man-slaughters, and all tainted with periurie You therefore (No∣ble spirits) whom great Henry aduanced, and this Stephen hath cast downe, whom Henry made wealthy, and Stephen hath empouerished, be now couragious, and vpon assured confidence of your great valours, yea, of Gods iustice, seeke both your iust Reuēge, which God euen puts into your hands, on these vngodly wretches; and immortall Glorie, which shall hence-forward attend both your selues, and your posterity for euer. If you are all of this mind, for executing this Iudgement of God now vpon them, then vow your selues vnto God, and this his seruice; and forbear, nay rather forswear, to shew your backs to your foes. At which words, all iointly lifting vp their hands, and acclamations vnto heauen, with a terrible shout abiured all thought of flight, and quickning vp their braue spirits, aduanced gallantly towards the enemy. (26) King Stephen, the meane while, was farre from being idle, who also ordered his Armie into three seuerall Battalions: the greatest part and best King Stephens ad∣dresse to the Battle. harnassed, whose horses he had sent away (perhaps also to depriue his men of all hope of flight) he ap∣pointed to remaine on foot with himself, and certain of his Nobles, all vnder one Banner. The horse∣men hee disposed into two seuerall wings, the one Math. Paris. Simon Dunel. commaunded by Alaine Duke of Britaine, Hugh Bi god Earle of Norfolke, Simon Earle of Hampton, wit∣the two Earles of Mellent and Warren; and the other Wing was gouerned by William de Ypres the Fle∣ming. Then the King, because his voice was not very pleasing or audible, commaunded Baldwine Fitz-Gilbert, a man of great honour and prowesse, to vtter his mind vnto the Army, who standing conueniently to be heard, spake vnto them as fol∣loweth. (27) All such as addresse themselues, and ex∣pose their liues, to the hazard of battaile, haue Henry Hunt. Roger Houeden. three things aduisedly to be thought on: The e∣quitie of their cause; the Number of the Forces; the sufficiency of their men. The first, lest they endanger the state of their Soules; the next, lest they be ouerlaied with multitude of their enemies; and the last, lest while they presume vpon num∣bers, they find them but faint-hearted, to their vtter ruine. But in all these, wee know ourselues to be sufficiently furnished. The Iustice of our cause is, for obseruing the vow made before God vnto our King, to withstand them that haue falsifi∣ed their faith, euen to the hazard of our liues. For our Number, in Horsemē; tis not inferior to theirs; in Footmen we farre exceede them: and for suffi∣ciency, what words can equall the noble valour of so many Earles, Lords, Captaines and Followers, trained vp euer in the warres? But aboue all, the incomparable prowesse and presence of our King, will be in stead of thousands to vs. Sith then this our Lord, and the Lords Anointed (to whom you vowed your faith) is in field here amongst you; now performe this your vow vnto God; assured, that the more constant you proue in this your Princes seruice, and faithfull against those faithles periured persons, the more shall your re∣ward bee at the hands of God, and of him. There∣fore be both couragious, and confident; the rather, considering against whom you fight: euen against Earle Robert. Robert the Base-borne Generall, whose vtmost worth is well knowne; for he can threaten much, and performe as little: a Lions tongue, and a Hares heart: his faire speech is his credit, his foule acti∣ons Earle Ranulph. are his shame. Chesters Earle what is hee? a man audacious, but without all iudgement; heady to plot a treason, but still wauering in the pursuit of it: ready to runne into battaile, but vncircum∣spect in any danger; aiming beyond his reach, and conceiting things meerely impossible; and there∣fore hath he few with him that know him, but leads onely a rout of vagrant rascals: so there is nothing in him to bee feared; for whatsoeuer he beginnes like a Man, he ends it like a Woman; vn∣fortunate in all his vndertakings; in his encoun∣ters stil either vanquished, or if he chance (rarely God wot) on a victorie, it is with farre greater los∣ses then the conquered. The Welshmen he brin∣geth, The Welsh. are fitter for our contempt then feare: their rashnes you may easily see, for it is naked and vn∣armed, who wanting both military Art and Pra∣ctise, runne headlong, like brutes vpon the Hunters Iauelins. The rest aswell Nobles (if such they may bee tearmed) as common Souldiers, are but straglers and runnagates: of whom I would wish their number greater; for the more they be, the more successesse will bee their seruice. You therefore (great Peeres and Worthies) it now be∣houeth (and indeed it much behoueth you) to bee very mindfull, both of your Valours, and Noble∣nesse: this day aduance your Prowes to the height, and following the foresteps of your famous An∣cestors, leaue to your posterities both a noble pat∣terne, and an euerlasting renowne. Your dayly successe of victories, should quicken your hearts this day to atchieue brauely, and the continuall miscarrying of our enemies, will quicken their heeles to flie as speedily: and (I dare say) they al∣ready repent of their comming hither, and are by this time casting how to be gone, if the nature of the place would giue them leaue. Then sith it is vnpossible for them either to fight, or flie; why come they hither, but euen by Gods own appoint∣ment, to offer themselues, and all their prouisions into your hands? and here you see their horses, their Armour, yea and their bodies, to rest at your pleasure: reach forth therefore your warlicke hands to seize on that ioyfully, which God hath freely brought you. Which exhortation hee had scarsly closed, when the noiseof Trumpets, and shout of the enemies comming on, was Rhetoricke enough to incite them The Battles ioin to their tasks. (28) A sore battaile was fought, and with equall successe a long time maintained: for the band of Henry Hunt. Wil. Par . Mat. Paris. the disherited, whose particular wrongs whetted their courage, (and were therefore politickly pla∣ced in the front) brake terribly into the Kings Vauntgard; and contrariwise William of Ypres into the Welsh, vntill the Fore-ward of the Kings horse∣men Polydor. beganne to shrinke backe, and (not without sus∣pition of treason) galloped away; when presently the Earle of Chester encountred the Kings battaile of foote, in whose strength he reposed most trust; but it being ouerlaid with Assailants, beganne also to faint and to flie, leauing the King enraged, both Ger. Dor. with his friends faint-heartednes, and with his foes successe. A very strange sight it was (saith Paris) there to behold King Stephen, left almost alone in the field yet no man daring to approch him, whiles grinding Mat. Paris. King Stephens great valour. his teeth, and foaming like a furious wild Boare, he draue backe with his battle-axe whole troupes assailing him, & massacring the chiefest of them to the eternall renowne of his courage: If but a hundred such had there beene with him, a whole Army had neuer been able to surprize his person: yet as hee was single, hee held out, til first his Battle-axe brake, and after that, his sword Huntingdon. King Stephen ta∣ken prisoner. also, with the force of his vnresistable strokes, flew in peeces; and he now weaponlesse, and (by an vn∣knowne, doubtlesse, an vn-noblehand) stricken down Ypodig. Neustr. Malmesb. Nouel. lib. 2. with a great stone throwne at him, was seized on by William of Alias de Kain . Huntingdon. Kahames, a most stout Knight, and by An. Reg. 6. Earle Roberts commaund, preserued from any vio∣lence to his person, was carried prisoner vnto Maud the Empresse at Gloucester, & thence was sent bound vnto Bristow, where in the Castle he remained in safe Math. Paris. custody. (29) The Empresse hauing thus got the Lion in her hold, triumphed not a litle in her own fortune, The Empresse absolute gouer∣nour of the King∣dome. & now as sole Soueraign of Englands Monarchie, commanded all businesse, elected her Counsellors, and bestowed many dignities where shee most fa∣uoured. Notwithstanding, that shee altered not her stile of Empresse, or Queene of Romanes, may appeare by this her Broad-Seale ensuing; vnder Charta Matild. Imper ricis. which shee granted the custody of the Tower of Lon∣don vnto Geffrey de Mandeuil, and his Heires, couenanting with him therein, that she would not make peace with the Citizens of London, without the said Gef∣freis consent, because they were his mortall enemies: but this Earle being afterwards vnawares apprehended in the Kings Court at Saint Albans, could not bee Geruas. Dorob. released, till hee had surrendred both the Tower of London, and other his Castles to the King. Vpon these happy successes of the Empresse, the States-men stood not any longer for King Stephen, but their Faithes turning with his Fortunes, all of them surrendred their allegiance vnto her; the Kentish on∣ly excepted, where Stephens Queene, and William de Huntingd. l. 8. Ypres, maintained his quarrell to the vttermost of their powers. THE TRVE SCVLPTVRE OF MAVD THE EMPRESSES BROAD SEALE, APPENDANT TO HER CHARTERS. (30) But the Empresse conducted in State to Winchester, had the Regall Crowne of the King∣dome Geru. Dor. The Clergie ap∣prooues the Em∣presses title. Wil. Malms. there deliuered her; no man more for∣ward then Henry the Bishop, and Brother of Stephen, who vpon the vowing to bee ruled by his aduise in affaires of Estate, being then the Popes Legate, so∣lemnely in a Synode of the Clergie, accursed all such Malmesb. Nouel. lib. 2. as withstood the Empressae, and blessed all them that assisted her interest: but both hee, and his friends forgot not to adde that wonted trayterous clause of their oath, so long to keepe faith to her, as shee kept her Couenants with them: and so with applause of the people, she came to London, and after much perswasion and mediation (for that the Citizens The Empresse receiued into London. were very stiffe against her) was receiued into the Ci∣ty with a roiall Procession. (31) Neither was King Stephen thus defeated of England onely, but Normandy also cast off the yoke Normandy falleth from King Ste∣phen. Will. Paruus. of subiection: for Geffrey of Aniou, husband of the Empresse, hauing some intelligence of this atchie∣ued victorie, induced the Normans to incline vnto him, by publishing the captiuation of Stephen, vna∣ble now to relieue them, or himselfe; and Dauid King of Scotland for his part was not behind, to set forward the claime of Lady Maud, assuming in her behalfe the County of Northumberland. (32) Maud thus established, all now esteemed her as Fortunes deare darling, and beheld her as their onely rising sunne; the Prison walles ouer∣shadowing the Presence, feature, and fauours of the now deiected vnfortunate Stephen, whose sor∣rowful wife Queen Maud, incessantly sollicited the Ger. Dor. Empresse in her husbands behalfe, desiring his li∣berty, but not his Crowne, which hee was now con∣tented Stephen desires liberty, and not the Crowne. to let her enioy; and thereunto offered for pledges many great persons, who protested for him to the Empresse, that hee thenceforth would de∣uote himselfe vnto God, & either become a Monke or a Pilgrime: Henry of Winchester also became a Ypodig. Neustr. King Stephen would be a Monk or Pilgrim. suiter vnto her in the behalfe of his Nephew Eu∣stace, King Stephens sonne, that the Bo gne and Mortaine. Counties be∣longing before to the Father, might bee conferred vpon the sonne. (33) The Londoners likewise hauing receiued her into the City as their Lady, thought now (as most doe with new Princes) they might haue what they would aske, and became her importunate Suppli∣ants, that the ouer hard lawes imposed by her Father, might now be remitted, and those of King The Empresse not facile to grant suites. Edward might wholy bee in force. But shee reie∣cted all these Petitioners, out of pride, say some; but it may seeme rather of policy, holding it safest, to passeaffaires of importance, not vpon intreaty, but by due aduice, and to gouerne the subiect with a seuere austerenes, rather then an indulgent lenitie. But this too regular strictnes, which might haue done well in a setled gouernment, in this her yet Her stifnesse incommodious. greene, and vnsecured estate, proued not so be∣houefull. For first, Queene King Stephens wife. Maud sent to her sonne Eustace, that their suites must bee obtained onely by warre; willing him to make strong his partie by the assistance of the Kentish: the Nobles The Nobles of∣fended, fall off from her. Malmes. Nouel. lib. 2. likewise, Stephens vndertakers, repined, that they were so slightly regarded, or rather reiected: and the Londoners also storming at the repulse of their de∣sires, deuised how they might take the Empresse The Londoners conspire against her. Nic. Triuet. their Prisoner, and so redeem King Stephen, to whom their affectiōs were euer firm: but she hearing of their conspiracie, fled secretly in the night, and tooke in∣to Oxford, which in all her difficulties shee euer found true vnto her, out of their loue, both to her cause, and to her Father; & threatning due reuenge for her late wrongs, wrought it vpon the Nobles in prison, and (more then was due or decent) vpon Stephen himself, whom she commanded to be laden with Irons, and to bee abridged of all princely ser∣uices. Roger Houeden. (34) Winchesters high mind not brooking the Em∣presses deniall of his suite, in behalfe of his Nephew Ger. Dor. Eustace, vpon secret conferences with Queen Mand, by her lamentable entreaties, began to melt in his affection towards the distressed King his brother; & Malmesb. Nouel. libro secund . in fine, resoluing to trie the vttermost for him, ab∣solued all those whom before hee had excommuni∣cated, Henry of Win∣chester recalls his Excommunica∣tion. pretending, that the Barons had all kept faith with her, but shee had not kept touch with them; and thin∣king this a fitte time to worke for his brother, soli∣cited the discontented Londoners in his behalfe, and stored the Castles of Waltham, Farnham, and Win∣chester with Munition and men; meane while the Empresse came speedily to Gloucester, to conferre with Milo her chiefest friend, and presently againe returning to Oxford ( Idem loco citato. which she chose for her Court and chiefe place of abode) was there maintained on∣ly The Empresse maintained at Milo his charges. at his charge, not hauing one dayes diet, or pro∣uision of her owne; to requite which fidelity, and other noble seruices, she there created him Earle of Hereford. (35) Her forces recollected, & thither assembled, she went forthwith to the City of Winchester, accom∣panied with Dauid King of Scotland her vncle, Earle Robert her brother, and many other Nobles; where sending for the Bishop being then in the City (whose aid shee could hardly spare, and therefore was desi∣rous of his reconcilement) though hee mistrusted some perill, yet not daring to send a deniall, returned the Messenger with this equiuocall answere, that he would with all speed addresse himselfe, as if hee had The Bishop of Winchester equi∣uocateth. meant to follow them: so forthwith issuing secret∣ly out of the City, did indeed addresse himselfe to * Ego parab me. Will Malmsb. worke her ruine: for, sending for Queene Maude her sonne Eustace, the Londoners, and William Ypres, (afterwards created Earle of Kent) made strong his part, himselfe and friends abiding in the City, whiles the Empresse and her Nobles defensed themselues in the Castle, not aduenturing to goe forth amongst Will. Malmes. Geruas. Dorob. so many their mortall enemies: and soone after, to worke his wrathfull will, knowing the Citizens to bee more affected to the Empresse then to him, com∣manded the said Citie to bee set on fire, where in, the Hee fires Winchester. Monastery of Nunnes, aboue twentie Churches, Alias The Co∣uent at Hyde. Malmesb. the Co∣uent of S. Grimbald, and the better part of the Citie, were consumed to ashes. (36) Seuen weekes thus spent, in this coun∣ter-siege Ger. Dorob. The Bishop of Winchester en∣trappeth the Empresse. of the Citie and Castle, the Bishoppe, to de∣ceiue the Empresse, commanded peace to bee pro∣claimed, and the Gates to bee set open towards eue∣ning. The Empresse then, who had indured such troubles and so long a restraint, greatlie desired to change her lodging, and to recreat her perplexed spi∣rits in some other place; so taking horse, accompani∣ed with her brother, Reinold Earle of Cornewall, her seruants, and many others her friends, besides Earle Robert, who followed behind with a troupe of No∣bles and Knights; presentlie at the Bishoppes com∣mandment, Malmsb. lib. 2. shee was pursued by his Souldiers, and many of her traine wounded and taken prisoners; the Empresse by good prouidence escaped into the Castle of Lutegareshall, and thence to the Castle Di∣uize: where vnderstanding that shee was still in ha∣zard to bee surprized, shee was contented, (as what will not necessity endure, & a womans wit deuise?) to bee laide in a coffine bound fast with cords; and so, as if it had beene her Corse, carried in a horse∣litter The Empresse carried as a dead Corse. Wil. Walsingham. Ypodigm. Neustr. to the Citie of Glocester: in which bonds of her owne distresse, shee had good occasion to remember the chaines of King Stephens captiuitie. To such ex∣tremities were these two Princes at the selfe same time subiect, that whiles they turmoiled for spacious Kingdomes, brought themselues to the very extream wants, of aire, and of elbow-roome; but with such dalliance doth Fortune (wee see) oftentimes follow her game, that shee maketh euen Monarchs the Balls of her play, and tosseth them lastly into the Hazard, whence hardly they escape with safetie of life. Yet this was not the worst; for Earle Robert her brother, whilest hee was busier in prouiding for her safetie, then for his owne, was taken by his pursuers at Stoubreg Malmes. Ger. Dor. with others; brought backe to Winchester, and there presented by the Bishop vnto Queene Maud, King Stephens wife, who committed him to the cu∣stodie of William Ypres, and he for more safety to Glo∣cester; but others taking sanctuarie in the Nuns Mo∣nastery Earle Robert taken. of Warwell were burned together with the place: Thus then the King on the one side, and the Malmes. lib. 2. Earle on the other, were kept in safe custodie; but the Queene labouring for the Kings release, and the Countesse for the Earles, many Articles were pro∣pounded, and many messengers imploied: at length, this was thought fittest, that Stephen should bee re∣stored to his kingdome, and Robert vnder him to haue the whole gouernment of the Land; so that both of them should now iointly vphold that, which they (the two Ring-leaders) by opposition had cast downe. But Earle Robert as he was no whit deiected in mind, with any frowne of Fortune whatsoeuer, so reserued hee his fidelity to the Empresse vnstained, and vnmoued either with feare or faire inticements, still refusing to capitulate for his freedome, but to Will. Malmes. his Sisters liking; who likewise bare so braue a minde, that were her state neuer so weake, shee would not consent nor giue the least eare to any composition for the Crowne. (37) Then was enmitie increased, the Kingdome Wil. Malmsb. An. D. 1142. The King and Earle Robert re∣deeme each o∣ther out of prison. Roger Houeden. diuided, and the peoples hatred kindled in maine∣taining the factions, all fore-running the ruine of the Land: Forthese two Chieftaines wearied with irk∣somnes of irons, and hard imprisonment, made ex∣change the one for the other, without any farther mention of peace, and so studied not onely to renew their former designes, but to encrease the lands mi∣serie by more eagre warres. Stephen in England wrought the people for him, & Robert Malmesb. taking pledg∣es Math. Paris. of the Nobles to attend and guard the Empresse at Ox∣ford till his returne, went into Normandie to solicite The warres re∣newed. Geffrey her husband for her defence. But the Earle hauing troubles with his owne Nobilitie, and the Normans scarsly brought to any subiection, thought it not conuenient by his owne absence for a state in hope, to hazard that in hand; and therefore sent with Robert some strength of Armes, and with them his young sonne Prince Henrie into England. (38) The Empresse in his absence, had well for∣tified The Empresse besieged in Ox∣ford. Geruas. Dorob. her selfe in Oxford, whom Stephen (vsing the benefit of Roberts absence) followed with an eagre pursuite, and wanne the Suburbs euen vnto the Ci∣tie gates; then girt hee the Empresse with so straite a siege, (meaning neuer to giue ouer, till hee had now made her sure in his possession) that for two mo∣nethes whatsoeuer Strength or Stratageme could per∣forme in assault or defense, was there put in practize, till at length great penurie enforced to thinke of a Nic. Triuet. surrender: but shee, a woman (whose sexe hath often Will. Neub. deceiued wise men) resolued once againe to ouer∣reach Higden. her foe by wit, whom shee could not by force: whereto the time did fit her wishes; for being a win∣ter, sharpe aboue measure, the Riuer Thamisis that runnes by the Citie walls, was then congealed with a Walsingh. Ypodig. strong crusted Ice, and besides a great snow did then Ger. Dor. continue, and had couered the ground. Maud vp∣on these aduantages, put in practize a most dange∣rous attempt: for cloathing herselfe, and some Math. Paris She escapes by a wile. choice of her company, in white linnen garments, to deceiue the eies of the Sentinells, issued secretlie by night out of a posterne-gate, and passing the frozen Wil. Malmsb. Simon Dun. Riuer, ranne on foote, through ice, and snow, ditches, and vallies, for fiue miles, euen to Abingdon, the fal∣ling snow still beating in their faces; and there taking horse, the same night got to the Castle of Wallingford, Ypodig. Neustr. Geru. Dorob. to the great ioy, and also admiration, of all that were therein. (39) In the meane while, Earle Robert, with Prince Henrie, were arriued in England at Warrhame Prince Henrie arriueth. Geruasius. hauen, and presentlie besieged the Castle there, (so to withdraw the King from siege of his sister;) but hearing of the happie escape of the Empresse, came with young Henry vnto his mother, whose sight made her forget the griefe and sorrowes that she had An. D. 1143. long indured. Then was Oxford vpon conditions yeelded to the King; and Wilton fired by the bastard An. D. 1144 Earle Robert: The Towre of London, with the Ca∣stles of Walden, Pleises, and Lincolne, yeelded to Ste∣phen; An. D. 1145. Math. Paris. the Castles of Warham, and Portland, yeelded to Robert: The Earles of Chester, and Essex, surprized by the King; William Martell the great fauourite, taken and imprisoned by the Earle. Thus sundrie An. D. 1146. yeeres passing with variable successes to and fro, and euery yeere heaping on each side, fresh calamities, to the great ruine of the whole land; the Empresse, e∣uen The Empresse and the Prince returne to Nor∣mandie. An. D. 1147. wearied with those warres and vncertaineties of successe, went into Normandie, chusing rather to be vnder the protection of her husband in peace, then to raigne in England perplexed with troubles: and to the same end she had not long before, sent her young Ger. Dorobor. sonne Henrie to his father, who desired to haue him rather heire of a Dukedome with safetie, then of a Crowne with daylie hazard. (40) Stephen, that by a fresh surprizall of Randall Kings durst not enter Lincolne before King Stephen. Earle of Chester had got Lincolne, and entring there∣into (which no King before him durst doe, for that certaine wizards had prophesied euilluck vnto such) at christmas did there weare the Regall Crowne on Geruasius. his head, and after the Empresses departure, caused the Barons of England, to sweare allegiance vnto Prince Eustace his sonne; by which two comple∣ments, hee supposed all had beene sure on his side; and the rather, for that the most faithfull, puissant, and euer-renowned Earles, Robert of Glocester, and Earle Robert and Earle Milo die. Milo of Hereford the two great and glorious pillars, which had by many Conquests supported their An∣ioueians cause, were now conquered by death; and the rest of the Nobles, applying themselues to the Times, kept themselues quiet in the absence of these An. D. 1148. Prince Henry returneth into England. Competitors; all which gaue no little assurance vn∣to Stephens estate. (41) But Henry Fitz-Empresse, grown now from a Child, thought it best a while to leaue Mercury, An. D. 1149 Ger. Dor. (for it is said hee was Bookish) and to follow Mars; so knowing his presence would preferre much his purposes (for men would bee loth to hazard all for one, who himselfe would neglect all) hasted a∣gaine into England, with an Armie of valiant and choice Souldiers; to whom ioined the discontented Earle of Chester, Roger the sonne of Miles decea∣sed, with many more Knights and Gallants of the English: hee therefore tooke into the North, and met with Dauid his cosen, King of Scotland, of whom Roger Houeden. Ger. Dor. hee was most honourably receiued, and solemnely sacred with the Military honour of Knighthood: and thence forward sought all occasions to prouoke both King Stephen, and his sonne Eustace against him: and hauing setled some courses with certain Peeres for the pursuit of his designes in England, hee retur∣ned into Normandy to compose & set forward some other businesses, which might be auaileable for these Prince Henry returneth into Normandy. his ends. (42) Where long he staied not, but that Geffrey his Father departed this life, and left him his Heire An. D. 1150 both of Aniou and Normandy; and the yeere fol∣lowing, he matched in marriage with Eleanor Dut∣ches Math. Paris. of Guien and Aquitane, lately diuorced from Henry Hunt. Lodowicke King of France for consanguinity, and adultery (saith Paris) after shee had borne him two daughters; Lodowicke fearing issue-male by this marriage to the disheriting of his said daughters, Prince Henry marieth Eleanor, diuorced by K. Iewes▪ greatly impugned Duke Henry; and Stephen suspe∣cting his greatnes, now being Duke of Normandy, Aniou, Aquitane, and Guien, both of them sought each way to impeach his peace: Lodowicke, with Prince An. D. 1151 Eustace, in the parts beyond seas, and Stephen in Eng∣land, to make sure his succession, sought to inuest the said Prince Eustace with the English Diademe; both The Archbishop of Canterbury re∣fuseth to conse∣crate Eustace King. Ger. Dorob. An. D. 1152. Henry. Hunt. to preuent, and vtterly depriue Henry Fitz-Em∣presse for euer: for calling a Counsell at London, King Stephen commaunded Theobald Archbishop of Can∣terbury to consecrate Prince Eustace for their King; which hee refused to doe, and that by commande∣ment from the Pope (whose holy See can deale on both sides, as makes most for their aduantage) alled∣ging Geruasius. now, that his Father was an vsurper, and per∣iured Intruder: whereupon the honest Archbishop fled into Normandy, and the King seized vpon al his possessions. It may seeme, that one cause of the Popes inclining to yong Henries title, was to strēgth∣en him against his enemy King Lewis of France, who Idem. had highly offended his Holines, for casting the Popes Bulles (whereby hee required the fruits of Vacancies of all Cathedrall Churches in France) into the fire, K. Lewes casts the Popes Buls into fire. saying, hee had rather the Popes Bulles should rest in the fire, then his owne soule should frse in hell. (43) King Stephen thus defeated of his purpose, and seeing his Title questioned by the Church, who had before approued it, resolued to make it good by the sword: for winning the Castle of Fortè Newbery. Muby, for∣tified Malmesbury, and laid a strait siege vnto Wal∣lingford; against which, hee erected the Castle Cran∣merse, to stoppe the passages of their reliefe, or com∣ming An. D. 1153. forth. But Henry after hee had calmed the boisterous stormes of warre, in the parts beyond Henry Fitz-Em∣presse comes a∣gaine into Eng∣land. the seas, came ouer into England well appointed, vnto whom also resorted many of the Nobility, who yeelded vp themselues, and aboue thirty strong Ca∣stles to the young Duke; now well furnished, hasted to raise the siege of Wallingford, and there vndertooke a great enterprice; for hee incircled the Bestegers with a great and deepe Trench, where∣by hee kept them from reliefe, as they did keepe the Besieged. (44) Stephen following hastily to succour his men, (though with the lesse edge, for that hee neuer sped Ger. Dorob. cap. 14 King Stephen and Fitz-Empresse well in any assault of that Castle) pitched downe his Tents, euen neere his enemy; and ready on both ready to ioine battaile. Henry Hunt. sides to giue battaile: the Winter stormes were suddenly so troublesome, that nothing could bee done; but those somewhat ouerblowne, and the Armies scarse three furlongs asunder; as King Ste∣phen was busied in disposing of his hoast, and giuing direction for order of the battaile, his horse vnder him rising with his fore-feet, fell flat vpon the earth, not without danger to his Rider; and thus did he Vnlucky presages to K. Stephen. thrice ere he left; which thing his Nobles secretly muttering, interpreted for an vnlucky presage: when William Earle of Arundell, a bold and eloquent man, went to him and aduised him to a peace; affirming the title of Duke Henry to be iust; that the Nobili∣ty on both parts there present, were neerely linked in Alliances & Bloud, and how these stood affected, was very doubtfull; yea, that Brethren were there assembled, the one against the other, whereof must needs follow an vnnaturall warre betwixt them, & of dangerous consequence, euen to him that con∣quested. With these and the like allegations at last Stephen beganne to bend, and a parley f peace was signified vnto the Duke. Henry already warme for the battaile, and his thoughts fixed on nothing lesse A Parley betwixt K. Stephen and Fitz-Empresse. then peace, could hardly moderate his youthfull af∣fections; yet at his friends importunity, hee yeelded to conferre with King Stephen. (45) The place for conference was so appointed; Ger . Dorobor. that the riuer Thamesis parted the presence of these two Princes; so that from either banke they saluted each others, and after a long conference, agreeing on a truce, and vpon faire tearmes of amity depar∣ted, A truce conclu∣ded. Math. Paris. commaunding all weapons and attempts of warre to be laid aside. (46) But Eustace, who hitherro had attended Fortune for the Crowne, and now hopelesse to haue Eustace K. Ste∣phens son like not the truce. as his Fathers Successor, was greatly displeased with this new moulded friendship, and in a fury departed the field, purposing to raise himselfe by his owne meanes; and comming to Bury, vrged the Monks Iohn Textor. of Saint Edmunds for money, to set forward his hea∣dy designes: But the wiser amongst them vnwil∣ling to bee wagers of new warres (which though ill for all sorts, yet proued euer worst to the Clergie mens possessions) denied his request; wherewith enraged, hee commanded his men to carry their Polycbr. corne and other prouision into his owne Castle, situated hard by. But being set at dinner, wee reade of him (saith mine Author) that euen the verie first bit Ger. Dorob. Prince Eustace dieth. that hee put in his mouth, draue him into a frensie, whereof shortly after hee died; whose body was interred at Feuersham in Kent. (47) The death of Prince Eustace so much aduan∣taged Duke Henry, that thereupon (the truce in likelihood expiring) many fell off vnto him, and ma∣ny Castles were deliuered, as Bertwell, Reading, Warwicke, Stamford, and others; whereat Stephen was not a little displeased, and thinking to entrappe the yong venturous Duke, with a strong Army fol∣lowed him vnto Wallingford: But God himselfe looking Polydor. down from heauen (saith Mathew of S. Albans) made there an end of those long calamities, by stirring the minds Math. Paris. of chiefe men in the land to labour for peace: such was Theobald Archbishoppe of Canterbury, and Henrie Bishop of Winchester, who hauing troubled the realm The King and Fitz-Empresse accorded. with fire and sword, moued now to repentance, wrought so effectually with his brother, that hee en∣clined vnto a wished peace, contented to adopt the Duke for his Son and Successor; and so comming both together to Oxford (a blessed sight to so distres∣sed and distracted a Kingdome;) there did all the Geruas . Nobles do fealty to him, as to the vndoubted Heire of the land; and the Duke to acknowledge this as a fauour, yeelded him the honour of a Father, and the roialtie of all Kingly power during his life. (48) Notwithstanding, the cleere Sunneshine of these faire daies, was somewhat darkened with a An. D. 1154 Prince Henry in danger by trea∣chery. cloud of treacherie, and lewd attempts of the Fle∣mings; who enuying Englands peace, vpon Barham Downes, intended to surprise Prince Henry in his re∣turne from Douer, and presence of King Stephen In this conspiracie was William the Kings son, though but yong, who himselfe meaning to haue one cast at the Crowne, instantly before it should haue been effected, was through the wantonnes of his horse cast to the ground, and with the fall brake his legge; to whose assistance, whiles euery one gathered and lamented, Henry vpon secret notice of the treason hasted vnto Canterbury, and thence to London, and Prince Henry go∣eth into Nor∣mandy. King Stephen dieth. soone after ouer the seas into Normandy. (49) And Stephen now after he had raigned eigh∣teene yeeres, ten moneths, and odde daies, departed this life at Douer, in the Monastery of the Monkes, of an Iliacke passion, mixed with his olde disease the Emrods, the twenty fiue of October, and yeere of Paris. Booke of S. Al∣banes. Christs Natiuity, 1154. A most worthy Souldier, saith Paris and (in a word) one who wanted nothing but a iust title to haue made him an excellent King; in his ordinary deportment very deuout; the fruites wherof we shewed in erecting with sufficient en∣dowments, he Abbeyes of Cogshall in Essex, of Furnesse in Lancashire, the houses of Nunnes at Ca∣rew, and Higham, an Hospitall at Yorke, and the Monastery of Feuersham in Kent, where his Queene, his sonne, and lastly, himselfe were enterred: but since, his body for the gaine of the lead, wherein it Iohn Stow. was coffined, was cast into the riuer. So vncer∣taine is man (yea greatest Princes) of any rest in this world, euen after buriall; and restlesse may their bodies be also (who for filthy lucre) thus enuie to the dead, the quiet of their graues. His Wife. (50) Maud, the Wife of King Stephen, was the daughter of Eustace Earle of Bulloigne, the brother of Godfrey, and Baldwin Kings of Ierusalem: her Mother was Mary, sister to Maud Queene of Eng∣land, Ger. Do . wife of King Henrie, her husbands Predeces∣sor. Shee was crowned at Westminster vpon Sun∣day, being Easter-day, and the two and twenty of March, in the first yeare of her husbands raigne, and of Grace, 1136. and being Queene fifteene yeeres, she died at Heningham Castle in Essex, the third of May, and yeere of Christ, 1151. and was bu∣ried in his Monastery at Feuersham in Kent. His Issue. (51) Baldwin, the eldest sonne of King Stephen and Queene Maud (bearing the name of King Bald∣win his vncle) was born in the time of the raign of K. Henry his fathers vncle; and died in his infancy, during the raign of the same King. He was buried at London in the Church of the Priorie of the Trini∣ty within Algate, which was a house of blacke The first Ca∣non Regular in England was of this place Ann. . and the Prior thereof was Alderman of London. Stowes, Suruey. Ca∣nons of the Augustinian order, founded by Q. Maud, the first wife of the foresaid King Henry the first. (52) Eustace the second sonne of King Stephen, & of Queene Maud his wife, being the heire appa∣rant to them both; when his Father was King, was created Earle of Bolloigne, which dignity was the in∣heritance of his mother. Hee married Constance sister of Lewis the seuenth King of France, daughter of King Lewis the Grosse: who afterward was remar∣ried to Raimond the third, Earle of Tholouze: for Eu∣stace died before her without Issue by her, the tenth day of August, in the eighteenth yeere of his Fathers raigne, and of Grace, 1152. Hee was buried by his mother in his Fathers Monastery at Feuersham in Kent. (53) William, the third and yongest sonne of King Stephen and Queene Maud, maried Isabell daugh∣ter and heire of William Warren, the third Earle of Surrey, with whom hee had that Earledome; hee was in his Fathers life time Earle of Surrey, Lord of Norwich and Peuensey in England, Earle of Mortayne, and Lord Eagle of Normandy. After his fathers death, King Henry the second made him Knight, re∣sumed those things that hee held of the Crowne, re∣stored him to all that his Father held before hee was King. And so he was Earle of Bolloigne, Surrey, and Mortaine, and being with him in his iourney to Tholouze, died without issue, in his returne home-Ward, in the Moneth of October, the seuenth of King Henries raigne, and of Christ Iesus, 1160. (54) Maud, the eldest daughter of King Stephen and Queene Maud, was borne before her father was King, in the raign of King Henrie the first, her vncle; Stowes Suruey. p. 105. in whose time also she deceased, beeing but yongue, (though some report shee was wife to the Earle of Millen) and was enterred at London, with her bro∣ther Baldwin, in the Priorie of the Trinity aforesaid, then commonly called Christs-Church, and now late∣lie named the Dukes Place within Algate. (55) Marie, the yonger daughter of King Ste∣phen and Queene Maude, was a Nun, and Abbesse of the Nunnerie at Rumsey in Hampshire; notwith∣standing, when her brother William, Earle of Bolloigne, was deceased without issue, shee was secretly taken from thence, and married to Matthew the yonger, sonne of Terry of Alsat, and brother of Philip Earle of Flanders, who in her right was Earle of Bolloigne. Shee was his wife ten yeeres, and was then diuorced from him, by the sentence of the Pope, and enforced to returne to her Monastery, hauing had issue by him two daughters, which were Ide and Maude, allowed by the censure of the Church to be legitimate. Lady Ide, the elder, was maried to Raymond of Damp-Mar∣tine, in her right Earle of Bolloigne; and Maude, the yonger, to Henrie Duke of Lorraine. His Naturall Issue. (56) William, the Naturall sonne of King Stephen, is mistaken of some to bee the same William, that was Earle of Bolloigne. Others, who know that William Earle of Bolloigne was lawfully borne, do thinke that his father had no other son named William but him; wherein let William Earle of Bolloigne, the lawfull son of King Stephen, be himselfe a lawfull witnesse of the truth, who hauing best cause to know it, doth best prooue it,; and in an ancient Charter of his, beeing written in those daies, and extant in these, doth name him for a witnesse, and calleth him his Brother. (57) Geruais, another Naturall sonne of King Stephen, begotten on a gentle-woman named Dame∣ta, and borne in Normandy, was brought into England by his father, the fifth yeere of his Raigne, Anno Dom. 1140. Hee was the same yeere, by his fathers meanes, made Abbat of Westminster, and so continu∣ed for the space of twenty yeeres: hee deceased there the twentie sixt of August, in the sixt yeere of the raigne of King Henrie the second, the yeere of Grace 1160. and lieth buried in the South part of the cloi∣ster, within the said Monasterie, vnder a flat stone of black marble, which is remaining there vntil this day. HENRIE THE SECOND, DVKE OF Monarch 43. Henry second NORMANDY, GVYEN AND AQVI∣TAINE, THE FORTIE THIRD MONARCH OF THE ENGLISH-MEN; HIS RAIGNE, ACTS AND ISSVE. CHAPTER VI. H Enry of that name the se∣cond, by the double in∣terest of descent and ad∣option (as you haue heard) succeeded in the Kingdome of England, whose Pedegree, (which Mathew Paris extendeth Ad A. D. 1135. by the mothers side, in a right line vp to Noah) and former fortunes, hauing already been touched; his counsels, acts, and other affaires of greatest impor∣tance, after the death of King Stephen come now to be handled. (2) Hee came not to the Crown vnexpected, nor vndesired; The great expe∣ctation of King Henrie. for the opinion of the man, and hope conceiued of his future gouernement, had the force to hold England in good obedience without the pre∣sence Math. Paris. Henry Hunt. of a King, about sixe weekes, whose entrance like that of the Soule into the Body, did quicken, and enspirite the Realme, as then (in the person of England) this clozing verse, or Epiphoneme spake: Henry Hunt. Spirituses, caro sum: te nunc intrante reuixi. Thou, Soule; I Body am: by thee to life I came. Neither did his presence diminish the expectations raised, but was saluted King with generall acclama∣tions, His accesse and Coronation. Ypodig. Neustr. Mah. Paris. and with no lesse ioy at Westminster by Theo∣bald Archbishop of Canterbury, annointed and crow∣ned: the summe of whose first courses for setling his State was this. (3) Sundry Castles (nests of Rebels) hee flatteth to the earth, some others hee fortifies or resumes at His first actions. Mat. Paras. his pleasure; chiefly such estates, as had beene ali∣enated from the Crowne, as the hire and vniust re∣ward of those who withstood his claime. Others write, that hee promiscuously tooke all such lands Lib. Monast. S. Albeni. into his owne possession, as were by Iurors found vpon oath to haue belonged at any time vnto the Polyd. Vir. lib. 13. Crowne. Some Earles vnduly created, he reduceth to priuate condition, and purgeth the Realme from Ps do-Comites, saith Mat. Paris. sorrine Souldiers; chiefly from the Flemings, whose mercenary swarmes most pestred the same, and had most insested him. And because Gouernment is the Soule of State, and Wisedome the Soule of Gouernment, he chooseth to himselfe a Body of Counsell out of the most eminent persons of both sorts: such was Theobald Archbishop of Canterbu∣ry; and for that selfe consideration, he laid the Chan∣cellorship of England vpon Thomas Becket, and held in speciall fauour Iohn of Oxenford, with sundry o∣ther Roger Houeden. Prelates of chiefest note: of the Laity, he had Robert Earle of Leicester, chiefe Iusticiar of Eng∣land, Richard de Luci, Iocelin de Bailull, Alan de Ne∣uile Roger. Houed. and others: but for a Cabanet-Counsellour at all times, he had his owne mother, Matildis the Empresse, one of the most sage and experienced Ladies of the World. Thus then furnished, and Math. Paris. ad A. D. 1155. assembling a Counsell at Wallingford, hee aswell for his owne securing, as for the assurance of his Ger. Dorob. Children, sweares the Realme to the succession of his sonnes William and Henry, the one being in re∣mainder to the other. (4) But quiet consultation did not take vp the most of his time, euen in the daies of these Sun-shi∣ning beginnings: for the raign of Stephen, a most gen∣tle Prince (who thought, out of the necessity of his Lib. Monast. S. Al. owne estate, that it was not safe for him to bee se∣uere) hauing giuen way for many of the mighty, to maintaine sundrie insolencies; these now feeling a restraint, beganne not a little to repine: but Hugh de Mortimer, wanton with greatnes, and the most arrogant man aliue, stuft his Castles of Glocester, Math. Paris. Wigmore, and Powel in hist. Camb. p. 222. mi∣stakes a Bridge for a Castle. In old Records indeede Bridge-North, is called Bruge, which caused that errour. Bridgenorth with rebellious Garrisons; which Henry notwithstanding reduced to subiecti∣on, though in the siege of the last-named, not with∣out imminent perill of his person, had not Hubert de S. Clare, cast himselfe betweene death and the King, taking the arrow into his owne bosome to preserue his Soueraignes life. It bound Tiberius to Seianus most of all, when a part of the banque∣ting Caue in which they were, suddenly falling, Powel writes that it was a Welsh man, who shot the arrow at the King, ibid. Seianus was found to haue borne the ruine from the Emperour, with the perill of his life: but Sei∣anus suruiued that aduenture, which our Senclere did not, saue onely in the better renowne thereof, which deserues to bee immortall, being an Act of piety, worthy of a Statue, with Codrus, Curtius, Manlius, or whosoeuer else haue willingly sacrifi∣ced themselues for their Country, or for the Father of their Country, the King. (5) Henrie thus hauing in some sort setled Eng∣land, hasteth into France to King Lewis in the first yeere of his raigne, and there did homage vnto Roger Houed. Annal. p. 2. him for Normandy, Aquitane, Angiou, Main and Tourain, which partly were his patrimony, and partly the inheritance of Elianor his wife. (6) His domesticke enemies being subdued or appeased, hee put his brother Geffrey by force to Math. Paris ad an. Dom. 1561. a pension, the summe whereof (if it be any thing to the purpose to know) was 1000. l. English, and 2000. l. Aniou by yeere, wringing out of his posses∣sion all such territories, as by their Fathers last Will Polyd. Uirg. in H. 2. and Testament, were bequeathed to him in France. But Geffrey did not long enioy the said annuity, or his brothers friendship: for in the third yeare, death brought a discharge, and Henry was disbur∣dened of those paiments. For his violence in ta∣king away those lands, King Henry might alledge he was eldest brother: but that allegation might bee auoided with his owne consent, which once hee gaue: but the great Elixar, called Reason of State, (though falsly so called, vnlesse it bee seasoned with Iustice, and Religion) hath so transmutatiue a faculty, as to make Copper seeme Gold, right wrong, and wrong right; yea, when all Pleas faile, it will stand for good, while there are forces to sup∣port it. (7) This accord between the two brethren, being thus (howsoeuer) established, the King repaires into England, and at Chester enters amity with Malcolme King of Scots, on such termes, as his Grandfather Rog. Houed. fol. 281, pag. 2. Annal. par. . had done, yet Saluis omnibus dignitatibus suis, sauing to himselfe all his dignities: and the said Mal∣colme restored to Henry the City of Karleol, New∣castle Math. Paris. Ypodig. Neustri. Hector Boetius. lib. 13. C. 1. saith it was at London. vpon Tyne, &c. and Henry restored to him the Earledome of Huntington in England. And, so iustly dreadfull did the growing puissance of this young Monarch appeare to his greatest enemies, that Hugh Bigod Earle of Norfolke, who had potent means to doe mischiefe, rendred his Castle to bee at his disposall. (8) The Welsh notwithstanding forsooke not themselues, but did some memorable matters vnder conduct of the valiant Prince Owen against the English, in defence of North-Wales, and their Countries liberty, to the losse of the English, and Hist. of Camb. extreame danger of the Kings owne person, whose Standard roiall was cowardly abandoned, and Iohn Stow. the King reported to be slaine: for which Henrie de Essex, the Kings Standard- Bearer at that conflict, was afterward accused by Robert de Montford his neere Kinsman, and in single battaile within lists was vanquished at Reading, where the said Henry de Essex was shorne a Monke, and died. Mathew Pa∣ris Math. Paris. relates the whole voiage of King Henry summa∣rily thus: That Henry prepared a very great Ar∣my against the Welsh, with full purpose to ouercom them both by land and sea; that hee cut vp the woods and forrests, and laid open a way; that hee recouered the Castle of Ruthlan and other fortres∣ses taken from his Ancestors; that hee repaired the Castle of Basingwerke, and that hauing brought the Welsh to his will, hee returned with triumph into England. (9) After this, himselfe and his wife Queene Elienor beeing openly crowned vpon Christmas day, ( Roger Houeden. some say Easter day) at the Citie of Worcester; Math. Paris. Ypodigm. Neustr. they both at the Offertorie laid their Diademes vpon the high Altar, vowing neuer to weare them after; Rog. Houed. this beeing now the third time in which at three se∣uerall places, Westminster, Lincolne, and Worcester, he Guliel. Tyr. Houeden. had beene crowned. This deuout act of his, did flow perhaps out of some such speculation as that of Canutus, who thought none truly worthy the name of King, but God alone; or that, vpon which Godfrey of Buillion, refused to weare a crowne of gold in Hie∣rusalem, where our Lord and Sauiour had beene crowned with thornes. For this King had at times the pangs and symptoms of mortification and pie∣ty, and did heerein acknowledge the onely giuer and taker-away of kingdoms God-almighty; putting him∣selfe and Realme, vnder the protection of that Ma∣iestie of whom hee held paramount; and professing (as it were) that from thencefoorth hee would di∣rect his actions to the glorie of his omnipotent Ma∣ster, which is indeede the only finall cause of all true monarchie. (10) Not long after, hauing established his af∣faires in England, hee crost the Seas into Normandie: An. D. 1158. Mah. Paris ab A. D. 1158. vsque ad A. D. 1163. where successiuely sundrie matters of importance fell out: as the seisure of the City of Nants in Bri∣taine after his brother Geffreis death; his iourney to Paris, beeing inuited thither by Lewis and his wife the Queene; the vnprofitable siege of Tholouze laid by King Henrie, where Malcolme King of Scots was Rog Houed. in companie with him; the vnripe marriage of his sonne Henrie to Margaret the French Kings daugh∣ter, whom Thomas Becket then Lord Chancellor had formerlie conducted with verie great State from Pa∣ris, by consent of parents for that purpose; the of∣fence taken at those spousals by Lewis, for that the children were but infants, and that himselfe was a looser thereby; the warre heereupon attempted by Lewis, fortifying Cha mount, which (the French ha∣uing quit the Field by flight) King Henrie recouered with aduantage; the Armies of both these great Kings, being afterward at point (as it were) to ioine, dispersed vpon reconciliation of the two Kings, by reason of a marriage concluded vpon, betweene Ri∣chard, King Henries second son, and Alice the French Kings daughter▪ All which and some other, not drawing with them any extraordinarie sequell, nor offording much matter for ciuill document, must not preponderate the handling of things more rare and considerable. (11) For after these accidents, beganne the fa∣mous An. D. 1163. controuersies betweene the King and his Arch-bishop Becket, a man of an inuincible stomack The great con∣tention between the King and Becket Archbish. of Canterbury. and resolution in his life, and after death reputed by some for a great Saint or Martyr; as is likewise no∣ted of Henrie, Mat. Paris, & alis. Leg end. aur. in vita Tho. that he was the most politike, mar∣tiall, rich, and honoured Prince of all his time. This Prelate by birth a Londoner, (though his mother, a Sarazen, Polydor. l. 13. but M. Fox denies it. say some) by profession a Gal. Wigorniēsis saith he was Doctor Oxonien∣sis. Ciuilian, was by Theobald Arch-bishop of Canterburie, both made his Arch-deacon, and also placed about the person of Duke Henrie, who beeing now King; aduanced him in the verie first yeere of his raigne to bee Lord Chancellor of England, in which high honor he car∣ried himselfe like another King, and afterward vpon Nubrigensis, l 2. c. 16. vt conregnare videretur. Geruasius ad An. 1154. Regis Rector & quasi Magister. the death of Theobald, though the Fox in Acts. p 264. Monks obiected against Becket, that neither a Courtier nor a Souldier (as Nubrig. l 2. c. 16. Houcden. hee had beene both) were fit to succeede in so high and sacred a function, yet the King gaue him that Arch-bi∣shopricke, partly in reward, and partly in further hope of his ready and faithfull seruice. Which to be true, a Legender of his Miracles can best relate. Nonnullis tamen &c. Many (saith hee) iudged his promotion not Chron. de Passione & mirac. beati Th. MS. Fox. p. 287. Canonicall, because it was procured more by the importu∣nity of the King, then by the voices of Clergie, or People; and it was noted as presumption and indiscretion in him, to take vpon him to guide the Sterne, who was scarce fit to handle an Oare, and that beeing skild onely in worldly af∣faires, hee did not tremble to ascend vnto that sacred top of so great dignitie. Whereto agreeth the reports of two learned Monks who then liued, (for such Au∣thors onely wee will heerein follow, as shall bee vn∣partiall) Gal. Nubrig. l. 2. c. 16. Math. Par ad An. 1163. permissi∣one, Regia, &c. one of which testifies, that the Pope about that time calling a Councell at Tours (and the King giuing Licence to his Arch-bishops and Bishops to goe thi∣ther) Becket secretlie surrendred his Arch-bishopricke, which hee had receiued from the Kings hand, into the Popes hands. The Nubrig. per ope∣ram, manūque Regiam. Geru. Dorob. other saith, Becket himselfe con∣fessed, that, not Canonicall Election did call him, but publick power droue him in, nor the will of God, but mans pleasure, placed him in the roome. Howsoeuer, these beeing memorable arguments of the Kings exceed∣ing loue; let vs now see how this great Prelate en∣deuoured to deserue it, or how hee chanced to lose it. (12) Great and flourishing was the state of the English Church & Comon-wealth at this season; the quiet of both which, the King studied & hoped to e∣stablish The causes of the debate betwixt the King and Becket. by the vndoubted assistance of his great fauo∣rite Becket, whose coūsel & authority he knew might much further his princely designs, especially touch∣ing affaires of the Church, and abuses of Church Nubrig. loco cita. men, which then were grown to a dangerous height: wherof let vs heare the Monke of Nuborough speake: It was declared in the Kings presence, how that Clergy mē had cōmitted aboue a hundred murthers vnder his raign; Gul. Nubrig. l. 2. c. 16. wherewith the King highly offended, hee was in punish∣ing of them somewhat too vehement; but the blame of the Kings too much earnestnes, must lie on the Prelates, in as much as they gaue the cause thereof: for, whereas sacred Canons ordaine, that Clerks found guilty, not onely of hai∣nous and grieuous sinnes, but also of lesser, should bee de∣graded, and thousands of such were in the Church of Eng∣land, like innumerable chaffe amongst a little good corne; yet very few such, for these many yeeres haue beene depri∣ued. The Prelates for sooth, while they bestirre them∣selues, rather to vphold the liberties & dignities of Clerks, then to chastice, and cut off their vices, thinke they doe God and his Church good seruice, in protecting from publike Discipline such hainous offenders, whom (by duty of their places) they ought to correct according to the Canons cen∣sure, whereby they through their impunity, hauing liber∣ty to doe what they list, haue neither feare of God, (whose iudgement they thinke is farre off) neither of men in au∣thority, sith on the one side their Prelates neglect to re∣forme them, and on the other side, they are thus exempt by their order from the temporall Iurisdiction. (13) This being the state of the Church and Realme, wherein some were so iniured without re∣medy, and others so iniurious without coertion, as if neither sort were in condition of Subiects; the King (who was a man of excellent Wisedome, Con∣stancy, and Zeale) tooke especiall care of quickning the Idem Nubrig. l. 2. cap 1. publike Discipline, and the rigour of ancient lawes, which thus lay neglected; for which end hee had setled choise Ministers of Iustice through all parts of his land▪ and vpon complaints brought him by his Subiects of the remissenes, and other defects of his Iudges, hee according∣ly by his princely prouidence applied remedies, and cha∣stised the delinquents. The like remissenes (to censure it no harder) was complained of in his Spirituall Houeden. M. Fox. Iudges, occasioned by a murther, committed by a Priest of Sarum Diocesse, whom the Archbishoppe commanded to be depriued, & put into an Abbey, whereby he was freed from sharper punishment, in∣tended by the Kings Iusticiaries: with which (and some other like affronts of his Archbishop) the King M. Fox. p. 264. conceiued no little displeasure, as requiring, that Iu∣stice should be ministred to all alike without partiality, & Nubrig. l. 2. c. 16. sine delectu. seeing this apparantly to tend vnto the ruine of all roiall gouernment: the Archbishop on the o∣ther side, stood no lesse peremptory on the immunities of his Clergy and See: yea so farre, as that hee chal∣lenged Geruasius. ad An. 1163. c gestiret iura Cant. Ecclesiae reuocare. from the Crown (to the Kings great offence) the custody of Rochester Castle and other Forts, which the King for securing his state had resumed into his Ibidem. owne hands. (14) This maine controuersie betwixt Regnum, & Sacerdotium, the Crowne and the Mitre, Houeden Roger Houeden. ad An. 1163. (who then also liued) thus summarily deliuers: The King would that all such of the Clergy as were deprehen∣ded in any Robberie, Murther, Felonie, burning of hou∣ses, and the like, should bee tried and adiudged in his tem∣porall Courts, as Lay-men were: against which, the Archbishops resolution was, that all Clergy men so offen∣ding should bee tried onely in the Spirituall Courts, and by men of their owne coate, who if they were conuict, should at first be onely depriued of their office and benefice: but if they should againe be guilty of the like, they should then bee adiudged at the Kings pleasure. The King finding himselfe to bee hereby but a Demi-King, depriued of all Soueraignety ouer one half-deale of his King∣dome, and perceiuing Beckets stiffenesse, in thus con∣testing with his Soueraigne, to bee no way mollifia∣ble by whatsoeuer his old fauours, or fresh per∣swasions; notwithstanding resolued to put nothing in execution, which should not first bee ratified and strengthned with consent of his Bishops; of whose rea∣dy assent to so iust demands hee had no cause to Nubrigensis. doubt: who thereupon assembling at Westminster, the King, tooke both offence there, at the Archbi∣shops thwarting his desires, and occasion also to e∣stablish sundry other Articles, which hee called his Grandfathers Customes, peremptorily vrging Bec∣ket to yeeld thereunto, without any such reseruation Ger. Dorobor. of sauing in all things his order, and right of the Church, wherewith he would haue limited his assent. (15) The points in those Ordinances which the Points which the Archbishop would not con∣sent vnto. Archbishop principally stucke at, as Ep. Tho. ad Alex: 3. PP. Ep. Th. ad Suffr. suos. apud Roge. Houed. himselfe did set them downe in his letters to the Pope, and his owne Suffragan Bishops within the Diocesse of Canterbury, were principally these; 1. That none should appeale to the See of Rome for any cause whatsoeuer, without the Kings licence. 2. That it should not be lawful for any Archbishop or Bishop to depart the Realme, and repaire to the Pope vpon his summons, without the Kings licence. 3. That no Bishop should excōmunicate any one whomsoe∣uer, holding of the King in chiefe, or put any other of his officers vnder Interdict, without the Kings licence. 4. That Clerks criminous should bee tri∣tried before seculardudges. 5. That it should not be lawfull for a Bishop to punish any one for periu∣rie or faith-breach. 6. That the Laity, whether the King or other, should hold pleas of Churches & Tithes, &c. (16) These points so neerely touched the Papal Soueraignty, and Church-Liberties, that the resolute Metropolitane mainely opposed his whole powers against them. Henry also persisted, as his Grandfa∣ther Henry the first had done, who hauing a See before in Henry the first. like warre with Anselm his Archbishop, was so vehement therein, as hee would not suffer him to returne into England (though after some yeeres banishment) vnlesse hee would absolutely bind himselfe to ob∣serue, not his Fathers Customes onely, but his bro∣thers also, who were the two fatall Williams, the Con∣querour and Rufus. (17) Many reasons moued Henry to attempt this Reasons mouing King Henry to vrge the Arch∣bishop to assent. busines; as first, the enlargement of his Regall au∣thority: Secondly, to exempt his State by degrees, from the dependancy on any external Gouernment, as lineally claiming both from a Conquest, and from absolute-Soueraigne Antecessors, and so to introduce that free Empery, to which he saw no way lie open, but by subordinating the Persons and Causes of Church-men to the secular soueraignety, in a few points first, and then in other. And that this was the secret, will not obscurely appeare in Act. & Mon. pag. 265. that Article, which was summarily this: That Appeales should be made from the Consistory to the Arch-deacon, from him to the Bishop, thence to the Archbishop, and so to the King. Thus farre M. Fox; but Mathew Paris hath more: That the King should commaund the Arch-bishop Math. Paris. to end the suit, and that it should proceed no further without licence of the King. (18) A third reason was, for that he had by his owne perswasions, and by the Counsell of one Er∣nulph a Hou den. Bishop, drawn vnto his purposes the Arch-bishop of Yorke, and all the other Bishops in a man∣ner, who were now sure vnto him, & ready to yeeld to his demands, which, they saw, did tend to the good of the State wherein they liued. Moreouer, hee was perswaded of great facility in obtaining his desire, both in regard of the Epist. Th. apud Rog. Houed. aduantage which the Schisme then vpholden by Frederick the Emperour against Alexander the third did giue, which might make that Pope afraid to leese or hazard his friends: as also for that the King, till hee found the contrary, thought himselfe assured of his Thomas, whom (if Ep. ad Th. apud Rog. Houed. Gilbert Bishop of London said true) he aduanced to that dig∣nity against the will and liking, aswell of Matildis the Empresse his mother, as of the Clergie and people. (19) Besides these and other reasons encoura∣ging the King, Pope Alexander very desirous to An. D. 1164 A. Reg. H. 2. 10. keepe the Kings loue (though secretly wishing well to Beckets attempts) sent one Philip his Almoner pur∣posely to compose the controuersie, by whom the Pope and Cardinals required the Archbishop to make H eden. promise vnto the King to the keeping his said Ordinances absolutely, and without any sauings or exceptions: whereupon Thomas seeing his scrupulosity thus dis∣approued by his Soueraigne, by all his Brethren the Nubrig. l. 2. c. 16. calls him Homi∣nem Scrupulosum. Bishops, and by the Court of Rome it selfe, hee rode to Woodstocke to the King, and there promised, that hee would keepe his said lawes, bonâfide, & sine malo ingenio, in good faith, and without mal-engin. Rog. Houed. (20) The King afterward (supposing now all contradiction had end, & that Thomas would not wa∣uer in his faith) called an Assembly of the States at The Councell at Clarendon. Clarendon (of which place in Wilt-shire and not in Normandie, as M r . Fox. some haue mistaken, the said Cu∣stomes called by the King, Auitae, were denomina∣ted) to collect and enact those Laws: where Iohn of Oxenford sitting President, Becket, relapsing againe Math. Paris. The Archbishop violates his pro∣mise. from his promise giuen to the King, said, that he had greeuously sinned in making that absolute promise, and that he would not sinne therein any more. (21) At which, the King was so vehemently stir∣red and inflamed, that he threatned banishment and destruction to him and his. But the Arch-bishop, hauing definitely resolued to vndergoe any perill, The Arch-bishop would not relent so farre as to subscribe. was yet so softned with the tears, praiers, and knee∣lings of so great and honourable personages, as the Bishops of Salisbury, and Norwich, the Earles of Lei∣cester, and Cornwail, and two knights Templars, Ri∣chard Roger Houeden. de Hastings, and another, priuately repairing Ger. Dor. vnto him, that before the King, the Clergy, and peo∣ple, Idem. hee sware in verbo Sacerdotali, in the word of a Priest, and de plano, sincerely, that hee would obserue the Math. Paris. Lawes, which the King entituled Auitae, and all the Bi∣shops, Guil. Nubrig. Houeden. Geruasius. Abbats, Priors, and whole Clergie, with all the Earles, Barons, and Nobilitie, did promise and sweare, the same faithfully and truly to obserue and performe, to the King and to his heires for euer. But when the King, not so contented, would haue him (as euerie one of the Bishops had done before him) to subscribe, and affix his seale to an instrument, in which those Customes or Lawes (beeing in number sixteene) were compre∣hended; Vide Geruasium, where they are all verbatim re∣cited. Beckes againe starts from his word. Ger. Dor. Ibidem. hee once againe starting from his faith, did absolutely refuse, alledging that hee did promise it, onely to doe the King some honour, verbo tenus, in word only, but not with intent to confirme those Ar∣ticles; neither could the example of the whole State mooue him, nor the credit of Rotrod, Arch-bishop of Roan, (though sent from the Pope) compose the difference, because Henry would not otherwise agree then as the Pope did by his Bull confirme those Lawes, which would not be granted. (22) Henry hereupon sent in Ambassage Iohn of The King dis∣patcheth Embas∣sadors to the Pope. Oxenford, and one Ridell, his clerkes, to the Romane Bishop, praying that the Legatine power for England, might be committed to Roger Archbishop of Yorke, that so yet hee might at last bring Thomas vnder: but neither did this plot thriue: for that the Pope (know∣ing that the cause was his owne more then Beckets) would not be an Author of any grieuance vnto him, (who in sorrow for that hee had so yeelded in pro∣mising, suspended himselfe from vse of his priestlie function, till vpon sute hee was Mat. Paris. repermitted) yet somewhat to gratifie the king, he by his Bull granted Geruas. Dorob. Houeden. a sleight authority; which when the King saw to bee but superficiall, and not well horned for his purpose, with great disdaine, he sent the Bull backe againe to the Popes stall. (23) There followed now vpon Thomas sundry The Arch-bishop called to account molestations: for first, hee was Rog. Houed. condemned in dammages for a Manor, which Iohn de Marshall clai∣med; notwithstanding the Archbishop had enioi∣ed the same for a long time, without interpellation or disturbance. Then was there at Northampton, (where the king had summoned a Parliament) an ac∣count demanded of him for the king, to the value of thirtie thousand pound, which came to his hand during his Chancellorship. Whereunto his answere was, Mat. Paris. Rog. Houed. That seeing he had formerly accounted, and that the kings eldest sonne Henrie, on his Fathers be∣halfe, and all the Barons of the Exchequer, and Richard de Luci Iustitiar of England, had acquitted him toward the king of all accounts, and that hee came free from all actions and dangers to the Arch-bishopricke, that now therefore hee would not an∣swere, as a Lay-man, hauing heretofore had so suffici∣ent discharge: which refusall of his was aggraua∣ted with diuers accusations laid vpon him, as of contempt towards the king, in denying to come to his presence, being thereto commanded by him, & the like: whereto though he made excuses (reasona∣ble enough, if true) yet the Peeres and the Bishops con∣demned Mat. Paris. Geruasius. all his moueables to the Kings mercy: and the Prelates perceiuing the kings displeasure, to tend yet to some farther seuerity, premonished him to submit himselfe, for that otherwise the kings Court intended to adiudge him a periured person, and also a Traitor, for Idem. not yeelding temporall allegiance to his Temporall Soue∣raigne, as himselfe had sworne to doe: and accordingly the Prelates themselues by ioint consent adiudged him of Periury, and by the mouth of the Bishop of Idem. Chichester, disclaimed thence forward all obedience vnto him, as their Archbishop. The next day, whiles the Bishops and Peeres were consulting of some further course with him; Becket, not as yet daun∣ted, Nubrig. Houeden. Dorobornensis. caused to be sung before him at the Altar: The Princes sit and speake against me, and the vngodly perse∣cute me, &c. And forthwith taking his siluer Cro∣sier in his owne hands, (a thing strange and vnheard of before) enters armed therewith into the Kings pre∣sence, Dorobornensis. though earnestly disswaded by all that wished him well: wherewith the King enraged, commanded his Peeres to sit in iudgement on him, as on a Trai∣tor and Periured person; and accordingly they ad∣iudged him to be apprehended, and cast into prison. The Earles of Cornewall and Leicester (who sate as Houeden. Geruasius. Iudges) citing him forthwith to heare his sentence pronounced; hee immediately appealed to the See of Rome, as holding them no Iudges competent: wher∣upon all reuiling him with the name of Traitor, and the like; he replying, That were it not for his function he would enter the Duell or Combate with them in the field, to acquit himselfe both of Treason and Periury, sped Geruas. Dorob. from the Court, and from thence without delay in∣to Mat. Paris. An. D. 1164. Flaunders, disguising himselfe vnder the name of Dereman. (24) The King on the other side, to leaue no∣thing vndone, whereby to atchieue his desire, forth∣with dispatched away Gilbert, Bishop of London, & Another Embas. sage from the King to the Pope William, Earle of Arundel, to the French King, that hee would not harbour, nor cherish one, that was fled as a Traitor; but preuailed not: for hee, vpon the contrary dealt with the Pope, That as he loued the Roman Church and the aid of France, so he would sup∣port Rog. Houed. Geruasius. the cause of Thomas against the King: which whe∣ther hee did it out of Faction, rather then Deuoti∣on, let others iudge: for as wee may easily thinke that the French would gladly incommodate the king of England: so this is not to bee denied, that Lewis was Mat. Paris. Rog. Houed. & alij. often afterward a Mediatour for peace, and vndoubtedly held the man himselfe in great estima∣tion both aliue and dead. (25) The Archbishoppe growing thus in fauour with the Pope, King Henry sends an Ambassage vn∣to him of many great Personages, as Roger Archbi∣shop The King sends Embassadors to Rome against Becket. of Yorke, the BB. of London, Winchester, Chiche∣ster, Iohn of Oxenford, William Earle of Arundell, &c. whose whole emploiment being prece vel pretio, by Geruasius requests and gratifications to procure disgrace vnto Becket, their finall suit was, That the Pope would send Houeden. two Cardinals into England, fully to end the matter; but the Pope denied it, as holding it derogatory to his owne absolutenes, saying (like Gods Vice-gerent at least) Isay chap. 42. ver. 8. I am the Lord, this is my Name, and my glo∣rie will I not giue to anyother, &c. Houeden. That is my owne glorie, which I will not giue to any other; but when he is to bee iudged, I will iudge him my selfe: For he knew the King of England was mighty both in speech and meanes, and that Legates might easily be corrupted, as being men, more thirsty after gold and siluer, then after iustice and equity: and the Pope and Cardinals wisely resolued (saith the Monke of Can∣terbury) that as, if this Archbishop were now vpheld in his Ger. Dorobor. cause, it would be a patterne for others in like case to resist Kings; so, if he should sinke, no Bishoppes euer after would darc oppose themselues to their Soueraignes pleasure, and so the State of the Catholike Church would be shaken, and the Popes authority be crushed. (26) The King hauing receiued this foile, and impatient of repulse, where his owne subiect was a The incensed K gs proceed∣ings. party, thought the indignity offered by the Pope vnsufferable, and to let him vnderstand how hee tooke it, directs his Writs vnto the Sheriffes in England, commanding them to attach such as did ap∣peale to the Roman Court: the fathers, mothers, brothers, Math. Paris. ad Ann. 1164. sisters, nephewes, and neices, of all such of the Clergy, as were with the Archbishop; and to put them vnder sure∣ties, as also to seise the reuenewes, goods, and chattels, of the said Clergie-men. Again, by other his letters to Gilbert Bishop of London, he sequestred the profits and liuings, which within his Diocesse did belong to any of the Clergie, who were fled to Thomas, that (without the Kings leaue) they might haue no part thereof. Lastly; to his Iustices he signified, that they should safe-keepe whosoeuer did bring any inter∣dict into England till the Kings pleasure were fur∣ther knowne: hee also caused the Church of Can∣terbury, and all the Archbishops goods to bee con∣fiscated, grounding himselfe (as may probably bee supposed) vpon the iudgement giuen against Bec∣ket at North-hampton, notwithstanding that the saide sentence was expresly nullified by the Popes The Originall selfe, I haue seene in the custodie of M r . of . Bul; and not onely by word of mouth, as * Mathew Pa∣ris seemes to mistake it. Neither was this all, for hee banished out of the Realme Ma h. Paris. Ann 1164. Rog . . Ger Dorob. all the kindred of the Archbishop, man, woman, child, and sucking babes; and for bad that hee should be any longer publike∣ly mentioned and praied for in the Church as Arch-bishop of Canterbury. (27) The Archbishop on the contrary part (the contention being now wither the power Ecclesia∣sticall An. D. 1166 Rog. Houed. Ep. Thom. or Secular, should worke most) did solemnly in France where he abode, excommunicate all such as obeyed, defended, or had occasioned the saide lawes, and Auitall Customes, and some of the par∣ties by name, as Richard de Luci, Richard of Poictou, Iocelin de Bailull, Alan de Ne ile, and other, who pre∣sently appealed; but the King hauing further no∣tice, that Becket Ger. Dorob. saith e isit. after his publike sermon, on a great Festiuall day, had solemnly threatned the like thunderclap against his Roiall Person; either to terrifie his aduersa∣ries, or to reuenge himselfe, if any such sentence should bee against him, gathered a mighty Army vnder * Geruasi saith vt &c. pretence of subduing Wales, where yet hee did lit∣tle. The meane while Iohn of Oxenford (who not onely followed the Kings cause stoutly, but also Bale Ce t. 3. writ a learned Booke in iustifying of it against Bec∣ket) preuailed so farre at Rome, that two Legates à la∣tere, should bee sent into England, to reconcile the King and Thomas; but when they were gone, the Pope hearing that they were resolued Geruasius. vtterly to con∣found the Arc shop, sent letters after them to re∣bate their absolute power, they being men (saith Ger∣uasius) * Auram & aur . Geruas. who too much thirsted after gold and glory. (28) When these two Cardinals came to Tho∣mas, he refused to put his cause to them, vnlesse Mat. Paris. there were first a plenary restitution made to him and his of all that had beene taken away: but be∣ing then counselled by them to submit himselfe to the king, his answere was, he would, sauing Gods ho∣nour, and the Churches liberty; sauing his own honour; and his Churches possessions; and sauing his owne and Acts and Monu∣ments pag. 284. Col 2. Ibid. his friends right: being further demanded, whither (to resettle peace in Gods Church, which hee see∣med onely to desire) he would renounce his Bishop-ricke, if the king would renounce his customes: he answered, The proportion was not alike: for that with the honour of his Church and his Person, he could not renounce his Bishopricke; whereas on the other side, the King was bound, aswell for his Soules health, as for his honour, to renounce those ordinances. (will you know the reason?) because the Pope and hee had condemned them. And so that designe for peace was frustrate. (29) The King of England tempestuously stor∣ming at these affronts, and daily encrease of new Saluo honore Person suia sal∣ , sal d , &c. salues, wherewith like a guilefull Chirurgion, he Math. Paris. Roger. Houed. still made the wound more to fester; menaced the Monkes (which in their Abbey at Pontenei, had now for two whole yeeres entertained him) to thrust all of their order out of England, if they durst releeue his enemy any longer: Whereupon they dismissing him, Lewis the French King tooke him to Sens with himselfe, where for foure yeeres hee remained and was (if wee may credite King Henry) a Ger. Dor. Ann. 1167. great instigator of the French King, and also of the Earle of Flaunders, against the King of England; Cardinal liter. Fox. p. 284. as was also by diuers Euidences most certaine; if the two said Cardinals told not a lie to the Pope: But, that the Peace was broken, and warres renued betwixt the Geruasius. Maxime propter Thoma , vt cr di potest. the two Kings, chiefly for Thomas his sake, Geruase the Monke himselfe doth record it as most cre∣dible. (30) Howbeit, by mediation at length, the two Kings were againe reconciled, and at their friendly Geruasi s, . 1169 A ud montem . enteruiew, Beckets wel-willers aduised him to submit himselfe in the presence of both kings, Tacita omni conditione. Geruas. ibid. without any more reseruations; which he seeming to yeeld to, presented himselfe verie humbly, and referred the cause to the king, not now, Saluo ordi∣ne suo, but yet on a new point, Saluo honore Dei; wherewith the king exasperated, told the French king, such was the humor of the man, that whatso∣euer Idem. disliked him, he would say it was against Gods honor, and so would bee neuer the neerer to conformity; with which, and other speeches, King Lewis of∣fended with Becket, asked him whether hee thought to bee greater or holier then Saint Peter? and the Peeres Idem. of both Nations accused him of much arrogancy, as be∣ing himselfe the wilfull hinderer of his own, and the Chur∣ches tranquility. (31) Notwithstanding, the Pope forgot not his faithfull Thomas, and therefore after hee had gra∣ced An. D. 1168. him with a confirmation of all the Priuiledges, Math. Paris. and powers, which any of his Predecessors in that See did enioy (to the daring and defiance as it were, of the kings vtmost indignation) the king sent a letter into Germany, declaring that hee would for∣sake The King goes a∣bout to forsake the Pope, and ioine with the Antipape. Pope Alexander, and ioine with the Emperour, and Antipape. Whereupon, when the Bishop of Rome had commanded Gilbert Bishop of London to admonish the king to giue ouer his courses, and cu∣stomes The Bishop of London com∣manded to ad∣monish the King. preiudicious to the Church, the said Bishop obeyed, and in his answere sought to perswade the Pope to a conniuencie, and forgets not to iustifie his Soueraigne, as That the King was ready to obey the sa∣cred Rog. Houed. hests of the Church, sauing to himselfe his own & his The Bishop of Londons defence of the King to Pope Alexand. 3. Kingdomes dignity: That, as for Appeales, he claimed that honour, by the ancient institution of his Kingdome, that is to say, That no Clerke should for a ciuill action depart the same vntill right could not be had in his Courts at home, and then he would hinder no an. That hee did not banish the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, who might returne at his pleasure, so as he would obserue all those his Grandfathers customes, which once hee had giuen his faith to doe: That the King thinks himselfe greatly iustified, in that hee is willing to stand to the iudgement of the whole Church of his owne Kingdome, &c. (32) But when mediations, letters, messages, or other waies, would not preuaile; the Pope admo∣nisheth The Bishoppe of London excom∣municated. the King, that he meant no longer to restrain the Archbishop from reuenging his owne, and his An. D. 1169 Churches iniuries with the sword of censure, and thereupon (for a beginning) the Archbishop excom∣municates Gilbert Bishop of London, and proceeded so farre with others, that there was scarce found in the Kings owne Chappell and presence such as might Geru. Dorob. performe the wonted ceremonies. (33) The King both touched with his owne wrongs, and tender of their case, who for his sake vnderwent that seuerity, animates Bishoppe Gilbert Comforted by the King. with most louing offers to beare the charges of pro∣secuting his appeale against Becket, and desires the Pope to send him Legates which might absolue his excommunicated Subiects, and settle a peace, or else Ger. Dor. he should bee compelled to prouide otherwise for his own security and honour. (34) Two Cardinals therefore, Gratian and Vi∣uianus, comming into France to end the conten∣tion, Cardinals at∣tempt to make reconcilement. returne notwithstanding without possibility of doing good; for that Becket would not yeeld in any point to those Customes, at which he had once excepted, but with his ordinary limitations. At last yet by the popes mediation, the two kings of Eng∣land and of France met at Paris, whether the Arch-bishop repaired, and yet no peace ensued: for that Dorob rnensis. the king refused the kisse of peace with him, and Becket would either haue a sound and full peace, or none at all; where, though the king of England re∣fused to satisfie any thing vnder the name of resti∣tution, as being against his honour (because all re∣stitution implied a wrong) yet in the other maine Math. Paris. matter of his Auitall Customes, offering to stand to the iudgement, not of his owne onely, but euen of the Parisian Diuines, and Church of France; hee came off from that conference with some aduantage & The King offers his caus to bee iudged by the Diuines and Church of France. fauour, in the opinion of the hearers. (35) King Henry (for all this) seeing no issue of his long disquietnes, and vnregall vsages, vnderstan∣ding also that the Archbishop of Seins in person had so∣licited the Pope, to put the Kingdome of England vnder Interaict, (which is the prohibiting of the publike Dorobornensis. A strange deuise of Christs Vicar to forbid a whole Kingdome to liue like Christians. vse of Christs Religion, & Christian Burial through∣out the whole land) hee beeing then in Normandy, sends forth his Edict: That if any man bring from the Pope or Becket, any letters of Interdict, he should prè∣sently suffer as a Traitour to the King and the State: Houeden. That no Clerke whatsoeuer goe forth of the land with∣out The Kings Edict to match the Popes Interdict. a Passe from his Iusticiaries, and none returne a∣gaine without letters of licence from the King himselfe. That none receiue any message from the Pope or Becket, nor make any appeale vnto them, nor hold any Plea by their mandates; That if any Prelate or Clerke, or Lay∣man shall obey any sentence of Interdict, he and all his Kindred shall be forthwith expulsed the land, and all his goods escheated to the Crowne. That all Clerkes who haue rents in England, returne home within three Mo∣neths, or else all their rents to fall to the King. That certaine Prelates specified, bee cited to answere in the Kings Courts for interdicting Earle Hughes lands. That Peter-pence be not paid to Rome, but reserued. Thus, (as Geruase the Monke lamentably complaineth) all from the eldest to the yongest throughout England were Geru. D r. made to abiure obedience to Pope Alexander and Bec∣ket. (36) After all this, it came into King Henries mind, to sweeten these his many cares with some so∣lace, The King causeth his sonne to bee crowned King. and to crowne his eldest sonne, yongue Henry, King of England, now in his owne life time: A coun∣sell not more temerarious, then infortunate: but of which yet he did hope to reape this consolation, that it was done in contempt of Becket (whose office it was to haue crowned the King,) with some aduan∣tage also toward the perpetuation of the Auitall Cu∣stomes, and that also without scruple of conscience, his sonne receiuing the Crowne without caution, to pre∣serue p. Alex▪ Pap. apud Roge. Houed. the Churches libertie, either by him put in, or by o∣thers exacted. Yea rather, an Oath ministred, and by the yongue King taken, to maintaine those Aui∣tall Customes to the vttermost. (37) This solemnitie was performed, at Henrie the fathers commandement, by Roger Arch-bishop of Yorke, (the anciently riuall See of Canterbury) con∣trarie to the Popes expresse Inhibition, the father himselfe King Henrie, being present thereat, though without any fortunate presage in comming, or cause of consolation in the action. For Roger Houeden. he, in his inaus∣picious passage out of Normandy, arriuing not with∣out very great perill, at Portsmouth, the best and new∣est ship he had was suncke in the stormes, and there∣in, besides Henrie de Agnellis and his two sonnes, Gil∣bert de Sullemni, M r . Ralf de Bealmunt, the Kings phy∣sition and fauourit, with about foure hundred men and women more, were deuoured of the working waues. And at the feast, the ioifull father himselfe, carrying the first dish, and the Arch-bishop of Yorke saying in pleasance to the yongue King: Reioice my faire sonne, for their is no Prince in the world, hath such a seruitor attending at his table as you. The vnnaturall Polyd. Uirg. in H. 2. yongue man answered; why? wonder you at that? my fa∣ther knowes hee doth nothing that misbecomes him, for so much as hee is roiall borne but of one side, but our selfe are roiall borne both by father and mother. (38) Adde heereunto, that this vnluckie Coro∣nations triumphes, were celebrated with bon-fires kindled by the furies in Normandie; which Lewis the French King inuaded with fire and sword, because his daughter Margaret was not crowned aswell as the yongue King her husband: but the father spee∣ding into those parts, quencht this flame with a pro∣mise to recrowne his sonne, and then his daughter Margaret should be honoured with like ceremonies. Thus the fathers patience was exercised on euerie hand, and worse things were feared. (39) So now yet at last, in the seuenth yeere of Math. Paris. Beckets banishment, another meeting was had at Sens, whither, the two great Kings, and the Arch-bishop The last meeting for a peace be∣tweene the King and Archbishop. of Sens, and Bishop of Neuers, beeing toge∣ther, the Arch-bishop of Canterburie repaired, and the treatie of Peace was entred into, which at Am∣bois, in an other meeting (at procurement of Rotrod Arch-bishop of Roan) was finished; and the Archbi∣shop (knowing the King was terrified with the expe∣ctation of the foresaid imminent Interdiction) was restored to the Kings fauour, and permitted to haue full vse of his Metropolitane See, and all the profits thereof with the arrerages. Which conclusion, the King signifies to his sonne into England, whither the Arch-bishop returnes, and lands at Sandwich: And thus the controuersie betweene the King and his Arch-bishop seemed to bee ended. (40) But the Arch-bishop had not beene long in England, before hee published the Popes letters, by which, Roger Arch-bishop of Yorke, and Hugh Bishop The Archbishop publisheth new censures. of Duresme, were suspended from the vse of their Episcopall function, for crowning the yongue King Math. Paris. Roger Houed. in preiudice of the See of Canterburie; and the Bi∣shops of London, Exceter, and Salisburie, cut off from the Church by censure, for assisting the said Arch-bishop at that Coronation; whom Becket would not, but vnder conditions, at the yongue Kings request, absolue. Whereupon a great complaint was carried into Normandy, to the father King, Polydor. Virg. l. 13. by some of the Bishops: and in the meane time, the Arch-bishoppe Thomas, putting himselfe vpon the way to visite the yongue King, at Woodstocke in Oxford-shire, was com∣manded not to approach. Lib. Mon. S. Alb. MS. (41) At the newes of these late censures, the fa∣ther King was so sore displeased, that some words The kings wrath fatall to the Archbishop. slipping from him, and arguing his great discontent, mooued Hugh Moruill, William Traci, Hugh Brito, and Richard Fitz-vrse, knights and courtiers, topost Ger. Camb. l. 1. c. 20. cals them Aulici Canes. into England, and there in a furie, (without either warrant, or priuitie of their Soueraigne) to murther the Arch-bishop (being then about The printed Legend saith, he was 53 yeeres of age. forty and eight yeers old) in his owne Church of Canterburie; which sacred Place, and Time, besides his high Calling, might haue pleaded for pittie, had not the men been whol∣ly transported with barbarous rage. For howso∣euer we are farre from their fancies, who, for his zeale to the Popes Soueraignety, haue so mounted him to the top of Martyrs glory, that not onely the basest part of his Shrine was pure gold, and his In the festiuals of Christs Nati∣uity Scil. . Nata∣l Dominici, Nubrigensis. Erasmus. Guil. Cambd. Stow in H. 8. old Shoe was deuoutly kissed by all Erasm. in Dial. de Peregrinat: Religionis ergo. passengers, but also shamelesse and numberlesse Miracles are blindly as∣cribed vnto him, and his Lambert Pe∣ramb. of Kent, in Harbaldowne. Bloud almost matched in vertue with our euer-blessed Sauiours: yet wee no lesse condemne their butcherly execution, who T per Thoma Sanguinem, quem pro e impendit, Fac nos Christe scandere, quo Thomas ascendit. (how great so euer his offence was against the King and State) had no lawfull authoritie to beare them out, or acquit them, from the guilt of Bloud. (42) To shut vp this long contention (which, as you see, would not be extinct but by bloud, nor take end but by his death,) because any censure of our owne will be said to sauour of Time-seruing, or State-pleasing, Guil. Nubrig. l. 2. c. 16, we will onely annexe the bare iudgement of the forecited learned Monke of that time, who thus speaks. Indeed though most mens custōe is, in those, whom they loue and praise, to extoll whatsoeuer they haue done, (an argument of their great affection, but slender wisdom) yet in plain truth, those things, which the venerable Arch-bishop so acted, that no profit at all thence proceeded, but the Kings wrath onely was kindled (whereby so many mischiefes afterward arose) I doe not thinke to bee praise∣worthy, though they sprang from a laudable zeale; as it was in the blessed Prince of the Apostles, who attaining the top of Apostolicall perfection, taught the Gentiles by his example to Iudaize; for which the Doctor of the Gen∣tiles Galat. 2. declares that he deserued to be reprehended, though hee did it with a praise-worthy and pious intent. And in another place. The Arch-bishop was hot in zeale of Iustice, but whither fully according to knowledge, God Nubrig. l 2. ca. 25. knoweth, (for it is not for a man of my meane quality, rashly to iudge of so great a mans actions,) but I thinke, the blessed Pope Gregorie would haue dealt more mildly, and winkt at those things which might haue beene borne, without any hazard of the Christian faith, &c. and then concludes: Therefore, that which the venerable Arch-bishop then did, I neither iudge that it is to bee commen∣ded, neither presume I to condemneit, &c. For good men are so to bee loued, or lauded by vs, that wee neither loue nor laud those acts wherein they shew themselues to be fraile men, but onely those things wherein without scru∣ple we ought to imitate them: and therefore they are wise∣lie and warilie to be praised, that Gods prerogatiue may be reserued intire to himselfe. (43) Some other learned men there were, who liued neere to that time, whose censure was farre sharper then that Monks: Such were some of those An. 1 20. Diuines of Paris, mentioned by Caesarius Dialog. l. 8. cap 9. ale Script. Brit. Cent. 2. Caesarius the Monk, who saith, The Question was debated to & fro amongst the Doctors, in the vniuersitie of Paris, whether Tho∣mas were damned or saued: amongst whom, Rogerius Fox. p. 289. the Norman auowed, that hee deserued death and dam∣nation, for his contumacie against his King, the Minister of God: but Petrus Cantor alleadged, that his Miracles were signes of his saluation, &c. An indeede if all bee true, which Monach. Cant. de miracul B. Thoma. one man hath written in fiue bookes, containing his 270. Miracles, wee cannot but ac∣knowledge him, both the greatest Saint, and the me∣riest too, that euer gotte into heauen; so ridiculous are many things recorded of him. As that of Ail∣wardus, who for stealing of a great whetstone (which the Author that writes it, best deserued) beeing de∣priued of his Eies and MS. Pendend perhaps for Pudenda. Malmesb. de▪ Rog. l. 5. Virilities, by sentence of Law; vpon praier to S. Thomas he had all restored againe: Yea euen a The printed golden Legend. in v . Thom. Bird, hauing beene taught to speake, flying out of her cage, and ready to be seized on by a Spar-Hauke, said onely, S. Thomas helpe mee, and her Enemie fell pre∣sently dead, and shee escaped, and (belike) reported it. Of which great power in this Saint, how canne wee doubt? sith wee read, that euen in his life time the * Virgin Marie her selfe was contented to bee his Semster, and sowed his shirt with red silke? Many of Ibidem. which kind of follies, (if that word be sharp enough) might bee heere inserted, were not our present argu∣ment more serious, and these forgeries fit onely for Monks to endite, children to read, and fooles to beleeue. (44) The report of the tragicall outrage on the The kings sor∣row for the mur∣ther, and his dif∣ficulties there∣upon. Math. Paris. Ypodig. Neustr. Arch-bishop, comming to the old King, at Argenton in Normandy; there was no kind of sorrow, into which, (without respect to Maiestie, or State) hee fell not; and not without cause, as knowing how plentifull an Hydra of mischiefes (vpon the opinion of his priuitie with the fact) would rise, if not pre∣uented. But the murtherers, fearing least this their fact would displease the king, in whose reuenge they Guil. Nubrigens. l. 2 c. 25. Mat. Paris. did it, fled into the North, and abode one whole yeere in the kings Castle of Knaresborough in Yorke∣shire; perhaps by fauour of the yongue king: none of them dying for the fact, by way of iustice, because, the Clergie exēpting themselues from the bonds of ciuill Laws, the punishment of a Priest-killer (as by Nich. Triuet. vowel, and Holinsh. p. 99. Math. Paris. saith it was gran∣ted to Cardinall Petro , by King Hen. Math. Paris, ad. A. D. 1176. some it appeareth) was not then the death of the Bo∣dy by execution of capitall sentence, but of Soule by Excommunication, till about the twentie third yeer of this king, it was (at the instant suite of Richard Arch-bishop of Canterburie, and of the Bishops of Winchester, Elie, and Norwich) yeelded, that such persons should also suffer losse of life. 45 The king therefore, vpon protestation to submit himself, to the iudgement of such Cardinals, Legats, as the Pope should send to inquire of the fact, kept his Realme from Interdiction, though the king of France, the Archbishop of Se s, and Theobald Earle of Blois, had outgone his Embassadors with their in∣flaming letters, conteining the descripion of that Parricide. (46) Henry therefore, among so many perplexi∣ties rising out of the Archbishops murther, saw no King Henry pro∣iects the cōquest of Ireland. way so ready for the calming his owne perturbati∣ons; or for the auerting mens thoughts from the consideration of that scandalous tragedie, as to vn∣dertake some great and noble enterprise, which now offered it selfe very seasonably. For Ireland, a verie spatious and plentifull Iland, and lying▪ commodi∣ously for the vses of the English, burned in it self with ciuill diuisions, kindled among the petty Kings and Girald. Cambr. de expug. H b. Princes thereof: while Rotherick the Great, called O Conor Dun, Prince of Connaught, abusing his power and the aduantage of the times, to the oppression of his Neighbours, sought to make himselfe the v∣niuersall King thereof, hauing already inuaded the Title & Stile of KING AND MONARCH Annalib. Hiber. apud Cam. pa. 794. An. Dom. 1166. OF IRELAND. And this his purpose was much aduanced by the fatall and familiar errour of proceedings in like cases: for the Irish Princes, ei∣ther through distrust or pride, forbearing to vnite their forces against the common enemy, while each prouides for one, they are all as it were, ouer-come. (47) Moreouer Annalib. Hiber. Ibid. Dermot Mac Murrgh (in that time of the Irish Pentarchie, or fiue-fold Kingdome) hauing secretly stolne away the wife of Rotherick (a Girald. Cambr. lib. 1. cap. 1. in Hiber. expug. light woman, and consenting or plotting rather, & vrging the rape it selfe) added to Rotherickes ambiti∣on, a iust desire of reuenge, for so notable, impu∣dent, and publike iniurie, so much the more odi∣ous in Dermots person, for that hee was old: ney∣ther was this all; for the causes of this change were higher. (48) The onely disposer and translator of King∣domes is God; & in Ireland to moue him to offence (without which no Kingdom is transferred) against the people thereof, all such sinnes abounded, as commonly forgoe the greatest changes: for not one∣ly the manners of the Nation were extremely cor∣rupted, but the Christian faith it selfe decaied; bar∣barisme ouerrunning the one, and Polig mie, &c. Polydor. Vir. l. 13. more then su∣perstitions the other. But it may seeme by some Girald. Camb. Hib. expug. l. 2. c. 7. Edmund Campi∣ans Hist. of Ire∣land l c. 2. M. S. Rossus Warwic. MS. Authors, that King Henries particular inducements to that Action, were both an ancient title vnto that Kingdome, deriued from his ancestors (the kings of England) for many ages before him; and Campian. l. 2. c. 1. MS. many vn∣sufferable wrongs (by their Piracies) vnto the English Nation, buying and selling their Captiues, and vsing Turkish tyranny on their dies: which made the Irish Clergy themselues confesse, that they had deserued no other, then that their land should bee transferred to Idem. ibid. that Nation whom they had so cruelly handled. Notwith∣standing, king Henry, who knew how great and dangerous tumults the Popes had raised on small occasions, thought his way would bee much easi∣er, if he went onward with the Popes good fauour, which hee easily obtained (so liberall is his holinesse of that which is none of his) for à fee; viz. a penny yeerely to bee paid to Saint Peter of euery house in Ireland. Touching which point, Rossus of Warwick lla Hadrian. apud Mat. Paris. (no Protestant, I assure you▪) saith, That Englands King is not bound to rely on the Popes graunt for Ire∣land, Rossus Warwic. MS. nor yet to pay that taxe, because hee had claime to that Kingdome by an hereditary right: and that the Pope had no temporall interest therein (as his fa∣uorites pretend) the often-mentioned Monke of Newborough can tell vs, who saith, that Nunquam Gul. Nubrig. l. 2. c. 26. externa subiacuit ditioni, Ireland was neuer subiect to any forraine command. (49) God Almighty therefore did now put it into the heart of Henry, for the reforming of that kingdome, to make a Conquest thereof, hauing in his infinite wisedome before hand fitted all circum∣stances needfull to concurre, for inducing so warie and frugal a Prince to such an enterprise, which thus tooke beginning. (50) Dermot Mac Murgh, beeing in possession of his fatall Helen (the adulterous wife of Rothericke) was pursued so eagrely with the reuenging sword of his enemie (who, howsoeuer wounded in heart with the abuse of his Bed, reioiced in the colour and occa∣sion ministred therby, for him to seise vpon the flou∣rishing Prouinces of Leinster) as hee was driuen to flie from place to place, and at the length to quitte his kingdome also, the subiects whereof his tyrannie and vices had vnsetled, in their affections toward him. Thus desperate of help at home, his last de∣liberations were to draw in forreine aides; the neces∣sity of his case requiring it; and for that purpose, fi∣nally Camb. pag. 730. resolues to repaire to the court of the wise and Giral. Camb. potent Henrie, King of England, beeing then in Aqui∣tain: neither could Dermot but knowe, that it had heeretofore beene in Henries designes, at such time Giral. Cambr. in Hiber. Exp. cap. 1. as hee ment to subdue it for William of Angion, his yongest brother, and also, because his present Domi∣nions did halfe (as it were) enuiron it. In which hopes he was not deceiued; for Henrie listened ther∣unto verie willinglie, as to a thing which hee had in∣deede Mat. Paris. Ann. Dom. 1155. some yeeres before proiected. (51) King Dermot therefore was heard in his suite. But, because the thing, as at that time, neither seemed great enough, for such a Prince as Henrie Dermots suite for aid liked by Henry. to vndertake directly, nor as yet was held sufficient∣ly discouered to his hand; that therefore the Ice might be broken by inferiour meanes, and aswell the conueniences, as inconueniences, sounded to the depth, (without engaging the roiall person, name, or power,) it was by the Kings letters permitted to Dermot (the exiled Prince) to draw what Giral. Camb. l. 2. c. 1. Hib. expug. aduentu∣rers, or voluntaries, either the commiseration of his estate, or other respects, of pietie, profit, or delight in armes, could allure to the action. Now whether it were, for that he, whose Countreis lay toward the Dermots first suc∣coures. coasts of Wales, (and within ken vpon a cleere day) by commodity thereof might entertaine intelli∣gence, aswell as trafficke, with the inhabitants of those parts; or, for that the fame of their Cheualrie did inuite; or, for that his acquaintance at his arri∣uall grew there first; or, for that these and many o∣ther circumstances mette in this accident: sure it is, that Dermot raised his first, and principall succours from among the English Colonies there. (52) The Welsh had then in their hands a vali∣ant Gentleman of Norman race, one Robert Authors call him Stephenides. Fitz-Stephen, Robert Fitz-Ste∣phen. who by Gilbert de Clare was entrusted with the defence of the towne of Cardigan, but through Camb. p. 518. treachery the Towne being surprised, Robert was also deliuered vp to Rhese ap Gruffin, Prince of South Wales, who would hearken to no other endentments of his liberty, but onely, that he should for euer a∣bandon his possessions in Wales. Whereupon (the oportunity of Dermots quarrel giuing hopes of new fortunes) immediately hee entred into contract with the Irish king, promising by a certaine day to come to his succour, with as many Voluntaries, as his remaining fortunes, or the hope of the voiage could stirre: which he Annales Hiber. apud Camb. & Giral. Cambr. did accordingly performe, leauing it very disputable, whether with more suc∣cesse or courage. But Dermot well knowing that the fortunes of this Gentlemā (to whose valor nothing see med impossible) were vnable to vndergo the whole Richard Earle of Pembroke. weight of the vnknowne worke, had formerly dealt with that renowmed Lord, Richard of the house of Clare, He is common∣ly called (of his chiefe seat in Monmouth-shire) Earle of Chepstow or Strigil. Earle of Pembrooke, surnamed Strong-bow: the man whom the Fate of Ireland did expect. (53) Dermotes perswasions to the Earle were of this kind: That the enterprise, besides the facul∣tie thereof, was full of pietie, honour, Iustice, and commoditie: That it appeared so to King Henry himselfe, by whose leaue hee was free to The of Der persua∣sions gather what forces he could: That hee was dri∣uen out by the cruell ambition of Neighbours, & treacherie of wicked Subiects. That Leinster was a Kingdome, and though but a part, yet cleere∣ly the best and richest part of Ireland. That mul∣titudes offered themselues to his aid; but his cares were not onely for a Generall to lead them, but for one to whom hee might leaue his kingdome also: That the Earle was he, as the onely man, in whose person all the respects of birth, honour, bounty, valour, youth and fortunes did happily meete. That the Earle (in his conceit) did dwell but narrowly (considering what hee was worthie of) pent-vp in the straights of an Earledomes ti∣tle, for whom a great Kingdome was not great. That they who would not allow Leinster for a kingdome, did forget, that England once was bro∣ken into lesser states; and if Dermot were not a King, neither then were Ella, Cissa, Vffa, Sigbert, Crida, and the rest in the Saxon seuen-headed go∣uernment: that the quantity of Dominion made more or lesse strong, but not more or lesse a King. That he was rightfull King of Leinster, as Sonne and Heire to Murgh King of Leinster: that if hee must forgoe his inheritance, it should be to such as had done him no wrong, and were wor∣thy of it; to Richard Strong-bow and his follow∣ers, and not to Rothericke and Rebels. That hee was not vnking'd, though vnkingdom'd: that E∣ua his daughter (Eua the pearle and starre of Ire∣land) should indeed be Eua to his enemies to bring vpon them death, and iust confusion: that yet in defeating the Tyrant Rotherick of his hopes by plā ting Earle Richard and his Forces, hee should pro∣uide for his Country, not destroy it. That if it did fall out otherwise, yet his disloiall people had their iust deserts, who obiecting vices to their So∣ueraigne, did themselues commit vile treasons. Indeed (quoth he) I was neuer such a King, as that I was not also a Man. But for those matters be∣tweene God and me, here is now no place to ac∣count, for though his iustice hath found me out, yet his mercy hath left me more friends at home, then the number & measure of my sinnes deserue: My quarrell is most iust, as against most wicked re∣bels and vsurpers: Restore me then (my Lord) by your puissance to my natiue soile, and my lawfull rights therein: restore with me Religion and Dis∣cipline to the ancient splendor thereof, which was not greater in any Realme about vs then in Ireland; reduce the stray, enlighten our ignorance, polish our rudenesse, and let not such abundant matter of merite and immortall glory escape you. God him∣selfe will prosper the enterprise; holy Church hath long since approued it: and vpon such Authors what can miscarry? And though in thy noble and Christian courage nothing can weigh so much, (and these I see work mightily) yet to satisfie all *The Irish phrase to vse thou and thee. respects, Thou shalt haue far larger territories then here Thou canst possesse, and goodly lands to di∣stribute for reward among thy friends and follow∣ers. My last offers now shall not shew a more de∣sire to vse thy forces, then a loue to thy person & vertues. They are not trifles I propose, but that of which God himselfe doth seeme to me to haue laid the ground; seeing it is his holy will that thou at this time shouldst bee without a wife. Know thou then, that I haue that one daughter Eua, the heire of my Crowne, and comfort of my age: let thine owne eye tell thee how faire and worthy: this I dare auouch, that thou wilt thinke far broa∣der seas wel crost, for view of so honest beauty: she in the first blossome of her youth, a vertuous vir∣gine, and by both Parents borne of Princes, shall at thine arriual, with this right hand, bee made thine, and with her after my death, my whole realme, and other my rights whatsoeuer: which were they infinitely more; (despise not such loue, nor thealliance of one distre ed, but neuerthelesse a King,) I would repute them farre too little for such a sonne in law: who though thy selfe as yet no King This seemeth to be spoken, becaus his mother Isa∣bel was Aunt (by the mother) to Malcolm King of Scots: Cambd. Annales Hibern. Ann. 1169. Earle Richard agrees. , art come of Kings, and it is my whole and last ambition, that I may liue to make thee one. The Earle accepted the conditions, reso∣lute to set vp Dermot againe, and for that purpose bound himselfe by solemne contract, to the full per∣formance of his part within a certaine time. (53) Dermot hauing thus negotiated his affaires and set it in so good forwardnes, while his friends in England prepared themselues and their Forces, lest hee should seeme to relie vpon forraine aides, and so to diminish with them the reputation of his owne valour and alliances at home; hee sailes backe into his Country; carrying with him the promises of confederates, and there both by his presence and perswasions did the best hee could to facilitate the entrance of the English; whose honourable enter∣tainements, deuotions, ciuility, riches, valours, wisedome, and victorious greatnesses he spared not to celebrate, as instruments aduancing his own de∣signes: which raised no little expectation, mixt with contrary affections of desire and feare. (54) The next yeare, when the season grew fit for an Army to take the field, Robert Fitz-Stephen Robert Fitz Ste∣phen saild into Ireland. accompanied with Maurice Fitz-Gerald his halfe brother by the surer side, & Trig Mili∣ti s. a competent number of Souldiers, reposing (vnder God) their chief hope in their swords and courages, set saile for Ireland; & M sc. Clonmel. in Custod. Patric. white. in the beginning of May came on shore, at a place called by the Irish, B nn (by the English at this day commonly, Bagg and Bunn) which in our language An. D. 1170 They were Soul∣diers of all sorts 390. Stowes Annals. ad An. Dom. 1170. signifies Sacred: a word which (so much as names may be presages of things) did as it were hallow the attempt of the English with a lucky and gratious o∣mination, whereof the Inhabitants at this present retaine this rime. At the head of Bagg and Bunn, Ireland was lost and wun. (55) The next day after, Maurice de Prender∣gast also, with Manuscr. Clo ∣mel, ibid. other men of Armes, and many Ar∣chers in two shippes arriued there, being parcell of Fitz-Stephans Forces and Companions of his For∣tunes, who ioining themselues together, immediat∣ly marcht to the City of Weisford vnder their Ban∣ners, and that in the greatest brauery they could, (the Knights and Men at Armes, in their The name of Pendergast yet remaines in Ire∣land: taken first (as seemeth) frō a Towne of that name in Pen∣brokeshire. Coates of Arms & Colours) to draw thereby now at the first the greater reputation to themselues, and with opi∣nion so gotten, to fill vp the smalnes of their num∣bere: in which manner assailing the City, the Irish therein rendred themselues, and in reward of the seruice, being also Pendergasts, coa Armour, was Gules, a S l∣toyr Vari , as my learned fri nd, M. Bolton (whose notes haue giuen mee much light in this Kings life, and diuers o∣thers) himselfe obserued in the Friers Church at Clon∣mell. according to capitulation, and en∣couragement of others, who were to proceed in this warre, Dermot, to whose vse the English Gene∣rall had taken it, Girald. Cambr. in expug. Hiber. bestowed the City it selfe, and the Country about vpon Robert Fitz-Stephen, at his pleasure to be disposed off: and there the first Co∣lony of our Nation was planted, which hath euer since immoueably maintained their abode among innumerable changes in the world, retaining at this day the ancient attire of the English, and the language also it selfe, though brackish with the mixture of * Camb. p. 748. The first English Colonie. vulgar Irish, which therefore by a distinct name is called Weisford speech, current onely in that City, & the County about. (56) But Robert Fitz-Stephan thus aduanced, for weisford . his more assurance, beganne to raise a Camb. ibid. Town at Carricke, making the place which nature had alrea∣dy fortified, much more by Art defensible. This entrie into Ireland being by him now made (vnder the name of Henry King of England) and the successe exceeding hope, Richard Strong-bow receiuing ad∣uertisement from Dermot, and the new Lord of Earle Richard prepared for Ireland. Weisford, of all occurrences; thought fitte, first to dispatch Annal. Hibern. apud Camb. p. 795. Raimund sent before with supplies. some supplies to Fitz-Stephen, which a∣bout the beginning of May, vnder the conduct of Raimundle grosse (a Gentleman of the Earles fa∣mily) were accordingly sent: and after Rai∣mund the Earle himselfe in the same yeere set forth: His Forces were about Annal. Hibern. apud Camb. p. . An. 1171. C . Reg apud Cambd. M scr . Annalib. Hiber. apud Cam. vbi per∣p am . 11 0. pro 1171. ibid. ad An. 1185. two hundreth men of Armes, and a thousand other Souldiers, with whom he came safe to Anchor in the Bay of Waterford, vpon the Vigil of Saint Bartholmew, Au∣gust, 23. Ann. 1171. Earle Richard the Generall, knowing that expedition did carry with it terrour and aduantage, presently marcheth to Porthlarge, (the Irish name of Waterford) and vpon the very next day tooke the City by force, and sacrificed the ar∣med Earle Richards first a mpts. Waterford taken Inhabitants to the reuenge of Dermot, so the rather to make roome, and security for themselues, to the exceeding terrour, and iust dismay of all a∣bout, as they who found, that, howsoeuer the pre∣tence was to resettle Dermot, the purpose was to seat the English for euer. (57) But Dermot, Author of this calamity to his Nation, resolute in his purpose, in full comple∣ment He marrieth the Lady Eua. of his Contract, doth openly in solemne ma∣ner bestow his promised daughter Eua, vpon the Conquerour in mariage, with his owne right hand giuing her in the Church: at which time, the famous Strong-bow did not celebrate his particular Wedding-day, but the indissoluble knot of the Irish allegiance to the English Soueraignetie, with the same Ring which circuled his Wiues finger, affi∣ancing that Iland to this our Country. (58) The Marriage performed, it was far from the mind of the Earle to spend much time in reuels and feasts, but consults with his men of warre what Earle Richard marcheth to Dublin. was next to bee done for the setling his Father in law King Dermot, and for finishing the Conquest which was now so happily begunne, in two seuerall parts of Ireland at once. Leauing therfore a sufficient Gar∣rison to make good the places already gaind, & to se∣cure the lāding of fresh supplies, he sets forward with his selected Companies, to whose victorious wea∣pons the whole Realme lay open, so farre forth, that Rotherick himself was very wel contented (notwith∣standing his lately vsurped, & swelling title of Mo∣narch of Ireland) to hold himselfe within the bogs and fastenesses of his peculiar Realme, the wild, and mountainous Connaught; meane while, Strongbow keepes on his way ouer the bosome of Ireland to the principall City therof, Dublin, taking in (as he mar∣cheth) all the places about, and securing himselfe by pledges, of their loialty, or otherwise, as he saw most fitte. In which iourney, pleased with the delight and fertile situation of C d. p. 75 . Kildare, he resolued there to settle his abode, and to erect a seate to his poste∣rity. The conquest of Dublin being speedily, and most happily atchieued; not long after, Dermot Mac Dublin taken. Murgh, Father in law to the Earle (whom the I∣rish for his affection to the English, call Dermot Nin∣gall, Dermot King of Leinster dieth. that is, Dermot the Strangers friend) breathed his last at Fernys, dying, ( Annal. Hiber. pr at. plenus dierum.) (59) The fame of these successes wafting ouer the Irish seas, and comming to the King, made him resolue to passe in person thither, that he might haue the honor of the Conquest: and not approuing such forwardnes in the Earle, who (as Will. Par us. Nic. Tr et. Holinsh. p. 83. some say) went a∣gainst his expresse commandement, (and indeed Giral. Cambr. cap. 13. lib. 1. Giraldus, who liued at that time, cals his leaue no better then an Ironicall leaue) and for that hee knew not to what insolency such faire for∣tune might in time allure, as also for that they see∣med to handle the Natiues too rigorously; Idem. lib. 1. c. 19. there∣upon hee forbids by his Proclamations, any vessell to carry any thing out of his Dominions into Ireland, and commands all English to returne before Easter, and leaue off their attempts, or their estates in England should be sei∣sed for the King. By which Edict these affaires were brought into fearefull extremity, which was chan∣ged into better condition by the trauell of Herucius de Monte Marisco, on the behalfe of the Earle, and the aduenturers, who finding the King in Glocester∣shire with an Army for Ireland, appeased his displea∣sure vpon these termes: That the King should haue the head City of the Kingdom, Dublin, with the adiacent Can∣treds, with all the Coast townes and Castles, the rest to re∣maine to the Conquerours to hold of the King, and of his Heires, and so to bee vnder his protection, as Subiects ought, and as they were before; which subiection it see∣med to the King they ment to haue renounced. (60) The Kings goodly Nauy lay in Milford ha∣uen, to which as hee iournied, hee thundred against Giral. Camb. the Welsh Nobility, comming to entertaine him, for suffering Strongbow to depart: At last being imbarkt, he had a faire Gale which set him safe in Ireland with all his Forces at Waterford, where first hee commits An. D. 1172. to prison Robert Fitz-Stephen, whom the Citizens presented bound, hauing held him in custody, vnder King Henri s doings in Ireland color of doing good seruice, because hee had entred Ireland without the Kings particular leaue; yet soon after the King released him, but depriued him of Weisford and the territories. Then takes he the ho∣mages of such petty Kings, and principall persons of Girald. Camb. lib. 1. H b. exp. Ca. 31. 32. &c. the Irish as repaired, dismissing them in honourable sort, meaning to winne them by gentle, and not ex∣asperating courses; and marching through Ossyrie to Dublin, he takes ô Rotherick the King of Connaughts homage by Hugh Lacie, and William Fitz-Aldelm: last ly, at Dublin he kept his Christmas in Royall state, which to behold, very many of the Irish Princes came thither. (61) Mindfull now of his duty to God, the I∣land being calme, and silent through the presence of such a mighty Monarch, the most noble King of Eng∣land, Religion establi∣shed by a Synode at Cashell. and triumphator of Ireland (as Idem. cap. 33 & 34. mine Author sti∣leth him) causeth a Synode to be holden at Cassils for reformation of the Irish Church, where amongst sundry other constitutions, to which the Irish Cler∣gy did willingly submit, it was decreed, That all the Church-lands, and their possessions should be altoge∣ther free from the exaction of secular men, & that from thenceforth, all Diuine things should be handled in euery part of Ireland in such sort, as the Church of Eng∣land handleth them. For (saith the Constitution) it is most iust, and meete, that as Ireland hath by Gods mercy obtained a Lord, and King out of England, so also that from thence they should re∣ceiue a better forme of life, and maners, then here∣tofore they vsed. (62) The King continuing his politicke iealousies, and thinking Strongbow to be as yet too great, draws from his dependency Raimund, Milo Cogan, William Makarel, and other of the best Captaines, & makes them his owne by bounty. But before hee could fully establish that Kingdome (the inseparable euil fate thereof, which would neuer suffer it to enioy the blessed benefite of exact ciuility) other affaires which he esteemed more necessary, call him away, and therefore hauing left Hugh Lacie at Dublin, hee sets saile for England vpon Easter Easter day after noone saith Math. Paris & Ypodigm. Neustr. Monday, and lan∣ded happily at Saint Dauids in Pembrookeshire, from whence with all speed hee posteth into Norman∣die. (63) In Normandy there attended for his arriuall two Cardinals, sent as Legates at his owne request, for taking his purgation concerning the death of Giral. Camb. Hib. exp. lib. 1. c. 38. the Archbishop of Canterbury, whereof, vpon oath that hee was no way consenting to that cruell, and sacri∣legious reuenge, and declaring withall his infinite sor∣row for hauing in his anger giuen occasion by rash words for others to doe that deede, and giuing further oath to performe enioined penances, he was by them absolued. The condition of his absolutions were, That hee Math. Paris. Sabellicus Ennead 9. lib. 5. should at his owne charge maintaine two hundreth Souldiers for an whole yeere for defence of the holy land. That he should suffer Appeales to be made freely. That hee should reuoke all customes in∣troduced to the preiudice of the Churches liberty. That he should restore and make vp the possessions of the Church of Canterbury. That hee should freely receiue all such as were in banishment for Bec∣kets cause, &c. Not long after Thomas was canonized by Pope Alexander, and so not onely the victorie Mat. Westm. Nic. Tri es. Holinsh. pag. 83. clearely giuen him against King Henry, but a triumph also. (64) Now beganne the wombe of rebellion, and vnnaturall conspiracies to disclose the mischiefes which were ordained to exercise this right redoub∣ted King and Warriour, hatched here at home by the malice (some say) of Eleanor his Queene, at such time as hee was absent in Ireland, so that as Math. Paris one writes, God stirred vp the Kings owne bowells against himselfe. Causes of this vnhappie dissention, there were many: First a Queene and Wife, violentlie vin∣dicatiue for wrong done vnto her Bed by the King, who was immoderatlie addicted to varietie of loues: then Ambition in an euill-naturd Child, and lastlie, pernicious Actors and instruments, who, for their owne ends, nourished this cursed mischiefe; so as if we should out of our stories recapitulate the seuerall occasions taken by the sonne against the father, wee should rather shew you the colours, then the causes: For none of those causes which his Son pretended, seemed great enough with men that feare God, to beare out such continuall diuisions as followed. (65) The head of this conspiracy was verie great, and iustly verie terrible: for on the side of King Henry the sonne, there were the Kings of France and Scotland, Ypodig. Neustr. Richard and Geffrey, two yonger sonnes of the King of England, whom by their mothers per∣swasions they forsooke, to follow the yongue King; Dauid the Scotish Kings brother, Philip Earle of Flan∣ders, (a Peere of France, and a potent Prince,) Mat∣thew Earle of Boloigne, Theobald Earle of Blois, Hugh Earle of Chester, Robert Earle of Leicester, Hugh Bigot Earle of Norfolke, Roger Mowbray, and other great ones, in great numbers, so as nothing seemed wan∣ting, but onely a good cause, which (such as it was) Queene Elianor, like an Alecto, kept aliue, so much as lay in her, with perpetuall fomentations. And indeed the scope of these confederats did require no lesse a combination, it beeing to depose the Father, whom it pleased them (for countenance of their vn∣godly armes) to repute no King, because hee had crowned his sonne. (66) Though nothing then could come more greeuous, to the bleeding heart of a most louing fa∣ther, then such a warre; yet not to bee vnprouided, hee (like a souldier) prepares himselfe, when faire meanes faild, and found multitudes readie to liue, and die with him; the indignitie of the vnnaturall re∣uolt, did so much inflame all honest courages, which acknowledged him their Soueraigne. (67) The particular accidents of the wars would fill a volume. At one time Normandie, Guien, and Britane were inuaded by the confederats in France, and at the same time Cumberland by the Scots. But the King of England had friends in all those parts, and himselfe hearing that Vernuil was Roger Houeden. besieged by the French King in person, hee beganne at last to kindle, hauing, like a sleeping Lion, sitten still all that while, and (for that the place had, vpon parlea, agreed to render if aid came not by a day) hee arriued to their succour within the time, Math. Paris. Ypodig. Neustr. sending King Lewis word that hee should gette him foorth of Normandie with speed, or he would without faile, come, and see how hee did vpon that verie day. Lewis, meaning no∣thing lesse then to put his owne Crowne in danger, while he sought one for his sonne in law, (and there∣fore in all the warre-time, would neuer set vp his rest vpon a battell,) but willing otherwise to doe to King Henrie the father, all the harme hee could, by coun∣tenancing the faction, and supporting the reuolted malecontents with his best meanes, and knowing King Henry was a sower and terrible Prince when he came indeede to fight, immediatelie raised his siege, and with as much hast as hee might, abandoned the place Th. Wals. in Ypodig. Neustri. leauing his Camp, tents, and warlike proui∣sions behind, and retired into France. (68) And though King Henrie, beginning now indeede to shake his dreadfull sword, had many faire daies of his enemies, mixt with some losses both of An. D. 1173. men and other strengths, though not great, nor ma∣ny, in regard of the ouerthrowes which on his be∣halfe were giuen: For that in Britane his forces had in battell vanquished Hugh Earle of Chester, & Ralph * Roger Houed. de Foulgiers, and slaine about one thousand and fiue hundred of their army; & in England, Reignald Earle of Cornwall, and Richard de Lucie, had in bloudie bat∣tell Math. Paris ouerthrowne the insolent Earle of Leicester, and Poly . . entred the towne of Leicest by force; and that he had the persons of the said Ypodig. Neust . Hugh Lupus Earle of Chester, Ralph de Fulgiers, and verie many other pri∣soners of especiall note and Nobility; yet Lewis the French King moouing a parlea, the father desirous to vse the good fortune of war, to reclaime his rebells, was so willing to make peace, that hee might seeme to haue outgone expectation in the qualitie of his * Houeden. offers, but through such wicked perswasions, as were vsed, preuailed not. (69) A violent firebrand in this diuision, was Robert Earle of Leicester, beeing matched with a La∣die no lesse proud, and stomachous then himselfe; * Math. Pari . The outragious and disloiall be∣hauiour of the Earle of Leicester who at this meeting, was not contented to haue af∣fronted King Henrie the father, on the behalfe of his yongue Lord, and Master the sonne, but (after many words of reproach) is said to haue laid his daring * Roger Houed. Ho rsh. hand vpon his sword, with purpose to haue strucken the King, had he not been with-holden: (and where such spirits had to doe, it is easie to gesse what kinds of counsell were like to be embraced and pursued;) hauing forsaken the father, not for that the others * Ypod. Neustr. cause was more honest, but for that (saith Thomas Walsingham) the father King, labouring to enlarge the re∣gall power, sought to set his foote vpon the neckes of the proud and haughtie. (70) But God, who ment to chastise the King, and not to deliuer him vp into his enemies hands, The Kings victo∣rie in England he beeing ab ent. destroied those hopes, that mooued the sonnes to their vnnaturall attempts; for it was not long after, when newes came into Normandy, that his faithfull friends and seruants, Polyd. Uirg. Henry Hunt. Holinsh. n H. 2. Richard de Lucie and Hum∣phrey de Bohun high Constable of England, together with the powers of Reignald Earle of Cornwall the Kings vncle, Robert Earle of Glocester, and William Earle of Arundell, not farre from Burie, couragious∣lie encountred with the Earle of Leicester, and his Gallos quidam vocat. Flemings, of whom aboue Houeden. and Polyd. Virg. sa h 10000. were ther slaine. fiue thousand were slaine, or taken, and among the prisoners was the Earle himself, and Math. Paris his Amazonian Countesse, whose persons at his commandement were not long after, brought ouer into Normandie. (71) This Polyd. Virg. great victorie and other good suc∣cesse, did so much aduantage the King, that Lewis Lewis King of France concludes a truce. beginning to distrust the enterprize, sought for sixe monethes truce for himselfe, and had it granted: but because there were yet in England, two principall men, Mat. Paris. the Earle of Norfolke, and Roger Mowbray, which held out; hauing Leicester for their Randenou, and seat of warre, with no small numbers of parta∣kers, notwithstanding that Geffrey (the Elect of Lin∣colne, the Kings base sonne) had taken two of Mow∣braies Castles, and done other good seruice for his Lord and Father, the truce serued the enemie for no other purpose but to breath, and to repaire him∣selfe. (72) The father (of whom Lewis said, that, hee seemed not to goe, but to flie, he went with such celerity * Ypod. Neust. from one place and Kingdome to another) in the meane while, recouers Xaincts from Richard his vio∣lent sonne, weakning that partie by so much, and would haue weakned it farre more, but that aduertis∣ments came post, declaring such matter, as made him speede into Normandie. (73) Thither Math. Paris. Great new dan∣gers against the King. came vnto him out of England, Richard (the Elect of Winchester) sent with all hast by the Kings Iustitiaries, to lay open vnto him, the dan∣gerous estate wherin the Realme at that time stood. For after that Philip Earle of Flanders had solemne∣lie sworne to inuade England, in supportation of yongue Henries quarrell, sundrie forces arriuing and ioining with Hugh Bigot Earle of Norfolke, had taken and spoiled the Citie of Norwich, and done other∣wise much harme, whereby the yongue King and his faction had taken great encouragement, as if the die of warre were turned, and aswell the yongue King as the Earle of Flanders, were come with forces to the Coasts, there to transport for England: Rog. Ho d. More∣ouer, Robert Earle Ferrers of Derby (who was falne from the father) had suddenly entred vpon Nottin∣gham, burnt the towne, beaten out the Kings Gar∣rison, slaine the people, and (enricht with spoile) retired to Leicester, whether about the same time, Anketill Malorie (Constable thereof) had also brought about two hundred prisoners taken at Nor∣thampton, which he (with slaughter of the like num∣ber of the Towns-men) had also suddenly surprised and taken: so that the Realme stood doubtfull, and in extreame perill; to the encrease whereof, William King of Scots (being deepe in the confederacy) inua∣ded England, diuiding his Forces, himselfe with part wasting Northumberland, and Duncan (a very cruell Captaine) with the other destroying the westerne Borderers. (74) The Father wonderfully stirred herewith, leaues Normandy in as good assurance as the time would permit, and sends before him to the Ships, Eleanor his owne Queene, and Queene Margaret King Henry sailes into Normandy. his sonnes wife, his sonne Iohn, &c. the Earle of Lei∣cester and his Countesse, with many other prisoners, and a mighty Armie; but the winde chan∣ging, and hee compelled to stay in harbour at Barbefleet in Normandy, where hee had taken ship∣ping, he is said (God touching his heart) to haue vt∣tered these words with much remorse, in the pre∣sence of al; If my purpose in this voiage be for the peace of the Clergy and people, and if the King of heauen shall vouchsafe to quiet and calme these troubles at my arriuall, then for his mercies sake wee beseech him to send vs a prosperous winde: But if he be against it, and hath resolued to visit the Kingdome of England with the rod of his fury, let him graunt mee neuer to touch the shore of that Country more. His Praier thus vttred from the depth of soule, was secunded with a fresh perie of wind: whereupon setting saile, hee arriued safe the same day with all his Nauie at the Port of Hampton in England. (75) The next day he took his iourney towards Canterbury, where (as it appeareth) the residue of his penance enioined him at his Absolution, was to bee performed. For, besides the fore-mentioned con∣ditions, the Legates enioined him (saith the Vita B. Th. l. 4. c. 5. Author of Beckets life) some other thing secretly, which came not to our knowledge; yea the Epist. ad Archi. Rauen. apud Houeden. Legates themselues wrote in their owne letters, that hee then promised to do (voluntarily, if yee list to beleeue it) some things which was not fit for them to lay open in writing. And well might they be ashamed thereof; but if it were so vnfit to bee written, how vnfit was it to be im∣posed on such a Soueraigne Prince? what it was, let Rog. Houed. i H. 2 p. 308. Houeden report. The King comming towards the Church, where the late Archbishop was buried, clad all in wollen, went three miles barefooted, inso∣much, that the very ground where hee went, was bloody, as was euidently seene, much bloud running from his tender feet which were cut with the hard stones. Neither yet was this the worst; for afterall this, He recei∣ued Discipline at the hands of the Bishops, of a great ma∣ny Priests, and of the Monks. Geruasius names Abbots also, wherby appears, that euery seuerall sort were to haue a hand in that seruice. Mathew Paris can tell you more plainly what that Discipling was: viz. he Mat. Paris. Ann. 1174. Walsingh. Nubrigensis. Capgra . Geruas. Dorob. &c. receiued the Discipline of rods on his ba esh, receiuing of euery religious man, (a great multitude of them being there gathered) 3. or 5. ierkes a peece: whence we may easily belieue, Baronius and his Apud Baron. An. Dom. 1174. Author spake within compasse, who acknowledge hee receiued 80. lashes. To such height was the Papall tyranny and pride grown towards those, of whom God had said expresly, Touch not mine Annointed. (76) Yet some Monkes of that age, attribute the happy and great successe which ensued, to the re∣concilement which King Henry thus made with God for the bloud of Thomas, because it pleased God to deliuer his enemy William King of Scots into Math. Paris. Rog Houed. Ypodig. Neust. Hector Boetius. 13. li. c. 3. saith the hands of his souldiers about that very time, & did also with stormes beat backe into France his dis∣obedient sonne the young King, being now vnder saile for England, scattering the whole Fleet, and al∣most the King was ta∣ken, 13. lul. Ann. Dom. 1174. sinking it with tempest. (77) The Kings other actions till his next re∣turne into Normandy, which was not long after, (be∣cause Lewis King of France, and his sonne in law the young King Henry, the head to which all this pu∣trified humour drew, with the Earle of Flanders had laid a strong siege to the City of Roan) Ypod. Neust. Tho∣mas Walsingham comprehends in these few wordes; He tamed his Rebels, put his enemies to flight, seized on their fortresses. And so hauing in a manner miracu∣lously quieted the Realme, hee takes with him the King of Scotland, the Earles of Leicester and Chester, with other his chiefe Prisoners Rog. Houed. (whom hee after∣wards first imprisoned at Caen in Normandy, & then at Faleis) but leauing his seditious wife behind him vnder straight custody, hee arriues with his puis∣sance in Normandy, which being vnderstoode in the Confederates Campe, the same Mat. Paris Ypod. Neust. brake vp, and first setting fire on all the engines of warre, retrea∣ted into France in such sort, that the English souldi∣ers laid hold vpon much munition and warlike fur∣niture. Roger Houeden (a very sure Author) saith Rog. Houed. that the confederates had onely besieged Roan vp∣on one side, and that Lewis hearing that the victori∣ous King Henry was within Roan, did first send a∣way the weake, and worst of his Armie, and then deceiuing the English with a solemne promise of re∣turning the next day, to enter into a conference with the King about making a finall agreement, did depart; so that Houeden aggrauates the dishonour of the retreat, with the note of faith-breach. (78) Let the greatnesse and felicity of this King The great felici∣ty of King Henry. bee now but sleightly looked vpon, and it will ap∣peare, that no Prince of those times was hitherto so much bound to God for manifold fauours as hee. The King and power of France, after so many at∣tempts with the young King of England, and all their forces, flying at his presence without any stroke strucken, the valiant king of Scotland prisoner, and the chiefest of his Rebels vnder his foote, Eng∣land assured, Scotland dismaied, Ireland retained, Wales ministring souldiers, Normandy in possession, and all the coasting Regions, Britaine, Angiou, Poi∣ctou, Main, Tourain, Limosin, Gascoign, Guien, &c. from thence as farre as the Mountaines which sepa∣rate Spaine from France, vnder his dominion; and the blessing of Peace shortly after ensuing, vpon such termes as himself could reasonably wish, made him like another Salomon to bee sought vnto: his An. D. 1175. Wisedome and Magnificence being in such high credite through the Christian World, that the Kings of Castile and Nauarre chose him sole Arbi∣ter in their debate, which to both their content∣ment he most wisely determined; and then Mat. Paris. Ypodig. Neust. at one time in his Palace at Westminster were seene toge∣ther, the Ambassadors of Manuel Emperour of Constantinople, of Fredericke Emperour of Romans, of Rog. Houe. William Archbishop of Triers in Germany, (a mighty Prince) of the Duke of Saxonie, and of Phi∣lip Earle of Flanders. Moreouer he had the gouern∣ment of France for a time, the Kingdome of Ierusa∣lem offered him, but refused, and two of his daugh∣ters married to the two Kings Math. Paris. of Castile and Si∣cilie. (79) There was first therefore a truce taken be∣twixt the three Kings, Lewis and the two Henries; wherein Richard (who stood out) was left to his Fa∣thers prosecution, who ing himselfe thus desti∣tute after many flashes paration to resist, and great conflicts with hi e, put himselfe most humbly into his Fath cy, and throwing him∣selfe Roger Houede. with teares obtained the pardon hee begd, and ion to his most inward grace and fauo istan, fatherly, wise & happy Act; ercome with this vnex∣pected and nes, neuer desisted till hee had brought t young King to a finall attone∣ment, armes being laid apart vpon all hands. The chief points of that wished peace were: 1. That Hen∣ry An. D. 1175. The Articles of Peace. the yong King with Richard and Geffrey his breth∣ren should returne, freed from all oathes of confe∣deration, to the King their Fathers obedience, as to their Lord and Father. 2. That Prisoners should be set at large without ransome on all hands. 3. That William King of Scots, the Earle of Leicester and Che∣ster, Ralph de Fulgiers, & other, who had compoun∣ded for their ransome, before this conclusion, should haue no benefite of this exemption. 4. That King Henry the Father should take assurance of loialty to∣ward him by hostage, or oath of such as were enlar∣ged. 5. That King Henry the son should ratifie that Grant which his Father the King had made to his son Iohn, of some Castles, & yerely rents in England, &c. The Seale it selfe, wherwith the yong king made this mentioned Ratification, we haue here annexed. (80) Touching King William of Scotland, his fore-mentioned compounding: our Historians all agree not, H eden. Math. Paris Nic. Tri et. Walsingh. &c. some saying more, Polyd. Uirg. Hist. Angl. lib. 13. some lesse: but Hect. Boe. tran∣sla. lib. 13. cap. 5. Hector Boetius (a Scotish Historian of some cre∣dit with that Nation) writes; 1. That King William was to pay 100000. l. Striueling for his ransome, the one half in present coin, the other 50000. l. vpon time. 2. That for assurance of that summe the Earle∣domes of Northumberland, Cumberland & Hunting∣ton The points ac∣cording to the Scotish Authors. should rest in morgage 3. That K. William should moue no warre against England for the retention of those lands. 4. That, for the moresecurity of the pre∣misses, the Castles of Berwick, Edenbrough, Roxbrough & Striueling should bee deliuered to the English. (81) In the meane while, King Henry according to Couenants, dischargeth out of captiuity nine hundred sixty and nine men of Arms, taken in those late warres; and King Henry the sonne discharged aboue one hundreth; and hauing accomplished whatsoeuer might content or secure his Father, they prepared for England, where the ioious letters of their comming written by the Father, had begot∣ten great and longing expectations in the subiects; which hee did, (saith Paris) That whom the generall danger of warre had afflicted, the common gladnesse Math. Paris. might recomfort. In their trauaile thitherward the confidence was such vpon this fresh reconcilement, that one Chamber and table serued both, for whom before one Kingdome was not wide enough. They landed at Rog. H ed. An. D. 1175. Portsmouth vpon Friday, 20. Maij, 1175. (82) The face of England at this present, was like that of a quiet skie and sea, no blast, no billow, no appearing signe of discontentment; which the better to continue, King Henry the Father accompa∣nied with the King his sonne, omitted no office of a iust and prudent Gouernour, visiting a great part of his Realme in person, consulting, ordering and e∣nacting such lawes and courses, as might most esta∣blish the good of Peace. Hence it came, that at Lon∣don Constitutions at London the Kings beeing present. both the Kings were present in a Synode, in which Richard lately chosen Archbishop of Canter∣bury, did publish ( Geruasius. Rog. Houed. with the Kings assent) certain Ca∣nons for the better gouernment of the Church of England, beginning thus; At the true fountaine of all happy rule, that is to say, at the honour of God, and esta∣blishment of Religion & Discipline, &c. & amongst the Houeden. in H. 2. fol. 310. Symonie was losse of Patro∣nage for euer. rest, this one Canon in especial words is enacted, both by authority of the King & Synode, (and indeed wor∣thy for euer to bee in force) That euery Patrone ta∣king reward for any presentation, should for euer loose the Patronage thereof. And the same Kings not long after being at Woodstocke, in accomplishment of such holy purposes, by aduise of the Clergy prouided men to such Bishopricks, Abbacies, and principall cures as were vacant, where King Henry the Father forgat not his true friend Iohn of Oxenford, whom he preferred to the See of Norwich. (83) From hence comming to Yorke, he set those parts in peace; whither William King of Scots * repai∣ring, sundry matters of importance were handled The Kings at Yorke. betweene the two Kings: as likewise afterward at Windsor (where the King had called a great▪ assem∣bly of the Lords Spirituall and Temporall) Rothe∣rick King of Connaught in Ireland (at the suite of his Ambassadors, the Archbishop of Thuamon and Too∣mund, & others of that nation, subiects to Rotherick) was receiued into protection & fauour, and became Tributarie: K. Henry being vnwilling Polyd. Virg. Parliament at Northampton. to fish with an hooke of gold, which in warring vpon Ireland hee should seem to do. In an other Parliament, not long after at Northampton, he caused England to be diui∣ded An. D. 1176. The first Iusti i∣ars Itinerants. Holinsh. Hen. 2. Houeden. into six circuits, & to each Circuit three Iustici∣ars Itinerants deputed; and aswell to giue his lawes more free passage, as also the better to secure himself he threw to the earth sundry Math. Paris. Roger Wend. Ma se. Castles which had bin formerly kept against him, as Leicester, Hunting∣ton, Walton, Groby, Stutesbury, &c. and had the rest both in his English and in his French Dominions committed to his disposition. (84) The young King Rog. Houed. Polyd. Virg. about these times dis∣couered fresh alienations in his mind against his Fa∣ther; who yet dissembling all, did arme notwithan∣ding vpon the defensiue, and replenished both Eng∣land and Normandie with Garrisons, which drew the sonne the sooner to come in. (85) But the old King not vnwilling perhaps (lest the Brethrens concord might proue no better then a conspiracy against the Father) that his warlike Children should contend, Tho. . in Ypod. Neust. did nourish deb te a∣mong them: Certaine it is, that to diuert the warre from himselfe, he appeased his sonne the King with an encrease of maintenance for himselfe, amounting in the whole to an hundreth pounds Aniouin by the day, and ten pounds of the same money for his wife the Queene: and whereas Alice (daughter of Lewis then King of France, who was maried at three yeares of age to Richard (second sonne of King Hen∣ry) Polyd. Virg. in Hen. 2 call her A ela. when hee was but seuen, and now demanded of King Henry the Father, to the intent that Richard her husband might enioy her, the old King who was Rog. Houed. suspected to haue deflowred her, for that time shif∣ted of the deliuery of her person, in such sort that peace was not hindered thereby. (86) But while the yong King by his Fathers Rog. Wend. Math. Paris. Th Wals. in Tpodig. Neustr. in∣stigation sought by force to constraine young Rich∣ard An. D. 1183. to doe homage to him for Aquitaine, and King Henry the Father for the same cause commaunded Geffrey his third son, Duke of Britaine (whom * some for his extraordinary perfidiousnes in this seruice toward his Father, and manifold sacrilege, cals the Rog. Houe. Child of Perdition) to aide and assist his said elder brother; while also the iealous Father (out of the strife of his sonnes) sought his own safety, and in nou∣rishing it, had by the treachery of the said sonnes bin twice endangered, and had at both times been won∣derfully preserued; and while the young King by profound dissimulations, plotted to bring both his Father and Brother Richard into subiection; behold the hand of God by taking away the young King at Martell not farre from Linoges, where his Father lay at siege, gaue an end to this odious, fowle and intricate contention. (87) Thus was his life cut off like a Weauers King Henrie the sonne dies in the flower of his y uth. threed (say Rog. Wend. MS. Math Paris. Them. Wals. Tpodig. Neust. Authors) who had by dying cut of the hope of many: But whatsoeuer his life was, which God thus shortned at his age of twentie and eight yeeres; certainely his death was not inglorious, but worthy to be set out in Tables at large as a pattern to disobedient Children: for his Father refusing to visite him (fearing his owne life,) but sending his King in signe of forgiuenes; the dying Prince most humbly with flouds of teares kissing the same, made a most sorrowfull confession of his sinnes, and fec∣ling death approch, would needs be drawne (as an vnworthy sinner) out of his owne bed, and laid vpon another, strewed with ashes, where his soule depar∣ted in a most penitent manner from his body; which being related to the Father, hee fell vpon the earth, weeping bitterly, and (like another Dauid for his Ab∣solon) Rog Houed. mourned very much, O quam nefandum est, saith one most grauely: O how hainous a thing it is for sons to persecute the father! for neither the sword of the fighter, nor, the hand of an enemy, did auenge the fathers wrong: but a feuer and a flux with excoriation of the bowels. His body was buried (by his own desire) at Roan; (which yet was not done without trouble, as if the factions, of which hee was the cause in his life, did by a kind of Fate, not forsake him beeing dead; An. D. 1183 for the Citizens of Mauns hauing enterred it, they of Roan without menaces, and the fathers expresse commandement, could not obtaine it, who thereup∣on was taken vp againe,) but his wife Queene Mar∣garet was sent backe into France, and his suruiuing sonnes were once againe reduced to due obedience, not any enemie daring to appeare. (88) Who would not haue thought, that this stirring Prince, should haue had opportunitie to end his daies in peace and glorie? but it was otherwise ordained by God, and ancient writers hold, hee was principallie scourged, for beeing drawne, by seeming reasons of State, to put off an holy enterprize, the occasion whereof, was laid as it were at his foote. An. D. 1184. For Heraclius Patriarcke of Hierusalem, drawne with the supereminent fame of King Henries wisdome, valour, riches, and puissance, trauailed from thence into England, where, Math. Paris Roger Wend. at Clerkenwell by London, in an assemblie of the States purposelie called, the king made knowne to them: That Pope Lucius had by ernest letters, commended the lamētable state of the Holie-land, and the Patriarcke Heraclius vnto him: That Heraclius (there present) had stirred compassi∣on, and teares, at the rehersall of the tragicall affli∣ctions of the Easterne world, and had brought with him (for memorable Rog. Houed. signes, that the suite was by common consent of the Countrey) the Keies of the Mat. Paris. places of Christs Natiuitie, Passion, and Resurrection; of Dauids Tower, and of the holy Sepulchre; and the humble offer of the Kingdom of Hierusalem, with the Ensigne or Standard of the Kingdom, as Roger Houed. fol. 358. dulie belong∣ing to him, who was right heire thereunto, to wit, the sonne of Geffrey Earle of Aniou, whose brother Fulke was king of Hierusalem. (89) Neuerthelesse, (the King hauing, at left∣wise King Henry refis seth the kingdom of Ierusalem. formally, adiured the Lords to aduise him, that which should bee most for his soules health) it was thought fit, to aid the cause with money, but not to emploie his person, northe person of any child hee had, which was the Patriarcks last request; and ther∣upon (to the vnspeakable griefe of the said Patri∣arcke, and of the whole Christianitie of the East) hee refused the said Kingdome, and abandoned as no∣ble an occasion of immortall renowne, as euer any King of England had beene offered; but gaue leaue Rog. Houed. fol. 35 to all such as would, to take vpon them the Crosse and serue. This Heraclius is hee who dedicated the Temple Church in London, as by this Inscription o∣uer the Church doore in the Stone-worke doth ap∣peare. ANNO AB INCARNATIONE DO∣MINI An Inscription vpon the Temple Church. M. C. LXXXV DEDICATA HEC EC∣CLESIA IN HONOREM BEATE MARIE A DNO ERACLIO DEI GRATIA SANCTE RESVRRECTIONIS ECCLESIE PATRIARCHA II IDVS FEBRVARII. Q i EAM ANNATIM PETENTIBVS DE IN∣IVNCTA S i PENITENTIA LX DIES IN∣DVLSIT. (90) Thus the sorrowfull Patriarcke being dis∣missed (not forgetting as Ran. Higden. Polyd. Virg. in Hen. 2. some doe write, to thun∣der Heraclius departs against the King for abandoning the cause) brought back nothing but discomfort and despaire, the Westerne Princes (by the Diuels malicious Arts) beeing wrapt and knotted in mutuall suspitions and quarrells indetermined, whereupon shortly after, ensued, with the losse of Ierusalem, the captiuity of Guido King thereof, and of innumerable Christians besides; whom Sultan Saladin, Prince of the Mu∣sulmans or Saracens, to the griefe and disgrace of all the Christian world, did vanquish. (91) But, King Henries mind was more fixed on An. D. 1185. setling the state of his already-possessed Kingdomes, and therefore in a great Parlament, held at Oxford, Roger Houed. King Henry giues Iohn his sonne Ireland. (vnto which came Rhesus and Dauid, Kings of South-Wales and North-Wales, with other their chiefe No∣bles, which al did there sweare fealtie to the King) he beeing desirous to aduance his sonne Iohn (whom he exceedingly loued, and commonly in sport, hee cal∣led Sans-terrae) hauing assured vpon him certaine Lands and Rents in England and Normandie, did there verie solemnly giue him also the title & King∣dome of Ireland; for, (besides the foresaid Bull of Pope Adrian the fourth, who for signe of inuestiture had also sent a Giral. Camb. lib 2. exp. Hib. c. 5. Houeden. ring of gold, which were laid vp in the Records at Winchester) Giraldus (who liued in that age) tells vs (to omitte what hee writes of one Gurguntius) that Guillomar King of Ireland, was tri∣butarie to the famous Arthur: that Baion (whence (saith hee) the Irish came) was at that present vnder King Henrie the second; and that the Irish Princes had voluntarily submitted themselues, as vnto him who by the * Law of a Sociall warre, was become their Soueraigne. But that Author had not seene belike, Ius Belli social, is that right, which accrews to Prin∣ces or States, who aid one a∣nother. or did not remember (when thus he went about to prooue a legall right in the King) what others write of Beda. Egfrides vngodly spoiles in Ireland, or of Cam. pag. 730. Ed∣gars Charter, in which is said to bee contained, that he had vnder his rule the chiefe City of Ireland Dub∣lin, and the greatest part of the kingdome also. But King Henrie strengthening his other rights with Grants of the Popes, Adrian, and Alexander, obtai∣ned also of Vrban the third (for Luciue the third, who was Alexanders successor, would not gratifie the the King therein) that it should bee lawfull for him, to crowne which of his sonnes hee would, King of Ireland, to whom hee sent a crowne of Feathers wo∣uen with gold, in all their Grants reseruing to the Ro∣man See, the Peters pence, and rights; whereupon the King gaue the same to his sonne Iohn, whose Coro∣nation (stung with the like before) his father onely did delay, at such time as two Cardinales offered to celebrate that solemnitie. (92 At Windsor, therefore his father giuing him the Chr. H b. apud Camb. pag. 795. Order of knight-hood (at which time hee was about Houed. fol. 359. pag. 1. & 2. twelue yeeres old) sent him foorth with in∣to Ireland, where the Arch-bishop of Dublin and the State, entertained him, but (by reason of such par∣simonie toward his souldiers as was vsed) hee retur∣ned the same yeere without doing much, but not without hauing wasted the most part of his Armie, in skirmishes with the Irish. His Stile in his seale of Ireland (though Houeden saith, his father made him Regem, a king) was onely, Sigillum Iohannis filij regis Angliae Domini Hiberniae, Lord of Ireland. (93) King Henrie, hearing now that his martiall sonne, Earle Richard, had fortified in Poictou against him, and vanquished Geffrey Earle of Britane, Houeden. fol. 359. pag. 1. pre∣pares a puissant armie, vpon terror whereof, Richard came in, rendring vp Poictou to his mother Elienor, (whose inheritance it was) at his fathers comman∣dement. The same yeere wherein the West was thus defiled with vnnaturall diuisions, the East was like∣wise polluted with the cursed Apostasie of one Ri∣chard de S. Albane (whom wee shame to thinke, was English) who renouncing the Christian beleefe (vp∣on the Patriarcks discomfortable returne) became a principall Commander vnder the Sultan of Babilon, Saladine, whom the Christians draue, with losse and slaughter of his armie, from Hierusalem. But on the other side, reuenge of disobedience still pursued Gef An. D. 1186. frey, sonne of King Henrie, who was in a Idem. pag. 360. Militari conflict saith Houeden. Tornea∣ment at Paris troden to death vnder the horse feete. A miserable end, and a fearefull. (94) About which times, betweene the French and English all things stoode vnsure, now warre, then peace, and warre againe, by reason that Philip (who had been crowned King some yeeres before, during the life of Lewis) challenging the custodie of Arthur, the Posthumus sonne, and heire of Geffrey Earle of Britane, and sometimes one thing, and sometime a∣nother, could not haue his will: Whiles Earle Richard turning to Philip against his Father, but ob∣taining a truce for two yeeres, such amity (if there be any amity among mighty Princes) grew between king Philip and Earle Richard, Heire apparant of England and Normandy, &c. that one bed and boord serued both. The Father perplexed, cals his sonne home, who pretending many griefes, as the deten∣tion of Alice his Spouse, the doubt of disinherison, and other things, stood out againe; and againe after a while submits to his Father. Then bursts forth Philip into Armes; and things so standing, the hea∣uy newes of Ierusalem lost, flew into Christendom. When this City was formerly recouered by Godfrey of Bolein, an Vrban was Pope, a Fredericke was Em∣perour, an Heraclius Patriarch; so now when it was lost, an Vrban was Pope, a Fredericke was Emperor, and an Heraclius Patriarch. (95) Vpon these news Henry and Philip meet, and An. D. 1188 for the honour of God, laying downe displeasure, in presence of William Archbishop of Tyre, at which time some say a Crosse appeared in the aire, take vpon them, as Souldiers of Christ, the badge of the Crosse, and there the better to distinguish them∣selues, it was agreed that the Roger Houed. fol. 365. Math. Paris. French should weare read Crosses, the English White, and the Flemish Greene. And this determination was seconded with warlike preparations, leuies of money, and in∣stitution of martiall Discipline: all which notwith∣standing nothing went forward. (96) At Richard began the breach of this honou∣rable confederation, who taking reuenge vpon cer∣taine Rebels of his in Poictou, who brooked not his hard hand; one mischiefe drew another, and at the last both the Kings of England and France became parties to the quarrell, greatly against the minde of K. Henry, whose heart was firmely as it seems) to reuenge the cause of Christ vpon Sultan Saladine: for that in his Epist 2. ad Patriar . Rog. Houed. pag. 7. answere to the Patriarch of Antioch, imploring aide, he concludes, That among o∣ther Princes himselfe, and sonne, reiecting this worlds glory, and despising all pleasures whatsoe∣uer, and setting behind, all things which were of this World, would in their owne person with their whole Forces by the fauour of the Lord speedily visite him. And sure the state of those parts required it, Saladine hauing slaine many of the Knights Templars, and Nobles, and aboue thirty thousand footmen, with innumerable other in Ci∣ties and Townes by him subdued. Among all which grieuous accidents, we cannot (to season sower ther∣by with sweet) omit one noble protestation made by the chiefe crossed Lords, Philip Earle of Flanders, the Earle of Bloys and other, who being required to take parts, made answere; That they would not contrary to their promise to God, put armour on, against any Christian, till they had done their de∣uoire against Saladine. (97) In the treaties therefore between Henry and Philip; the demaunds of Philip on the behalfe of Richard were such, and so vnsafe for the King (as that all his subiects should sweare fealty to Richard du∣ring the Fathers life; but yet reseruing their allegi∣ance to the Father) that Richard apparantly fell off, and became Liegeman for Normandy, &c. to Philip King of France; and at a new Treaty (by mediation of a Cardinall Legate) the demaunds of Philip being more hard then before, as that King Henry should not onely settle the Kingdome vpon Richard, but take Iohn also with him into Palestine, or that other∣wise Richard would not goe (being iealous of his brothers grace with his Father): Henrie would con∣sent to none of those insolent propositions, but dis∣daining to seeme to be enforced, they betooke them selues on all sides to their swords. (98) The effect whereof was, that former good fortunes forsaking King Henry, hee sustained many An. D. 1189. An. Reg. 35. losses by the Armies of King Philip and Richard, & was driuen out of Mentz in Main; (the city where he was born, & which he loued aboue all other places) by firing of the Suburbes before the enemy came, being casually consumed, hee was glad to yeeld to such conditions as it pleased Philip to prescribe. It is written Rog. Houed. that at the meeting of these two Kings, the skie being cleare, a thunderbolt stroke betweene them, and after a little pause comming together a∣gaine, it thundered more terribly, so that Henry had falne off his horse, but that his people sustained him; whereupon hee came presently to an end, though it were to his vnspeakable griefe; his Kingly heart be∣ing vsed to giue, and not to take conditions. (99) Fearefull was the speech which King Henrie, when hee abandoned Mentz by reason of the fire, King Henries death. vttered against Richard; which was, That sith he had taken from him that day the thing that hee most loued in this world, he would requite him, for after that day hee would depriue him of that Holin . pag. 119. in . 2. thing which in him should best please a Child, to wit, his Heart. But after the peace concluded, (vpon mediation) between the sides, another thing strucke neerer; for finding the name of his sonne Iohn first in the Catalogue of the Conspirators a∣gainst him in that action, hee bitterly cursed the howre of his birth, laying Gods curse and his vpon his sonnes, which hee would neuer recall, for any perswasion of the Bishoppes and others: but com∣ming to Chinon fell there grieuously sicke, and fee∣ling death approch, hee caused himselfe to be borne into the Church before the Altar, where after hum∣ble confession, and sorrow for his sinnes, hee depar∣ted An. D. 1189. this life. Accidents after his death, which was, when he had raigned 34. yeers 7. monethes and 4. daies, beeing 63. yeeres of age. (100) It shal not (in contempt of humane glory) be forgotten, that this puissant Monarch being dead his people presently left him, and fell to spoile all he had, leauing him naked; of whom Roger Houede. one saith trulie and grauely, Verè melmuscae, &c. Surely, these flies sought honey, these wolues a Carcase, these Ants grain; for they did not follow the Man but the spoile and bootie. Neither must it be vnremembred, that the fierce and violent Richard (now heire of all) comming to meete his Fathers body, roially adorned for the buriall according to the Maiestie of his estate; the ve∣ry Corse (as it were abhorring and accusing him for his vnnaturall behauiours) gushed forth bloud; whereat Richard pierced with remorse, melted into flouds of teares in most humble and repentant ma∣ner, attending vpon the remaines of his vnfortunate He was buried at . Father to the Graue. His Wife. (101) Eleanor, the Wife of King Henry, was the eldest of the two Daughters, and the sole Heire of William Duke of Aquitaine, the fift of that name, & the ninth in succession, sonne of Duke William the fourth, her Mother was Daughter to Raimund Earle of Tholo se, and her great Dowrie was motiue first to King Lewis, (who had two daughters by her, Mary and Alice) and after to King Henry, to marry her. There are of the Serr in Le the y ger. French Historians who re∣port that king Henry had a former wife, and that shee bare vnto him Prince Henry: but Writers of our owne affaires (and Paulus in Lu ic. 7. who call her Leo ra. some also of the French,) ac∣knowledge but onely Eleanor for his Wife. Certain it is, that king Henries times were much famoused by two Women of much differing qualities; the one was his renowmed Mother Matildis, whose Epitaph thus comprised part of her glory: Ortu magna, viro maior, sed maxima prole: Hic i cet Henrici Fili , Sponsa, Parens. Here Henries Mother, Daughter, Wife dothrest: By Birth, much; more, by Spouse; by Child, most blest. The other was this Eleanor his Wife; the first cause of these bloudie Warres, which long after continu∣ed as hereditary betwixt England and France, yea and the bellows of that vnnaturall discord, betwixt her husband and his sonnes. Shee much out-liued her husband (as a bad thing stickes longest) beeing so happie as to see three of her sonnes, aduanced to the Crowne, and so vnhappie as to see two of them in their graues: for she liued till King Iohns time. His Issue. (102) William, the eldest sonne and first child of King Henry, and Queene Eleanor his wife, was borne before his father was King, and while hee was but Duke of Normandy, in the eighteenth yeere of the raigne of King Stephen, 1152. and the fourth yeere after, (his father beeing then King, and in the second yeere of his raigne) the Nobilitie of England sware vnto him their fealtie, as to the heire apparant of the Kingdome, at the Castle of Wallingford in Barkeshire; but he deceased the yeere following, being the third of his fathers raigne, and the fift of his owne age 1156. He was buried in the Monastery of Reading at the feete of his great Grandfather, King Henrie the first. (103) Henrie, the second sonne of King Henry, and Queene Eleanor, beeing borne the last of Febru∣arie 1156. was their heire apparant, after the death of his brother William; was Duke of Normandie, Earle of Aniou and Maigne; and was crowned King of England, at Westminster, by Roger Arch-bishop of Yorke, the fifteenth of Iulie 1170. His wife was Margaret, daughter of Lewis the Yonger, King of France, married to him at Nuburgh in Normandy, the second of Nouember 1160. crowned Quene at Winchester, by Rotrocke of Warwicke Arch-bishop of Roan, the 21. of Nouember 1163. and suruiuing him was remarried to Bela, King of Hungarie: He died without issue, before his father, at Marcell in Tou∣r ine, the eleuenth of Iulie, the twentie sixe yeere of his fathers raigne 1182. and was buried in the Church of our Lady at Roan. (104) Richard, the third sonne of King Henrie, and Queen Eleanor, was born at Oxford, (in the Kings Ross War ic. & alij. Pallace there, called Beau-Mount,) in September the fourth yeere of his fathers raigne 1157. He pro∣ued a Prince of great valor, and was therefore surna∣med in French Cuer-de-Lion; in English Lions-Heart: hee was created Earle of Poyton, and had the whole Dutchie of Aquitaine, for which he did his homage to King Lewis the Yonger of France, in the eighteenth yeere of his fathers raigne 1170. yet afterward he conceiued some discontentment against his father, and maintained warres vpon him, but was reconci∣led againe into his loue, and succeeded him in his Kingdome. (105) Geffrey, the fourth sonne of King Henrie, and of Queene Eleanor, was borne the twentie third of September, in the fifth yeere of his fathers raigne 1159. Hee married Constance daughter and heire of Conan Duke of Britane, and in her right was Duke of Britane, and did his homage to his brother Henry for the same Dutchie, and receiued the homages of the Barrons of the same: hee died at Paris, in the thirtie two yeere of his fathers raigne 1186. the nineteenth of August, and is buried in the quire of our Ladies Church there: hee had issue Arthur Duke of Britane, borne after his fathers decease, the heire apparant of King Richard, and by some suppo∣sed to bee made away by King Iohn; and also Eleanor called the Da sell of Britane, who died in prison in the raigne of King Henrie the third. (106) Philip, the fifth sonne of King Henrie, and Queene Eleanor, may bee mistrusted, to be mistaken by Antiquaries of our time, as misunder-standing the ancient writers, who mentioning the birth of Philip the Kings sonne, might by good likelihood, be thought to meane, Philip sonne of Lew the Yonger King of France, who was borne about this time, and was after King of the same Countrey. But M r Tho∣ as Talbot, an exact trauailer in genealogies, hath not onely set him downe in this place, amongst the children of this King, but also warranteth the same, to bee done with good authoritie: howsoeuer, it is apparant, his life was verie short. (107) Iohn, the sixth and yongest sonne of King Henrie, and Queene Eleanor, was borne in the thir∣teenth yeere of his fathers raigne, in Anno 1166. hee was iestinglie surnamed by his father Sans-terre, in English without Land, because hee was borne last, as if there had beene nothing left for him: Notwith∣standing soone after, hee was created Earle of Mor∣taigne, and had more-ouer by degrees, the Earle∣domes of Cornwall, and Glocester, the Counties of Derby and Lancaster, the Honors of Wallinford and Nottingham, the Castles of Tikhill, Marlborow, and Ludgarfall, with many other great Seigniories, and (aboue them all) was also Lord of Ireland, and at the last succeeded his brother Richard in all his-Domini∣ons and was King of England. (108) Maud, the eldest daughter of King Hen∣ry, and Queene Eleanor, borne in the third yeere of her fathers raigne, married to Henrie, surnamed the Lion Duke of Saxonie; Lothar that died yong, Otho the fourth German Emperour, and William borne at Winchester, progenitor of the Dukes of Brunswicke, who bare for their Armes, the Coat of England, with the two Lions, as King Henrie his Grandfather bare, before the match with Queene Eleanor, and Maud married to Geffrey Earle of Perch: Shee suruiued him, and died in the first yeere of the raigne of her brother King Richard, and was buried by her hus∣band, in the Church of S. Blase at Brunswicke. (109) Eleanor, the second daughter of King Hen∣rie, and Queene Eleanor, was borne at Roan in Nor∣mandy, in the eight yeere of her fathers raigne, 1162. She was married to Alf se, the ninth of that name, surnamed the Good, King of Castile in Spaine, and had issue by him Sa ches, that died in his infancie: Fer∣dinando that died in his youth, Henry King of Ca∣stile after his Father, Blaunch Queene of France, wife to King Lewis the 8. and mother of Saint Lewis. Berengar married to Alfonso king of Lion: Vrraca Queene of Portugall, and Eleanor wife of Iames king of Arragon. (110) Ioane, the third and yongest daughter of king Henry, and Queene Eleanor his wife, was born at the City of Angiers in France, in the moneth of October, the 13. yeare of her Fathers raigne, which was the yeere of our Lord, 1166. when shee was e∣leuen yeeres of age; shee was with great honour conueied to the City of Palermo, and there married to William the second of that name, king of Sicil, Duke of Apulia, and Prince of Capua, vpon Sunday the 13. day of Februarie, 1177. and was crowned Queene the same day at the same place. Shee had a sonne by him named Boamund, whom his Father when hee was returned from his Christning, crea∣ted Duke of Apulia: but the child died first, and the Father after, leauing no issue. And she surui∣uing, married againe, and was the third wife of Rai∣mund the fourth of that name, Earle of Tholouz, by him shee had Issue Raimund the last Earle of that house, Bertrand Lord of Branquell, Montelore, and Saluiac, and a daughter married to Berald of Elbeine, Prince of Orenge. His Naturall Issue. (111) William the Naturall sonne of king Henry, born of Rosamund, the daughter of Walter Lord Clif∣ford; which Lady for her incomparable beauty was reputed (with allusion to her name) Rosa-mundi, the Rose of the world: the deare affection the king bare her, caused both burning iealousie in the Queene, and fatall ruine to her selfe, albeit the amorous king, for her secresie and security, (but what walles will not a iealous eye pierce through?) had built for her a most artificiall Labyrinth at Woodstocke in Ox∣fordshire, with such cunning windings and intricate passages, as had not Fate, and Heauens reuenge on Adultery, shewed the way, the enraged Queen had not so soone beene rid of her Riuall, nor that wan∣ton Dame of her life. Shee was buried in the Nun∣nery of Godstow by Oxford with this Epitaph. Hac iacet in Tumba Rosa , non Rosa munda; Non redolet, sed olet, quaredolere solet. (Rose, This Tombe doth here enclose the Worlds most be teous Rose, passing sweet ere while, Now ght but edour vile. But Hugh (called the Saint) Bishop of Lincolne, thought the Hearse of a Harlot no fit spectacle for a Quire of Virgins to contemplate, & therefore him∣selfe in person caused her bones to be cast foorth of the Church; which yet those chast sisters afterward recollected, and placed there againe with much ho∣nour, cting a goodly Crosse, thus inscribed to the honour of her memory: Qui meat hac, oret, Signumque salutis adoret, Vt{que} tibi detur requies Rosamunda, precetur. All you which passe this way, This Crosse adore, and pray, That Rosamunas Soule, may True rest possesse for ye. The first Sonne which by her King Henry had, was the said William, surnamed in French, Longespee, in English, Long-Sword. He was Earle of Salisburie, in right of Ela his Wife, Daughter and h ire of William Earle of that County, son of Earle Patrick, by whom hee had Issue William Earle of Salisbury, Stephen Earle of Vlster, Ela Countesse of Warwicke, Ida Lady Beucham of Bedford, and Isabell Lady Ves∣cie: his sonne Earle William the second, had Earle William the third, Father of Margaret, Wife of Henry Lacie Earle of Lincolne: hee died in the Ca∣stle of old Salisbury, and was buried in the Cathe∣drall Church of the New City, in the ninth yeare of the raigne of king Henry the third. (112) Geffrey an other Naturall sonne of king Henry, was borne of the Lady Rosamund aforesaid: This man in his tender youth, was (by his Fathers procurement) made Archdeacon of Lincolne, and after Bishop of that See, which hee held aboue seauen yeeres without consecration. and then re∣signing it, in the yeare, 1181. into the hands of Ri∣chard Ger . Dorob. Archbishop of Canterbury, and his Father; hee was made Chancellour of England, and afterward An. D. 1181. by his brother king Richard, hee was aduanced to the Archbishopricke of Yorke, (being consecrated at Tours in France, An. 1191.) which See he gouerned with good approbation. But in the time of his Bro∣ther King Iohn, hee vnderwent many difficulties, by opposing the Kings purposes, who therefore made seisure of his whole state, and An. 1207. he left the Land and after fiue yeeres banishment, died, viz. Ann. 1213. (113) Morgan, an other Naturall sonne of King Henry, is thought by M. Ferrers. some (because so small men∣tion is made of him) to haue beene of no long life af∣ter his birth, and to haue beene borne of some wo∣man in Wales, where this Christian name is most commonly vsed, and whither this King vpon many occasions, sometimes resorted. But Goodwin of the . of Durham. Iohn Stow in the life of King Iohn. some others (whose studious paines, deserue much thankes of posteritie) report, that hee was gotten on the wife of one Rodulph Bloeth (or Blewet) a knight, and liued both to bee Prouost of Beuerley, and to be elected to the Bishopricke of Durham, when comming to Rome for a dispensation (because his Bastardie made him otherwise vncapable) the Pope willed him to pro∣fesse himselfe Blewets lawfull son, and not the Kings Naturall, promising to consecrate him on that con∣dition: but he, vsing the aduise of one William Lane his Clerke, told the Pope, that for no worldly pro∣motion, he would renounce his father or deny him∣selfe to bee of roiall bloud: so blind were some Pre∣lats of those times, who esteemed spirituall functions, to be but worldly promotions. RICHARD THE FIRST, DVKE OF Monarch 44 Richard I. NORMANDY, GVYEN AND AQVI∣TAINE, &c. THE FORTIE FOVRTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISH-MEN, HIS RAIGNE, ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER VI. R ICHARD succeeding to his deceased Father Henrie, brought forth that wonder, which a An. D. 1199 King Richard or∣ders his estate. Writer ofthat age thus celebrated, Mira cano; Sol occubuit, Nox nulla secuta est. A Wonder strange I write, the Sun did set, yet was no Night. Meaning, that though Henry were dead, yet the glo∣ry and happinesse of the land was not thereby clou∣ded, for that Richard was another Sunné, and in some respects farre the more bright, and farther shi∣ning of the two; as hauing for honour of Christi∣an Cheualrie, wholy consecrated his warlike minde and actions to the seruice of God, and readuance∣ment of the Crosse of Christ, dishonoured by the Infidels in Asia: in which enterprise hee was so fer∣uently zealous, that from the time of his Fathers death (in whose vowes it had beene) hee scarse any thing else, disposing the affaires of his E∣state (but not R g. H ed. Mat. Paris &c. carelesly, as some would impose) as of things which did but onely vnder-serue, and con∣duce Rand. Higde . in . 1. to the maine and principall end of aduancing his Sauiours glory, whereunto hee iudged that acti∣on did tend. (2) Hauing therefore ordered his weightier bu∣sinesses in , and other his transmarine Do∣minions, & in gland by his letters, set Ger. . the Queen his Mother at liberty from that captiuity, wherein her late husband the king had long detained her, (who sensible of others woe by her owne, did af∣terward exercise many works of mercy in that kind) he cuts ouer hither, aswell to receiue all the rights of Soueraignety, and to settle the same; as also to leuie me nes for proceeding in his intended holy voi∣a e, together with Philip king of France, and other Christian Potentates. (3) And though before his Coronation, most Kingly power before Corona∣tion. Writers doe not call him a King; yet sure it is, that he and others did immediately, and vnquestiona∣bly, vpon the first accruement of the interest, (which was at his Fathers last gaspe) exercise all the offices of the roiall power; for so hee restored Robert Rog. Houed. fol. 374. Earle of Leicester to his whole estate: So plaine it is, that our Gouernment allowes not the dangerous conuulsions, & emptie spaces of an Interregnum, such as in meer electiue States are cōmon, if not continual. (4) But in nothing more could this noble Prince shew his iudgement (though he were otherwise Ger. Dorobor. Sagacis ingenij, of a sharpe and searching wit) then King Richards choise of friends and seruants. in this: That hee banished from his familiarity, & (as my Author saith) hated all those of what pro∣fession so euer they were, who had forsaken his Fa∣ther, and both retained, and enricht those other, who had loially stood for him against himselfe in al assaies. (5) At his Coronation, which was most magnifi∣cently performed at Westminster, by Radulp. de Diceto apud Too. Wals. in Ypod. Neustr. Baldwyne Archbishop of Canterbury, the pointes of the Oath which hee made to God, and the Kingdom of Eng∣land, Chiefe matters at the Coronati∣on▪ of Richard. at the Altar vpon the holy Euangelists, before the Prelates, Nobles, and whole people, Rog. Houed. fol. 374. were these: 1. That all the daies of life he would beare peace, honour, and reuerence to God, and holy Church and the Ordinances thereof: 2 That in the people to him committed, hee would ex∣ercise right, iustice, and equitie. 3. That hee would blot forth naughty lawes, and peruerse cu∣stomes, if any were brought vpon his Kingdome; and would enact good lawes, and the same in good faith keepe, and without mal-E gyn. Which oath being most solemnly taken, and the sacred vnction performed; the Archbishop standing at the Altar forbad him, on the behalfe of Almighty God, to assume that honour, vnlesse hee had a full purpose to keepe what hee had sworne: whereto Richard as∣senting, and with his owne hands, humbly taking the ponderous Crowne Imperiall from off the Al∣tar, in signification, as is probable, that hee held it onely from God; hee deliuers it to the Archbishop, who thereupon accomplished all the Ceremonies of Coronation. (6) Which Act was accidently han eld, and aus∣picated with the bloud of many Iewes (though vt∣terly slaine at the Coronation. against the Kings will) who in a tu mult (raised by the So Martiall cals the multitude. Ocean) were furiousliè murthered, which (though it were afterward punished by the Lawes) might seeme a presage, that this Lion-hearted King (as his by-name Ceur-de-Lion did import) should bee a speciall destroier of the Enemies of our Sauiour. (7) After counsell therefore (first moouer in all worthy enterprises) Money was in his first, and chief∣est cares; for raising whereof, to furnish the inten∣ded pilgrimage, he fold, morgaged, estated, and by Richard p rueis for the Holy Land a thousand princely skills) as if he should neuer come againe, added incredible heapes to those huge sums, which hee had scruzed out of Stephen de Turn∣ham, his fathers Treasurer (amounting to eleuen hundred thousand pounds sterling, if some say true) all hoorded by King Henry. What could indeed be said enough for such a voiage? and it was a cogita∣tion woorthy so glorious a purpose, so to order his estate, as if hee were not to returne at all; because, looking-backe doth vnbend and soften resoluti∣ons. (8) As for men and soldiers, the Prelats, Friars, and other Preachers, had stirred vp innumerable, by their manifold exhortations (the Arch-bishoppe of Canterburie hauing Gir. Ca b. trauailed through Wales in per∣son for that purpose, going afterward with the King to Palestine, where also Rog Houed. Math. Paris. he died) in pulpits and pri∣uate conferences, sounding nothing but the Crosse and Passion of Christ, calling the world to reuenge his cause vpon the Pagans, and setting soules o re with vehement gestures, actions, and perswasions. But the ngdome of England he ordered thus. (9) The onely maine danger of the ab in his brother Iohn Earle of , of whose ambition hee was some what , His pro on for . Geruasius. knowing that King Henrie, not long before his death, had intended the Crowne to him: to con∣quer therefore his appetites, with bountie, and mu∣nificence; and to take away all murmuration in him, for want of Princelie competencies, King Richard did as it were share the Realm with him, giuing him sixe Earledomes, Cornwall, Dorset, Sommersette, Not∣tingham, Derby, and Lancaster, besides Castles, Ho∣nors, Manors, Forests, and much other riches, and finallie, the Earledome of Gloster, with the Heire of that Countie to bee his Wife, though the Arch-bi∣shop of Canterburie forbad the Nuptialls, alledging shee was within degrees of consanguinitie. (10) But lest, through euill nature or aduise, Earle Iohn should conuert those so great gifts to the subuersion of the bestower, Hee entrusted him with no part of the Regall power, as the Key, and se∣cret of his proper safetie: but laide the maine bur∣then of Gouernment vpō William Longchamp Bishop of Ely, Mat. Paris. & al . chiefe Iustitiar, and Lord Chancellor of England, and Papall Legate, (a person out of all suspi∣tion Roger Houed. for aspiring to the Crowne) whereby was con∣ferred vpon him, whatsoeuer either King or Pope could grant, for accomplishment of his authoritie; so that he might well be stiled Rex & Sacerdos. Mat. Par . Prince and Priest of England; as hee was one, the most powerfull subiect for the time, that perhaps this Realme hath had: for, though the King had (as it were) ioined with him in Commission, one Hugh Bishop of Durham, for the parts of England beyond Humber; yet, as it . li. . c. . hap∣ned in the Consulship of Caesar and Bibulus, that no∣thing was reported of Bibulus, but all of Caesar, so did Long champ in a short time easilie make himselfe sole and absolute, his sway burying in silence, the name, and endeauours, of his Colleague. (11) Thus the summe of commaund, or the Souereigne power it selfe, was in the Chancellor as Viceroy, but for defence and preseruation of his iu∣stice, hee * did subordinate or associate to those Bi∣shops, Rog. Houed. William Earle of Arundell, Hugh Bardolfe, William Marshall, Geffrey Fitz-Peter, William Brunor, Robert de Wh tfield, Roger Fitz-Re rey, wherein hee did shew his loue and care of the English Nation, as also of Iustice it selfe: for that many of these, were of the most honourable Peeres of the Land (and not Iustice is best where it brings Honour rather then riches. men bred-vp or formerly enured to make Iustice, or their owne Tongues venall, for a fee:) honour beeing the rule of their proceedings, and strength of priuate fortunes, with their Princes fauour, the pil∣lar to susteine that honor. (12) There remained to prouide for (before hee left England) the neighbour-hood of Scotland and Wales, which might otherwise make vse of his ab∣sence to his preiudice: But Rhese ap Gruffith (of whom there is extant a short but elegant Panegyris) Prince of South-Wales (beeing already in amitie) came as farre as Oxford toward him; but because the King (who was there) came not in person to meete him (as his father King Henrie had done) the Prince (not∣withstanding Earle Iohn the Kings only brother, had conducted him from the Marches with speciall ho∣nor) tooke it in so high scorne and indignation, (for euen the meanest, from whom seruice or loue is ex∣pected, will againe expect regard) that hee foorth∣with returned into his Countrey, without once sa∣luting the King; who by this neglect▪ lost Rheses loue, as, vpon the like omission, and vnrespectiuenesse, Augustine (the too supercilious Monke) did leese the affections of the Monkes of Bangor, Rheses owne countrie-men, in another part of Wales. (13) As for william King of Scots (a verie wor∣thie Rog. Houed. The agreement betweene the two Kings of England. and Scotland. Prince) hee iourneied hither to King Richard in∣to England, and heere concluded a firme friendship, which hee kept verie religiously, euen in the greatest troubles of King Richard, to the glorie of himselfe and his Nation, and as some write, sent his Brother D d with 5000. Scots, to serue him in the sacred Hector . 13. cap. 7. w res. The chiefe points of their tion were . That for ten thousand Markes Sterling, (then Hector 000. . paid) the Castles of Rockesbrough, and Berwicke (cau∣tionarie Castles, or g ge places, for part of his ran∣some) should be restored. 2. That he should haue all such deedes, instruments, and charters, made by him to the late King Henrie, which had by constraint or duresse beene obtained: and himselfe to be freed from all encombrances, claimes, or pretensions Houeden. whatsoeuer. 3. That he should haue all such dig∣nities, as his brother Malcolm held in England, (for which King William did there make fealtie) and all such Lands as his Ancestors did hold of the English Crowne. (14) The State of England being thus in the The agreement betweene the Kings of France and England. maine, and other meane points established, King Richard crost the Seas into France to Philip king ther∣of, according to appointment, that from thence, with minds & forces vnited, they might set forward vnder the Ensigne of the Crosse; which after some stay (occasioned by the Ger. Dor. death of the French Queen) they did, vpon these Christian and friendly termes; 1. That each of them preserue the others ho∣nour, and beare faith to him for life, and member, and earthly dignity. 2. That neither of them shall faile the other in their affaires; but that the King of France shall helpe the King of England to defend his land, euen as hee would defend the City of Paris, if it were besieged; and Richard King of England, shall helpe the King of France to defend his land, euen as he would defend his City Roan if it were besieged. This H . being fairely engroft, and afterward ratified with oath, and sent by the kings themselues in per∣son, the Earles and Barons sware in solemne man∣ner, The agreement solemnely ratifi∣ed on all parts. that they would not trespasse against their feal∣ty, nor stirre any warre in either of the kings Domi∣nions, so long as they were in that pilgrimage: on the other side, the Math. Paris. Archbishops and Bishops did firm∣ly promise (in verbo veritatis, in the word of truth) that they would accurse and excommunicate al such as did transgresse this agreement. (15) Thus (after some necessary staies) these two The Kings of France and Eng land set forward to the Holy Land. the greatest Monarks of the West, set forward ouer land (toward the publike seruice of Christianity) with such numbers as thēselues thought best; which were so great, that hauing aduanced (not without some little losse of people by the Roger H d. Mat . Paris. fall of the Bridge ouer the riuer Rhene at Lions, which brake by reason of the throng) beyond the said violent streame, they parted company; Philip passing ouer the Alpes into Italy, and Richard to the Sea-side at Marsilia, there to meete with his Nauie, which being com∣pact of all the chiefe Ships in England, Normandy, and other his French Dominions, was there appoin∣ted to attend. (16) But the voiage being very long, and King The Citie of Mes sana in Sicilia the Rende u of the Kings. Richard comming to the Port before his Fleet, after eight daies expectation there, waxing impatient of delay, embarkt himselfe Act & M n. pag. 314. in twenty hired Gallyes, and ten great hulkes or Busses (a kind of shipping as it seemes peculiar then to the Mediterranean seas) and set saile toward Messana in Sicilia, the Rendeu w of both the kings and of their Armies: in which passage, lying at Anchor (on occasion,) in the mouth Roger Wend. Math. Paris. of the riuer Tyber not far from Rome, * Oct ianus, the Bishoppe of Hostia repaired vnto him, desiring him in the Popes name, that hee would visite his Holinesse; which the King denied to do, laying to the Popes charge many shamefull matters touching the R ish Simony, and Couetousnesse, with many other reproaches, allcad∣ging that they tooke 700. Markes for consecration of the Bishoppe of Mains, 1500. Markes for the Legatiue power of William Bishop of Ely; but of the Archbishop of Burdeaux an inf ite summe of money: whereupon hee refused to see R e. Thus (after sundry accidents and commings on land) hearing that his Nauy was safe, he *staied for them by the way, and then came Rog. H ed. to anchor not long after (to wit, 23. of September) before the City of Messana, with so great a shew of power, and sound of Warlike Instruments, and o∣ther signes of Maiesty, in the sight of Philip and his French, and of many other Nations there assembled, that it stroke horror into the Inhabitants, (saith Ho∣ueden) and moued no small enuy in the hearts of his confederates. (17) From this time forward, as it may seem (the Enemy of Concord feeding the maleuolent passi∣ons of men with perpetuall matter of debate) the king of France was neuer truly king Richards friend in heart, but vpon the same day (whither streight∣ned in prouisions or otherwise) hee left the king of England; but by contrary wind was driuen backe before night, where (after many troubles and quar∣rels betweene the English and Sicilians) the two kings peaced againe, and setled a new & as firme a league, as they could, during that martiall pilgrimage. (18) Tancred was at that time king of Sicilia by King Richards Sicilian affaires. vsurpation, after the death of William, who had mar∣ried Ioan sister of king Richard, whom (at that time vpon displeasure and quarrell being prisoner) Tan∣cred set at liberty, sending her in honourable man∣ner to her brother, and did yeeld to sundry Articles, and also present paiments of ample summes. Feare Rog. Ho ed. fol. 383. wrought on both parts; for Richard being among strangers, and not very sure of the French, seised vp∣on a strength of the Griffons (people much redoub∣ted in those parts, till the arriuall Ide ibid. of the English) & in a tumult tooke the City of Messana it selfe, where he displaied his En ignes, till for the French Kings loue hee was content to disaduance them, and to entrust the City to the Knights Templars and Hos∣pitalers, Act. & M . in R. . vntill Tan red had fulfilled all such things as Richard did challenge to bee due, being many. (19) Vpon great deliberation therefore, the Si∣cilan The accord be∣tweene King Ri∣chard and King Tancred. King made answere, that hee had already paide to his sister, late Queene of that Iland, a very great quantity of coine in recompence of her Dowry or Ioincture, and would satisfie all his other demands (concerning the Legacies intended by his Predeces∣sor king William, to the Father of king Richard) as far as hee ought according to the custome of that king∣dome, and thereupon gaue vnto him for the quit∣claime of his sisters Ioincture, twenty thousand oun∣ces of gold: and farther to bee acquitted of all other claims & pretences, as also in consideration that Ar∣th r Duke of Britain, nephew & next heire of king Ri∣chard Arthur King Ri∣chards next heire (if Richard died without issue) shold take to wife the daughter of K. Tancred, he paid him other twen∣ty thousand ounces of gold, and of his owne accord, and for King Richards loue, and for the loue of the English Nation (which, saith our R g. H ed. fol. 386. Author, was then in greatest reputation through the kingdome of Si∣cilie) as also to bee the more assured of performance, he gaue him other twenty thousand ounces of gold, Threescore thou sand ounce of gold giuen to King R chard. besides afterward foure great Ships, called Vrsers, fifteene Gallies. (20) King Richard on the other side, not to bee wanting to any matter, which in honor and equitie King Richards sureties or Spon∣sors. might bee expected of him, besides letters Patents, hee put in vpon their Oaths for his sureties, two Arch-bishops, and two Bishops of his owne there present, and twentie great Lords, and principall men his subiects, whose names because many of their po∣sterities doe yet stand) are heere inserted out of the saide letters Patents, as they are vpon record in Ho∣ueden. Iordanus de H z his Constable, Wiliel us de Curci, Richardus de Camuilla, Girardus de Talebot, Robertus Sabluil, Guido de Cro n, Guarinus filius Geroldi, Bertra∣mus deVerdun, W. Chamberlangus de Tankeruile, Rober∣tus de N uo-burgo, Hugo Bardolf, Wigain de Cheresburg, Gilbertus de Wascuil, Hugo le Bruin, Iohannes de Piller, Ama ri de Muntford, Andreas de Ch uenni, de Forz, Gaufridus de Rancu e, Ama ri Torell, and other not named. (21) Moreouer for finall assurance, he offereth that Pope Clemēt should vndertake for performance The Pope King Richards surety. of his part in the said agreement; and that the said Clement would accordingly vndertake, hee requests him by most officious letters, giuing him leaue with∣out any reluctation) to put his dominions (vpon a∣ny his breach) vnder seuerest censures. (22) This peace and accord being happily thus concluded, King Tancred (hauing most roially and louingly feasted the King of England for three daies and three nights in a Castle of his) discouered, vpon the way at Tauernium in his returne, a foule and vn∣princely conspiracie of Philip (whome one of our Writers cals the vain-glorious King) against the head and safety of King Richard; which comming to bee * Ger. Dor. scanned betweene the two Kings, the French char∣ged the English with picking of quarrels; and added, that vnlesse Richard maried his sister Alice, according as hee ought, hauing beene contracted long before together, he would be his enemy while he breathed; whereunto King Richard (being pressed) did replie: That his Rog. Hou. fol. 392 Act. and Mon. p. 316. sister during the time of her abode in England, had a child by his Father Henry King of England, which he was ready to proue by many wit∣nesses there present: so that King Richard had farre more cause then a suspition of dishonesty (which Iohn Stow. in Rich. 1. some write) to refuse the marriage. This falling out so shamefully, Philip (vpon certaine conditions betweene Richard and him) left him at liberty to take a wife where he thought good, but neuer (as it may seeme) forgaue him his euill will while they two liued together. (23) And because acts of Christian remorse and humility are too rare among the Great ones of this vaine world, it were a crime to pretermit the exem∣plar A Christian ex∣ample of King Richard. humiliation of this famous General K. Richard, at this time, who (to vse my Ro. Houed. f. 388 Authors words) inspi∣red with diuine grace, and studying to fitte himselfe for the great attempt he had in hand, was stung at the soule with so iust compunction for his sinnes, that calling before him his Archbishoppes and Bi∣shoppes into a Chappell, at the house where he was lodged without the walles of Messana; hee blushed not to make a penitent confession of his manifolde Holin. p. 12 . col. 2. excesses, humbly praying God of mercy, and them (as his subordinate Ministers) of Absolution; & God (saith Houeden) respected him with eies of Mercy, and gaue him a penitent heart, so that from thenceforth hee proued a man fearing God, eschuing euil, and doing good, Ro. Hou. ibid. O foelicem illum, &c. O happie he, who so fals, that he may rise more strong: O happy he, who after peni∣tence, relapseth not into fault and ruine. (24) Wherupon addicting his mind to diuine con∣templations, & meditation of the christian Church, whose Champion now he was; hee desired confe∣rence of one Ioachim (a Cisterciā Abbot) whose great learning and deepe vnderstanding in the Scriptures, Ro. Houed. in Ric. 1 Paulus Aemilius in Philippo. 2. with an opinion of a Propheticall inspiration, made him so famous ouer the world, that King Richard sent for him, being thē in Calabria neer Sicilie, whom at his comming he heard preaching and expounding the Apocalypse of S. Iohn, touching the afflictions of Houed p. 388. the Church, and of Antichrist, which (saith hee) was then borne, and in the City of Rome, and shall bee aduan∣ced No new opinion that the Pope is Antichrist. in the See Apostolicke, of whom the Apostle said, he should extoll himselfe aboue all that is called God; and that the seuen Crownes were the Kings and Princes of the earth which obeyed him. Surely, neere about this ve∣ry time hapned that in Rome, which might seeme to giue great probability to that Abbots opinion, espe∣cially, if Emperours and Kings bee truely called Houed. p. 392. Gods, ouer whom Antichrist also should extol himself: for in the same moneth that Richard left Messana, Psal. 82. v. 1. & 6. was the Coronation of Henry the Emperour, and his Empresse Constantia, in S. Peters Church; where Pope Celestine, the very next day after his own con∣secration to the Papacie, sate in his Pontificall chaire, Idem. holding the Emperiall golden Crowne betwixt his feete: and the Emperour (as likewise the Empresse) stooping low, receiued on his head the Diadem from the Popes feet; and presently againe the Pope strake the Emperors crowne with his foot, and dasht* it to the ground; signifying that Houedens printed Copy hath , as if the Pope had thrown do e the Em∣perour, is more probable with relation to cor. n . A D. 1191. The King of France lets aile for the Holy-Land. hee had power to throw him (vpon his demerites) out of his Empire: but the Cardinals catching vp the crowne, put it againe on the Emperours head. (25) The same day in which Philip & his French Forces set saile out of the Hauen of Messana, arri∣ued Alienor King Richards mother, accompanied with Berengaria his new intended Spouse, daugh∣ter to* Sanctius King of Nauaire, whome afterward he tooke to wife in Cyprus; but his Mother after a short stay returned by Rome into England, leauing the young Lady with Ioan Queene Dowager of Sicilie, both which accompanied the King toward the holy Land, his whole Nauie being Ro. Hou f. 392. one hundred and fif∣ty great ships, and fifty three Gallies well appointed for the warre, and Ypod. Neust. many other Sailes and Vessels: and (not to omit the same because it is recorded as a singularity) he had among all these,* thirteen Buces or Buscies, which had each of them three course of Mat. Par. ad A. D. 1191. Yood. Neust. Sailes to saile with: but no Writer (so farre as we yet find) declares what numbers of Souldiers were in the English Armie. (26) This Nauie roiall betweene the Isles of Rhodes and Cyprus, (for the honor and good of King Richard) was scatterd by God with a terrible tem∣pest, some one or two of which suffered wreack vp∣on the Isle of Cyprus, whom Houed. King Richards Nauie scattered. Cursac (or as other call him Isakius, Emperour of the Griffons) being a Ypod. Neust. Math. Paris. ty∣rant did spoile, and contrary to Christian Religion, (which was his profession, though Houed. Ger. Dor. Hect. Boet. l. 13. cap. 7. some mistake) and all honour and humanity, he would not (among other his vnprincely, or rather barbarous behaui∣ours) suffer the Kings sister, and Lady Berengaria, with other of that tender societie, to come into har∣bour, to their great discontentment and perill, a Houed. fol. 39 . Shippe or two sinking there: but neither would God, nor King Richard forgiue it him. (27) For the said vnworthy Prince hauing thrice King Richard subdues the Isle of Cyprus. Ro Houed. Mat. Paris. Ypodig. Neust. Ger. Dor. Act. and Mon. p. 320. Holin. p. refused to make restitution of his vnlawfull seisures and prisoners, was entred vpon by the English, driuen from the shoares with great dishonour and slaugh∣ter; the City Limeszun left for a prey to the victors, and himselfe beaten againe out of his Campe, and taken, and after an escape made by him, his onelie daughter and heire yeelding her selfe, and her Fa∣ther lastly comming againe of his owne accord (as despairing to lie hid) vnder custodie, and thrust into fetters of gold and siluer, the whole Iland (with all the people, strength, and riches thereof) became subiect to the King of England, and both Father and Daughter led away into captiuity. (28) There arriued at Limeszun, to salute and ho∣nour King Richard within three dayes after his first victory, Guido King of Ierusalem, Geofrey de Lusignian. Leni∣zant his brother, Raimund Prince of Antioch, Earle Boemond his sonne, &c. offering their seruices, and swearing to bee his against all men; with whose priuity King Richard seised the flourishing and spa∣tious Iland of Cyprus, by antiquity celebrated as the very seate of Venus, which that it might so proue to himselfe, in the ioyous moneth, he solemnly took to wife his beloued Lady Berengaria. (29) The person of the Emperour (for by that lofty title Writers call him,) was sent to Tripolis in Syria, vnder the custody of Ralph Fitz Godfrey, Lord Rog Houed. pa. 392. Act. and Mon. p. 319. Chamberlaine to King Richard: his daughter was committed to the two Queenes Berengaria and Ioan: the Iland it selfe was entrusted to Richard de Camuile, and Robert de Turnham his Viceroyes, with compe∣tent force and prouisions, and the Ilanders suffered to enioy all such lawes and liberties, as they held in the time of Manuel the Emperour of Constantinople, or (as now they call it) of S mboli. (30) This fame of Richard was much en∣larged by his conquering a mighty Rog Houed. Mat. Paris Ypod. Neust. Argosey, cal∣led a Dromond, wherein were aboord one thou∣sand and fiue hundreth Sarazens (though disguised vnder French Flagges) furnished, besides all other prouisions, with fire-workes, barrelles or cages of venemous serpents, and the like, for the vse of the Sarazens at Acon, (anciently called Ptolomais, to the siege whereof he was then sailing,) thirteene hun∣dreth of which Miscreants, he sacrificed to Mars & Neptune, keeping the rest for ransome. (31) Philip King of France, (in hope perhaps to conquere Acon before the English could arriue, and to winne thereby that glory intire) came safe before that City in Easter weeke; but as yet had not forced the same: at which time (that the Reader may obserue the generall disposition of the western Christians in those dayes) there engirded Accon (o∣mitting the many great Prelates, Princes, Earles, and Honourable Cheifes) these Nations following; the Genowayes and Florentines, the English vnder Hu∣bert Bishop of Salisbury, afterward Ger. Dorob. Archbishop of Canterbury, Flemings, Almaines, Danes, Dutch, Friselanders, Pisans, Lombardes, besides the Knights Templars (collected out of all Nations) and beside the aides of the Asians: all which lay quartered at the Seige in order, as here they are placed, at that time in which the King of France arriued. But Rich∣ard King of England with his victorious and trium∣phant Nauie (which when it went out of Cyprus, be∣ing much belike augmented* did containe 254. tall shippes, and aboue 60. Galliots) brought terrour & Act and Mon. p. 318. dismay to the besieged, and comfort to the Christi∣ans, *vpon the Sunday after Pentecost, being about the middest of Iune. Rog. Houed. (32) The siege was so vehemently plied, that (notwithstanding sundry dissentions between Phi∣lip The City of A∣con rendred. and Richard, the two competitors of glorie in this voiage) after seuerall breaches and assaults, the last whereof was made by the Pisans and English, vpon the twelfth of Iuly following, many offers of com∣position made by the Saladine, being vtterly refused, the City of Accon was rendred to the Christians vp∣on these conditions. 1 That Saladine (Prince of Mat. Paris Ypod. Neust. Miscreants) should by a certaine day restore the ho∣ly Crosse. 2 That he should set at liberty fifteen hundreth Christian Captiues. 3. That the City with all the things contained therein should remain and be to the Christians. 4. That the Turks or Sarazens should haue their liues onely saued, if these conditions were performed. 5. That they should pay twenty thousand Bizants, (peeces of gold) to∣ward the charges of the Kings.* To take possession * Rog. Houed. fol. 395. for the French, there was sent in Drogou de Merlou, and one hundreth men of Armes, and for the Eng∣lish, Hugo de Gurnay with the like number, who equal∣ly parted the City, goods, and people, betweene them. (33) And euen now Philip King of France, as∣well because the Earle of Flanders died at the siege King Richard vp∣on certaine con∣ditions permits the King of France to depart Roger Houed. fol. 394. p 16. without issue, whose countries hee long had coue∣ted, as for euill will to Richard, whose noble Acts so farre outwent his, and because, as some * write, hee had taken bribes of Saladine, meditates nothing but return, asking licence of King Richard to depart, being then but the tenth day after the Cities surren∣der; so badly his enuious eyes could, as it seemed, endure the splendor of his companions glory. The chiefe commanders of his Army hearing this, shew∣ing themselues true French-men, and sensible of their obligation to God, and honour, with many teares besought him not to forsake that holy affaire, ita im∣pudenter, so shamelesly. In what Prince would not this haue kindled a desire of a better resolution? But impotent passions carrying him, and miscarrying him, he persisted to get leaue of Richard, who but two dayes before, would haue had him sweare to a stay of three yeeres longer in that seruice; but hee who had other cogitations farre more vnworthy of a King, would needes depart, giuing his oath vpon the holy Gospels, without which oath King Richard would not grant his good will. That he would well and faithfully keepe the lands and subiects of the King of England, and neither doe dammage nor grieuance to them by himself, nor suffer it to be done by others * till his returne. R . Higd. in Polyer. lib . cap. 27. Iu . (34) The King of France thus leauing Accon, in the Castle whereof King Richard, his Queene and Sister were lodged, and the Duke of Burgunaie re∣maining behind with the French hoast, (to whome King Philip, not without sundry secret instructions, had with it committed a great part of his treasure) king Richard in the same day set forward vpon a new enterprize; but it is true which one writes, *that by reason of the dissention betweene the Kings, which Ger. Dorob. of them should seeme the greater, little or nothing pros∣pered; & iust cause had King Richard to complaine in Rog Houed. his letters, that Philip to the eternall reproch of himselfe and Kingdome, had fouly forsaken his purpose and vow vnto God. (35) But when the Saladine could not by any means obtaine a longer day for performance of the said Articles of composition, hee cut off the heads of all his Christian Captiues; in reuenge whereof King Richard brought out his Turkish Captiues, (being about two thousand and fiue hundreth) and in the sight of the Saladines hoast caused their heads to be chopt off; the Duke of Burgundie doing the same to the like number, neere vnto the walles of A∣con, seuen onelie being kept aliue by the Christian Generals, whereof Karakeys Salaadines * foster Fa∣ther Math. Paris. was chiefe. But Richard proceeding in his vndertaken action, and in his march to Ioppa, be∣ing set vpon by Sultan Salaadine (who had put the Duke of Burgundie to flight, and slaine the valiant Iaques de Auennis, who onely with a few in the Re∣regard made resistance) so couragiously encountred him, that the Salaadine with the losse of three thou∣sand his choisest Souldiers was glad to turn his back and flie: whiles therefore this Champion is thus imploied in the Holy-land, let vs looke backe a litle how the affaires of his Kingdome are managed at home. (36) Iohn the Kings brother, making vse in England of such discontentments, as the incredible insolencies, Disorders in England. Guil. de Newbur∣go. l. 4. c. 14. Rog. Houed. Mat. Paris. Nubrigens. l. 4. c. 18 and intollerable tyrannies of the Chancellour (who carried himselfe both like a Pope and a King) had bred among the Nobility and people, to aduance there∣by his owne designes, stirred against him (though strengthning himselfe like a Generall in the field,) so powerfull opposition, that in the end, (vpon war∣rant of a new Houed. in Rich. 1 p. 391. Nubrig. l. 4. c. 18. Commission sent from the King his Brother) hee with the rest of the Peeres suddenlie thrust him out of all commaund, and shortly after most reprochfully (as it happened, for he fled, and was taken in a Curtesans attire, il beseeming a Popes Legate) out of the Kingdome also, vpon occasion, *Uelut delicata muliercula. Nu∣brigens. l. 4. c. 17 Houeden. p. 401 as of other foule demetites, so particularly of a sa∣crilegious and barbarous outrage, committed by the Chancellours commaund, vpon the person of Geffrey Elect Archbishop of Yorke (naturall brother to King Richard and the Earle) on pretence that he entred England contrarie to his oath giuen to his brother King Richard, where as he then came to take possession of his See, to which hee was aduanced by the Nubrigens. l. 4. c. 17. Houeden, p. 399. Kings owne procurement, and by Queene E∣leanors owne trauaile to Rome in his behalfe. And Houeden in Ric. 1. p. 392. albeit this punishment & shame deseruedly follow∣ed the Chancellors pride and oppression, yet in one maine point of opposing the Earles Ambition; (who sought to assure to himselfe the remainder of the Crowne, which in right of bloud belonged to his Nephew Arthur) his seruice to the State had beene very commendable, if it had proceeded from loialty of affection, and not from a swelling desire of greatnesse, which he hoped still to enioy, if Ar∣thur (a child) should succeed in the kingdome, wher∣as Guil. de Newbur∣go. l. 14. he knew Earle Iohns aduancement could not be without his apparant ruine. (37) But Philip King of France in all places la∣bouring by Guil. Nubrig. l. 4. 6. 25. wrongfull and vnprincely aspersions to deface the renowne of King Richard, though fin∣ding small credite to his words (because the man had done nothing himselfe) deuised after his return how to trouble and endammage his friends domi∣nions; and had effected it, if the Lordes of France whom he sollicited to that wicked worke, vpon pre∣tence of the composition made with King Richard at Messana, had not (to their immortal glory) Ro. Houed f. 408 Nubrigens l. 4. 6 25. refu∣sed to assist him therein, till Richards returne, aswel in regard of their owne oathes, as because the sen∣tence of excommunication was denounced against all such as did attempt to endammage him in his absence. (38) King Richard notwithstanding that the re∣lation of these things greatly troubled him, gaue not ouer as yet, but after sundry other matters of im∣portance performed, did march vp within the sight of Ierusalem, where he skirmished with the enemie, & ouerthrew the Conuoy or Carauan of the Salaa∣dine, which came laden from Babylon, guarded with ten thousand men; whom King Richard valiantlie encountring with fiue thousand selected souldiers, Mat. Paris saith they were 7000. Camels, and makes no men∣tion of Mules or horses. put most of them to the sword, and took three thou∣sand Camels, and four thousand Horses and Mules, besides those that were slaine, and so gained the rich spoile of all the Carriages. (39) After this, and many other worthy thinges done, as the rescue of Ioppa, and repulse of Saladine from thence, &c. the King indefatigable in his braue attempts, desirous to regaine Ierusalem, and the Ci∣ty Baruck, was abandoned in that enterprise by the Duke of Burgundie (who is * said to haue beene ap∣parently corrupted with gifts from Saladine, and the Math. Paris in Rich. 1. regiments of French vnder his conduct;) wherupon he was the rather perswaded by the Knights Tem∣plars, and chiefes of the Christian hoast, not to refuse Saladines offers for a surceasance from hostility, con∣sidering that hee had a purpose to returne with re∣enforced numbers and meanes; that his present powers by diuisions, by sicknesse, by battales were wasted, and that the dangerous estate of his owne Dominions did require his presence, (the greatest motiue, for he had supplies of money for his Soul∣diers wages from Pope Celestine) by reason of some vndue practises at home, and the rancour of King Philip his vnreconcilable aduersary abroad. Wheru∣pō a truce was taken for three yeers, and Saladine re∣paid Sabellic. Enn. 9. l. 5 Polyd Virg. l. 14. such charges as Richard had been at in fortify∣ing Askalon, which was brought to the same estate, as in which King Richard found it. (40) But the King of England, though hee had very far excelled all the Christian Princes in great exploites at that iourney, because* he had neither conquered Salaadine, nor Ierusalem, did mourne, Ger. Dor. and parted pensiue. In the holy-land hee left Hen∣ry Earle of Champaine, (who vpon taking the said Baruck was to haue beene crowned King of Ierusa∣lem, which Guido had resigned) and hee left Guydo de Lusignian (the late King of Ierusalem in Cyprus, to whom hee had passed it, in exchange for the other, to aduance his Kinseman the said Earle of Champain; which vpon that Title, the familie of Lusinian for Rog. Hou. f. 417. many descents after did possesse and enioy. Thus Richard hauing ordered his affairs in the East parts, Poly Verg. lib. 14. sets saile homeward. The Queenes Berengaria his wife, and Ioan his sister, with the Captiue Lady, Daughter of the Cypriot Emperour, vnder the con∣duct of Stephen de Turnham (hearing of the Kings most heauie fortune) soiourned at Rome about sixe moneths, for feare of Richards enemies, & afterward came safe by Marsilia in Poictou. (41) God, whose cause was onely pretended in this voyage of the Christians, did not seeme to ap∣proue the said truce; for hee Mat. Paris. scattered the English with a terrible tempest, and the Polyd. Verg. lib. 14. opportunity of Conquest was so lost, that hitherto it could ne∣uer bee regained, and the King of England letting it slippe when God had almost put the same into his hands, did miserably fall into his enemies hands. Certainelie, the name of Richard was at that time growne terrible to Saladine, who had receiued di∣uerslosses, foiles and ouerthrowes at his haudes: Moreouer, the Saladines whole estate being endan∣gered by such of his own sect as reputed him a meer vsurper, hee could not long withstand the double impression of the Christian Cheualrie, and of his owne Allies and Countrimen; as indeed not long after* he died, leauing his Empire fowly, but iust∣ly, distracted by ciuill confusions: whereas by this Rog. Houed. f. 414. Truce the crafty Turke made the world see, that the powers of two so potent Monarkes had in a manner effected nothing; & Richard could neuer haue time to return for accōplishment of his designs; for which all Christendome hath at this howre reason to bee sorrowfull, and hereofhimselfe* was very sensible, so that hee would oftentimes crie out, that hee Polyd Verg lib. 14 was not alwayes wise, alluding to this occasion lost. (42) But the noble King, hoping to pierce with speed through Germanie in disguise, tooke to him An. D. 1193 the name of Mat. Paris. Hugo a Merchant, the haire of his Polyd Verg l. 14 head and beard growne very long, being the fitter to conceale him; but in his iourney ouer land, was Rog. Houed. f. 408. neere to Vienna vnhappily discouered by the pro∣fusenesse of his expenses; when hee saw he could not escape them, Math. Paris. in contempt of his fortunes, he put on roiall garments, and refused to yeeld but Ger. Dor. onely to the Duke himselfe, who came with ioy as to a prey which he sore longed for: but the ras∣call multitude Hardings Chr. cap. 138. cried things worthy of themselues, calling him (O barbarisme) Traitour, and some say∣ing, stone-him, some cut off his head, & others hang him: and because the inhumanity of this vsage may be suited with rimes as rude and ragged, you shall in such heare the cause of this Arch-dukes malice, growing first at Accon, where the Author speaking of King Richard saith; He gate it soone with his great Ordinance, And on the walles his Banners full high set, The Kings Armes he set vp also of France, And King Guyes Armes of Ierusalem well bet, The Duke of Oistrich Limpold without let, Set vp his Armes after aboue them all, Which King Richard did cast downe from the wall. (43) And though it is certaine that this Author faines not this fact, for that some such matter (and Pretences for the detinue of King Richard. told by *some with more disaduantage to Richards cause) is by others Mat. Paris ad An. D. 1192. Ger. Dor. who writes that the Archduke set vp his Standard in the chiefe place of the City of Acon to the iniurie of King Richard. Guil. de Nouobur. go. lib. 4. cap. 24 & lib. 5. cap. 16 This description fitteth a like sect novv in the vvest. related, yet the grauest Authors agree (that next to the common enuie at his vertues) the greatest pretence was the murther of the Mar∣quesse Conrad committed at Tyre, by two cur∣sed Assasines, a* certaine sect in the East, liuing vnder a Senior or Ruler, whom they honor as a Prophet, by whom they are sent forth to murther such Princes as fauor them not, promising themselues the reward of immortality by obeying him in all things, though with the losse of their owne liues. Of which barbarous fact Henrie the Emperour, and Leopold the Arch-duke (whose neer kinsman Conrad was) would seeme to beleeue that Richard was the Author, though therin they toucht his princely reputation and integrity, * most iniuri∣ously, for that the chiefe of that sect by their owne Ypod. Neust. p. 455. Edit. An, D. 1603 The copie of the said letter see Nubrig l. 5. cap. 16 publike * letters (written with the bloud of the shel-fish called Murex, wherewith Scarlet vsed to be dyed) acknowledging the fact, declared the true cause thereof, which was a particular Act of iniustice in Conrad himselfe: There wanted not sundry other pretences, as in such cases is vsuall, as * that Richard had entred league with Tancred King of Sicilia the Emperours enemy, and that hee had thrust the Cy∣priot Mat. Par. ad An. Dom. 1193. (their kinsman) out of the Empire, and kept his onely daughter Captiue. But this booty, being too great for a Duke, the Emperour got into his custo∣dy, meaning to coine much gold and siluer out of his most vniust affliction, by sharpe imprisonment: which could not make him in any act or speech, or gesture of his, shew beneath the Maiestie of a victori∣ous Prince and King of England. (44) The dismall newes thereof flying through the world, presently disclosed who were sound or The face of England in her Kings captiuity. vnsure; sorrow and dismay was euery where among his owne: Ger. Dor. Rog. Houed. f. 40 His carefull mother and other his fast friends sweare the realme to be true to King Richard, watch the coasts, and prouide for the security of the State with singular vigilancie, assuring the Cities & good Townes with Bulwarkes, Walles, and Muni∣tion. On the contrary, Earle Iohn being (by the The attempts of Iohn King Richards brother cunning inueigling and suggestions of his brothers professed foes) not onely put out of all hope of his releasement, but also incensed against him for inten∣ding the Crowne to his Nephew Arthur, entred in∣to an vnbrotherly attempt against his Soueraigne Lord; the summe whereof, take in the words of Tho∣mas Walsingham, who saith, that Iohn with promises allured many to him through the whole Kingdom, Ger. Dorob. Rog. Houed. Math. Paris. did carefully and speedily fortifie his holds in Eng∣land, and passing the seas, entred into league with Tpod. Neust. the King of the French, that he might vtterly put his Nephew Arthur, Duke of Britaine from that hope, which the Britaines had conceiued of his promoti∣on. The Rog. Houed. Normans giuing any way to his disloiall practises, hee swears fealty to Philip King of France (his brothers most mortall enemie) and also that he would take to wife the Lady Alice King Philips sister, though polluted by his owne Father, and for that cause reiected by King Richard. Out of Normandy he posts into England, sollicites Peeres and people, and was loyally resisted: but hee not quieted so, labors to stirre the Scot and Welsh to ioine in an inuasion with him: the French and Flemings assuring them that his Brother King Richard would neuer be set at liberty: but William King of Scots would neither giue assent, nor countenance to such vndutiful pra∣ctises, or rather madnesses. Ger. Dor. (45) In this most perilous time the valour and loyalty of the City of Roan (the choisest of Nor∣mandy) did most clearely shew themselues to the euerlasting commendation thereof: for Philip com∣ming before it with a puissant Army solicited thē to reuolt, promising mountaines. In stead of an∣swere Rog. Hou. f. 412. they set open the gates, telling him that hee might enter if he would, for no man hindred him: but the Ger. Dorob. vaine-glorious King being better ad∣uised, (for the inhabitants, yea & the damsels of the City, whose heads were polde like as mens, powred molten pitch, and such like matter vpon the besie∣gers) Martiall women in oan. retreated from the walles, and marcht away confounded: and being certainely aduertized that the Emperour and King Richard were agreed, hee sends ouer to Earle Rog. Houed. f. 414 Iohn, bidding him looke to him∣selfe, for the Diuell was now let loose. Hee thereup∣pon crost ouer the seas to Philip, who *excited him to vsurpe the Kingdome of England. Lanquet ad A. D. 1191. (46) Neuerthelesse by Queene Elianors negoti∣ation (who in person trauelled to the Emperour) the The Articles of King Richards liberty. King her sonne was come to be assured of his liber∣ty vpon these conditions. 1. That hee should pay to the Emperour one hundreth thousand Markes sterling. 2. That he should pay fifty thousand Markes of like money to the Emperour and Duke. 3. That he should marry his Neece, (sister to Ar∣thur Duke of Britaine) to Duke Leopolds sonne. 4. That the Emperour should secure him, till he were vnder saile with a fore-wind. 5. That hee should set the Cypriots person at liberty, and deliuer his daughter to the Duke of Austria, who was her vn∣cle, and should deliuer 67. hostages for assurance of all. (47) But to colour this vnreasonable and vn∣princelie extortion, the Emperour by his Impe∣riall Charter giues vnto King Richard, Prouince, and sundry other ample territories, containing 5. Arch∣bishoprickes, and thirty three Bishoprickes (some∣time parcell of the Empire, but both then and a King Richard crovvned King of Prouince, &c. long time before out of possession) & therof crowns him King, writing magnificent letters into England, with such like offices. (48) Now when King Richard (who had wonne to himselfe wonderfull honour and respect, euen of A new and foule treason of Earle discouered. the couetous Emperour, by the proofe of his inno∣cency, and by his most noble and constant carriage) did expect his liberty at an assembly or diet, where the greatest Princes and States of the Empire were in person, to wit, The three Archbishops of Mentz, Colon and Saltzburg; The three Bishops of Wormes, Spire, and Leiges; The three Dukes of Swaue (the Emperours brother) Austrich, and Luuain; The Count Palatine of Rhene, &c. which had vndertaken for the Emperour, whose officers had already re∣ceiued the greater part of the ransome: behold euē then the Emperour shewes a willingnesse to breake off, producing the letters of Philip King of France, and of Iohn Earle of Morton, in which they offer an huge summe &c. too impious and diuelish to speak of: but the Princes who had vndertaken to King Richard for good dealing, went to the Emperour re∣prouing him for his auarice, who would so disho∣nourably trauerse and start backe from the agree∣ment: Ro. Houed f. 418. In Ianuary saith Nubrig. di Parisi. B. Mariae, saith another. vpon the fourth of Februarie therefore being Friday, the Archbishoppes of Mentz and Co∣leine restore him Rand. Higden in Polycr. lib. 7. cap. 28. Fabian. after fifteene moneths imprison∣ment, to Queene Alienor his mother, free from the Emperour, all that were present weeping thereat for ioy. (49) This Archbishop of Coleine was hee, who entertaining the King in the Dominions of his Archbishopricke; with great ioy for his deliuerance did celebrate diuine seruice in this manner: Now know I truely that the Lord hath sent his Angell and ta∣ken Roger Houed. me out of the hand of Herode, and the expectation of the common people of the Iewes, &c. (50) And indeed it was Gods Angell did it: for after all this, whiles the King staied for a wind, and other preparations at the Sea-shore, the Emperour repenting him of his release, sent speedy guarders to Nubrigens. l. 4. c. 41 apprehend him againe, vowing hee should neuer bee freede from bonds whiles he liued; but some secrete message (as Princes Courts neuer want Spials) spee∣dily premonished him, and so by a verie little time Mat. Paris. Ypod Neust. he preuented his surprisers, landing happily at Sand∣wich, in April the Sunday after Saint Georges day: where in stead of all other triumphes, or particulars of ioy for his returne, wee will content our selues with onely one, as signe of the rest. When the King drew neere to Rochester, the venerable new Archbi∣shop of Canterbury Hubert (who had beene with him The ioyful mee∣ting between the King and Arch∣bishop. at Accon in the Holy-land) went ioyously foorth to meet him; whom when the King saw, he dismoun∣ted from his horse, and hauing bowed his knee, fell Ger. Dor. vpon the earth, in like sort the Archbishoppe lay right against him; at the last both of them rising from the ground, they ranne into each others arms, comforting themselues with mutuall embraces & weeping with ioy. (51) The iustice of a true history will not suffer vs here to forget, in what sort the iniustice of this vnnoble captiuation of Richard King of England, was King Richards wrongs reuen∣ged vpon the Duke of Austria. punished by God, and on Gods behalfe. The Duke of Austrias Country, and people, being visited with these fiue plagues, Fire, Water, Barrennes, Worms, Mat. Paris. Ro. Houed f. 4 5. & Pestilence: the Fire, casually burning his Towns; the Riuer of Danubius drowning ten thousand of his Subiects, in an ouerflow; the earth waxing drie and Panui. Cestr. Polichr. l. 7. c 27. sear; the Wormes destroying such fruit and graine as grew; and the stroke of Pestilence killing the principall Nobles and Gentlemen of his Domini∣ons: The Duke for all this continued obstinate like another Pharao, swearing to cut off the heads of K. Richards Hostages, vnlesse all Couenants (though extorted by cruell Duresse) were exactly and spee∣dily performed. Baldwin de Betun (one of the Ho∣stages) is sent to the King with this bloodie message; but before his return, vpon S. Stephens day in Christ∣mas, the Duke Ger. Dor. spurring his horse in sport vpon a Castle of snow among youthes, which were coun∣terfeiting a siege, and an assault, with the slip of his horse, brake his foot in such sort, as it came to be* cut off, and within a while feeling himselfe perishing vp∣ward, Tpod. Noust. Iohn Stow in Rich. 1. Holin. pag. 147 ad A. D. 1195. so that his death was certaine, could not bee absolued of his Bishops from the sentence of Ex∣communication which had by the Pope bin denoun∣ced, till hee and his Lords had sworne to release all the said matters betweene the King of England and him; but his sonne after his death refusing the performance, his Fathers body lay stinking aboue ground eight daies, for that no clergy man durst bu∣rie it, being but conditionally absolued, till the son did yeeld to the performance; yet (if* some may be Polyd Virg l 14. credited vpon his bare word) the sonne did volun∣tarily condiscend, and not vpon this compulsion. (53) But albeit the Emperour Mat. Paris ad Ann. Dom. 1196. to declare him∣selfe King Richards in∣iuries reuenged vpon Henrie the Emperour. wounded with some remorse for his vngodlie violence, or to engage others in the impietie, gaue three thousand Markes of King Richards ransome to make siluer Censers through all the Cistercian order, who generally refused the gift, as parcell of an accur∣sed spoile (for as for those* seuenty thousand marks, Roger Houed. fol. 431. which hee forgaue to King Richard, with as bad a purpose (being to hinder peace betweene him, and the French) as he had taken the other vniustly, they are not to be accounted as restitution, but as the wa∣ges of sinne); reuenge forsooke him not, being pur∣sued by his owne wife (the Heire of the Crowne of Sicilia) in reuenge of some cruelties done to her Countrimen; and after reconcisement with her, fal∣ling dangerously sicke, he died at Messana, excom∣municated for King Richards cause. And albeit hee had in his life time sent his Chancellour out of Bur∣gundie, of purpose to offer King Richard recompence for the iniuries he had sustained, and although Con∣stantia the Empresse had sent the Archbishoppe of Messana (while the Emperours body lay aboue ground without buriall) to Pope Celestine in humble manner, praying Christian buriall, yet Rog. Hou. f. 440. vnlesse the mony which hee had extorted from the King of England were restored, hee could by no entreaties obtaine it: which accordingly was promised. (54) Neither were the King of Englands afflicti∣ons vnprofitable vnto him, for they gaue him oc∣casion to reforme his life, taking home to him his Queene Berengaria, whose society for a long time he * Iohn Stow in R. 1 had neglected, though she were a roiall, eloquent, & beauteous Lady, and for his loue had ventured with * Rand. Higden in Polycr. lib. 7. cap. 26. him through the world. (55) King Richard after his ioyous returne into England, hauing at the Abbey of Saint Edmunds, in King Richards doings after his returne. Mat. Par. Ro. Houed. f. 392. performance of his vow (as may seeme) offered vp the rich Imperiall Standard of Cursac, Emperour of Cyprus, which hee tooke among the spoiles of the Griffons Campe: thence he marched, and tooke in by surrender such Castles as the seruants of his bro∣ther Iohn (beleeuing that the King was not retur∣ned) held against him; but Henry de Pumeray, who had fortified Saint Michaels Mount in Cornwall, hea∣ring for certaine that King Richard was come, died for very feare. And now, forty daies of summons Houed. fol. 418. being exspired, which were allowed to Earle Iohn, & Hugh Bishop of Couentry, for making their appea∣rance, to answere to such heinous matter as was pre∣pared, and they not appearing, Iohn was adiudged by the Peeres and States of England, to haue for∣feited all that hee might forfeit in the Realme, and the Bishop to be punishable by the Ecclesiasticall censures, as hee was a Bishop, and likewise as an Of∣ficer of the King, by the Laitie. Richard afterwarde bestirres himselfe to draw in money more greedilie, then did become so great a Maiesty, wherein yet (saith * one) he was rather to be pardoned then ac∣cused, Math Paris. for that hee was presently to lead a mightie Armie against the French. (56) But first of all, to wipe away both the sad∣nes and contumelie of his late restraint, for a better fortunes beginning, he caused himselfe to be crow∣ned againe at the City of Winchester; which celebri∣tie was honoured with the presence of William king of Scotland, who bare a sword before Rog Houe. f. 420 Hect. Boat. l. 13. cap. 8. King Richard: betweene which two Princes, there* followed great amity and tendernesse of loue; then beeing granted to him, and his successors Kings of Scotland, a certaine pension, with sundry other allowances, Ro. Houed. f. 419. and princelie attendances, from the first day of their friendlie entrances at any time into England, til their returne. (57) The King likewise caused a new broad Seale to bee made, requiring that all Charters granted vnder his former, should be confirmed vnder this, whereby he drew a great masse of money to his Treasurie, subscribing such renued Charters thus: This was the tenor of our Charter vnder our first Seale, which be∣cause Iuter Chart in . D Rob. Cotton Equi . it was lost, and in the time of our beeing captine in Almaine was in the power of another, wee caused to bee changed, &c. Some haue obserued, that as this Rich∣ard was the first of the English Kinges who bare Armes on his Seales, as appeareth by the Wherein are 2. Lions rampant combattant: vvell ting that Ceur∣de L . former: so was hee the first who carried in his shield, three Lions passant, borne euer after for the Regal Arms of England. And whereas we see heere the Moone in her full, which in the other was but a Crescent, (which is the Turkish Ensigne,) it may seeme to be done Emblematically, in that sence, as wee read of a∣nother Prince (who going against the Turkes) gaue a Crescent with this word, Plenior redibo, I will re∣turne more full. The true draught of this second Seale we haue here annexed. (58) A good . Ypod. N . Author reports, that after this, the King being at dinner at Westminster, and receiuing aduertisement of the siege laid to Vernoil, by his restlesse enemie Philip of France; sware that hee would neuer turne his face, till hee had gotten thi∣ther with his Armie to fight with the French; whereupon hee caused the wall to be cut through, (the signe of which breach appeared In daies who ued vnder Henry 5. aboue two hundred yeares after) neuer resting, till with an hundred great Shippes hee had crost the seas from Portsmouth into Normandy, where the onely rumor Ro. Ho f. 421. Mat. Paris. of his approch made the French King raise his siege, and without stroke or sight of his magnanimous Ypod. Neust. Enemie, (but not without losse and shame) to quite the field. (59) Neither was his clemency lesse then his courage, whereof needs no greater testimony, then King Richard for∣giues his brother Iohn. when vpon Earle Iohns Nubrigens. l. 5. c. 5 dutifull submission, & his mothers intercession, he so freely forgaue him, as that he calmely said, Tho Wals: in Ypodig. Neust. fol. 456. Would that thy fault may so be forgotten of me, as that thy selfe maiest keepe in memorie what thou hast done. and Houed. fol. 428. afterward restored his pos∣sessions vnto him; the Earle from that time for∣ward becōming his Nubrig l. 5. c 5 Ran. Higd. in Ioh. li. 7. c. 29. true Knight, & doing him very noble seruices, (especially against the French who had seduced him) as a louing brother, & faithfull Leege∣man, whereby he made amends for his former ex∣cesses, and fully recouered the hearty affection of his Lord and brother. (60) There were after this sundry skirmishes, takings of Prisoners and Townes, and conferences betweene the French and English, moued belike, by such as religiously tendered the effusion of Christi∣an bloud, so as no great matter was yet effected; that which was, being rather by Ger. Dor. Ypod Neust. Stratagems and starts, then by battle; but within *thirty seuen daies after the French mens flight from Vernuil, King Rich∣ard (in reuenge of that desolation which the French King had brought vpon the City of Eureux, where he neither spared age, sexe, nor Church) comming to Vendome, with purpose to surprise the King of France, had the spoile of the French Campe, their King (a thing almost incredible) now the second time flying without battle. Many of the French were slaine, and taken, together with Ypod. Neust. fol 456 Nubrig. l. 5. c. 2. much treasure, the Rog. Houed. f. 421. Chappell roiall, the Indentures of such as had left Richard to serue King Philip, and all the * tents, car∣riages, and other furnitures for warre: and from hence marching in Poictou and Engolisme, hee had such successes (howsoeuer the silent partialities of forrain Writers smoother them) that Rog. Hou. sol. 422 himself wrote ouer to his deerest Hubert Archbishoppe of Canter∣burie, That by Gods fauour, who in all things considers the right, hee had taken Tailburg, Marsiliac, and all the other Castles of Geofrey de Rancune, the City of En∣golisme, and all the Castles and Territories of the Earle thereof, and almost three hundreth Knights, or men of Armes, and about forty thousand armed Souldiers. (61) We will not here ouerpasse, that which Houeden reports, (being an example of Christian re∣pentance in Princes) of a poore Hermits comming A. D. 1195. Ro. Houed. 428. to this noble Monarch, and preaching to him the words of eternall life; and bad him bee mindfull of the subuersion of Sodom, and to abstaine from things vnlawfull, otherwise (saith he) the deserued ven∣geance of God will come vpon thee: The Hermit being gone, the King neglected his words: but not long after falling sicke, hee more seriously bethought King Richards amendment of life and dayly exercise. himselfe, and afterward waxing sound in soule, as well as body: his daily exercise was to rise earely, & not to depart from the Church till diuine seruice were finished: whereupon (saith Houeden) how glorious it is for a Prince to beginne and end his actions in him, who is beginning without beginning, and iud∣geth the ends of the earth. Moreouer, hee bounti∣fully releeued euery day much poore both in his Court and Townes about: and restored gold and siluer vessels to such Churches, from which to pay his ransome they had beene taken away. (62) After this passed sundry interchanges be∣twixt the French and English, sometimes of warres, with wasts and spoiles, sometimes of truces with interuiewes and Parlies; in one of which, the Lady Alice, (cause of much mischiefe) K. Philips sister, was restored (according to the contract of Messana) to her brother, who forthwith bestowed her in ma∣riage, vpon Iohn Earle of Pontif. In the mean while the Kings sought to make friends vpon all sides; but King Richard by his munificence, and other means, drew from King Philip a mighty party of his neerest neighbours: Rog Houed. pa. 436. Baldwin Earle of Flanders, Raimund Polyd Virg. l 13. Earle of Tholose (to whom also King Richard gaue in Mat. Paris. marriage, his sister Ioan Queen of Sicilia) the * Chā∣panois and others: so that Philip was faine to trust wholy vpon himselfe: for whereas hee had latelie married the sister of the King of Denmarke, of pur∣pose to vse the Danish shipping against the English, that affinity proued enmity: for the Nubrig. l. 4. c. 26 Vide ibidem, with Picardus his notes. Nubrig. l. 5. c. 16. next day af∣ter his wedding, hee put her away, pretending (be∣sides * other things) that shee was of too neere a pro∣pinquity of bloud; albeit most vntrulie, as her bro∣ther, the King of Denmarke proued before the Pope, though he could not be heard, the King of France more preuailing, either by feare or fauour. (63) About this time, Iohn the Kings brother & An, D. 1197 Markadey Captaine of the Brabanters, called the Ro. Houed. f. 438 Rowtes, had made an incursion vp to Beauois, where the Bishoppe, being also an Earle of the Roiall Bloud, and the eleuenth Peere of France, valiant∣ly fighting, was Ot Rutters who s ued on any side for wages, therfore called by Houeden, nefanda gens, and accur∣sed in the Lateran Counsel. Ger. Dor. Guil. Nubrig. l. 5. c. 30. taken in the skirmish, armed at all points, and brauely mounted; on whose behalfe the Pope (vpon the Bishops humble suite, * pleading the Clergies immunity) wrote somewhat earnestlie to King Richard, to set his verie deare sonne, for so he called the Bishop, at liberty; The King in a kind of pleasant earnestnesse, caused the Habergeon and Curaces of the Bishop to be presented to the Pope, with this question (alluding to that of * Iacobs chil∣dren to their father, concerning Iosephs garment,) Gen. 37. 33. Holin. in Rich. 1. Vide an tunica filii tui sit an non, See whether it bee thy Mat. Paris. sonnes coat or no. Whereupon the Pope replied, that he was neither his sonne, nor the sonne of the Church, and therefore should be ransomed at the Kings will, be∣cause hee was rather iudged to be a seruitor of Mars, then a Souldier of Christ. Whom the King of Eng∣land (in Nubrig. l. 5. c. 30. reuenge of many euill offices, especiallie in the time of his captiuity with the Emperour) handled sharpely. The Bishop at length waxing impatient, writes a passionate letter to the Pope; whose answere in part is here set downe, for that it notably defends the King of England. If (saith the Pope) thou hast had ill successe, it is no mar∣uaile, The Popes an∣swere to the Bishop. Holin. for putting off the peaceable Prelate, thou didst put on the warlike Souldier, and rashly too∣kest a shield in stead of a cope, a sword for a Stole, a Curace for an Albe, an Helmet for a Miter, a Lance for a Bishops staffe, peruerting the order, & course of things: neither meant you (as you al∣ledge) to repell violence but vertue, nor did you fight for your Country, but against it: for of your France we can now publikely pronounce; Woe to that land whose King is a Child in dis∣cretion, not in yeeres, for Philip was old inough. Child. For your King was strictly bound by corporall oath to the King of England, not to damnifie his territories, &c. at least wise till his returne from the iourney of his Pilgrimage: neuerthelesse, contrary to his faith and oath, hee without all shame seised by force the good townes of the said King, and cruellie wasted his Dominions with hostile hand: but that King returning at last out of captiuity, man∣fully encountred your King, not reposing his hope in multitude, but in Almighty God, &c. Humili∣ty therefore against pride, right and equity against wrong, measure and modesty against intempe∣rance and arrogancy, haue certainely hitherto fought for the King of England, &c. Wee haue notwithstanding directed our supplicatorie let∣ters to him on thy behalfe, &c. for in such a case we neither can nor ought commaund, &c. Meane while beare your bands and sorrowes patientlie, &c. (64) While thus sundry warlike matters passed betweene the English and French, the King of Eng∣land encreaseth his side with new associates, Arthur Duke of Britaine, the Duke of Luuain, the Earles of Gynes, Boloine, Perch and Blois with others: and * Ho∣ueden Houed p. 443. recites three seuerall times within a short space, in which the King of France was driuen with losse and dishonour out of the field by King Richard, beside the losse of Saint Omers, of Air, and of other Townes wonne by Baldwin Earle of Flanders, and besides the wast of the French Dominions by many inuasions. But the greatest of the three victories was the second, which King Richard gained at the battaile betweene Curceles and Gysors, where the K. of France himselfe fell into the riuer of Ethe, the bridge breaking vnder him, with the throng of peo∣ple which fled for their liues before the English Li∣on: neither was hee easily saued (twenty of his men of Armes being drowned by that ruine) but before he could be drawne out, water had gotten into his belly. (65) This was a famous victory; for besides a long Catalogue of great names extant in Authors; there The famous vi∣ctory of Gisors. were taken by the Kings Armie, 100. Knights and Seruitours on horse-backe, and footmen without Houed. Math. Paris. Ypod. Neust. number, besides thirty men of Armes, and other inferiour Souldiers not countable, which Markadey (Generall of the Rowtes) had for prisoners. There were also taken 200. great horse, whereof seuenscore had barbs, and caparisons armed with yron. King Ger. Dor. M. S. Rog. Wend. M. S King Richards warlike handi∣worke. In his letter to Philip Bishop of Durisme. Ro. Houed f. 445. Richard in his owne person did most nobly, for with one speare he threw to the earth Mathew de Mum∣merancie, Alan de Rusci, and Fulke de Giseruall, & took them. So haue we vanquished the King of France at Gysors (saith the King) howbeit wee haue not done the same, but Die & mon Droit: the motto of the English Kings seemes hence to be de∣riued. God and our right by vs: and in this fact we did put our owne head and king∣dome in hazard aboue the counsell of all that were ours. Howsoeuer therefore the French or others may slubber ouer such a noble Iourney, wee haue not doubted vpon so good warrant to record the same. (66) The warre continuing still, many vertuous men laboured to make a finall accord; and the new Pope Innocentius the third, hauing proclaimed a new vndertaking of the Holy-warre Ro. Hou. s. 447 sends a Cardinall Deacon to attone the two mighty Kings of France and England. At length Articles of peace were drawne; but Richard (being farre before hand) was nothing hastie to conclude, and therefore put it off, till his returne from Poictou, whether hee went to chastice his rebels, though * some say, hee did then conclude the peace. Math. Paris. (67) At this enteruiew or treatie, Philip King of France, Mat. Paris. (the sower of strife, though he sought peace) shewed to King Richard a deed, in which Earle Iohn An. D 1193 Rog. Houed. f. 449 newly yeelds himselfe Liegeman to King Philip, a∣gainst his brother. A wonderfull thing (saith Houe∣den) that Richard should beleeue it (being perhaps but a Copie of that deuice or tricke, if it were a deuice which they once had iointly put vpon the same Iohn, as in the end of King Henry the second you heard) who thereupon forthwith disseised the Earle his brother euery where. But the Earle hauing sear∣ched and learned the cause of the Kings sudden dis∣pleasures, (whose loue hee had before redeemed with many loiall seruices) Hee sends two men of Arms to the French Court, who should on his behalf, in what sort soeuer, defend his honour and innocency, against any his Houed. ibid. accusers: but there was no man found in that Court, nei∣ther King nor any other, who would vndertake the proofe or maintenance thereof; wherupon euer afterward Rich∣ard held his brother more deare, and gaue lesse credite to King Philips words. (68) But now ensued the fatall accident, which drew the blacke cloud of death ouer this trium∣phall and bright shining starre of Cheualrie, the vnworthy occasion of which misaduenture makes it the more lamentable; which notwithstanding, for a document to the Great ones, against the outrage of Auarice and Cruelty, God suffered thus to fal on him. Widomare, Vicount of Limoges hauing found a great * horde of gold and siluer, sent no small por∣tion thereof to King Richard, as chiefe Lord, with Houed. f. 429. which being not contented (as pretending that trea∣sure troue, was wholy his by vertue of his preroga∣tiue royall, or else misliking that the Vicount should make the partition) came with a power to a Castle of the Vicounts called * Chaluz, where hee suppo∣sed the Riches were; the Garrison of which place This Chaluz the Engl sh d d cal Castle Galliard saith Fabian. offered to yeeld the same, and all therein, if onelie their liues and limbs might be saued: but hee would not accept of any conditions, bidding them defend themselues as they could, for he would enter by the sword and hang them all. It grieues me to thinke that such a Prince should so forget himselfe: but be∣hold the seuerity of Gods iudgement. An Arbala∣ster (or Archibalista) standing vpon the wall, & see∣ing his time, charged his steele bow with a square arrow or quarrell, Ger. Dorob. making first his praier to God, That hee would direct that shot, and deliuer the innocen∣cy of the besieged from oppression. Whereupon dischar∣ging it, as the King was *taking a view of the Castle Roger Houed. Mat. Par. Ypod. Neust. within the danger and distance of such an Engin, & the King ( Ger Dorob. vpon hearing the bow goe off) stooping with his head, was mortally wounded in the left shoulder; the anguish & perill wherof was extreme∣ly augmented by the butcherly and vnskilfull hand of the Surgeon, who hauing drawne out the wood Houed. cals him Carnifex. and not the Ro. Wendouer. enuenomed yron, Rog. Hou. f. 449. mangled the arme with cruell incisions before hee could preuaile; the paine whereof hastned his end. (69) Concerning the name of this tragicall Ar∣cher, there is so much variety, as that we could wil∣lingly take that vncertainety for a warrant to silence it: being loth to ennoble him with our pen, it being a thing worthily punishable with vter obliuiō, to haue shed (though defensiuely or but casually) the bloud of such a King. Mathew Paris Mat. Paris in calling him Peter Basilij, seemes to allude to some ominous conceit in Basilii (which with the Greeks signifies a King;) him Thomas Walsingham followes therein, as Mathew Pa∣ris followed *another: there want not * some who Ypod. Neust. Rog. Wendouer. Ger. Dor. also giue him a third name; but Houeden who deli∣uers this accident, as all the rest of this Kings life, in the most probable and fullest manner, cals him Ber∣tram de Gurdonn, applying vnto him certaine Constitit ante pe∣des , ; , &c. verses of Lucan, in commendation of his vnapalled constā∣cy, when he came before King Richard: where thou maist perhaps (for satisfaction of thy mind, with be∣holding some reuenge) desire to know what became of the Actor. After that the Castle by continuall assaults was taken; and (by the Kings command) none left aliue but he (as being reserued Rog Houe. s. 44 perhaps to some more shamefull death) the king (vpon a christi∣an magnanimity) for gaue him the fact, which the party (without shew of dismay) did neither deny nor excuse, but alledged the necessity of his case, and the iustice of Gods worke in it, for that the king had slaine his Father and two Brothers with his owne hand: being hereupon set at liberty, and one hun∣dred shillings sterling giuen him by the king: Mar∣kadey (Captain of the Mercenarie Rowtes) after the Idem fol. 450. king was dead, tooke him, flead him quicke, & then by hanging ended his life. (70) King Richard feeling the approch of certaine death, disposed his worldly estate, thus: to his bro∣ther King Richards will. Iohn he gaue the kingdome of England, and his other dominions, with three parts of his Treasure, Houed. fol. 449 commaunding such as were present to sweare him fealty: to his Nephew Otho king of Almaine, he be∣queathed (as it O nia sua, saith Houed. seemes) all his goods and chattels, money excepted, and the fourth part of his said tre∣sure he gaue to his seruants, and the poore. And hauing thus discharged his last cares toward the world concerning his transitory state, he prepared himselfe for the presence of God, strengthning his soule Rog. Wendo. Math Paris. with hartie contrition, confession, and par∣ticipation of the holy Sacrament: commanding further, that when he was dead, Ro. Houed. his bowels should be buried at Charro , among the rebellious Poicto∣uins, as those who had only deserued his worst parts: but his Heart to bee enterred at Roan, as the City, which for her constant loialty had merited the same; and his Corps in the Church of the Nunnerie at Font-Ebrard in Gascoigne, at the feet of his Father King Henry, to whom he had beene sometime dis∣obedient: and God affording him gracious leasure till hee had thus disposed of all; the venemous va∣pour ascended to his heart, and draue the spirite forth, with whom (say *Authors) the glory and honor of Militarie skill exspired. Mat. Paris. (70) There hath been an opinion, or fancy, that this King was called Cordelyon, because hee encoun∣tred a Lyon in prison at the Emperours Court: but (saith Fabian. one very truly) these are fables imagined by English tale-tellers to aduance their King Richard, as the Britaines, by the like, aduanced their King Ar∣thur. The like deuice (though more lofty and Mathematicall) may theirs seeme, who coniecture, hee was called so of the famous And yet a Starre he gaue in his de∣uise, as is seene in both his Seales. Starre called Cor Leonis. But how the conceite of killing of a Lion should come vp, as i is not worth the while to en∣quire, so certainely, Hugo de Neuile (one of King Richards speciall familiars) is recorded to haue slain a Lion in the holy-Land, driuing first an arrow into his breast; and then running him through with his sword: whence perhaps that atchieuement is trans∣ferred from the man to the master; and the story applide to the by-name of King Richard, whereof the true reason is that which * Thomas Walsingham mentioneth, saying; That for the magnanimity of his Ypod. Neust. heart (grossitudinem praestans, saith an Ger. Dorob. other, mea∣ning, as it seemes, that his materiall heart it self, was bigge and massiue, which Math. Paris, in Rich. 1. and his Epitaph. Neustria tu{que} Cor in∣expugn Regis. another also saith was in∣expugnable) this King was both by the English & Nor∣mans stiled Caeur de Lion. His Wiues. Alice the daughter of Lewis the seuenth, King of France, by Queene Alice daughter of Earle Thibald of Champaigne, is by M r . Ferrers. some reputed the first wife of King Richard, though indeede she were A ilius. onely con∣tracted to him (being both children) and committed to his Father; but when he demanded her, his father refused to deliuer her, or she to com to him, or both: Wherefore being King, conceiuing displeasure a∣gainst King Philip her brother, and more then suspe∣cting Houeden. her continency with his owne father (by whom he alledged she had a child) he refused to take her: yet Mat. Paris p. 113 gaue a hundreth thousand pounds to Phi∣lip, pro quieta clamantia, to be quite freed from her. She became the wife of William Earl of Ponthieu, and had issue Queene Ioan of Castile, the mother of Queene Eleanor, wife to King Edward the first. Berengaria the second wife of King Richard, was the daughter of Sanches the fourth of that name, King of Nauarre, sonne of King Garcie▪ the fourth: her mother was Beatrice daughter of Alphonso, the seuenth King of Castile, called the Emperour of Spaine. She was conueied by Eleanor the kings mo∣ther vnto the king in Sicily, and married to him in Cyprus, whence she accompanied him to the Holy land. The king (vpon what cause we find not) negle∣cted her company for a while, but vpon more setled thoughts, he resumed her againe to his loue and so∣ciety, but had no issue by her. His naturall Issue. Philip, the naturall son of king Richard, seemeth to haue been begotten, while he was Earle of Poytou, M r . Ferrers. of a Gentlewoman Poytouin, and to haue had of his fathers gift a towne in Poytou named Sumac, to haue taken also his surname, and title of the same towne; and to haue beene the Progenitour of a familie of Gentlemen of the same surname & title, in the same Country. Isabel (by * some who mention not Philip at all) is reputed the Naturall Daughter of king Richard, M r . Millet. (whose mother the Author nameth not) and that she was married to Leoline Prince of Wales. Three other Daughters, (Bastards no doubt) King Richards three Metaphori∣call Daughters. he is said to haue, of whose names and matches wee will report as we finde recorded. Whiles hee was in France imployed in his warres against king Philip, Fulco a French Priest, came vnto him, telling him he had three very bad Daughters, which he wished him to bestow away from him in marriage, or else Gods wrath would attend him: when the king denied, he had any daughter, yes (quoth the Priest) thou cheri∣sest three daughters, Pride, Couetousnesse, and Lecherie. The king apprehensiue of his meaning, called his Lords there attending, and saide: My Lords, this Hypocrit hath found that I haue three Daughters: which I maintaine, viz. Pride, Couetousnes, and Leche∣rie, which he would haue me bestow forth in ma∣riage; and therfore (if any such I haue) I haue found out most fit husbands for them all. My Pride I bequeath to the haughty Templars & Hospitallers, who are as proud as Lucifer himselfe: My Coue∣tousnesse I giue to the white Monks of the Cisteaux Order, for they couet the Diuell and all: But for my Lechery I can bestow it no where better then on the Priests and Prelates of our times, for therein haue they their most felicity. Doubtlesse these ma∣riages proued so fruitfull, that their issue hath now ouerflowed all kingdomes of the earth. IOHN DVKE OF NORMANDIE Monarch. 45 An. 1199. GVYEN AND AQVITAINE, &c. THE FIRST, STILED LORD OF IRELAND, THE FORTIE-FIFTH MONARCH OF ENGLAND, HIS RAIGNE, ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER VIII. T He lustre of Diadems, and Soueraignety, so dazeleth the eyes, and bewitcheth the hearts of ambitious beholders, that whiles they fondlie Greatest happi∣nes not in grea∣test dignities. deeme the greatest con∣tent to bee in highest Ti∣tles, running after a see∣ming Happines, they often cast themselues headlong, and whole Kingdoms, in∣to irrepairable ruine; as the calamities, which after the death of the noble Ceur-de-Lyon, lighted on the Pretenders to his Crowne, and on this miserably di∣stracted State, will yeeld vs too ruful a President. To the full acting of which Tragedy (for such it was, and so we must now present it in this our Theatre) con∣curred The principall Actors in K. Iohns tragicall raigne. as principall Actors, the two (though these Patients rather, as the issue proued) vnfortunate Corriuals for the Crowne, Iohn Earle of Moreton Brother to the late King, and his Nephew Arthur, the Borne after his Fathers death, who died at Paris 1186. Cal. Aug. Ypod. Neustria. Giraldus, Hib. expug c. 22. Posthumous sonne of Geoffry Duke of Britaine, the Earles eldest Brother: their two Female (and there∣fore more emulous and restlesse) Solicitors, Queen Eleanor and Lady Constance, each ambitious of their owne, in their Sonnes aduancements: their two reuengefull Abettors, Otho the Emperour for Iohn, and Philip King of France for Arthur: thereupon, the two vniust Intruders on the Crowne; Lewis the Philip the 2. of France. French Kings Sonne, and Innocentius the Pope, the one by vnprincely forces, the other by vnpriestlie Innocentius the 3. fraud: and lastly, their two sorts of treacherous In∣struments, of the Laitie for the one, and Clergie for the other; all which, like so many Tragicke fire∣breathing Furies, set this State in so horrible com∣bustion, as that the In other . smoake is not as yet, so many ages after, quite allayed. (2) Earle Iohn (the very Centre in which those Earle Iohns so Kingdome. calamities met,) had from his infancy beene fedde with high and royall hopes, as Quem tenerri∣me diligebat. Guil. Nubrig. being his Fathers one∣ly darling, from whome hee had the Gerald Hib. ex∣pug. l. 2. c. 31. possession of the Irish, and Ger. Dorob. M. S. intendment also of the English King∣dom: and in his brothers time ( Guil. Nubrig. whose return from the holy warres all men despaired) had by gracious deportment towards the Subiect, obtained an Rog. Houed. in Ric. 1. oath of Fealty to himselfe, in remainder, in case his brother should die childlesse: hauing now therefore the way to those his designs made smoother by the Triuet. M. S. Roger Houed. Ypod. Neust. and al, except wilful Polydor. last Wil of King Richard, and Rog. Houed. & alij. allegiance of his Nobles then attending; (for these courses may facilitate, but not make a iust claime;) wee may not thinke, that either hee was cold now, for the accomplishment of The titles of both competi∣tours. that, which so hotely hee had before pursued, or so nice, as to neglect a Kingdome, vpon scrupulous points of Titles and Right. Iure propinqui∣talis, & Testa∣mento Successor. Walsing. Ypod. Anno 1199. Triuet. Propinquity of Bloud plea∣ded for Iohn, as Iure communi Paul. Aemil in Philip. 2. Lineall descent for Arthur, the Kings Brother being neerer then his Brothers sonne; but Iohn, who knew that the weaker vse to argue their Titles, whiles the stronger hold the possession, re∣solued to trie the strength of his claime by no other Law then of Armes; and therefore, being at time of King Richards death in those forraine parts, hee Earle Iohns helps for the Kingdom. makes it his first care to fasten to himselfe, by present Rog. de Wen∣douer. M. S. largesse, and large promises of future fauours, (the vsuall Rhetoricke of Competitours) all the Stipen∣diary Souldiers, and other Seruitours of his deceased Bro∣ther. To winne himselfe the like assurance of loue at home, and Rog. Houed. in Ioh. to settle (it it might be) an vniuersall quiet, he Math. Parisi∣ans. Hist. Maior. forthwith despeeded into England (there to concurre with Queene Eleanor, his experienced mo∣ther) three of the choisest men of the State, Hubert Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, William Marshall a potent Peere, and Geoffry Fitz-Peter the great Iu∣sticiar, Earle Iohns Agents. by whose seuerall interests, the three States of Clergy, Chiualry, and Commonalty, might best bee ey∣ther allured to him by fauours, or awed by feare; himselfe, the whiles Wendouer M S. in Ioh. posting to Chinon, where King Richards great Treasure was kept; as knowing that hee should hardly get or keepe a Crowne by Forces or Friends, if hee wanted Coine & Crowns, to winne and hold such needfull Ayders. (3) The Treasurer, though Houeden in Ioh. himselfe with his Store, Castles, and Fidelity, thus assured to the Earle, Duke Arthurs Adherents. had yet a powerfull Thomas de Fu ∣nes. Nephew, the Castellan of Angi∣ers, wholy Paris Hist. Ma or deuoted to Duke Arthur, to whose vse hee yeelded vp that City and Castle, with whom also Idem. The beginnings of hatred betwixt Earle Iohn and the Prouincials. sided the Nobility of Aniou, Maine, and Turaine, surrendring those large Territories, as to Rog. Hou. in Iohn. their liege Lord, iointly auowing it to be the Iudici & con∣suetudo, ib. Mat. Westminst. saith Iudicium, Ius & consuetudo Law and Custom of those Signiories, that the heritage which was to accrew to the elder Brother, if hee had suruiued, should descend vnto his Sonne. But Constance Arthurs mother, no lesse Polyd. Verg. l. 25 desirous to be Regent to a King (for her son was but Walsing. Ypodig. Borne An. 1187. die Pas∣chae, his father dying before in August. twelue yeeres young) then Queene Eleanor Solainuidia, &c Polyd. ibid. disdainefull to goe below a Dutchesse, did not dare to build her high hopes on so low grounds, for that such subordinate Princes as fauoured her cause, might easily be corrupted by faire meanes, or cru∣shed by foule: and therefore vpon newes of King Iohns successes in England (for with general applause and Houeden. Iohn proclaimed King in England. homages hee was now proclaimed King,) di∣stracted with violent and Woman-like Passions, Ambi∣tion of her sonnes Right, Rage for his Wrong, Feare of his Safety, and (not the least) Emulation that Queene Eleanor (whose Prudence and Grace with the English, had Polyd Virg. l. 15 swayed exceedinglie) should effect more in a wrong, then her selfe in a iust cause; Rog. de Wen. MS Constance com∣mitteth Arthur to Philip King of France. shee flies to Turon to the French King Philip, (to seeke a Wolfe to whom shee might commit her Lambe,) to whose Protection shee wholy surrenders his Person, his Cause, his Countries. Philip Maguisicis ver∣bis, &c. Polyd Verg. l. 15. pretending (as Princes vse) atender care of his neighbour Princes state, but Iob. de Serres in Phil. August. meaning indeede out of so wished a prize, to raise aduantage to his owne, forthwith ( Nich. Triuet. MS. The beginning of hatred betwixt K. Iohn & King Philip. without regard of Truth, or Truce sworne to King Richard) reenfor∣ceth all Arthurs Cities and Castles with his French Garrisons; some of which had scarse put their foot into Maunz, but Math. Paris, King Iohn ta∣keth and ruineth Maunz. King Iohn was at their heeles, to prouide them their last lodging, sacking that Citie, and demolishing it to the ground, for a terror to all o∣thers, which after fealty once sworne vnto him, (as Rog. Houeden. they had done) should dare to reuolt. (4) Queene Eleanor, who hauing setled England in Queene Eleanor comes to her sonnes aide. Peace, was now come ouer to forward her sonne in the Warres, and was Wendouer, MS. Mat. Paris. present at the surprising of Maunz, is Hollensh. Polydor. censured to haue too much sharpened his edge against her Nephew Arthur and his friends, out of her implacable disdaine, and Enuie towards Constance her Daughter in-Law, and appears no lesse; for the King passing thence into Aniou, left there his Marchadiune cum ruia sua. Rog. Houed. Queene Eleanor taketh & ruineth Angiert. Captaines and Forces with his mother, who made An∣giers participate the Fortunes of Maunz, the City ruined, the Citizens captiuated; whiles himselfe comming to Roan, Mat. Paris. was there by the hands of Walter the Archbishop, in the Cathedrall Church with great pompe on Saint Marks Festiual, girt with the Gladio Duca∣tus. Nic. Triues. M S. Ducall Sword of Normandy, and crowned Houeden. King Iohn crow∣ned Duke of Normandy. with a Coronet of Golden Roses, (taking his Oath for faith∣full administration in that Dukedome) which was the pledge or earnest of his vnquestionable admit∣tance to the English Diademe, which euery day now expected him. Neither yet may wee thinke, albe∣it King Iohns An. aetat. 32. Walsing. Ypodig. The fittest age, as a. Sam. c, 5. v. 4. Dauid was 30. yeere olde when he began to raigne. mature & experienced age, his home∣bred, and well knowne education, his reannexing of Irelands Kingdom to Englands, made his person more gracious then Arthurs, that yet his Agents all this while in England found no rubbs in their way, before Rog. Houed. King Iohns hin∣derances how remoued. all the Earles, Barons, Burgesses & Free-holders could bee induced to disclaime Arthurs apparant Right, and to sweare fealty to King Iohn against al men liuing: yea, many of the Ric. Earle of Clare. Ranulph Earle of Chester. William Earle of Tucesbury. Walram Earle of Warwicke! Wil. de Mowbray, &c. Pretence of li∣berties, the plague of the State. English Peeres (who through their last Kings absence, and others conniuences, had habituated in them a conceit of vncontrouled Greatnes, which they miscalled Liberties and Rights, vnder vayle whereof, they after drew, not onely vndue restraints vpon the Regaltie, but also infinite calamities and massacres on the people, whose good they pretended,) in the great Assembly at Northam∣ton, yeelded onely to sweare a Sub bac con∣uent ne, Houcd. Conditionall Fealty, to keepe Rog. Houed. The first seed of the ensuing troubles. Faith and Peace to King Iohn, if hee would re∣store to euery of them their Rights: which was the first seed of disloyalties, which after grew to so great a height. Thus howsoeuer, all domesticke difficul∣ties ouerblowne, and Queene Eleanor Vergil. hist. l. 15. left in A∣quitane to prouide against Forraigne, King Iohn ar∣riued at In Sussex. 8. Cal. Iun. Houed. Iohn crowned King of England. True honestly is only true, Polycy. Shoreham, and the next day comes to Lon∣don, preparing for his Coronation to bee at West∣minster, the morrow following being Assention day. (5) Strange it was to consider, (if ought bee strange in State-plots) how men, otherwise very pru∣dent, transported once with Wordly, and seeming∣politicke respects, can so wilfullie cloud their Rea∣son, as to attempt those things, which leaue both a present staine on their Soules, and a lasting disrepu∣tation both of their Integrity and Wisedome, wherein so much they glory. For what else did Hubert Archbishoppe of Canterbury, the man so Mat. Paris. famou∣sed as the Singularie Co∣lumna stabilitatu. ibid. Pillar of the Common-wealthes stabilitie, & Vir profunds pectoris, Incom∣parabilis sapientia ibid. incomparable for deepe-reaching Wisedome, when in that sacred and celebrious Assembly of Omnium qui Coronationi inter∣esse debuerant, Wendouer, M S. all the States, addressing for the roiall Inauguration, hee ad∣ded to those Lay-Peeres Conditionals, his Clergy-So∣phismes, and The second roote of ensuing treasons. second Seede-plot of Treasons; perswa∣ding them by a cunning, but disloyall speech (which yet Polydore for∣geth a sleight speech of his∣ovvne brain, and Hollinsh. as idly followes him. Archbishop Hu∣berts Sophisticall Oration verba∣tim. some by transforming, haue more deformed) that the English Crowne was meerely Arbitrary and Electiue at the peoples deuotion? That Mat. Paris. Hist. Maior. they all in discretion were to know, how that no man hath Right or any other fore-Title to succeed another in a Kingdom, vnlesse first (with innocation for Grace and Guidance of Gods Holy Spirite) hee be by the Body of the Kingdome thereunto chosen, and be indeed some choice man, & pic∣ked out for eminencie of his vertues; by the President of Saul, the first Annointed King, whom God made Ruler ouer his owne people, though neither the Sonne of a King, nor yet of any Regall descent. So after him likewise Da∣uid the Sonne of Printed Copies read Semei falsly for Ishai, 1. Sam. c. 16. Ishai: the one for being valourous, and a Personage fitting royall dignity, the other, for being Holy and Humble minded. To The examples doe not shew it: for they were of Gods particular commandement, which was not now. shew that so he, whosoe∣uer in a Kingdome excelleth all in Valour and Vertue, ought to surmount all in Rule and Authority: yet so, as that, if any of the Ofspring of a deceased King surpasseth others, it is fitte iointly to consent in election of such a one. Thus hee spake (as hee professed) in fauour of Iohn, who then was present, whose most illustrious Bro∣ther King Richard dying without any Heire from him descending, Him they had all (first imploring the He ascribes that to the Holy Spirite, which after he confes∣seth to proceed from his owne deuise. Holy Ghosts assistance) as being a Prouident, Valiant, and For, his Father, and two Brethrē, Kings, his Mo∣ther, Queene, first of France, after of England: Arthur nothing so. vn∣doubtedly-Noble Prince, vnanimiously Elected, as wel in regard of his Merites; as of his Royall Bloud. So vn∣iust a speech from so great a Person, could not but moue both Offence and Wonder to many, euen to Iohn himselfe, who doubtlesse meant to stand to Iohn de Serres, in Phil. August. his right of proximity by bloude: Mat. Paris. N usi ambigere. but they durst not then and there moue Questions thereof, as afterward Idem, ibidem. some did, to whom he gaue a reason of it, as strange as the speech it selfe; saying, Rog Houed. Mat. Paris. Hubert forecasts to bridle the King. that he was assured by some diuining foresight, that King Iohn would work the ruine of the Kingdome, and that therefore, to Giraldus Camb. saith he was Principis frenum. See vit. Archiep. Cant. in Hubert. bridle him from so doing, hee had affirmed his Admission was to be by Choice, and not Hereditary Succession: implying that as by Election he got the Crowne, so by E∣iection on demerite hee might as iustly loose it. But for that present, the Ceremonies all pompouslie accomplished, (where Rog. Wendouer, Triplici Sacra∣mento inuolutus Rex. King Iohn first doth reward his three Agents. three Oaths were ministred to him; To loue Holy Church, and preserue it from all oppressors; To gouerne the State in Iustice, and abolish bad Lawes; Not to assume this Royall honour but with full purpose to performe that he had sworne:) the first act and bounty of his kingly Power, was to reward those, whose hands had lifted him to it, making William Marshall and Fitz-Peter, Earles of Pembrooke and Essex, and the Archbishoppe, Lord high Chan∣cellour; who seeming Rog. Houeden, d gloriaretur in potestate illa. to glory in that addition of ho∣nour, was told by the Lord Bardolf, that the height of Archiepiscopall dignity was such, as it was euer reputed a great aduancement for a Chancelor to be Archiepiscopall dignity. made Archbishoppe, but none for an Archbishop to be made a Chancellour. (6) The Kings Enemies, Polydore, Francus re dissimulanit. who kept their heads in, whiles hee was there in Armes, founde oppor∣tunities to impeach him, while hee was here setling his Peace: the Pol. Verg. French King in Normandy surpriseth the City Eureux, & recouers the County of Main; the Britaines regaine the City Angiers with other strong holds: the newes whereof caused King Iohn with all speed From Shore∣ham to Deepe, (13. Cal. Iuly.) Nich. Triuet. to passe the Seas, to giue stoppage to that current; where on his arriuall, his Army of Rog. Houed. Friends and Voluntaries was so encreased, that King Philip was soone content to take In Crastinum Assumptionis, Houed. ib. A Truce with the French. truce for fiftie dayes; on expiration whereof, an Enteruiew was a∣greed on to establish a lasting Peace. But Philip a With Henry the second, and Richard, vide supra. Double dealing most vnseemely in a Prince. long time noted of dubling, (ill beseeming any, but chiefly a Prince) the Crastine Ass . Math. Paris. very day before the two Kings should meet, giuing Duke Arthur the Militari Cing ∣lo, ibid. Belt of Knighthood, and taking of him Homage for the Sig∣niories of Aniou, Poytou, Turaine, Mayne, Britanny, and Normandy, hee made him faithful vow, to yeeld him powerfull helpes, for acquiring those possessi∣ons. Neither was King Iohn behind him in that kind of preuention, when Philip Earle of Flanders, the French Philips professed Enemie, Feria 6. ante Assumptionem. Houeden. comming to Roan, and disswading King Iohn from trusting anie French friendship, did there sweare vnto him both x Rog. Wend er, MS. A League be∣twixt England and Flanders. faithfull Helpe and Homage. Yet the two Kings keeping touch for the day, though not for the pur∣pose of amitie (and yet making faire shew of that too) held Parley betwixt Butauant and Houeden, which Wend er and Paris call Wail . An Enteruiew of the Kings of England and France. Guletun, Wend er. two dayes by Commissioners inter-current, the third by presence and priuatie, that not one of their Nobles or Attendants (who on each side lay farre aloofe for the space of an howre) vnderstood any passages betwixt them. This much yet came to notice by after re∣lation, that Rog. Houeden. King Philip then required for Himselfe the large Country of , , Woge∣sin. Houed V o∣casinum. Poly r. V o-Casium. . King Philips vn∣reasonable de∣maunds. Veulguessine, pretending that Geffry Earle of Aniou graunted it to Lews le Grosse, for aiding his Sonne King Henrie the second against King Stephen: and for Arthur, all Poictou, Aniou, Maine and Turayne: both which immoderate de∣maunds with others, King Iohn (conceiuing with 1. R g. 2 22. Sa∣lomon, Why doth he not also aske for Adoniah the King∣dome?) N t, nec , Par . The Parley ends in discord. neither would nor ought to graunt vnto him; whereby their amities intended, ended in more ho∣stile defiances. But Philips capitulating then for Arthur, was onely perfunctorie and complemen∣tall, as his owne words, (and afterward his actions) bewraied; when being questioned by his Fauou∣rites of his implacable Rog. Houed. hatred against King Iohn, who had neuer harmed him, professed it was onely, for that hee had (not, defeated Arthur, but) possessed himselfe of Normandie, and the other Demaines, without asking him leaue, or offering him Homage. (7) The flames thus on all sides breaking forth the stronger, by how much the more they had been for a time kept in, Houeden. many Earles and Barons of France (who formerly adhered to King Richard) be∣came Homagers to King Iohn, they swearing, neuer without his assent to reuert to Philip, and hee, ne∣uer to make Peace with Philip, but they therein to bee concluded. In the heate of which sidings (if not before) a Math. Paris. chiefe adherent of the foresaid Earle of Flanders (now col-leagued with King Iohn) being the Bishop Elect of Cambray, fell into the hands of the French, at which time also Of whom, see in Richard the 1. Philip Bishop of Bea∣uois, (a great French Peer) was held in prison by King Iohn; and neither of them willing to forgoe their mi∣tred Champions, Mat. Paris. Petrus de Capua, the Legat, inter∣dicted France for the one, and Normandy for the o∣ther, till they, as persons sacred & inuiolable, should bee dismissed: yet King Iohn (whose Person and Title the Pope and Papals as yet much tendred) had the fauour to wring out of his prize, Paris, Houeden, saith but 2000. sixe thousand Markes for his release, and an Oth, neuer whiles he brea∣thed to beare Armes against any Christian. Nic. Tri et. M. S Rog. Houeden. This Le∣gat in King Richards time, had made agreement with King Philip for a fiue yeeres Truce, which expiring with Richards last breath, hee still laboured to esta∣blish it betwixt the now Kings: but King Philips great heart would not so come downe, which was likely to haue cost him deere. For pursuing whi∣ther his Furie (a bad guide) did lead him, after his King Io pur∣sue Philip from place to place. siege of Lauardin ( Rog. Houeden fol. 452. Whence vpon King Iohns approach with his Army hee fled to Maunz, and thence again fled, King Iohn comming thither;) seized the Castle of Ba∣lun (which belonged to Arthur) and to preuent his enemy (as is likely) Rog. Houed. he leuelled it vnto the very ground; which fact Duke Arthurs Princeps Exer∣citus Arthuri, H cd. 8. Generall, William de Rupi∣bus wrathfully expostulating with King Philip, as hauing done therein contrarie to Couenants with his Lord Arthur, hee as scornfully answered, that hee King Philips wrongs to Arthur would not for his Lord Arthures pleasure, forbeare his owne, in doing as himselfe listed, with such forts as hee tooke. The Generall seeing Arthur was but the outward maske, vnder which Philip reuelld for his hidden ends, Mat. Paris. Rog. Houed. seriously perswaded his Lord to reconcilement with his vncle King Iohn, and rather to hazard his hopes on the clemency of a Generous Foe, then on the guiles of a false hearted Friend: & so making his peace with King Iohn, hee presentlie yeelded vp to him both Maunz, & (with Lady Con∣stance) Arthur reconci∣led to King Iohn. the young Duke also, the important matter of so great contentions. But Heauens were not so propitious to these Reconciliats, as so to hold them long: some Philippines buzzing such needlesse Rog. H d. ter∣rors of Imprisonment into the Noble Childs eares, that the next night, Feare giuing wings to his flight, Arthur flyeth from King Iohn. as Loue did to his Mothers, (for leauing her hus∣band Paul. saith Guydo was her second Husb∣band▪ but it ap∣peares otherwise by Houeden and others. Ranulph Earle of Chester, shee was amorous of, and married Guido a gallant Gentleman, who thē fled with her,) they escaped into Angiers. Arthur neither sure of K. Philip, nor sure to K. Iohn, had now cast himselfe betwixt two Milstones; but (howsoe∣uer) Philip ment the greist in the end should be his. (8) The breach betwixt these two great Kings, King P lip and the Emperors ha tred, encreaseth the malice be∣twixt King Iohn and Philip. was the more irreconcileable, by reason of the ha∣tred betwixt King Philip and the Emperour Otho the fourth sonne of Henry Duke of Saxony, and Maud daughter of K. H. 1. Otho, King Iohns Nephew, whose aduancement to the Empire (himselfe perhaps Rog Houed. f. 457. aiming to it) Philip still endeauoured to impeach, Mat. Paris. not regarding that the Pope (whose power Kings then regarded only, while it made for their purpose) had thundered his Anathe∣ma against all his Opposers: and Otho in Mat. Paris. gratitude to King Richard, who Mat. Westmin. An. 1198. procured him the Diadem Imperi∣all, and in tender regard of his vncles honour, sent him aduise, Rog. Houed. f. 452. The Emperour offers his aide to K. Iohn. not to hasten any finall attonement with the French King, for that himselfe would bring him his vtmost Imperiall assistance. Notwithstanding, by the Cardinall-Legates assiduous interceding, a Truce was concluded till the Idem. ibid. An. 1200. The Kings inter∣uiew againe. Feast of Saint Hilary: at which time, the Kings comming to a Treaty be∣twixt Wailun and Butauant Castles, Rog de Wendo∣uer, M. S. Paris. Houed. Articles of at∣tonement. it was agreed: that Lewis the Heyre of France should marry King Iohns Neece, Blanch, Daughter of Alfonsus King of Castile; that King Iohn should giue for Dowry the City and County of Eureux, with sundry Forts in Normandy, and thirty thousand Markes in siluer; vowing also not to aide his Nephew Otho with men or means to attain the Empire: & further, Nich. Triuet. MS promising to leaue (if he died without Issue) vnto Lewis al the Terri∣tories he held in France; all which Articles were Vide Chartam apud. Houed. p. 463 for∣merly engrossed, but finally cōcluded betwixt Buta∣uant, & Guletun (the Houed. f. 456. one, K. Iohns, the other, King Philips Castle) the Paris. 11. Cal. Iul. Octaues of Saint Iohn Baptist, when, these Counties were actually surrendred to Philip; the Lady Blanch Walsing. Ypod. A. 1200. espoused to Lewis his son; Duke Arthur (Philips once vowed, but now vnua∣lued charge,) yeelded ouer, and made Home Io annis. Houed. Seruant and Ypod. Neust. Loco cit. King Philip yeelds vp Arthur to King Iohn, a∣gainst his vow. The Emperours two Brethren sent to King Iohn. Homager to K. Iohn for his own Dukedom; whom yet his vncle was content to leaue with King Philip, who had now so left him, and erst had vpheld him, onely as the baite of his owne aduantage. If Princes can bee thus vnprincely degenerous, what trust can men repose in baser vassals? King Iohn hereupon proued much more stedfast to Philip, then either Philip was to him, or himselfe to Otho the Emperor, who sending his two Brethren Henry Duke of Saxo∣ny, and William (surnamed of Houed f 456. Winton) to demand the Counties of Eboraci, saith Houed perchance for Ebroica, . Yorke and Poictou, with the Treasure and Iewels which Nich. Triuet, in Rich. 1. M. S. King Richard bequeathed him: King Iohn denied to yeeld thereunto, Rog. Houed. King Iohns care of his oath to K. Philip. only in regard of his Oath which hee had passed to Philip, to yeelde no kind of aide to the Emperour. And further to testifie, (yea further then he ought) his faithfull meaning to preserue intire this amity with Philip, Wendouer. Houed, f 457. by his ad∣uise he diuorced So called by Wendouer, Paris. Mat. Westminst. Houed, &c. but our Heralds (Glouer, Milles, Ferrers, &c) call her Isabel. Hawisia his wife, as too Grandchild to Rob. base-brother of King Iohn. neere of Bloud, by sentence of the Archbishop, and Bishops of Burdeaux, Poictoirs, and Xanton, and by the Arch∣bishops hands espoused Isabell, Ioh. de . Heiretrice of Ail∣mar Earle of Angolisme, a faire yong Lady, but Ypodigma. de∣destined to another bed. (9) This Finall Concord (so Apud Houed. called, but not prouing so) with Philip, who now acknowledged Iohn the Ibid. f. 463. rightfull Heire of King Richards Crowne, gaue him more leasur, to receiue peaceably all Idem f. 457. Sub∣mitties, and bring in forceably all ib. f. 458. out-standers of those his transmarine Dominions, and after to look home to the affaires of his Kingdome, from which hee had beene (and we there following him,) too long absent. Yet in the heate of those forrain im∣ploiments, hee on occasions had his recourses hither to settle his State-affaires, and Ib. Consuet. . 463. Crowne-Reue∣newes; to enact wholesome Idem f. 439. lawes for forraine and domesticke Commerce; to collect an Houed. Ayde for his Neeces great Dowry, and Martiall vses; which later (being three shillinges on euery See the de∣scription of Hun∣tington shire. Carrucata,) though his first and onely Subsidie since his com∣ming to the Crowne, caused much heart-burning; especially by meanes of his Sonne of H. 2. by Rosam d. owne brother Geffry Archbishoppe of Yorke (touching whom the King was Houed. f. 453 forewarned, that hee would bring a Sword, & not Peace into England) who bearing himselfe too bold on his bloud and place, Wendouer. M S. forbad the Collectours of that Aide in his precincts (though it were Wendo. granted to the King generally for all England) and also being required by the King to attend him into France, to conclude the Peace, and his Neeces Espousall, he very vndutifully denied his seruice. The King Causa multi∣plex . Paris. iustly moued with those his disloyalties, caused all his Temporalities to bee seized on by his Sheriffe; whom therefore Geffry (adding fresh fuel to the fire) did solemnly excommunicate, caused the Kings Offi∣cers to beare blowes, and interdicted the whole Pro∣uince of Yorke. So partiall, and vnhistoricall, is the report of Polyd. Virg. l. 15. one; (a Stranger by birth, but more strange for bold vntruthes) who faines the onely in∣centiue of such indig nation in the King, was that Prelates reprehension of his Rapines on the people. For (to giue a further taste of that Authors Gra , l. 3. vehe∣ment fond malice, iustly so taxed) what ancient Iudi∣cious Writers call an Wend. Houed. Aid necessarie for Warres, that he enstileth Rapines and Spoiles; where they make Iohn his Brothers Heyre by Will, hee makes Arthur; they say hee was a Strenuus Ani ∣sus. Houed. Cam∣brens. valiant man, hee saith he was a Coward; where they make him Houed. pursuing, and Philip flying, hee chargeth him to haue made on∣ly plaints, when he should haue drawne swords; where they charge the Peeres for Su detrectan∣tibus Militiam. Triuet. MS. drawing backe from his Warres, hee makes them the onely Hasteings, and Iohn the Hinderer; briefly, if a Polyd. l. 15. fire-shooting Mete∣or appeare aboue, it portends Heauens fury on Iohn; if the ibid. watry Element ouerflow, it bodes Iohns fury on his Land. But surely that part thereof, which fell on Geoffry, it was (you see) not vndeser∣ued: notwithstanding, vpon the Kings 8. Id. Octob. Paris. returne into England, and Geoffreys to his more loyall carriage & submission, his Peace was made, at the very time, & for the more celebrity, of Queen Isabels Dominica ante festum Dionys. Coronati∣on, with whom the King himselfe was Paris. Houeden. again crow∣ned at Westminster by Archbishop Hubert. (10) The Pompe of that solemnitie ended, the King resolued of ending a long depending contro∣uersie with King William of Scotland, who formerlie The Interuiew of the Kings of England and Scotland. (before Iohn was proclaimed King) had challenged, as Houeden. his patrimoniall Right, the Counties of Northum∣berland, and Cumberland; and afterward seeing he got but words and delaies, was ready, (King Iohn being then in France) with an hotter and more forceable argument, to winne, what hee could not craue: but being in dark At Dunferli . Houeden. deuotion all Night at Saint Margarets Hearse, the still true Shee was Grandchild to King Edmund Ironside, and wife to King Malcolme 3. of Scots. English- hearted Queen per∣swaded him by a Dreame (for certainely it was no o∣ther) not to infest England her natiue soile; who ther∣upon sent backe his Army. But now he commeth with a more friendly traine, vpon King Iohns sen∣ding to him, in Honourable Houeden. Embassage, the Earles of Huntingdon and Hereford, King Williams Brother and Nephew, his three Sonnes in Law, Lacy, Vescy and Ros with others, to desire him to giue him mee∣ting at So Houeden, VValsing. Westm. but Hector and Polydor by error say at London. Lincolne, where accordingly they both 11. Cal. Decemb. Houed. meet with kingly curtesies; and the next day, King Iohn to auspicate his Temporall affaires with Spirituall deuotions, (and yet to shew what hee thought of some superstitious follies of those times) went Idem. vn∣dauntedly into the Cathedrall Church, being much dis∣swaded by many, (for Monkish Impostures perswaded many it was very ominous for a King to enter that, and certaine As Saint. is∣wides Church in Oxford. other places) and there offered a gol∣den Chalice on Saint Iohns Altar, which King Stephen be∣fore dared to enter the City. Paris. in Steph. no King be∣fore him durst doe. Where his Deuotions perfor∣med, the two Kings (in presence of Cant. Dublin. Raguse. three Archbi∣shops, thirteene Bishops, the King of South-Wales, with a multitude of English, Scottish, French, and I∣rish Princes and Peeres,) ascending the toppe of that conspicuous & high Now called Bore. ill. hill, on the North side of the Citie, did there in a glorious solemnity, sweare a∣mitie and faithfull loue, Triuet. M. S. VValsing. vpon the Crosier of Archbi∣shop Hubert. (11) That Spectacle so roial to the beholders, was seconded with another no lesse Honourable to K. Iohn, (for Humility in such great ones is more glori∣ous then their glory,) when the King hauing latelie left Hugh Bishoppe of Lincolne (called the Saint, for The funerals of Hugh Bishop of Lincolne. the opinion of vnfained integrity, though See Polydor l. 15. ble∣mished with some obstinacies, and surcharged with Legends of In Wendouer. Paris. & Legend. of S. Hugh. fained Miracles) at London very sicke, (where himselfe with gracious care Paris hist. ai. went to visite him, and both confirmed his Testament and promised the like for other Bishoppes after,) now hea∣ring hee was Negligent Po∣lydor saith he di∣ed, An. 1207. Reg. Iob. 6. dead, and his Corpes then bringing into the gates of Lincolne, hee, with all that prince∣ly Traine, went forth to meete it; the Rog. Houed. three Kings (though the Scottish was to depart that very day) with their roiall Allyes, carrying the Hearse on those shoulders, accustomed to vphold the weight of whole kingdomes: from whom the Great Peeres receiued the same, and bare it to the Church Porch, whence the three Archbishops and Bishops con∣uaied The manner of Bishops funerals in those dayes. it to the Quier, and the next day (it there ly∣ing the meane time Mat. Paris more Pontific , p. 197. King Iohns great humility. open faced, mitred, and in all Pontificall Ornamentes, with Gloues on his hands, and a Ring on his finger) interred it with all solemnities an∣swerable. Yet here the King rested not to giue proofe, in so great a height, of his lowly mind, and then benigne (how euer afterward auerted) to the Clergy; when twelue Abbots of the Cisteaux Habit (whose See Hollinsh. in K. Iohn. The Cisterians deny aid to K. Iohn. whole Order had displeased him, by refusing to giue Aid towardes his great payment of thirtie thousand pounds) Houed. f 462. came now to Lincolne, and all prostrate at his feet, craued his gracious fauour, for that his Forresters had driuen out (for so the King had giuen commaund) of his Pastures and Forrests all their Cattle, wherewith themselues, and Christs Poore were sustained. The King touched with remorse on K. Iohns facility to pardon offen∣ders. so venerable a troope of Suppliants, (though so great offenders) commaunded them to rise, who were no sooner vp, but the King Rog. Houed. ib. inspired with diuine Grace, fell flat on the ground before them, desiring pardon, ad∣ding, that hee not onely admitted them to his loue, & their The great welth of that Order consisted in cat∣tle and wooll. beasts to his Pastures, (a speciall fauour which Kings had graunted that Order,) but would also build an Abbey for men of their sort, (if they would designe some choice seat) wherein himselfe meant to bee enshri∣ned. Neither did he promise then more then hee performed, nor were those wylie Humiliates regard∣lesse of choosing a delicate plotte for the purpose, where hee built a goodlie Abbey of their Order, de∣seruedly for the pleasance of the place, named The Beauteous place an Abbey in Hampshire by New-F rest. Beau∣lieu, and of valued (at the dissolution vnder H. .) at 428. l. 6. . d. q▪ yeerly. rich Reuenue, and excessiue Priuiledge; continuing long of great renowne, as a Castle of refuge inuiolable; our Auncestors thinking it most hainous sacrilege, thence to draw any, though wilfull Mur∣derers or Traitors: wherein the Founders of such vnsanctified Cambden Hampshire. Sanctuaries, & Temples of Mercy (so they called thē) throughout this Kingdom, seemed rather to take Romulus for their President, thē Moses, who granting fauor to casuall Manslaughters, yet Exod. 21. v. 14 commanded wilfull Murderers to bee drawn from the Altar to the slaughter. (12) By what degrees, men not onely of such re∣puted-religious habit, but also of the Secular-Clergy, fell afterward more and more from such fauours of The first brea∣ches betwixt the King and his Clergy. the King, and hee from theirs, a man that will not purposely winke, may easily behold, both sorts stan∣ding so stiffe on their persons, and their possessions Exemption from Regall commaund, that whiles the Apud Mat. Paris, pass . Pope could haue all for any superfluous im∣ploiment, The Clergy stand on a three∣fold exemption. 1 Of their Per∣sons. 2 Of their pōsses∣sions. 3 Of their Pre∣lacies. the King could get nothing, though his Kingdome were in hazard, as you heard by the dis∣loyall obstinacies both of the Archbishop of Yorke, who denied the King his personall attendance, and those Cisteaux Monkes, whose Coffers were thus lockt against him. The like pretended Exemptions of their Clergie-Prelacies (as well as of their Persons and Purses) wrought also like offences, both with former Kinges, and now with King Iohn, who on the death of Bishop Hugh, resoluing to conferre by gift, (as his See in K. Hen∣ry the 1. Ancestors did, and Successit de Oxe in Norwic. Iob. de Gray. D Io regis. Hou. f. 458 Hereford. Rex dit gydip ibid. himselfe elsewhere lately had) that See, on some whom either merite or affection had endeared to him, (the rather, because Mat. Paris▪ in Guil. 2. men of those places, in those dayes, were vsually their Soueraignes bosom-Counsellors) Rog Houed. hee was with peremptory affronts withstood by the Cannons there, who very bolde on the Popes vp bearing, reckt very slenderly their Princes displeasing. It is not vnlikely that Arch∣bishop Offence taken by the King against Archb. Hubert of Cant. Hubert (lest Canterbury might be thought in∣ferior to Yorke in daring boldnes,) as being Papal le∣gate, in secret bolstring them had a hand, though closely carried in a gloue: for that the man, who lately, Rog. Houeden. gloried the King was wholy his, now finding hee had not the sway hee expected, and thought hee deserued (by obligement of his first Agency about the Crowne,) not onely studied to make vpp that by his Legatine Glory which hee wanted by his Princes countenance, but further, Habe hollow heart to K. Iohn. (as Polyd. Verg. l. 15 one who thinkes hee extolles his vertue, paints forth his disloyalty) hee repented now, more then any thing in all his life, that hee had so aduanced King Iohn to the Crowne. Certes, about this time, hee shewed slender respect to his Soueraigne, (for as God is in Hubert resisteth the Kings chiefs officer. his, so are Kings dishonoured in their Ministers dis∣graces) when being prohibited by Fitz-Peter, the Kings great Iustitiar and Minister (in the Kings ab∣sence) of regall commaund, Houeden. from holding a General Councell of his Prouince, (neuer vsed to bee held, but by Soueraigne permittance) his pleasure scornde to take any countermaund, but from him especiallie, who, in Archiepiscop in Regno a Rege secunda perso . Mat. Paris. calling his inferior, by As fellow agents for the Kings aduancement. Hubert outbraues the King himself. An. 1201. ioynt deserts to∣wards the King, but his Equall, was now, in neere∣nesse and fastnesse to the King, become farre his Superiour. But what speake I of confronting a subordinate power? did hee spare to out-beard his Soueraigne himselfe? It seemes no. For hauing notice, the Feast of the Natiuity now approaching, that the King intended with his Queene, at Guilford to keepe that feastiuity with great magnificence; he whose Pallace ordinarily, for Splendour, multitude of Attendants, and sumptuous intertainements did striue with the Kings (as one of his own Mat. Parker in Antiq. Ecc. Aug. in vit. Hubert. Successors auows) thought this a fitting time, to shew, both his great state, and little regard of his Princes discountenance, by Mat. West. Quas cum Rege a pari conten∣dens. paraleling to the Kings, his owne sumptuous pre∣parations, Wend , M. S with rich attires, and costly gifts for his At∣tendants at Canterbury. The King (as Kings brooke not to bee braued by Subiects, nor is it wisedome for dissauourites to doe it,) moued Mat. Paris. with great in∣dignation, thought the man had too much riches, & too little Discretion (which seldome lodgeth in the braine, where Pride dwels in the Heart,) and there∣fore to abate somewhat the one, and learne him more of the other, hauing first beene in the St eth in saying he then went into Ire∣land. North parts to gather money for his better vses, hee meant not to lauish it in keeping his Easter, which he chose rather to doe at the cost of Hubert the Mat. Parker Antiq. cc. Aug. Godwin. in. vit. Hubert. Rich; & not to spare him, who spared not himselfe, he there in∣creast that great expense with a greater, of His, and his Queenes solemne Rog. Wend M. S. crowning againe on Easter day, in the Cathedrall Church; where, in lieu of his expence, Hubert had the formall honour to set on their Crownes, but yet not the grace to sit neere the Kings Heart. (13) Such being the first ouertures of hart-bur nings betwixt the King and his Clergy, which after The first br ∣ches the king and his Lay Peeres. by additament of dayly fuelling, brast forth into a more fearefull flame; the Lay-Peeres were so farre from labouring to quench it, that they made it the fiercer: for these Bellowes of Rebellion, which be∣fore their Homages did condition for their Rights & Liberties, were not all this while sparing of their breath, to inflame other Nobles with the like heat of fury. Hell it selfe (whence al Rebellions spring, and thither fall againe) could not wish a fitter oc∣casion to broach and actuate such a mischiefe. For the Rog. H d. Poyt ins with King Phillps conniuence, (taking aduantage of King Iohns absence, and Springs ap∣proach) were vp in Armes, dislodged his Garri∣sons, beleagured his Castles; tidings whereof recal∣led King Iohns thoughtes from his Domesticke Pompes, to his Transmarine Affaires; for the pre∣sent, he gaue commaund to his War . de Clapi∣ . Seneschall of Nor∣mandy to attempt on them some Counter-seruices, to withdraw the Seigers, (whom also King Philip, Houed. f. 465. hearing King Iohn was in person comming ouer with an Army, forthwith recalled,) and published his gene∣rall Apud Tenk sbu∣rie, die Ascensio∣nis. Paris. summons, that his Earles, Barons, and all that held by Knights-seruice, should bee ready at Ports∣mouth with Horse and Armes, on Whitsonday then instant, to crosse the seas with him. The tumultu∣ous Earles knowing, that the King then needed Liberties the cause of conten∣tion. their present helpes, and therefore might bee forced to any Capitulations, in a conuenticle held at Ley∣cester, by a Houeden. ioint conspiring, sent an audacious mes∣sage to the King, that they would not attend him, vnlesse hee would first restore their rightes; with which disloiall refusall, the King iustly incensed, Malousus con∣ lio. Houed. by some mens too praecipitate aduise, (considering the ha∣zardous time which needed a salue rather then a co∣rasiue) seized into his hands some of their Castles, to preuent their further attempts, of some he tooke their children for pledges, and others, whose Purses were likely to doe him truer seruice then their ow∣ners, hee Wendouer. M S. released vpon payments. At which prefix∣ed time, he dispatched before him William Earle of Pembrooke, and Lord Roger Lacie with Houed. two regi∣ments to ioyne with Normandies Seneshall. What a Rog. Houeden. graue Author iudged of those bold Barrons here, and other turbulent Great-ones then abroad, may bee gathered by this; that as soone as mention fell in of those refractary Lords, he streight fell off, to shew how in that very yeare, Pope Innocent then raigning in Rome, Saffadine the Turke in Ierusalem, By Houed. so na∣med, but Alexius by Nic. Triuet. A∣lexander the Nic. Triuet. M S sheweth he de∣priued his bro∣ther Cusath of Empire and eyes not of life. Fatricide in Constantinople, (for so he yo∣keth those three together, with some others follow∣ing them;) the great Doctors preached, that then was the time ( Apoc. 20. v. 7. prophesied by Saint Iohn) when after a thou∣sand yeers restraint, the Diuell was let loose, to seduce the Nations like a v. 2. & 8. Serpent, and trouble the world like a Ibidem. Dragon: which how true it proued in this our Nation and little-World, (in whose Tragedy the Diuell also, amongst the Supra § 1. first named Actors, comes now to play his part,) the Diabolicall ensuing pra∣ctises, both of fraud and fury, will hereafter demon∣strate. (14) The King, though thus disfurnished of his principall home-helpes, yet Houed. f. 465 entrusting the custo∣die of the land, especially those Southern parts, with Parker in vit. Arch. Cant. erreth in saying it was Hubert the Arch∣bishop, whose name was Hubert Walleri. Hubert de Burgo Lord Chamberlaine, and re∣ceiuing to Houed. f 465. full reconcilement (for more security of the Northerne,) Geffrey Archbishop of Yorke, whose Ibid. Churches large Priuiledges then he ratified; with∣out delay at Portesmouth hee put forth to sea, with I∣sabel his Queene, though in sundry Bottomes, and with differing successe, a Hollens. sudden gust disparting the Fleet, whereby the King was driuen backe on the Isle of Wight, but the Queene Mat. Westmin. Walsing. and yet Houed. saith, Prosperis ventis ganisa. with much adoe, arriued safe in Normandy, whom soon after the King follow∣ed thither. Vpon whose arriuall, the French King Paris Hist. minor M S. perceiuing the power of his aduersary, presently con∣discended to another personall (but very Nemine conscio Houed. priuate) Parley; wherein each gaue and receiued such reci∣procall satisfaction in their desires, that thereupon, not onely the former bonds of Amity seemed to cōtinue strong, butwere also more strengthned with a new knot of Wendouer. M S. Association, wherein sundry great Lords of either side were by indentment of Wri∣ting, made suerties to the counter-part, with condi∣tion, that whither of the two Kings did first violate the Couenants, all his cautionary Lords should bee released of their alleagiance to him, and become Leegemen and Assistants to the Prince offended. And that the world might take more notice of their combined loues, they Houed f. 471. both agreede to contribute to the Holy-Warres, (which now beganne to bee on foot) the fortieth part of the whole Reuenewes of their Crownes; sending their Epist. Apud Houed. f. 471. letters abroad into their Dominions, to encourage all their Nobles & people, by their examples to doe the like. With which intercourses, & other cōplements, three daies being spent betwixt them, King Philip the deeper to serue himselfe into King Iohns good opinion, (the Tuta frequensq via est, per Amici fallerenomen. surest way to ouerreach another in any commerce) by intreaty obtained his company, first to S. Denises Pallace, Hollias. where hee entred with a pompous Processi∣on of the Clergy, and lodged with royall entertain∣ment by the King; and the next day, to Paris, where hee was receiued with Ypod. Neust. Holins. very rich Presents of the Ci∣ty, and great applause of all sorts, to see so noble ar∣guments of affection betwixt two so great princes, lately so mortall enemies: where the French King betaking himselfe to a more priuate mansion, left his owne pallace to accommodate and honor Eng∣lands King. After some dayes there bestowed in princely delights, and entertainements, King Iohn conducted forth of the City by King Philip, and par∣ting with mutuall attestations of loue neuer to bee parted, tooke his iourney towards Normandy, in ful hope to enioy thence forward the contentment of quiet to himselfe, and peace to his Dominions: but those windy hopes soone changed with his change of the aire. (15) For whiles at Chinon hee was roially enter∣taining Queene Berengaria his K. Richards wife sister (whom Rog. Houed. hee there also bounteously satisfied in performing the A new conspira∣cy. Ioynture promised her by King Richard, giuing her the c City and Signiory of Baion, two Castles, and their Demaines in Aniou, with a thousand Markes yeerelie for tearme of life,) and at Mat. West. Ann. 1202. Argenton in Normandy, where hee kept his Christmas, was sola∣cing himselfe with his faire Queen Isabel; the Earle of March, Hugh, surnamed Le-Brun, a P. Aemyl. in Phil. 2. Peere of great power and alliance, to whom Isabel was first promi∣sed (though for her Nondum aunos nubiles attigerat. Houeden. vnripe yeares he neuer bedded her) enflamed with loue of her, who was now thought worthy to bee a Queene, Aemil. lo. citat. drew on other Poictouine Nobles, to thinke that hee was vnwor∣thy to bee a King, who wrongfully had taken her Houed. saith her father gaue her to King Iohn. fol. 457. from him, and would, if not preuented, do the like in time with them. So, Ypod Neustriae. once againe young Ar∣thur, whose former hopes were all cold, is re-kindled by these fire-brands, and set vp by their malice, to supplant his vncle, but by Heauens Decree, to o∣uerthrow himselfe, howsoeuer the Mills his Cata∣log of honour in Richmonds Earles. Britaines, then fascinated with his ominous Name, dreamed that the ancient Great Arthur was risen againe in him, and that the Translation of the English Kingdom was now The French king breakes amity with K. Iohn. by him to be effected. Neither was the Wendouer M S. French King, for all his late painted pretensions of loue, deafe to their suggestions, who laboured to incense his hatred against Iohn; whereto hee had these fur∣ther inducements; that King Iohn might quicklie waxe too potent a Neighbour in that Continent, if his quiet and power were not timely rebated; that now the meanes to worke it, were more then be∣fore, the Rog. Houed. English Peeres being alienated in affection from him, for denying their claimed Liberties; but chiefly, that the Nico. Triuet, M. S. profite (such base ends can some propose of so Noble a Band) which hee hoped for by his amity (being the Walsing. Ypod. enioying of those Signiories in the Continent, if hee died sans Issue) was now in a manner cut off, Queene Isabel beginning to giue apparant hopes of some faire fruite from so faire a stemme. Thus whiles Earle Hugh out of his loue, Duke Arthur out of Ambition, King Philip out of Auarice, (ah that the noblest person should haue the basest end,) but all out of Hatred, were contriuing King Iohns ruine; hee was farthest from suspition, when neerest his danger, and yet they, who thus were forwardest to vndermine his Greatnes, were themselues formost to bee crusht with the weight thereof. An other enter∣uiew of the two kings. (16) But these slie Serpents shrowded in secret their enuenomed heades, till the warmth of the Mat. Paris. hist. min. M. S. saith in Lent. Spring (a time suiting for martiall mischiefes) cal∣led them forth; when King Philip (hauing new∣ly cast his skinne, and as most able, so was Mortali arma∣tus odio. Wend. M. S. most willing to break the way) desired another enteruiew with King Iohn: who comming thither (the Nich. Triu. M S. Mat. Paris saith it was neere place was twixt Vernon and Lisle Dandale) vvith expecta∣tion Castle. of some fruits of those louely courtesies which their last meeting seemed to haue engrafted; he there found that this last winter had nipt all those faire blossomes. For Philip, Hist. min. Paris. MS. forgetfull of all former Com∣pacts, and Tr et. M. S. pretending some imaginary wrongs, in outragious manner Mat. West. W douer, M. S Paris hist. min. M. S. required him without delay to redeliuer into Arthurs hands, all his Transmarine do∣minions, Normandy, Turayne, Aniou, Poictou; or o∣therwise as Lord Paramount of those Countries, which Iohn held by Homage, he peremptorily VValsing. Ypod. cited him personally to appeare in In qumdena Paschae, ibid. Easter Terme at Pa∣ris, there to Nich. Triuet. M. S. answere what should bee laide to his charge, and to abide the Arrest of his Court of Iustice. The colour on which hee thus did cite▪ him, was (say Ralph Cogshall. Iohn Stow. some) King Iohns sharpe repressing of some rebellious attempts of Hugh le brun the former yeer, whereof the Earle complained to King Philip, as to the chiefe Lord. King Iohn much amased to see, not onely hony so soone distempered into gall, but the French King also turned into an Apparatour, Hist. maior. Mat. Paris. disdai∣ned both his Citation and Commaunds, as very vnno∣ble for Englands King to accept, or the French to of∣fer; neither indeed did Philip thus put the matter to daying, as intending any such legitimate proceeding, but onely to make his aduersary secure of any other assaults, then by Petty-foggers. For whether it be true or no, Ralph Cogshell. Iohn Stow. that King Iohn for his non-appearance, was by sentence of the French Peeres adiudged to loose all his Territories in the Continent: certaine it is, that Die sequenti, say Mat. Westm. & Rog. Wend. M. S. no sooner was the Conference with indignation bro∣ken off, but Philip (hee had before prepared to ef∣fect what hee had proiected) with power and fury assailes Butauant Castle, whose Turrets (high-reared by Stowes Annales King Richard) hee Hist. minor. Mat. Paris. MS. leuelled with the Foundati∣ons, and thence sodainely like a flash of lightning, be∣ganne to inuolue the Mat. Westm. King Iohn for∣ceth King Philip to raise his siege. neighbouring partes with ransakings and ruines, till giuing an assault, (which had held him eight dayes) to the Castle of Radepont, King Iohn comming to the rescue, forced him with shame to speed away. To repaire which dishonour, d Confusus recessit. Wendouer. MS. and to empaire the English forces by distraction of imploiments, returning to Paris, hee there Paris. min. hist. MS. ap∣points for Arthur (to Stowes Auncles. whom hee had now affianced his yonger daughter) both certaine selected Nobles to bee protectors to secure and guard his person, & also bands of Souldiers to attend his commaund, a∣mongst which were 200. the Mat. Westminst. choice Knightsof France; all which in Mat. Paris hist. maior. very pompous Troupes followed him, (with Philips Paul. Aemil. in Philipp 2. directions, and also supply of The. Walsing. great summes of money) into Poictou, to reduce those partes to his Allegiance; which was no hard matter to ef∣fect; the greater part of Commaunders there (being fore-wrought) expecting nothing more, and the bet∣ter part suspecting nothing lesse, then these perfidi∣ous assaults. (17) Queene Eleanor Regent of those prouinces, attended with a Mat. Paris. hist. min. very slender guard, yet strong inough for daies of quiet, (which both her Magno nat , Aemil. Age did now desire, and her Idem. Homage done to Philip, and Philips faire shewes to her did promise;) hauing no speedier notice of those incursions, then the vnpleasing ef∣fects thereof, (for on Arthurs good successes, Paulus Aemil. K. Philip proclaimed him Lord of those Dominions) be∣tooke her selfe into Mirabeau, one of the most te∣nable townes in saith Andeg s agri . Poictou, sending to King Iohn, (whose force were then in Mat. West. Normandy and King Iohns letter, see Hollin. Queene Eleanor besieged in Mirabe . Mayne, repressing or preuenting Philips attempts) for pre∣sent aids. Which yet could not so speedily come, but Arthur (who knew that vpon seisure of such a prize as Eleanour, hee might draw her sonne to any conditions) had preuented them, besieged her, and Iohn S rres Paulus Aemil. possessed himselfe of her towne, though not of her person, as A il. Polyd. some by mis-understanding haue mis-re∣lated. For she Westmin. Paris retiring into the Castle, made it good against her Grandchilds incessant batterie; about which, whiles he, with his Paris. . continuall supplies of Poi∣t ine u Paris , MS. and Mat. West. Anio ine princes, was Paris. . MS. indefatigably bu∣sied, King Iohns Army neere at hand (for his ex∣pedition both by day and night to his mothers res∣cue, is recorded as W douer, MS King Iohns letter in Hollin. admirable) brought the newes of their owne approch; which caused Mat. West. the great Army of the Leagers so industrious before to im∣peach others, no lesse sollicitous now to de∣fend themselues. Both Armies Wendo. M. S. martially ranged, & Arthurs Battalions not onely Paris hist. . MS. vndauntedly, but also very W douer. pompously comming on to the shocke, the fight proued Mat. VVest. most fierce and terrible, each side resoluing, by reason of both the Competitors presence in the field, that the End and vpshot of all their designes, depended on that dayes succese: which in the end by the fortunate Paris. hist. . prowesse of King Iohn and his English, fell disastrouslie on Arthur, his French, and other Assistants, who after a Polydore, great slaughter made amongst them, Triuet. MS. turning their backs to him, from whom they had before turned their Faithes, tooke their flight Mat. VVest. towards the Towne, to shelter their liues within those walles, which so late the Seat of their triumphes, became now the cage of their cap∣tiuation, and the Toombe of all Arthurs ambitious hopes, though himselfe so vnhappy as to suruiue them: for VVendouer. MS together with the tumultuary flyers, the victorious King & his Armie entred, renued a Mat. VVest. most bloudy fight, repossessed the Town, freed his mother, enthralled his Enemies, and recouered all the prouin∣ces which had reuolted. (18) This victory was so glorious to King Iohn, and so dreadful to his Enemies, (for King Philips two chiefe confederates, Paris. Arthur and Hugh Brun, Litera K. Iob. Ray∣mund, Father to Guido the husband of Constancia, Rog. VVend. all the Peeres of Poictou and Aniou, Litera Regis. aboue 200. French Knights and others of command, besides the vulgar multitudes were taken prisoners) that both then King Philip, though very hote in the siege of Argues in Normandy, presently cooled and Mat. West. con∣founded with newes thereof, brake vppe his fortnights fiege, and returned home; and since, the French fawning fauourites, and King Iohns malig∣ners haue sought to extenuate the matter, auerring against VVend. Paris. Tri et. VV lfing. VVest. all truth of record, that it was exploited So Aemelius, before the French were come to Arthurs aide, and So Polydor. when all his Souldiers were both vnarmed and vnor∣dered. But, as others highly extolling king Iohns valour herein, Triuet. Walfing. interprete those fore-doomes of Merlin to haue beene ment of him, M rlini V tici∣nia. that hee should hee crowned with the head of a Lion, should cut out the tongues of Bulles, and lay yron chaines on the backes of r ring Beasts (and indeed hee VVend . chained them hand and foot, and so conuayed them away in Carts, a kind of riding till then vnusuall with them,) so King Iohn him∣selfe, Litera Regis apud Hollins. duely acknowledging the greatnesse of Gods goodnesse therein, sent his Letters to all his Barons wheresoeuer (thereby to encourage the loiall, and hold in awe the tomultuous) inciting them so ren∣der all prayse vnto God for so admirable a worke, and so gratious assistance: and soone after Paris . MS. hee dispersed his noblest Captiues into sundrie Castles in Nor∣mandy and England; Arthurs sister Eleanor, called the Damosell of Britaine, being Yp digma. Neustr. committed to Bri∣stow Castle, where shee Shee liued till 1241. Paris . 3 long liued with VV lfing. Anno 1203. very ho∣nour able vsage. And though the kings displeasure was iustly incensed against her brother Arthur, for so frequent wauering in his faith, yet meaning to trie all meanes of winning him who had thus lost himselfe, Holl sh. hee sent for him (being then at Falaise in the custody of . Hubert L. Chamberlain) and entreated him very gently, promising him all honoura∣ble respects, if (as yet) he would resolue to forsake the French kings amity, and frame both his mind for hearty loue, and his Actions for peaceable obseruance towardes him, his vncle and Leege Lord. Which exceeding clemency, the ill-aduised young Gentleman (for what wisedome is it to shew pride where wee neede mercy, and to giue threates beyond possibility of performance?) Mat. st. requited onely with arrog nt and vndutifull language, furiously obraiding the king with violent and fraudulent detention of the English Crowne, which menacingly he there required of him, and allother King Richards Countries, as his lawfull in∣heritance, affirming with an Oath, that vnlesse he did forthwith restore them, hee should not long line in peace. With which incorrigible pertinacy the King pro∣uoked, as seeing no place left to better hopes, Mat. Paris. com∣mitted him to stricter custody Stowes Annales vnder Robert de Vey∣pont, in the Castle of Roan. (19) The Britaines fury and conspiracies, which King Iohn hoped to abate by this their Princes du∣rance, Rad. Cogshall. were thereby much more augmented; like Serpents, most strugling with their traines, when they feele their head in pressure. Which moued the King, who was now returned into England, (and in triumph of his late victory, Wendouer. MS wore his crowne a∣gaine at Canterbury at the cost of his former host) to take aduise of his Councell touching his troubled affaires, whose sentence was (if wee will credite the Rad. Cogshal. reporter) that Arthur should loose his eyes. But the escaping of such tortures, is by Holins. some ascribed to the commiseration of Lord Hubert; by Paul. Aemyl. others, to the mediation of Queene Eleanor, who interceded with her Sonne for her Grandchild as long as she li∣ued, which was not long; Deathes vnpartiall hand (and Iohn de Serret griefe of heart, some say) laying that great & prudent Queen, (the wife of Lewes of France & Hen. of Eng. two mighty Kings, and mother of Hen. Rich. Iohn. 3. sonnes of H. 2. three) where Princes and Pesants are all equals. Her Nephew much behind her in age, soon ouertook her (if not By Paris it see∣meth shee out∣liued him. outwent her) in destiny; whose death diuulged on King Iohns returne from Eng∣land, Paris. min. hist. M. S. gaue his maligners fresh coloured occasion, both to molest his quiet, and to distaine his estimati∣on, as if hee had not onely beene the Causer, but also the executor of it with his owne hands. (20) As the Tongues of Parasites are no true scales to weigh the worth and vertues of Great men; so nei∣ther King Iohn slan∣dered about Ar∣thurs death. ought we to iudge of their (or any mans) ble∣mishes, by the deforming pencils of Enuy or Rancour; with one of which, no eminency, either of place or of vertue, was euer vnattended. And that this bloo∣dy aspersion on the King, came from no other foun∣taine but malignity; such as then liued, and might therefore best know the truth, and were also (as Monkes gnerally were) his most bitter Taxers, and therefore farre from saluing his infamy with parti∣all falshood, can best witnesse. It was (saith Paris. hist. min. MS. one) by certaine persons auowed that Arthur attempting to escape secretly out of hold, was by casualty drowned in the Riuer Seyne (on which the Castle of Roan is seated;) and yet the Frenchmen, the Kings mortall enemies (and therefore plenary credite not to bee giuen them) giue it out, that hee was murthered by the Kings command, yea and by his owne hands: thus by the malice of slanderers, Englands King became not a little defamed. With whom other the approuedst Authors accord (thogh differing in the Some saying he died of griefe, some of wilfull abstinence from food. manner of his death) that this im∣putation sprang onely from the Trinet. Walsing. French emulation, as since it hath beene kept on foot, onely by Serres. Aemy∣lius, Polydor. French, or Italianate spirits; Sabellicus Ennead. 9. l. 5. one of which hath not blushed to charge King Iohn with murdering of his owne Bro∣ther King Richard, and Paris ad Ann. 1241. another with killing Arthurs sister, who yet outliued him 24. yeeres; so shame∣lesly will the penne blur the truth of Actions, where its once dipped in gall against the person. But sharper showers then of tongues (which being vndeserued, are a Iohn Harding. Chron. c. 142. er∣ring also in his Sisters name, saying: Thus slew hee both Arthur and Isabell, To ioy the Crowne of Eng∣land, as men tell. to bee vnregarded) were sequels of Arthurs death: it seeming to giue new life to King Iohns troubles, & King Philips hatred, which yet once againe must go masked vnder the roabe of Iustice. For Philip cites Iohn as Duke of Normandy, to appeare at a set day, to bee tried vpon point of Mat. West. Treason by his Peeres; Con∣stance Arthurs mother (well brooking her name for her immutable hatred to King Iohn) is made the Iohn de Serres. plantiffe, requiring iustice of Philip, as both their So∣ueraigne; King Iohn not appearing, is condemned Paul. Aemil. in Philipp 2. The Peeres sen∣tence vpon King Iohn. of a traiterous outrage, for that carelesse of his oath made to the French, he though an vncle, had murthered his elder brothers sonne, being an Homager to the French, and that within the French Territories; without any le∣gall course, nor by cognizance of those to whom it apper∣tained; whereupon hee is adiudged to bee held an enemie to the French State, to forfeit all his Signories which by Homage he held of the French, and those to reuert to the Crowne of France, and a re-entry to bee made by force of Armes, if any deny possession. Thus now the se∣cond time, by solemne sentence the King & Peeres of France disherited and condemned King Iohn, though absent, vnheard, neither confessing, nor conuicted of the Action; albeit at that time Ex Combdeni Brit. in Richmun∣diae Comit. hee sent them his royall promise to come, (if they would giue him publike faith and safe conduct for his comming & returning) and answere at Paris touching the death of Arthur, though hee was his Leegeman, had sworne him fealty, had violated the same, had raised a rebellion, and was taken in battle. Vpon which grounds, if King Iohn had caused the pretended execution on so ca∣pitall a Complotter both against his Life & Crown; and one, who had caused so much bloudshed of his people, and more would if he had escaped; in Ingenia Regum prona ad formidi∣nem, Salust. which cases Princes are and ought to be very iealous; what vnderstanding Statist can iustly condemne him, or iustifie the French iniustice? Especially it being questionable, and euen then Cambd. loco citato. much debated, Whe∣ther the Peeres of France were competent Iudges on a King annointed, and so their superiour, the King of Eng∣land and Duke of Normandy being but one person, & maior dignitas absorbet minorem, the greater dignity was to swallow vp the lesse. But when the will of a Ru∣ler, is a rule, or ruled-case to his Iudges, no other could bee expected then by these Peeres was per∣formed. (21) Neither did they here stay; but (as in most Ann. 1203. States, the Acts and Decrees aduantageous to the Princes, are carefully pursued, though others sel∣dome or coldly executed) that heady sentence was Ioh. de Serres. seconded with as hasty force, on Philips part, and on Iohns (if some Authors say true) as much neglected. It is no rare thing to see Princes (because on their safety depends the State of their Kingdomes) often suspitious of dangers where there is no cause; but it is vnexcusable in them, vnder a shew of resolution to bee secure, where they see their Person or State may bee neere vnto hazard. An intelligent man would thinke, that whiles so vaste indignities were in hatching (yea and now on wing) by so insatiate e∣nemies, King Iohn had beene whetting his reuenge, leuying his forces, strengthning his confines, com∣bining his friends and Allies, so to regret their pride and malice, who thus proceeded to vnstate him of that Paulus Aemil. in Phil. 2. goodliest portion of France, Iob. de Serres saith ab An 885. part wherof for a∣boue three hundred yeers had been the inheritance of his Ancestors. But whether it were the Male filijs infa∣tuatus. Wendouer. bewitch∣ing dalliances of his faire Isabel, with whom hee was in armes, when hee should haue been in Armes as Paris hist. min. some Authors taxe him; or his deceiued expe∣ctation of Aides from his Barons, as Apud VVendo. himselfe al∣leadged; or promised redresse by the Pope, as the Ypod. Neust. sequele shewed: too true it seemeth, that beginning his Christmas at Cane in Normandy with festiuall pleasures not vnfitting the season, hee continued them so vnseasonably and vnreasonably too, that he gaue both to the De Serres. French leasure to execute their Peeres sentence, and Paulus Aemil. to the Brittons and Poytouins, an edge to prosecute their old rebellions, now new∣quickned with the losse of their young master: where∣by his strongest Towns and Castles dayly fell away, either by force of Assailants, or treachery in defen∣dants, or on dispaire of needfull aides. (22) Treachery as it was formost (for it gaue be∣ginning and meanes to the rest) so did it most in vndermining King Iohns possessions, which stirred him to take sharpe reuenge Th. VVals. by hanging vp all his Hostages of Poyton for their Countrimens treasons. But such a death (though of all other most disgrace∣full) is not so hatefull to a Spirit truly enobled, as is the staine of dishonour, especially for Treachery or Co∣wardize: from either of which I wish I could with truth acquite S r. de Quincy. Rob. Fitz-walter. Paris. hist. ma. those two great Barons (whose names wee will here forget) to whom King Iohn entru∣sted the defence of the famous Castle called Vall-de Ruill; who no sooner saw King Philip Rog. Wend. M. S. engirding it with his great hoast, and mounting his Engines of battery against it, but eftsoones, before one stone of the wals was shaken, or any one of their men had lost the least haire of their heads, they dishonourably surrendred the Fort (a matter of very great consequence) to King Philips pleasure: who though abundantly pleased with the deed, yet so Mat. Paris. contumeliously (but most iustly, and prince-like) recompensed the Doers, for Traytors al∣wayes become odious, though the Treason becom∣modious,) that, for so base a part he commanded them to be fettered in chaines, and basely intreated in close pri∣son, till they had deerely redeemed their liberty, though they could hardly their reputation. Another noble Baron, Hugh Gur y. Polyd. l. 15. Captaine of Castle Galliard (which being built on a very high Rocke ouer Seyne, Ypod. Neust. King Rich∣ard had made impregnable) by his vndaunted prow∣esse, and Pol. Virgil. great slaughter made vpon Philips hoast, lying Walfing. Aemil. 6. moneths in siege about him, was far from any suspition of dastardie; but yet Wendouer. M. S. escaped not the blemish both of ingratitude and infidelity, in that at length hee not onely yeelded vp that Castle to the enemies, but also Mat. Paris. a. hist. secretly by night brought them into the Castle of Montfort, which hee betraied vnto them, not weighing his faith to his Leege Lord, who had bestowed on him that Castle, with all the honour and demaines thereto belonging. Otherwise for his first surrender, his case had beene more excusable, the fa∣mine (an vnresistable enemy) in the Castle being so great, that, as the Paul. Aemil. French Recorders them∣selues confesse, when the Women and others of the vnseruiceable sort were put forth for sparing of pro∣uant, and being betwixt the Castle and the Enemies, found pitty and releefe of neither, in the sight of them all a Woman great with Child was deliuered, and her in∣fant presently eaten vp. Amongst those, and other of King Iohns reuolting Barons, like so many falling Starres, if we should pretermit that fixed and bright Starre of vnmoueable fidelity and resolution, the Lord Constable of Chester. Robert de Lacy, wee should bee guilty of high of∣fence against true honour; who hauing receiued of his Prince the custody of the goodly Castle Rocke-Andely ( Rog. Wed. MS. which was builded also by King Richard) Paris. ad Ann. 1204. did brauely beare of the siege and power of King Philip and his hoast almost a whole yeere; in which space, though by their continuall batteries and vn∣derminings VVend. MS. a great part of the walles were flatted, yet they could neuer make entry vpon him, but were repulsed with slaughter, till his prouision of victuals being now spent to the last howre, he called his Souldiers together, encouraging them, after so long proofe of their Manhood not to faint now in the last Act; but to consider, that though it were better for them to die by famine, then to liue with reproch of false or faint-hearttednesse, yet it is more noble for soul∣diers to die fighting, then famishing, and together with their owne liues, to sacrifice to their Countries honour the bloud of their slaughtered enemies. Whereupon fiercely Pridie Non. Mart. Paris. sallying forth with his Resolutes, after a bloody shambles made in the middest of his belea∣guers, hee was by multitude ouerborne and taken; but De Wend . MS in regard of his exemplary faith and prowesse, in main∣taining his charge by King Philips expresse command, (a second princely and prudent fact, to discipline his Subiects by thus entreating his foes,) hee was ho∣nourably vsed, and Sub libera cu∣stodia, Paris. without r int of a priso∣ner. (23) But as the fact of this Peere was peerelesse, so was this Clemency in that King, but rare and vnac∣customed towards such Cheiftains as stifly out-stood his assaultes; Paris. hist. a. some of whom formerly hee had caused to bee dispiteously dragged at horse-heeles, for the terrour of others. Of which indignities, & other irkesome extremities, (the inseparable com∣panions of warre) indured by his people, when King Iohn had notice by Messengers sent vnto him for re∣liefe and aides; no maruaile is it, if Polyd Uirg. his griefe were aboue beleefe or measure, finding himselfe vtterly de∣stitute of meanes to relieue their wants, or his owne losses; albeit for the time hee bare it out with a manly shew, saying, Virg. l. 15. that these were but the French pilferings, of which he meant in due time to exact an ac∣count with interest. For what else could hee doe? The Normans (to omit those others in open Re∣bellion) Mat. Paris. ma hist. either wholy fallen away from him, or but dissemblingly adhering to him; his Paris. min. hist. MS. in ipso ar ∣culo deseruissent. Barons from home, failing him at his need; his Wend. MS. Nobles there about him, being vnder pretext of a speedy comming againe, retur∣ned into England: by which meanes the King Paris. hist. ma. was left very dispeopled, hauing onely a small traine, which could in so great a need doe him but very small ser∣uice: but that these important and vnportable mat∣ters Mat. West. did no whit moue him, nor could retriue him Wend. West. from the bosome of his too-dear Enchantresse, (which occasioned some to think him infatuated with So ilegijs vel male s. ibid. sor∣cery) is a thing past capability of beleefe. (24) The King thus disfurnished of all helps, In∣nocentius, the stirring Bishoppe of Rome, made fayre The Pope inter∣poseth betwixt the two Kings. shew to salue these temporall wounds with a spirituall playster; which doubtlesse made King Iohn more secure then stood with his good: for, in so great distresses, there was no forraine Prince fitter for the King to conbine with, then Otho the Emperor, his owne Nephew, and Philips professed enemy: so the Pope on the one side beginning to bee-iealous of O∣tho's greatnesse, mistrusted the concurrence of two such great friends, and therefore vndertooke to vm∣peere the debates betwixt those two great Enemies: and King Iohn on the other side, willing to make vse of the Popes fauour, durst not yet comply with any, whom his Sanctitude any whit disfauoured. His Le∣gates for this businesse, were the Abbots De Cas. Marij, & Trim ontium. Ypodi . of Cafmer and Troisfons: his motiue, that Polydor. these dissentions The Popes Nun∣ce . of Christendom weakned the wars against Turky: his colour, Paul. Aemil. that this contention being a matter of faith∣breach (as of Leagues, Oath and Couenants) the cogni∣zance thereof did properly appertaine to his sacred iu∣dicature; whereof hee made so little doubt, as that the Aemilius in Phil. August. very letter then sent to the French Peeres, is to this day registred for , De tal. l. 2. Tit. 24. de iure∣iur. c. 29. a pontificall decree: and this audaci∣ous Law then by Innocentius first brought to the world for current, Blon Decad. 2. l. 6. That whensoeuer one Prince is de∣linquent against another, the correction thereof apper∣taines to the Pope. Their Commission was, Tr t. MS. to call the Bishops and Princes of both Kingdoms, for setling a Peace; to inhibite all hostility; to reserue the further triall of the Right to the Pope as Ioh. de Serres. Soue∣raigne Iudge; Ypod. Ne st. to enioyne that all Religious places by the warres destroied, or empouerished, should be restored to their due State; P. Aemil. if either of the Kinges should bee refractary, his whole Kingdom present∣ly to bee put vnder Interdict. Philip, albeit the Pope was then offended with him vpon other terms, (for that hee Ioh. de Serres. imposed towards his warres a taxe of cer∣taine Tenthes vpon his Clergy, (against the Popes will) alleadging it was necessary that out of their pri∣uate abundance, they should beare a charge in the common preseruation,) yet knowing the Pope had need of his friendship about setling the Empire, he ment so long to side with the Popes authority, as the Pope would stand with his commodity, & repining to haue so faire a prey taken out of his talents, made bold to despise both the commands and the curses: yet this hee did Walfing. Polyd. in smoother fashion then hee had done once before, when he rigodrously punished all the Tri t. MS. ad An. 1201. Bishops and Pre∣lates, whom, for consenting to such a Papall censure, hee turned out of their Sees and dignities; for now, he Gagui . ap∣pealed from the sentence for a fashions sake, Polyd . but yet violently proceeded with his warres, and Wend. MS. did swimme with the full current▪ of his victories. The waues whereofso fast surrounded King , that Grast , . fearing also further treason of his owne men, hee thought good, till some better daies would shine vp∣on him, (especially winter season enforcing surceasse of warres) to abandon the place of his iniurious foes, to expostulate in England with his perfidious friends. (25) For that was the first worke hee did, alter his arriuall, ( Paris. hist. ma. which was at Portsmouth on Saint Ni∣cholas day in December) when Ma . VVest. laying to the charge of his Earles and Barons, that in his warres they suffe∣red him to be destitute of requisite aides, and VVendo MS. Paris. min. bist. MS. had left him in the middest of his enemies, by which their defaults, hee was thus despoiled of his Castles and Countries; thereup∣pon, by Paris. hist. . aduise of Hubert Lord Archbishoppe, and Lord Fitz-Peter Chief Iustitiar (who knew these were no Ao d M . VVestmin. occa∣siones cauillatori∣as. forged cauillations) he put them and other de∣linquents to their Fines, (for his Warres made him desire their mony more then their liues) wherein these two great Counsellors were Wend. MS. ouerseers for the receits the one for the Clergy, the other for the Lai∣ty) of both whom they receiued no lesse summes of curses, then of Coine. The like repining among the people, (who iudge of the goodnesse of a King on∣ly An. 1204. by sparing their purses) ensued on the grant of a large Subsidie (two Marks and halfe of euerie Knights Fee) in a Parliament In cras cir∣cumcisionis. Paris. presently after held at Oxford, where the King & Peeres conuening about redresse of those remediles mischiefs, the issue ( Rand. Cogshal. as seemeth) was, that Ambassages should bee addressed into France, two Prelates, Canterbury and Norwich, with two Earles Marshall and Leicester, to treat from the Body of the Kingdome, touching those Prouin∣ces, which being incorporated with Englands Soue∣raignety, could not without apparant iniustice▪ bee abstracted from a Nations common interest, vpon coloured pretences against any particular. Philip, ha∣uing Mat. Parri, vpon King Iohns departure thence vsed his whole Forces and wittes, to weary, or to winne di∣uers other Cities & Forts; which had till then stood faithfull (for which purpose hee also imployed sun∣dry Polydor. l. 15. instruments, themselues first corrupted, that they might corrupt others to defection, with great rewards and greater promises,) hee meant not now to re-commence Questions of Right, hauing alrea∣dy neere decided that point by the point of his sword: yet because hee was to deale with a migh∣ty Nation, hee would not abruptly refuse to capitu∣late, and yet againe by proposall of Stow. Hollins . conditions exceeding either Reason of Possibility, hee dam∣med vp all passages to peaceable agreement: Rad. Cogshal . Stowes Annales. his King Philips de∣maunds. demaunds were to haue either Arthur, whom hee knew to bee dead, redeliuered into his hands a∣liue, or else, his Sister Eleanor in marriage with all those Countries in that Continent: but those Statesmen easily perceiued that Philips heart, aimed farther then his tongue, and that with Eleanor hee hoped to purchase a higher dowry, euen the English Diadem, whose claim glided down from her bro∣ther to her; which perchance was the secret ground of his Hollinsh. Oth, that he would neuer linne to pursue that quarrell, till hee had depriued King Iohn of his Kingdome. (26) This Ambassage was not onely thus issue∣lesse, but produced also effects tending to further irritation: for this seemeth to bee the time when Annales Hiber∣nia, apud Camb. in Hris. Philip sent a brauing Champion, to iustifie by Du∣el before the States here in England, what his Master had done in France against their King in open warre; and Campians hist. of Ireland. l. . c 3 though it was not deemed expedient to ieo∣pard a Title of such weight on the Armes and For∣tune of one man; yet it was resolued the Challenger should not passe vnanswered, whereto none was held fitter then Iohn Curcy Earle of Vlster, (for Annales Hiber. re∣bellion and denying his homage to the King, condemned to perpetuall imprisonment in the Towre,) a man of Giantlike limme and strength, and of some dis∣positions not despicable, if they had not beene sa∣uaged with a too carelesse rudenesse: which appea∣red not onely in his Ibidem. wild speeches, touching the Kings misusage of his Nephew Arthur (which Campion hist. of Ireland, Iohn Stow Anna. some by errour alledge as cause of his indurant durance,) but euen now, when the king demanding him, whe∣ther hee would combate in his quarrell? Annales Hib. No, (quoth he) not in thy quarrell, nor for thy sake, but for the Kingdomes right I will fight to the death. Against which day, whiles hee repaired with large diet his impayred limmes and sinewes, the Frenchman hea∣ring of his excessiue feeding, and strength answera∣ble thereto, thereby fearing he had been some Mon∣ster of Nature, rather then a man, hee secretly snea∣ked away Campian la. citat. into Spaine ashamed to shew his face in France againe Curcy finding the King gracious, was hereupon released, and Annales Hib. is said (if this bee not to digresse) to haue crossed the seas for Ireland fif∣teen times, and euermore beaten backe to the shore: Compian ibid. (acknowledged himselfe herein iustly punished of God, neuer againe to see his owne seat, for displa∣cing God out of his, when he conuerted the Church of Prebendaries in Doan consecrated to the blessed Trinity, into an Abbey of Monkes, to the honour & name of Saint Patrick, Annales Hib. whose Image was erected in a stately seat, wherein before the Trinitie was depor∣tracted, which was thence reiected into a priuate Chappell. The Ibidem. Irish relate, that the two Kinges being afterward together (belike when they made the next truce in Erance) King Philip hearing Cur∣cy to bee in the English Campe, intreated to see some experience of his so much feared and repor∣ted strength: where a Helmet of excellent proofe The great strength of C rcy. full farced with Mayle, being set vpon a great woo∣den blocke, the Earle lifting his trusty Skeyne, first louring round about him with a dreadfull aspect, cleft so deepe quite through the steely resistance, in∣to the knotty wood, that none there could draw it out but himselfe, who did it with ease, and being asked by the Kings, why hee frowned so irefully be∣fore the stroke; hee told them, that hee then inten∣ded if hee had failed of his blow, to haue killed them all, both Kings and others the lookers on. (27) But what Philip could not in England by one Champion, he accomplished in Normandy by many; where hauing a Paris. hist. ma. mighty power attending him frō City to City, yet hee thought faire wordes would bee for himselfe both cheaper and safer, and with the Pro∣uincials more forceable then force it selfe; especial∣ly, where such troupes of armed Orators were at hand, and where golden preparatiues had made way with the chiefest. Philip tolde them, VVendouer MS their late Lord had quite forsaken them, and that therefore himselfe, as their supreme Liege came to prouide that his owne Countries might bee indemnified, desiring, them louingly to admit and embrace him as their Lord, sith now they had no o∣ther to protect them from skath; but menacing withall, that if they forced him to vse force, they should die no other death then hanging, or to be flead aliue: with which fawnings and fears, though many well munified places were fetched off without any resistance, Walsing. Ypod. Neast. their Captaines violating their faith to curry fauour with the French; yet Roan, the Polyd. l. 15. place e∣uer honoured for fidelity to the English Crowne (and Supra in King Richards raigne. therefore worthily selected by King Richard to bee the Shrine of his Leonine Heart,) was better fortified both in affection and munition, then to wane vpon parties. Which neglect incensed Philip to turne his Oratory into Battery, (it being the chiefest City, and therefore of greatest consequence for consumating his victories,) which he continued in a most fierce & Pol. Virgil. l. 15. horrid manner of siege, the space of two monethes; but finding it to be with small aduantage, hee fell a∣gaine to D is & pro∣missis ad defectio∣ em, Ibid. golden Eloquence, attracting some in spe∣ciall with present pay, and all in generall with Paul. A il. pro∣mises of future inioying all their wonted lawes, and li∣berties without impairement of any their commodities whatsoeuer: aduising them Polydor. not to reiect those pro∣fered conditions, which ere long they would gladly get, when they should not be granted. The Roanists, seeing their dangers, feeling their wants, fearing their ru∣ines, yet desired respite till King Iohn might know their State: who finding himselfe at home as ill bestedde as theirs abroad, his Barons Rog. Wend. Suis detrectantibus militiam. refusing to follow the warres, returned them answere, he could not presently releeue them. Whereupon the Paul. A il. is Phil. August. Great men who could sway the multitude with cheaper reasons, then Philips open hand had swayed with them, per∣swaded them to weigh, that in truth they were all ori∣ginally Frenchmen, though now called Normans, of that Roan lost, circa omn. Sanct fest. Mat. West. noblest and richest part of all France, and the French king being Supreme Lord thereof, there was no cause at all of continuing this new hostility, but very many of renuing that antique amity. (28) The Caput totius Normaniae Rotho∣magum, Polydor. Head, yea and Heart of all Norman∣dy thus fainting; who can expect that those few in∣feriour members, yet vntainted should so continue long? neither did they. So as eftsoones all that Dukedome, one of the goodliest gemmes in the Normandy fallen from English allegiance. English Diademe, and disbranched from France Ioh. de Serres. so that Aemyl. much erreth in saying Rollo had it but 270. yeeres before. since the yeare eight hundred eighty fiue, was againe rent a∣way, ingloriously for them who lost it, iniustlie by them who got it, but perfidiously by such as should, and might haue kept it. For whatsoeuer necessity then, or malice since hath laid on the King; this Eu∣logie, and memoriall thereof, written by Waling. Ypod. ad An. 1203. Triuet. MS. vnpartiall pennes, will stand indelible on his Subiects, A rege Angliae, Normannia fraudibus suorum alienata, Englands King lost Normandy by treachery of his owne people. And no lesse treacherously dealt Philip with them, when hee had caught them with the trappe of his glosing proffers (as such Princes more vsually then princely, square their promises to others liking, their perfor∣mances to their owne) causing without delay their Cities goodly wals Triuet. MS. Walsing. to be vtterly demolished, and gi∣uing strict charge that they should neuer bee built vp a∣gaine. The other neighbouring Countries, Main, Turaine, Poictou, who were all forerunners in the rebellion, would not be now behind in the finall re∣uolt; Angiers in this more happy, that shee fell a∣way by others falshood, not her owne, when stan∣ding on her guard, Ypod. Neust. William de Rupibus cladde his choice Souldiers vpon their armour in the habite and other furniture of market-men, who so getting accesse into the City gates, made easie entrance for a greater hoast; which soone after became absolute Lords of all Aniou. (29) Wofull experience had now taught King Iohn a lesson fitte to be learned of all Princes, whom the fawning world enstyleth most Mighty, that this Ann. 1205. their might is not onely lyable to the checke and dis∣pose of that Highest all-ruling power, who vn∣thrones them at his will; but euen depends of the wauing humors, and wils of those Involuntate ob∣sequentium pote∣st s Principum. Triuet. MS. dNic. Triuet. MS inferiour vas∣sels, of whom they thinke themselues vnresistable Commaunders. But King Iohn was not vnsenfible eyther of his forraine dishonours, (though as d often as hee endeauoured to redeeme it, by leuying any Army, suteable to so great a designe; so often was hee crossed by his own Nobles) or of those his do∣mesticke affronts; which notwithstanding, by coun∣sell and assistance of his better affected, & truer hear∣ted friendes and subiects: at length Cirea Pentecost. Paris. f Hollinsh. hee gathered a Royall Hoast and a mighty Nauy, (therein 14000. Mariners f some say) with full resolue to reuenge his wrongs, and repaire his losses. Which great enterprize managed with vnmoueable determina∣tion (for now with full sayles, and fuller heartes at Portsmouth they were ready to embarke) brought to the Kings further knowledge, and to the worlds, who had beene all this while the secret vndermi∣ners of his fortunes, and hinderers of his imploy∣ments. For Hubert VVend. MS. Paris. hist. min. M. S. the Archbishop, and Papall Legate with many others, (amongst whom, Cogshall, some find Wil∣liam Marshall Earle of Pembroke numbred) thither comes vnto the King, and flatly Wendouer. Paris forbids him to pro∣ceede in the voyage. Some Cogshal. Hollin. Writers haue laboured to coniect the true cause and reasons of this audaci∣ous Prohibition; but if wee consider on the one side the Popes vse of Philips Forces, to counter-ballance if need were Othes greatnesse; on the other, the interest which both the Pope and Hub. de nimia familiaritate Phi∣lippi suspectus . Paris. Philip had in Huberts affe∣ction: wee may without Huberts Supra S. diuining Spirit prie into the mystery of his secret workings, as an Archbishop, and now open commaund as a Legate to hinder King Iohn, for feare of hindring King Phi∣lip. (30) But whatsoeuer was the reason, Hubert was the Instrument that so resolute proiects, so Cogshal. Stow. inesti∣mable charges, so necessary an action fell sodainely to the ground, whereby, besides the selfe mischiefe which therewith fell on the King, many fresh grud∣gings accrewed vnto him, for suffering himselfe to bee thus violently repulsed from so behouefull a purpose. The Archbishoppe and Marshall as prin∣cipals were rewarded with the Hollinsh. curses of the dismis∣sed multitudes, as the iust fee for their vniust coun∣sell; and the King himselfe was so little pleased with so vnexpected a countermaund, that albeit at the present, (either awed with the authority of the Pa∣pall Legate, or with the weight of his coloured motiues, or with hazard which hee might leaue be∣hind him) hee durst notwithstand it; yet Ibidem. the very next day, checking himselfe for ouerprizing the commaund of any man, aboue the value of his king∣ly honour and state, hee Rog. de Wend. resolued to recollect his disparkeled troupes, and to Idi us Iulij Paris. put forth to Sea. To which end, taking order for his Nobles to follow, they gaue him leaue Mat. Paris. ma. hist. with a small company to waffe vp and downe two daies in expectance of their at∣tendance, till seeing them more obsequious to Hu∣berts commaund then his, ( Mat. Paris. hist. min. MS. the Archbishoppe also sending his Inhibition after them on the sea) hee was forced to come againe to land. How a King of any royall sparkle, could brooke such Sea-and land-Tempests, without disgorging his Kingdom of the causers therof, I cannot conceiue; and yet so vne∣uenly doth some mens iudgement poyse, whose af∣fection guides the Beame, that this defeating of the Kings weightiest affaires, is censured as apud Mat. Par. too light to deserue the punishment which insued, when the King put many of his Earles, Barons, Knights, yea and Clergy men to a grieuous pecuniary redemption for thus refusing to follow him for recouerie of his Inheri∣tance. (31) The Archbishop though their Ringleader, Archbishoppe Hubert dyeth at his Manor of Tenham, Paris, might well haue beene exempted from this iudge∣ment, by his passage to a higher, dying, (if Windouer, Paris some erre not) the very same weeke, eyther of Polydo. griefe, or of a Vit. Arch. Cant. feuer, which killed him in foure dayes: but the Ibidem, king forthwith in person at Canterbury seized vpon all his wealth and possessions, shewing himselfe Paris. hist. ma. right ioy∣full, that now hee was rid of him, whom men suspe∣cted of too familiar practising with the French King; & saying, Mat. Paris. min. hist. MS. hee was neuer a King till now, by reason of Huberts too presumptuous daring to crosse his royall re∣solutions as late hee did. But this ioy and hope of hap∣pier b Idem, daies, was soone choked and buried in the same Toombe with Hubert; out of whose Ashes sprang Archbishoppe Huberts end the beginning of greater troubles to King Iohn. vp a roote yeelding more, and more bitter fruites, then King Iohn had as yet tasted, by how much more lamentable are the wounds which are in the bow∣els and heart of a State, then those which onely light on the skirtes or more remot members. The first seedes of which fast growing mischiefes, were to the eye, (as are the beginnings of all Kingdomes ruine) very small and contemptible, and the Sowers of little better regard, being but Cloistered monkes, who craf∣tily The Monks of Canturbury the seedmen of Englands troubles. factious to aduance a priuat friend, (which once mounted into Hubers chaire, might befriend them againe,) they gaue a deadly blow, both to themselues; their Soueraigne, and the State in generall. The Paris min. MS, Wendouer MS. yon∣ger heads amongst them (whose vnexperience makes them in acts of Societies more foreward and daring) hauing secret notice of Huberts death, M . Westmin. meant by a slight (whereunto they doubted not to find the Popes furtherance) to defeat their Soueraignes in∣terest in that Election, (and perchance in all other, euer after) of a Primate for the See of Canterburie, the most important place of his Kingdome. Triuet MS. him , Regi∣nald, the Sub-prior of their Couent, One (as you shall heare) fitter for their proiects, then for that place, was the man they chose, and that at Wend. MS. Paris West. &c. mid∣night, when singing Te Deum, they lifted him first vpon the High Altar, and after into the Metropoli∣tan chaire. They ought to haue first obtained the Kings assent, and leaue to elect, and therefore to pre∣uent both his Paris. hist. . interposing and displeasure, till it were too late for him to redresse the wrong; the same night they caused their Elect to enter Prastita cautio∣ne i toria, VVestmin. caution by oath, neuer to carry himselfe as Archbishop, nor to make it knowne to any man liuing, till he had fur∣ther especiall warrant from them, vpon proofe of the successe it might find at Rome, whither forthwith they sent him for his dispatch. (31) Reginald taking Flaunders in his way, was both so Vit. Arch. Cant. proud, VVendou. MS. periurious, and VVestmin. impudent, (the ver∣tues of their most choice man) that he could neuer conceale the purpose of his iourney, and boast of his dignity from any mans Eares, nor from their Eyes the Conuentuall letters ratifying the same. Wherof when the Couent had notice, vehemently incensed a∣gainst him who had thus diuulged their secret, and pro∣uidently casting how to euade the Kings offence, M. Fox mista∣keth saying, it was the next day after Regi∣nald went, also Polydor, Holinsh and Mils saying, it was not till they heard from Rome. out of hand they despeeded certaine of their Crue, to craue both In vit. Arch. Cant. pardon of their fact, and licence for choice of some worthier Primate. There was then in high grace and imploiment about the King, Iohn Gray Bishoppe of Norwich, a Godwins Catal. man of great wisdom, learning, and Integrity, (qualities truely befitting that high place) whom the King much desired to ad∣uance, commending him, as one Paris. hist. ma. most deare vnto him, and of his secretest Counsels (of Gra , Hollin. which, some say, hee was President) most behouefull for the Common-wealth, for Himselfe, and them: which message from the King faithfully deliuered, VVend. MS. all of them glad thus to redeeme the fauour, which they had hazarded, with vnanimous consent elected him; and sending for him from Yorke (where hee was in the Kings affaires) the Mat. VVestm. King himselfe graced his entrance into Canterbury with his presence in great pompe; and the next day, the King with a multitude of People assembling in the Metropolitane Church, the Prior did there publish his Election solemnly, and in due forme performed; where the Monkes carrying him with Te Deum to the high Altar, did forthwith enthronize him in the Chaire of his Primacie; The King there in presence of them all, giue∣ing him actuall possession of his Temporalities. This louing correspondence betwixt the King and his Clergy, gaue great hope of more blissefull fortunes henceforward vnto them both; but the Infernall Author of debate, and his chiefe Agent, tooke a hint hereby to intrude a Tyranny both vpon Clergy, King and all. (32) Little thought false Reyner what was doing at Canterbury, whiles hee was trotting to Rome; whi∣ther when hee came, and shewed his letters of Ratifi cation to his Holinesse and his Cardinals, VVendouer MS hee re∣ceiued this short answere, that it was a busines which as∣ked mature deliberation and better informations; the Pope soon finding, that the Sub-prior was too sleight an instrument for him to worke with, and for King Iohn to bee wrought with, and therefore bethought him of some fitter hammer for so hard an Anuile. But sundry stoppes were in the way, which wisely and by degrees were to bee remoued. The first was (which Reginald in likehood had imparted to hasten his owne dispatch) that the Bishoppes of the Prouince claimed a ioint interest with the Monkes, in choice of their Primate: a point which could no way suite with the Popes aduantage, because Bishoppes were generally much obliged to their Soueraignes, and so likely still to Elect a Royalist, whereas Cloyster∣men, professing ignorance of worldly affaires, and o∣bedience to one Superior, might more facilly bee swayed to bend as the Pope would bow them, in preferring his creatures. Which was the Motiue (we may suppose) of the Popes Dated 6. Id . letters, soone after sent to the Suffragane Bishops, exhorting them by Paris hist. . sacred example, and precept of filiall obedience, to desist from vexing, like vndutifull sonnes, their Mother Church with such vnd claimes. The Bishops notwith∣standing, who knew themselues in sacred writ to be styled Fathers, would not thus acknowledge the Monkes for their Mothers, till I centius to his light Reasons added the weight of his Keyes, and by his power swept both that and other rubs out of his intended way. For the King keeping his Christmas An. 1206. at Oxford, (attended as it seemeth by his Bishoppes) Mat. VVestmin. Wendouer MS. Paris. hist. min. MS. meaning not to pretermit any faire means to worke the Popes inclination towards the new Elect, he sent for Mat. Parri, hist. ma. ad an. 1207. twelue of the Monkes, whom with some other of his owne Clerks (which carried his letters to the Pope) he put in trust for transacting this businesse at Rome; allotting them very bountifull expenses out of his Exchequer for their whole iourney. They to leaue with the King (who knew well the traines of Rome, and the ouer-reaching fetches of Innocentius,) a pledge of their duty, and assurance of his hopes, Ibidem. entred with him Prastito iura∣mento, ib. a couenant by oath, that no man, nor meanes should remoue them from him, whom the King & themselues had already appointed. The Bishops sent Mat. Westmin. the same time their Procurators also, to plead their right of Co-election; so as, foure ob∣stacles stood at once in the Popes way, (the two ele∣ctions of the Monkes, and the two claims of the King and Prelates, hee for his Royall assent, they for their ioynt consent, in the choice) which all must be done and voided before the Pope can haue his full forth. But because these will aske long time for contriu∣ing, (which moued his Holinesse to adiourne the hearing to the very 12 Calen. Ian. We r. Paris end of the yeare,) wee will see the while how the King and State of England is im∣ployed. (33) The dorre, which deceased Hubert did put vpon K. Iohn and his late design, gaue both K. Philip aduantage, to take surer footing in his new posses∣sions, and King Iohn greater stomacke and edge to recouer his old. The last taske (almost) of the one, and hold of the other, was Chinon a place of great strength, but in nothing more, then in the euer-tru∣sty valour of her Captain, Roger Lacy; who (if Polydo. some mistake him not in steed of Hollinsh. Hubert de Burgo) being redeemed from the French, resolued here to giue Philip another taste of his prowesse, and King Iohn of his fidelitie; had not others faithlesse feare de∣feated his braue resolution. For the besieged ha∣uing P. Virgil. no rest night or day, from a long and inces∣sant batterie, their Commanders inuinceable con∣stancy against yeelding, which enheartned the bet∣ter sort, dismayed the baser, as more prizing their ease, then their faith or fame; some of which by night slipping ouer the walles, so instructed the e∣nemy of all secret aduantages to possesse the towne, that by a sodaine assault, both it and Lacy (more worth then it,) was againe surprized. Here see∣med to haue beene the Garland of Philips conquest; had not newes beene thither brought vnto him of some new risings in Brittaine, where Guido, the hus∣band of Constantia, Arthurs Mother, (sensible be∣like King Iohn strengthneth himselfe with new Leaguers. of the false-grounded wronges offered to King Iohn, vnder pretence of Arthur,) Paul. Aemil. returned gladly both into Amity and a strong league with the English: and with him also Sauary Malleon, and Almerick Lu∣signian, Polyd. Aemil. two Peeres of heroicke valour and great commaund, whom King Iohn of his They vvere ta∣ken when Artbur was. prisoners, had made by prudent and louely vsage his trusty friends. The French King fuming to see his vniust intrusions thus preiudiced, (especially by Arthurs owne father in law) was hastning from Chinon into Britaine, to worke reuenge on them, whose exemplar equitie should haue beene his mirrour of amendment; Englands King on the other side, was no Polid. lesse heart∣ned with this new confideration, Mat. P . leuying once again a puissant Army, which he 7. Id. Iulij. landed at Rochel, being the onely noted place, which in all these turmoiles and mutabilities of Fortunes, kept her selfe entire from entrance either of enemy, or of disloiall thought. (34) The King hauing his Army much augmen∣ted King Iohns suc∣cesses. Paris. hist. . with great concurses of his best-affected Pro∣uincials, marching confidently forward, subdued a great portion of that Country; till comming to Mount-Alban, a Wend. MS. Castle of much renowne, (as being repu∣puted VVestmin. inexpugnable, and now the Rende-uou of his most potent enemies, and all their flower of Chiualry, hee gaue a terrible assault thereto for 15. dayes toge∣ther; where at last his Paris. Englishmens valour was so aduenturous in scaling the walles, and both giuing and taking blowes vnportable, that in those few dayes hee entred Conquerour into that very place, Mat. Westmin. which Charles the great, could not get with his seuen yeers siedge. The VVend. MS. multitude of Nobles therin taken was so great, that hee sent into England a bedroll of their names, for a memoriall of so great a victory. Which auspi∣cious beginnings he seconded with no lesse expedi∣tion, prouidence, and prowesse, in the siege of An∣giers, where on his first approch, hee Les Annales de Franc. Polyd. gaue present instructions to his maine Army, suddenly to enui∣ron the whole City, & by assault to seeke entrance at the walles on euery side, whiles himselfe and his selected band, with fire and Engines would assaile the Gates; where with great celerity, and no lesse hazard then hardinesse, breaking through, he be∣came Lord of his owne. But whatsoeuer were the Citizens demerites, pittious it was, that their of∣fences, and the Conquerours wrath, lay so heauy on those stately walles, as Paul. Aemil. Polydor. to throw them flatte to the ground; which hasty doome, (it being the Idem. cradle of his birth, and City of his chiefe delight,) hee as hasti∣ly (and very deerly too) repented, when with exces∣siue expenses hee encircled it againe with a beautie farre beyond the former. These faire successes, hum∣bling all the Country before him, cleared his pas∣sage into Picardy, whither King Philip was now con∣uerting all his power to oppose himselfe against the violence of this Torrent: which P. Aemil. now more fa∣cilly hee might stoppe, hauing in his way by laying secret ambushments, laid hands vpon Duke Guido, * Infidijs excepti. Sauary, and Almericke, King Iohns principall hopes, as they were busily aduancing his present affaires: by which surprize, though the English forces missing their Prouincial aids, were greatly impayred, yet their Fractus animo Anglus, saith Aemil. great hearts were not much amated, as the French-men Polyd. Uerg. found, when both the Armies neere approa∣ching ouer night, the next morning alacriously they addressed to the fight, and with great spirits on each side expected the Signall. Notwithstanding, the day likely to proue dreadfull with expence of bloud, vp∣on earnest interceeding of Mat. Paris. forraine Prelates and re∣ligious persons, who vndertook equably to compose all things; both Kinges condescended to a two∣yeeres Infesto om. Sanct. Westmin. Truce, King Iohn chiefly out of affection to his Captiue friends, whose liberty was formost in the conditions. (35) Hauing thus setled those Countries in farre better termes then last hee found them, he embar∣ked K. Iohn returns to England. for England; where hee laid not aside a carefull (though distastfull) prouidence, for still bettering those his successes: for which ends, whiles from his Subiects (both Lay and Clergy) he Wend. MS. gathered money, Ann. 1207. the Sinewes of warre, he lost their affections, the ioints of Peace; whereof Geffry Archbishoppe of Yorke (his Naturall and vnnaturall brother) was a principal in∣centiue; who Mat. Paris. hist. Min. MS. solemnly cursing all the Kinges re∣ceiuers within his Prouince, fled secretly out of the land. Which peruicacie, Paul. Aemil. a bitter enemie of K. Iohn, yet bitterly taxeth, saying, In Phillppo Augusto. the English Bishops were farre from that dutifull obseruance towards their Soue∣raigne, which the French Bishops perfourmed to theirs, at whose commaund they maintained Souldiers in his warres against King Iohn, acknowledging they were so bound to doe, as often as the King pursued the warres in person; though now also they did it, where hee was not in person. And indeed how hollow-hearted to the State those money-murmurers were, their Mat. VVestm. owne friend be∣bewraieth, shewing, how with curses they wished, and prayed to God, that these exactions might neuer haue a∣ny good successe, though they knew it was purposelie for preseruing a maine part of the Kingdome. A dis∣loyalty the more vnsufferable by the King, knowing that but a Paris. very little before, the Popes Legate, Io. Io. de Florentia. Triuet MS. Fiorentinus, nick-named Paris, a ferendo, Hollinsh. Ferentinus, for bearing a∣way so much money,) had Mat. West. Mat. Paris. MS. gathered of the Clergy a huge masse os money which in full chests hee conuayed to Rome. Yet all these domesticke grudges abated not the Kings due care, nor yet his good hopes, which were soone after much augmented by the encou∣ragements of Othoes Imperiall presence, Idem. who in person arriuing here in England, to proiect for his owne and his vncles warres, was with great ioyes met by the King, and conducted through London The Emperours entertainement. by night, where all the City was seene in her glory, & all the streetes adorned with richest hangings, beautified all along with the lustre of pendant Crownes, and bur∣ning lampes: who after some dayes of royall enter∣tainements, hence departed not vnfurnished with helpes to defray his warres. (36) Whiles King Iohn is thus busied about his The Popes be∣ginning of wrongs towardes King Iohn. open hostilities, Pope Innocentius is plotting his se∣cret Stratagemes against him at Rome: where, like vnto that Q abco inter Nolan. & Neapo∣lit. arbiter. other old Roman, who, being chosen vm∣pere touching some march-lands betwixt two neigh∣bour Nations, vnpartiall to either, Cicer. offic. l. 1. adiudged it from them both to the Romane State; so hee now, being Arbiter betwixt the King, Bishops, & Monks, concerning their choice, hee means to defeat them all, and Hoc decipere est non indicare. ibid. adiudge the right of disposing thereof to his Romish See. Therfore, at the 12. Cal. Iun. fore-limited day of hearing, his first care was, that the Paris. Bishops lippes for euer should bee sealed vp, (notwithstanding their Wendouer. M. S. allegations of Law, Reason, Decrees, and Practise,) frō intermedling in choice of their own Primate. Wil you heare the maine reason? because himselfe, and some other Popes would haue it so. Which definitiue sen∣tence being Dated . Cal. Ian. Paris. sent to the Prelates into England, it was thought a point of prudence also, to Mat. Paris. prepare the King and worke him pliable before hand, to entertaine that which was to follow: which must be done by ami∣able lines, and gemmes, wherewith he knew the King was much delighted. His Present, being 4. gold Rings, The Popes pre∣sent and letter to King Iohn. with foure precious stones, an Emrauld, Saphire, Ruby, & Topaze, he so vainely & childishly (though Iohn Stow in Annal. igno∣rance enstile it eloquence) celebrateth in his Epist. Innocent. apud Paris. Epistle, for their number, forme, and colour, that no man will question whether it were dictated with an Aposto∣licke Spirite. The Rings Roundnesse must remem∣ber the King of Eternity; the Quadr at number of Con∣stancy, and of the foure Cardinall vertues, Iustice, For∣titude, Prudence, Temperance; the Golds price, of Wisedome; the Emraulds greenenesse, of Faith; the Sa∣phires brightnesse, of Hope; the Rubies readnesse, of Cha∣rity; the Topazes clearenesse, of operatiue Sanctitie &c. Which, though toyes, were yet accepted as pledges of loue for a while, till at last, the King find∣ing by the sequele, they were but baites to beguile him, esteemed the Popes Gold as drosse, his Iewels as Ge Gemi∣ . ib. Iewish fraudes, and his loue as most rancored hatred. For shortly after came to his notice, the most indigni∣ous iniurie, which the Pope meant to obtrude vpon him and his Kingdome, hauing not onely hunted both Reynard and Gray out of their holdes, but also imposed vpon him, for the chiefe place and mana∣ging of his State, one whome hee reputed a chiefe and dangerous Enemy to himselfe and it: which thus was fetcht about. (37) The Monkes freed from the Bishops im∣pugning, were hote now in the strife amongst them∣selues; the Paris. one side against Reyners election vrged, it wanted Royall assent, the greater and sounder part of Electoro, due solemnities, due Being by night. time: the other, a∣gainst Norwich, that no second election could be vali∣dous, vnlesse the former were first annulled. Both their Reasons pleased well the Pope; who (as pre-pos∣sessed Iudges often vse) made shew of Wend. MS, great dili∣gence in pondering the Pleadings, whereas himselfe long before had resolued on his Sentence; which was, that by Apostolicall definitiue dome, neyther of the Elects should euer bee capable of that See. So great rubbes hath the Pope with so little breath blowne out of his way. The man whose aduancement al this while hee had aimed at, was now commended to them, who must be there presently chosen for their Primate, Stephen de Langton, a Cardinall, English by birth, apud Mat. Par. hist. ma. French by education and affection, one of so Mat. Paris. min. hist. MS: transcendent power in the Romane Court, that the Pope was thought not for loue, but for enuy, (as being himselfe eclypsed by his necrenesse) to haue wished his seruice in some remoter dignity. But the Monks ill apaide with what was done already, and very tremulous to enter matter of new intrications, alleadged against all further courses, that Mat. West. Paris no Cano∣nicall Election could be there made, they hauing consent neither of King nor Couent; at which word the Pope snapping them vp, bad them know, that Nor, Wendouer MS. Westminster saith vos as of the Monkes. he had there plenitude of power ouer the Church of Canterbury; and besides, that no consent of Princes vsed to bee expected in Elections celebrated where the Pope was: hee there∣fore charged them vnder paine of his high curse, (a ter∣rible bug-bear in those daies) there presently to choose him for their Primate, whom himselfe thought good to nominate vnto them. Thus trembling vnder the cracke of his Thunderbolt, they (all Idem, excepting one Helias de Brantfield (whose constancy shall per∣petuate his memory,) durst not sor feare but elect him, though very vnwillingly, and with murmurations: whose 10 Cal. Iul. Paris 25. Mat. Westmin. Consecration followed by the Popes owne handes at Viterbium, and his earnest recommendation by the Popes Rog. Wend. MS. flattering letters, to the Kings fauourable acceptance. And this was the vnblessed beginning of those new miseries which brought the King to his ending, and his Kingdome to vn-reportable cala∣mities; all which, little did his Holinesse or his Cha∣rity reckon of, so his desperate Policie might take ef∣fect. Yet not vnduely fell those iudgements on ma∣nie Princes of those times, who neglecting the do∣mesticke execution of Supreme iustice, suffered their Subiects, at so high a rate both of expence and tra∣uels, to buy such arbitrary and dangerous formes of a forraine, and falsly-named Iustice. (38) Two very presumptuous Lawes hath Blandus Decad. 2. l. 6. Pope Innocentius his three strange lawes. one obserued to haue beene first hatched by this lawlesse Pope, the one occasioned by King Iohns and Philips formet strife, that Princes delinquent must bee lyable to correctionfrom the Pope; the other, vpon the choice of the Emperour, that wherein elections voices are e∣quall, or concord wanting, the Pope may gratifie whome hee please: vnto which wee now may adde a third no lesse arduous & insolent, that the Pope may strike vp Elections, both where, and of whom, and with, and with∣out what consent him listeth. Which lewd obtrusion, that it galled the King to the quicke, wee need not maruaile, if wee ballance in one scale, the Popes meere will and pleasure; in the other, the dishonour to The wrongs of∣fered vnto King Iohn. thè King (thus to be triced out of that, which so ve∣hemently, and with his owne presence hee took care to see effected;) the preiudice to his Crowne, to be defeated of Soueraigne assent; the hazard to the State, to haue his Publi ini∣mic ; Regi Franc. ffamilia∣riss. Mat. Paris. hist. min: MS. Enemy. (a Phillippine, and French fauou∣rite) the In regno secun∣dum, ibid. chiefe man ouer his English: besides wrongs more particular; as both the disgrace to his best-de∣seruing Counsellour, the disloyalty of the Monks, first, to choose without his licence, then to mocke him with a second choice, next, to beguile him with oaths, after to trauaile vpon his excessiue charge, and last∣ly to doe, and vndoe all, with their periurie. With all which so farre the Kings patience surfetted, that he beganne on them to disgorge his wrath, who with him beganne these affronts; proscribing first all those Monkesas Mat. VVest . Traytors, and afterward writing his apud , & Paris. letters to the Pope, with relation of those great wrongs to Himselfe, and exceptions to Langton; vowing immutably to stand for his own Elect, and to die in defence of the Liberties of his Crowne; putting the Pope in mind, that Rome reapt more gaine from England, then from all the Trans-alpine Regions; threatning also, if he were now crossed in this, hee would stoppe all from crossing the Seas to Rome, nor would any longer emendicate their forraine Iustice, sith his owne Kingdomes, so abounded with Bishoppes and learned men of most accomplished perfection in all professions. (39) If, when this Kings Father vttered some such threats to Gratian the Popes vassall, hee then replyed Paris. in H, 2, Sir doe not threaten vs, for wee feare no me∣naces, because wee are of such a Court as vseth to be im∣perious ouer Emperours and Kings, (which as a remark∣able Apothegme, Baron An. 1169. Baronius sets forth in greater letters;) we may then guesse, how this great Lord of that Court did himselfe brooke such tart saluta∣tions. Nay the effects bewray it: when in his sub∣limed Literae Innocentij apud Paris. Reply, hee snebs the King for comminatory obraydings, and contumacious malepartnesse; and threatens him, that if he do not, by referring him∣selfe wholy to his good pleasure, seeke to deserue his Grace, hee should plunge into those difficulties, whence hee should hardly euer get forth; intima∣ting, that himselfe (being vnworthy vicegerent to him, vnto whom euery knee in Heauen, Earth, & Hell must bow,) must in the end needs haue the vpper hand; and that to resist him is to oppugne God himselfe and his Church, for which glorious Becket spilt his bloud. These were indeed bloody words; to affright the King with expectance of more such blowes, and bloody stripes from Rome, as had lighted on his Father. And hee threatned no more then he acted; for thereupon, hee VVend. MS. sent An. 1208. his doubled Apostolicall command, the one general to all the Prelates, for submitting and adhering re∣solutely to Langton, the other, to some BB. Lond. Ely, Wigorn. particular Bishops, for Paris. hist. ma. conuenting the King, and Interdicting his whole Kingdome, if him they found still contu∣maciously rebelling. Neither was hee more insolent in the command, then they in the execution, wher∣by (on The Munday in Passion week, Paris. on Easter day, saith Polyd. a day ill suiting so vnchristian an Action) this flourishing Church (though the King had sworne their banishment, and confiscation if they did it) was depriued of the very face of Christianity for many ensuing yeeres; as if, not Innocentius Christs Vicar, but Iulian his professed Enemy, had mured vp the doores of the Christians Temples for despight of their Chron. Angl. MS. God. (40) But this High-Priest had forgotten what a∣nother Caiphus, Iohn c. 11. v. 50. 2 Rog. Houed. 456. taught him, and a he himsefe sometimes thought, about interdicting France for their Kinges offence; that better it was one should suffer then a whole Nation perish: whereas now, for the Kings on∣ly crossing the Popes good pleasure, God is censured to loose his worshippe, and all the People to hazard their soules, Vide apud Wend. & Paris liuing almost like Infidels, without Gods seruice and blessed Sacrament, yea and dying More Canum. Mat. Paris. like dogges tumbled into euery ditch. But what? did such wofull effects fasten onely on the Layty? The Clergy bare their part too; whom the flames of the Kings iustly incensed wrath did so scorch, that his Dominions were too hote for their abode: for, their Mat. Paris. persons hee proscribed and sent packing to the Pope, their reuenewes, hee confiscated their Bishop∣rickes, Abbeyes and Priories; hee deputed to Laymens cu∣stody: their women (for such as had not wiues, had Lemmans) were dearely ransomed: and euery where they suffered wrongs without ordinary protection of Iustice. Whereof, though our Hollinish. Stow. &c. vulgar perfuncta∣ry Writers produce no other reason, but the onely ouerflowing of the Kings gall, as if first stirred by some few delinquent Bishops, through furious re∣uenge it ouer-whelmed the whole Clergy; yet in∣deed these were but the due chasticements of their generally disloyall hearts. As (to instance) when the King sent his Ex libro S. Al∣ban vita Iob. Abbot. MS. mandate to S. Albans, that not regar∣ding the Popes commaund in the Interdict, they should continue the celebration of Gods seruice; the Abbot calling his Monkes into the Chapter-house, perswa∣ded them to obey God rather then Man (meaning the Pope rather then the King) and to beare resolute∣ly the Kings anger, Debit Deus quoque nem. a cunning speech indifferently touching the Kings end or his anger. whom God in due time would bring to an end. What maruaile then, if the Clergy carri∣ed so generally with this streame of a forraine vsur∣ped power, against Gods seruice, and their Soueraignes godly desire, and due authority, were likewise gene∣rally inuolued in that reward of their disloialty. And yet, euen in the Clergy, many of eminencie detested these cruell and irreligious courses of the Pope; Mat. Paris, Godwins Catalog. of BB. Lib. S. Al∣ban. in vit. Abb. Ioh. MS. Phi∣lip the Bishoppe of Duresme, and his Successor, with the Bishops of Norwich and Winchester, heartned the King to contemne the Papall curse; the Mat. VVest. Cicestertian Abbots (neglecting the Interdict) continued their di∣uine celebrations, till the Pope suspended them for their contempt; Alexander Balam. Abbot of the Be∣nedictines, a Diuine of Literatum ple∣nitudine imbutu , Mat. West. exquisite learning VVend. MS. publi∣shed in his Sermons, that their present calamities were no reproch to their Soueraignes proceedings, but due rewards of the Subiects hainous trespasses, because kings ought to gouerne, yea and strongly bridle all disobedient Subiects whomsoeuer; but as for Popes they ought not to intermedle in the ciuill affaires, and regiment of any Princes ouer their vassals, seeing Peter himselfe recei∣ued no power, but onely in matters appertaining to the Church. And though the He was depri∣ued of his digni∣ty and liuings. Pope were reuenged on him for his plaine truth, and some Monkish humors haue aspersed other such men with bitter reproches, yet what may bee thought both of these the Popes courses, & of such his opposers, a late Iesuite (no par∣tiall man to Princes) sheweth, saying, Persons against Cooks, part, 2. c. 9. that many, and godly wise men at that time did wish, that Pope Inno∣centius had not stood so hard with King Iohn in such a point as this was, for contenting him with a person grate∣full vnto him in that See. And no maruaile they so wished, seeing that was the graund cause of such in∣finite confusions, factions, and wrongs, hurrying so indignely the Prince, Peeres, Clergy & Commons; the very contemplation whereof to all godly wise men must needes bee gastly and rufull: yet welfare those Anathématizing Bishops, the Instruments of al these euils, who patiently endured vnder the name of Exile, Paris. Omni∣modis viuent s in delicijs. to liue the while abroad in all varietie of de∣lights. (41) Such perplexities in the People could not Ann. 1209. but breed as great hatred and hazards to the King; who therefore to preuent the issue of such discon∣tents, (which though causlesse, yet kindling in the multitude proue often vnquenchable,) hee Mat. Paris. VVestmin. requi∣red of his Nobles new Oathes of allegiance, pledges of such as hee most suspected, and homage of all Free∣holders, Paris. hist. ma. euen of twelue yeers old, whom he dismissed with a kisse of peace. Misdoubting also the Popes fur∣ther intent to absolue his Subiects from their due allegi∣ance, hee gathered about him (by Supra in H. 2. example of his Father Henry on the like ground) a mighty Armie for all occurrents. The terrour whereof hee first displayed in the North, offended (saith Trinet MS. one) with Not Alexander as Polyd. mista∣keth. William King of Scotland, for marrying his daugh∣ter to the Earle of Bulloigne; for receiuing (saith Paris hist. ma. an∣other) Fugitiues, and enemies of his State: for throw∣ing down (saith a Mector Boet. l 13 third) a Castle built by King Iohn against Barwicke: but whatsoeuer were the breach, the cloze was amiable, each accompanying other to York, where King Williams Boet. ibid. two daughters were promised to King Iohns two sonnes, and Wend. MS. deliuered as pledges of vnited loue, with a Paris. hist. mi. M. S. but VVendou. MS. saith xi, (not ix.) millia. gift of nine thou∣sand markes. The dread of this his power so gly∣ded out of the North into the West, that vpon his return, the Mat. Paris. Princes of Wales, and others rich & poor came to him at Woodstocke (the like thing neuer heard of before) to doe him homage. But all these linkes of allegiance were soone crackt by another thunder∣clap The King ex∣communicated by name. (from Rome) of Anathema on the King by Name, with strict iniunction for all men to abandon his presence: Rog. de Wend. MS. which sentence being sent to bee diuul∣ged by the Bishoppes and Prelates in England, al of them for feare or fauour of the King, were content to neglect the Popes commaund, and let the Apostolike processe escape without execution. The fame yet thereof was in all mens mouthes, but came first (as seemeth) to the Kings Eares, Paris. hist. ma. by a seruant of his owne Exchequer. Geffry Arch-Deacon of Norwich, who secretly persiading his fellow-officers, that they were boundin conscience to relinquish the Kings ser∣uice, gaue them example himselfe by leauing his duty and charge; for which hote-braine tricke, hee was put in a Ca d Plumbed, Paris. Coole of lead, the weight whereof (as a punishment of his leuitie) soone hastned his end in prison: but the greater and wiser sort, both of VVestmin. Ann. 1210. Nobles and others, continued their due attendance on their Soueraigns Court and person, without Non obstante Senten a, ibidem. regard of the censure. (42) Those Romish furies thus infesting all at home, gaue also courage & oportunity to il-affected mēbers further off; some of which in Ireland hauing The King setleth the State of Ireland. surfeited long of the Kings Indulgence or absence, Gyrald. in Pro∣em ad Reg. Ioh. beganne now to play the Kings themselues. The no∣ble spirite of this Prince in his tender yeeres Idem Hibern. expug. l . c. 26. made choice (on bended knees to his Father, in pre∣sence of Heraclius Patriarke of Ierusalem) rather in deuotion to conduct an Army against the Turks, then in Ambition to take possession of that goodly Kingdome. But being now possessed thereof, and intending (by a kind of compensation for his losses in France) to annexe and assure that Kingdome to the English Crowne, hee resolues with a powerfull Army to quell the disturbers, and reforme the dis∣orders, of his first, and long vnuisited charge. Whose approach such fame and dread did forerunne, that Paris. hist. ma. more then twenty Petty Kings of that nation ha∣stened to Dublin, there to honour his 8 Idus Iulij, Paris. arriuall with their submissiue attendance, homage and oath of alleagiance; others, eyther vpon confidence of their good holds, or diffidence for their ill desertes, flying his presence, and some of them, the Coun∣try. The Walter & Hugh the sonnes of Hugh. Campians hist. of Ireland, two Lacies (whose onely prayse was, that they were the sonnes of a nobly-deseruing Father) hauing beene, through ambition of Soueraignety, the fountaine of dangerous garboyles, ( Annales Hib. Campians. hist. of Ireland. tyrannizing ouer the Commons, and making away such of the Nobles, as stood eyther in their light, or in the Kings fauour) fled into France, where they liued in S. Tauri . an Abbey as poore Gardinars, vntill the Abbot de∣scrying by their deportment some state aboue their habite, vpon penitent humility reconciled them to the King. The Lord William de Breuse, (a Hist. Cambr a. Baron late∣ly of great commaund and wealth in the Marches of Wales,) shewed not the like penitence, nor found the like grace; who, vpon Wend. MS. refusall to de∣liuer his sonne as a pledge of his fidelitie, spedde into Ireland to flie the Kinges wrath, and now, to auoid his pursuit, fledde also into France, then the common Sanctuary of all trayterous fugitiues; but Famished (some say) in Windsor Castle. sharpe reuenge ouertooke both his Sonne and his Lady (taken in a strong Castle of Meth) whose virulent and rayling * tongue had more exaspera∣ted the fury of the King (whom shee immodestly Paris. reuiled as a Tyrant and Murtherer,) then could be pacified by her strange present, Old Chron. of Flaunders. Helli . (foure hundred Kine, and one Bull, all milke-white, except onelie the eares, which were redde,) sent vnto the Queene. (43) But Ypod. Neust. Catalus, the vnquiet King of Con∣naught, trusting to his owne Forces, King Iohn sub∣dued by strong pursuit: Walsing. Paris. Annales Hiber. Campian. hist. of Ireland. and after all carried him captiued in triumph, imprisoned the English Fugi∣tiues, tooke pledges both of English and Irish Inha∣bitants, punished by death malefactors, turbulent persons by ransomes, established all their Lawes, Coines, and Officers, to the English forme, and depu∣ted (which was worth all) a wise, stout and vpright Iusticiari Paris. Gouernour ouer them, the Bishoppe of Norwich, Langtons competitor: thus setling on that barba∣rous Iland so noble and ordered a face of gouerne∣ment, as was the stay thereof in those tumultuous times, and a patterne euen to more peacefull ages to imitate. By which both glorious and Red 3. Col. Septemb. speedy conquest and reformation, hee better merited that Style of Irelands Lord, then when it was confir∣med to him by a Crowne of Walsingham. Ypodig. So the Pope sent Tyrone a Ph nix feather Cambden. in Hiber. Peacockes feathers from the Pope, at what time (long before) hee inioy∣ed it by his Fathers gift, as his Broad-Seale (here not vnfitte to bee annexed) will shew. This Seale is at a Charter granted to Dublyn, before Iohn was King. (44) The Banckes of King Iohns estate, were not An. 1211. King Iohn subdu∣eth Wales. vnlike to those in Grounds ill-neighboured with an encroching Sea, where before one breach is well made vp, another no lesse dangerous is laid open: which endles turmoils kept his Body still in Action, his Minde in passions, and his Prowesse in vre. The vaste expenses of his Irish expedition were no sooner repayred (by a 140000. l. wher∣by they redeemed their possessions from Laymens custody, Lib. S. Albon, MS. great taxe charged on all the Con∣uentuall houses) but Lewylin Prince of North-Wales, with his great spoiles on the English Marchers, made new matter of charge and exploit for the King; Hist. of Cam∣bria. ha∣uing, to preuent due reuenge, caused his Wallians to conuey all their cattell and better substance to the scarce-accessible refuges of Snowdowne Hill. These difficulties much more whetted and excited the Kings resolution; neither had the vertuall power of the Popes fulmination as yet so blasted his good fortunes, but that hence also hee Ibidem. returned in great Triumph, as Conquerour of all Wales, where, with won∣derfull celerity and valour, hee Paris. hist. mi. MS. subdued all their Prin∣ces and Cheefes, whom hee receiued vpon Oath, homage, and hostages, with an absolute Hist. of Camb. graunt of all their In∣land vnto the King for euer. Notwithstanding, per∣ceiuing that Pol. Virgil. very many slipt away for dread (at least for colour) of the Popes curse, from those his martiall and other ciuill seruices, (though Paris. hist. ma. hee puni∣shed by fine all such Reuolters) whereby his person could neuer bee free from danger, nor his State from trouble; hee resolues (seeing the Pope vnflex∣ible, & vnsensible of so many Christians calamitie) at length to relent from his vowed stiffenes against the Popes Elect, in hope so to settle his owne and his Subiects tranquility, though with vnsufferable indignity to himselfe. In his Rog. de Wend. MS. returne from Wales, two Nunces from the Pope, Randulph a Subdeacon, and Durand a Knight Templar, meete him at Nor∣thampton to make the attonement: English Chron. MS. compared with Paris his min. hist. MS: whereto he was so propense, that hee accorded to assure vnder his Seale, that Archbishoppe Langton with the Bishoppes, Monkes and others, should bee restored both to his fauour, and to their possessions; that, holy Church should haue all the Franchises, as in Edward the Confessors time: that hee would neuer take any thing of holy Church against the owners will: but, because hee Rog. Wend. MS. would not also make full satisfaction for all confiscations, and other emo∣luments receiued of the Clergie, (nay, hee could not The Kings offers reiected. hauing expended all his treasure in his conti∣nuall warres,) the Cleargy and their Factors (the Legates) more prizing their priuate gaine, then the weale publike of their Natiue Country, contemned the sweet proffer of peace, & exposed all to the bane of a reuengeful contention. For hereupon they did not onely English Chro. MS. denounce the curse vpon the King by name (which the Prelates be∣fore durst not doe) and vpon all other who conuersed with him; but, as if hee had most Paris. hist. ma. contumaciously con∣temned quietnesse, by their relations they incensed The Pope ab∣solues the kinges people from al∣legiance. the Pope (too procliue of himself to set forth his own greatnesse) to put on him a farre more indignous wrong and contumely then Interdiction, by Paris min: MS, absol∣uing all Kings and People, poore and rich, hauing depen∣dance on him, from all Fealty and Subiection to him. (45) This being the third steppe, whereby, both Ann. 1212. the Pope ascended to the height of his vsurped pow∣er, and mercilesse reuenge, and the Subiects Paris hist. min. MS. daylie descended from their loyall obseruance, made king Iohn more circumspect to strengthen himselfe, both with an Army no lesse faithfull then powerfull, & also with the loue of his Neighbour-Princes. King William of Scotland, Hector Boet. 13 at this time infested with a dangerous rebellion, (stirred vp within his Kingdom by one Gothred, Lib. de Bernwel laying claime, vnder color of some antiquated title, to his Crowne) being himselfe in∣firme with age, sent his sonne Prince Alexander into England, to craue assistance of King Iohn, who (by his owne princely loue and readinesse, to demerite theirs,) resoluing with his Army in person to cha∣stice the disturbers of his trusty Confederate, before his setting forth, did Paris. hist. ma. on the Table in a solemn feast, (which hee kept in the Hospitall of Clerken-well) ad∣orn Prince Alexander with the belt & Order of Knight∣hood; and Lib. de Bernwel. afterward with his hoast vanquishing the Rebels, aduanced their Chiefe-leader farre higher then his owne Ambition expected, and left that Cothred hanged by King Iohn. Kingdome in a setled peace. But whiles he is thus kindly carefull in suppression of anothers Rebelles, Fruites of the Popes curse. his owne at home are as vnkindly vigilant to vnder∣mine his State; the Popes Absolution, like magicke spelles, hauing let loose many tumultuating Spirits, which will not easily be laid again. For the Mat. Paris. Chiefes among the Wallians, whom neither breach of their 28 Welsh hosta∣ges hanged at Nottingham. Paris. Oathes, nor losse of their noble hostages, (*which soone after perished for their parents sinnes) could deterre, suddenly fell off from the King, and fell on his Subiectes with VVend. MS. much slaughter of men, bur∣ning of Townes, and surprizall of Castles: whereof, whiles the King meaning to take sharpe reuenge, was on his way at Nottingham with an vnresistable Armie, letters of great speed and secresie were de∣liuered to him (as hee sate at meate) from his faith∣full and gratefull friend the Scottish King, & instant∣ly others from his daughter Ioan, Prince Lewylins, Lady, both giuing him intelligence of imminent Treasons Mat. Paris. plotted by sundry of his Peeres, who meant eyther to murther him, or betray him to the butchery of his foes. Which dreadfull notices from so true-har∣ted Informers, could not yet affright his manlie heart, till comming to Chester, hee there vnder∣stood by sundry other Intelligencers, that his No∣bles Idem. held themselues quite discharged from his alle∣giance; and knowing that they wanting fidelity, he himselfe could not but want security, hee dismissed his hoast, tooke hostages of his Barons, pursued the detected Conspirators, and Fitzwalter, Vesci, Ridel. apud Paris. & Triuet. MS. the three principal of them flying the land, he prosecuted their per∣sons, demolished their Castles, and confiscated their possessions. But many of as vile and virulent af∣fections they left behind them, as that Apud Mat. Par. Wendou. & alios. trayterous Act of those Nobles bewrayed, who sent to Philip of France their sealed Charter, promising to settle on his head the Crowne of England, if hee would come to re∣ceiue it. And that the mindes of the vulgar should, not bee vnpossessed with like expectation of Iohns vn-crowning, the prophesies of an Peter of Pom-frait. VVend. MS. Heremiticall wi∣sard (foretelling, that on the day of Ascension, King Iohn should bee no King) were buzzed into their eares. Whether by Gods inspiring, or the Diuelles, these were reuealed, Polyd. Verg an magicis artibus. some doe doubt; but hee that considers the quotidian impostures of these times, and the secret machinations of the Pope, the French King, and the English Barons, all for diuers ends, complotting against King Iohn, will easily perceiue both what vse there was of suborning such a Prophet, to deterre the popular maynie, from stic∣king to the King, and to beguile their credulity, as if the thing were to be done, by Gods fore-appoint∣ment, and ordinance, and also Wendouer. Paris that his punish∣ment by death as a Traiterous Impostor, was no other then he deserued. (46) Neither is the Popes reuenge thus appea∣sed, some higher greeces yet remaine, on which his Greatnesse, and greatnesse of his holy rage must dis∣play it selfe: the vnderprops whereof (a thing al∣most incredible) were not onely Englishmen, but English Bishops also. For Stephen Langton with the BB. of London and Ely (thirsting after reuenge though with the destruction of their Country, & blood-shed of innumerable their Compatriots) go∣ing to Rome with complaints on the King, Paris, Triuet. Westmin. Polydor. made humble supplications to the Lord Pope, that hee would vouchsafe in a touch of pious compassion, to support the English Church, being at the point of ruine. At whose earnest sollicitation, the tender-hearted Pope (grie∣uously lamenting the desolation of the Kingdome Sentence of de∣position of King Iohn. of England,) decreed by solemne sentence: That King Iohn should bee deposed from his Kingdome, and that the Pope should prouide some other, who should bee deemed worthyer to succeed. To effectuate the former clause, Innocentius eagerly pursued the latter, send∣ing speedy letters to (whom but King Iohns most mortall enemy?) Philip King of France; Rog. de Wend. MS. requiring him to vndertake the labour of the dethroning King Iohn, with no lesse reward then pardon for all his sins, The Pope be∣stowes Iohns Crowne of Philip. and enioying of the English Crowne to him, and his heires for euer. A goodly large patent both for a Spiritual and Temporall Kingdome, which (more like Mars his Priest, then Christs Vicar) he meanes to seale, with a deluge of Christians bloud. For not thus yet satiated, hee transmits his Letters generall: Paris. hist. ma. Wendouer. MS. To all Potentates, Souldiers, men of warre of all nations, to signe themselues with the Crosse, and to follow their Captaine Philip for the deiection of King Iohn, as∣suring all that their assistance (whether in Person or Contribution) shall bee no lesse meritorious, then if they visited our Sauiours Sepulchre. That this Pope vnder colour of such Crusadoes, did formerly cloake his own Auarice, his VVendouer MS Mat. Paris. ad an. 1202. owne Monkes auerre; but here hee cloakes therewith both his Pride, and a far more sauage vice, the thirst, not of mens gold but of their bloud. In which seruice with King Philip, hee vsed the same English Prelates for his Negotiators, which were before his Solicitors thereunto; with whom also he sent his Factour Pandulph; Mat. Paris. giuing him in priuate, secret instructions how to manage euery particular of the whole designe, to the most behoofe of the holy See. The French king prepares for England. (47) The French King likewise receiuing Mense Ian. Paris. from the Archbishoppe and his Associates (in a Rog. de VVend. M. S. councel) the Apostolike sentence; was very apprehensiue of that imployment, whereto not so much the Papall com∣maund, as his Mat. Paris. owne ancient malignity, and the Eng∣lish Barons traiterous requests, had prepared him, both which he was now Triuet. MS. willing to maske with the spe∣ous pretext of iustice and deuotion. Vnder which colors hee had Octauis Paschae. speedily marshalled an immense Army at Roan, & drew a mighty Nauy richly furnished to the mouth of Seyn, VVend. MS. al his Dukes, Earls, Barons, Knights, & souldiers being sūmoned to the exploit vnder pain of hie Treason and disherizing, who therforeboth in feare & hope of spoile came flocking without number. (48) A preparation of so great importance, that all Christendom tooke notice of, could not long be hidden from King Iohn; whose care, by reason of King Iohns pre∣paration for re∣sistance. his now doubled opposition (forrain & domestick) could be no lesse for his owne and his Kingdoms safe∣ty, then was his Enemies for impugning both. Wher∣fore his Summons being 3. Martij. Paris. sent to all his officers both for Sea and land, for speedy furnishing both of a Nauie, & an Army, equiualent to encounter so pow∣erfull an Inuasion, such Wendo. MS. innumerable multitudes swarmed to Douer, and other harbours for landing, that the Chiefe-leaders for want of prouision, dis∣missing the rest, Paris. hist. ma. encamped at Barham-Downes, one∣ly with 60000. choice, valiant, and well appointed men, who, if they had carried all one mind, and true affection towards their King, and safegard of their Country, there breathed not any Prince vnder heauen, whose assault Eng∣land had not beene able to repell. And being no worse appointed for a Sea-fight, his intent was to graple first with the French Fleet, Wend. Paris. making no doubt of sinking them all: so secure and confident was he in expectation of all Inuaders. In which braue addresse, whiles both shores of the Sea are thus belaid with both those Kings puissant Armies, the one waiting for the Enemy, the other for faire windes, and more forces, behold Pandulphus (the Popes Pragmaticke) hauing Ibidem. first desired safe conduct of King Iohn, arriues at Do∣uer, to put in execution those Mat. Paris. secret Instructions which his Lord (who made his aduantage of the Foxe-skinne, as well as of the Lions) Papa for mam euidenter expressit Paris. had expresly pre∣scribed. He there vnfoldes to the King, the innume∣rable multitude both of King Philips shippes, and of his Souldiers Horse and Foote, (all in readinesse to passe, and yet more expected to follow) to be∣reaue Pandulphus per∣swasion to King Iohn. him of his Kingdome by Apostolicall autho∣rity, and to enioy it himselfe with his Heires for euer. That with him were also comming all the English Exiles, both Clergy and Lay, they, by his forces to repossesse their estates (maugre the king) and hee from them to receiue allegiance, as from his sworne Subiects. That hee had the fealty of almost all the English Peeres obliged to him by their owne Charters; which made him distrustlesse of attayning easily his wished successe: which ca∣lamities (the more vnsufferable, because imposed by his insulting enemie, and his owne Subiects) he might yet euade and retaine his Crowne, which by Sentence hee had already lost, if penitently hee would submit himselfe to the Churches iudge∣ment. Doubtlesse the straites whereinto the King saw himselfe plunged, were very dreadfull; so many deadly enemies abroad to assault him, so few trustie friends at home to guard him: which droue him in∣to this sad cogitation Rog. de Wend. MS. Mat. Paris. that those his perfidious Peeres would now with their followers abandon him in the field, or betray him ouer to the Sword of his Enemies. Yet not vnlikely other motiues also might forcibly perswade him to relent: the remembrance of the Emperour Otho whom this very Pope (not without foule blot of Paris. hist. ma. Iniustice and Mat. VVestm. Leuity) had both eagerly aduan∣ced, and furiously dis-empyred; the boundlesse fu∣ries of the Crusado promulged against him, where∣with this Pope As Serres shew∣eth in Ludon. 8. touching the Al∣begois, and Paris touching Otho, &c. vsed to ouerflow, as with a merci∣lesse Ocean, all such Princes as withstood his will, which once broken in would neuer end, but with the end and ruine of all. Thus thinking it better to yeeld to the time, with assurance both Wendouer. MS. of his Crowne, and of the Mas. West. Popes fauour, then desperatelie to hazard Life, Crowne and all, to his immortall foes; hee redeemes his safety on such conditions, as tiable, that with money eyther paid or promised, hee might be wrought like waxe and made plyable to all wicked acti∣ons. Thus hauing the true length of the Popes foot, he fittes him accordingly with rich presents, and golden promises, crauing (by such mouing Rhe∣toricke) not his aide onely, but his Curse also a∣gainst the Archbishoppe and Barons, who so vnces∣santly distressed him. But Innocentius (forward of himselfe without any Motiues, to put in vre those his Papall vertues, and the execution of his late-v∣surped power,) vpon the first gladsome newes of Englands Vassallage to his See, had presently dispat∣ched for England an Agent of greater port then Pan∣dulph, a Subdeacon, Nicholas Bishoppe of Tusculum, The Popes Le∣gate commeth into England. with no meaner credence and instructions for pre∣seruing what the Pope had guilefully gotten, then Pandulph had to purchase, what hee ambitiously ga∣ped for: by whose Circafestum S. Michael . Rog. Wend. MS. arriuall the King seemed to be possessed of those his desires, before his golden let∣ters arriued at Rome to craue them. (54) For this Legate was infected with the like itches ( Paris hist. min. MS. Ambition and Auarice) as his Master, and The new Legate stickes close to king Iohn. therefore King Iohn knew how to demerite his fast∣nesse and loue, by supplying him with like Donatina preci∣osa, ibid. oint∣ments; whereby the Archbishop and Barons soone perceiued, that the Legate was Summo opere regi placere, &c. ibidem. wholy Regall, and the King Papall; which iealousie made both their Actions more distastfull. The Ouert and professed end of his comming, being to release the Interdict, hee first tampered a little to accord the King and Prelates vpon couenantes of Restitution; towardes which, though the king offered ten thousand marks, yet the Prelates ( Mat. Paris MS. repining at the Legates Pl parti, regia, &c. ibid. partiality to the King in approuing that offer,) Nic. Triuet. MS. chose rather to suffer the whole land to grone vnder that vnchri∣stian, and truly-styled Curse, Cler interdict relaxari lente, vsque satisfactum esset ad plenum. ib. then to defalcate any iot of their couetous demaunds. Vnder which co∣lour, the Popes Agent, (a fitte helue for such a hat∣chet,) brake his mind to the King of a more secret & principall cause of his Legacie, which was Wend. MS. for the contriuing of a more validous and vnexceptionable conueyance of his Kingdomes to the yoake of Ro∣mish Soueraignety; pretending doubtlesse, (as Pan∣dulph had done) that VVestmin. Triuet MS. hee could neuer be safe or quiet, but vnder the powerfull protection of the Popes winges. What iust exceptions the World might take to the former Graunt, his Holinesse was not ignorant; it Exceptions to the first graunt. being an Act in the King, both of manifest* Periurie 1. against his oath at his Coronation, and also of* Con∣straint, 2. * Circumuention, and * Feare; hee being dri∣uen thereto by the Pope himselfe, who had set vp 3. 4. both the French power, and his owne Barons a∣gainst him; an Act of one * actually excommuni∣cate, as also were the * Witnesses conuersing with 5. 6. him in that action, whereto, as neither the * next Heyres, nor the * Clergy, nor * Body of the King∣dome, 7. 8. 9. gaue any consent, so an * open disclaime there∣of was made by the very Archbishoppe of Dubleyne. Principall man there pre∣sent, 10. in the name (as is likely) of all the rest: and that all was ingrossed with so many grosse * vntruthes, as 11. if done most voluntarily; without any feare or force; in Grosse vntruthes prescribed by the Pope in that graunt. The Pope re∣nounceth his first Charter, & seeks a new. a general Assembly of the Barons; onely by a diuine in∣spiration, and because the King had nothing fitte to pa∣cifie God for his sinnes, but the giuing away of his King∣domes: Well might the Pope blush at these shame∣lesse abusions; and therefore if now the King, stan∣ding on calmer termes, can be wrought to ratifie his former Graunt, though the dealing bee more fraudu∣lent, yet the Act will seeme more colourable, be∣cause sauouring of lesse constraint, and more free de∣uotion. But if we looke with an vnpartiall Eye, wee shall see both the plight of King Iohn, and the action King Iohns present conditi∣on. of Innocentius, still like it selfe: the Interdiction still burthening his land; his Barons more molestious to him then forraine foes; his Prelates greedily gra∣ting on him to empouerish his meanes; his Arch∣bishop stopping all proceedings against forraine or home-bred enemies; and if hee had thwarted the Popes commaund herein, hee foresaw farre grea∣ter stormes at hand, then hee had hitherto escaped. Thus in desire to settle his Kingdomes quiet for his owne time, and in hope, perchance, that his Succes∣sors would (as since by diuine blessing they haue) vin∣dicate The new Char∣ter to the Pope. it againe from such an enforced slauery, hee condescended to renue his Dated 3. Octo. Charter of Subiection, knowing belike that his expresse Saluis nobis & aeredibus. See the Charter. Mat. Paris, Westmin. &c. reseruation to himselfe and his Heires, of all due administration of Iu∣stice, all Liberties, and Regalties, (as being excepted out of the Graunt,) was forcible of it selfe to make it vnforceable. For how hath hee his wonted power of Iustice, who was supreme, and is made subordinate? how his wonted liberties, who was absolute, & is made Homager and Pensioner? how his fore-vsed Regalities, whom another may name, and command as his vas∣sall? Yet this Charter, adorned with a Golden Bull, (fitte for the Roman Phalaris tortu∣red men in a brazen Bull. Phalaris, whereas the former was but sealed with wax) was at a meeting in Saint Paules Cathedrall Church ( Paris. hist. maior. pretended for other bu∣sinesses about the Interdict) presented for more authenticke solemnity at the High-Altar, where, in the King and Legates presence, the Archbishoppe of Canterbury, himself also both a Cardinal and a Legat The Archbishop of Canterbury ap∣peales against the Kings subie∣ction. (in this, acting the office of a stout Patriote, and noble Prelate, as the Archbishop of Dublein had done at the first Graunt,) stept forth, and in the As appeareth in Mat. Paris. ad An. 1231. Iuri & appellationibus Steph. Cant, and in Rossus Warwic. name of the whole Clergy and Kingdome, Paris. hist. min. MS. saith also Procaciter. ad Ann. 1214. boldly and earnestly presented Paris. hist. ma. in Henrico 3. ad Ann. 1231. Rossus Waruica∣nus. at the same Altar in solemne manner, his Appeales against that Charter so execrable to the whole world, as likewise formerly Paris. hist. min. MS. he had vsed all possible ende∣uor to diuert the kings hart frō that subiection to the Pope and Court of Rome. That the Peeres of the land accor∣ded with the Archbishop in the Appeale, (and more then in Appeales) both the Kings owne Dated at Do∣uer, 5. Septemb. Citat. in respons. ad Apolog, Bellar∣min. cap. 3. letters to the Pope saying, they openly professed, that they forci∣bly made head against him, because hee had so enslaued his land, and their owne bitter exclamations against it, so frequently in In VVendouer, Paris, Westmin. & alij. Authors reiterated, doe demon∣strate: and yet both the Archbishop and other Ba∣rons, are so cunningly named in the Popes In Original. in custod. R. Cotton Baronetti. Tran∣script, as if they had not onely beene present and witnesses at the doing, but also approuers of the deed. What comfort then had Innocentius of renouncing his old Charter, and thus shuffling for a new? Surely but little, it seemeth; especially when he saw both his owne Creatures in England thus oppugne it, and Christian Princes abroad; yea King Iohns King Philip & the Peeres of France. mortall e∣nemies, who not onely denied, that England (notwith∣standing this Transaction) Paris hist. min. MS. was any patrimony of S. Peter, and condemned the Pope for holding an errour so pernicious to all Kingdomes; but also vowed to die before they would yeeld, that any King can of his owne will, make his Kingdom Tributary, and his Nobles slaues to others. By which vniuersall detestation, of this the Popes vsurping, it is not improbable (though for the present hee flourished the Transcript there∣of, which hee sent into England, with the Ex originali Transcript. Dat. Octob. 3. 1214. Preface of Christ, and Melchised h being Kings and Priests, and that therefore in one person of Christs Vicar, as the Soule and the Body, so both Kingdome and Priesthoode did now concurre,) that yet ere long hee was no lesse ashamed of this latter, then of his former Charter. Whereto well suteth his testimony, who writes that a Author. Eulog . Citat. in Tortura Torti, per Epis. Cicestrens. Parliament was held at London the yeere 1214. Where the Archbishop sate as President with all the Cler∣gy and Layty: wherein by commandement of the Pope, the Charter, Fealty, and homage by which the King was obliged to the Pope, was absolutely released on the 7 day of Iuly: which if bee true, no maruaile if the Court of Rome cannot produce, though often chal∣lenged thereto, this Charter whereof so much they vaunt. Notwithstanding some vnquiet Spirits, as∣piring long after to the Papacy, though pretending (perhaps) the Mat. Paris. hist. mai r. An; 1245 Originall Charter was consumed at Lyons (where the idem ibid. Pope causing, some say, his owne Conclaue to bee set on fire, so haue a pretence to extort a contribution from the Prelates there in councell, the fire went farther then Could the Pope rule Pur∣gatory fire, and not this. hee meant it should) they made some flourish to See Parliament Rolles, temp. d. 1. & Ed. 3. renew their claime of homage and pension, till in a Generall Parliament, the Prelates, Lords, and Commons, seuerally and ioyntly An. 4. Ed. 3. Par∣l ament Rolles. No. 8. enacted, that for somuch as neither King Iohn, nor any other King, could bring his Realme and people to such thraldom, but by common assent of Parliament, (the which was neuer The like answere to this was made, Ann. 3. Ed. 1. Rot. Claus. m. 9. Schedule. done,) and that in so doing hee did against his Oath at his Coronation; besides many other causes of iust ex∣ception; if therefore the Pope thence forward should at∣tempt any thing therein, the King with all his Subiects See Cambden in Hibernia, p. 732. should with all their Forces and powers resist the same, and rather hazard all their liues and liuelyhood, then en∣dure that vsurpation. If Pope Paschall (in the Houeden in Henrie. 1. time of King Iohns grandfather) hauing with much solem∣nity made some graunts to the Emperour Henry, and confirmed them with an Florent. Wigorn. ad an. 1111. Anathema, with the Houed. ib. oathes of thirteene Cardinals, and with Idem. ib. religious recey∣uing of the blessed Sacrament; yet, because such grants were thought preiudiciall to his See, Paris in H. 1. Houed. solemn∣ly disclaimed his owne Act, and such his doing was aproued by a Clergy Councel, as pretended to be done Boetius Floren∣tius. by feare: how much more iustly might King Iohns Successors and his State, by such approbation of their grand Councel, free themselues of those seruitudes wherewith by anothers vniust, forced, vnwarranta∣ble Act, they were supposed to be enfettered? (55) Though the Archbishoppe were so vnkind against the Pope (the Aduancer of his Fortunes,) as to giue by his appeale so fatall a blow to his desired An. 1214. The Popes dis∣pleasure against Stephen Langton. Crowne, yet the Pope was not so ingrace as to die in his debt; as quickly hee found in Mat. Paris, hist ma. another Ap∣peale which hee made to the Pope against his Le∣gate, for that he, relying on See Innocentius his letters in Paris. Apostolicall indulgence, not onely disposed of all Spirituall dignities to Regijs nutibus, Paris. hist. min. MS. such as best liked the King, but also to his owne Idem. Italians, and Kinsmen, though absent, vnknowne, vnsufficient, vnworthy, yea, and some Ibidem. vnborne. Which Legatine Legati Tyrannis. ibid. Tyranny vnsufferable in a Christian State, though Simon Langton (the Archbishops brother and Pro∣ctor) vrged earnestly before the Pope, yet the Le∣gates Agent Pandulphus, so displayed both the Archbishoppes feruentnes in vsing suck Contra factam subiectionem pro∣caciter appellasse. Paris. MS. eager per∣swasions and appellation against the Kings subiection, and the Prelates Rigidos & aua∣ros, Mat. Paris. hist. ma. auarice, in their vnreasonable exacti∣ons for restitution from the King; being the most be∣nigne, modest, and humble Prince that his eyes euer be∣held; that his Holines not onely conceiued Paris, hist. min. MS. excee∣ding hatred against the Archbishop and his cause, but sent also his Authenticke Letters for repealing the Interdict, vpon restitution onely of 13000. Markes The King had paid 27. thousand before, and was to make it vp 40000. more to the Prelates (the King before had voluntarily offered them 100000) and that but by equall portions of Nic. Triuet. fiue yeeres payment. But the King, who knew the Popes pleasure before these letters came to impart it, hauing found that his French affaires had sustained vnreparable impeach∣ments by his hitherto enforced delayes, Wendouer. MS. entrusting his Kingdome to the Legate and Earle Marshals custody, was with his Forces passed into Poictou, (whiles in his absence, the relaxation of the Inter∣dict, after 6 Annos men∣ses 3. 14. dies. more then sixe yeeres continuance, was by the Legate in a Parliament solemnly promulged) where his Successes were so fortunate, that Lit. Regis Ioh. apud Wendou. it being powerfully subdued, great hope was conceiued the o∣ther Prouinces would follow. Whence breaking with Mat. Paris. like victories into Britaine, being there at the point to giue Rog. Wend. MS. battle to Lewis the Dolphine, his euer∣faithlesse Poyctouins sodainely Paris min. MS. forsooke him, and made him forsake his purpose. But a greater im∣payrement of those his hopes, was the Paul. Aemil. defeature of his Confederate Otho the Emperour, at the renow∣ned Battle of Ad Po tem de Bouines. 6. Cal. Augusti, Paris. MS. Bouines, where King Paris hist. . See in Aemylius this battle at large. Philip, stricken from his horse by the hand of Reginald Earle of Bul∣loigne, had there with his life ended the quarrell, if a faithful Souldier had not couered him with his own Body, and brauely sacrificed his life, to saue his So∣ueraignes; who thereupon recouered both his foo∣ting, and the victory. The heauy newes whereof, concurring with his Barons outrages at home, droue King Iohn on 8000. . Paris MS. deare conditions, to capitulate on a fiue yeeres Truce, and return to bridle them at home, whose attempts hee euer found most dangerous, The Barons new d sloyalties. when hee was most busied abroad. For vnder a gratia. Wendouer, MS. pre∣text of Deuotion (the vsuall maske for Treachery the Barons assembling at Saint Edmunds Mat. Paris. hist. ma. did euery man on the high Altar seuerally sweare, to renounce their sworne fealty to the King, and pursue him by Armes, till they had enforced his consent to the Charter of liberties formerly by the Archbishop recommēded to them. Which An. 1215. when VVend. MS. afterward they came in person to challenge of the King, as a part of his Oath taken at his Abso∣lution; hee Mat. Paris. seeing both their forces and affections ad∣dressed for violence, was enforced with gentle language and promised satisfactions, to desire, till after Easter, mature deliberation on so important a matter; in which breathing time, both in pollicie, hee tooke new oath of loyalty through all the land, and Idem. in deuotion, vndertooke the Vow and Signe of the holy Warres, choosing belike to die against faithles Turks, rather then to liue amongst such vnfaithfull Subiects. But neither Oathes, nor holy vowes Literae Innocen∣tij apud Wend. & Paris. (then esteemed the su∣preme priuiledge of protection) could bee sufficient Bucklers to protect against such desperate attemp∣ters; who at the prefixed weeke of Easter, prepa∣ring themselues not for a Conference, as with their Prince, but for a Battle, as against some hostile pow∣er, trouped together at Stanford, with Paris. Wend. MS. an Army ine∣stimable for number, whose Coniurati princi∣palem consenta∣ne m habuerunt Stephanum, ibid. very principall Abetter and conspirer was Stephen the Archbishoppe, the more per∣nicious person, because (to hide his false entende∣mentes) most assiduous in attendance about the King. And Idem. him the King selecting to send to the Barons Army (who were come on as farre as Brackley, not farre from the King, residing now in Oxford) to know the contents of their desires; hee brought a Rog. de Wend. MS. Schedule of their claimed liberties, with a message of their resolutions, if presently hee sealed not a Charter thereof vnto them, they would compell him therto by for∣cible entrance on all his possessions. Whereat his great heart Cum indignatione. ibidem. highly disdaining, hee demanded, why they also demanded not his Kingdome? those their exactions be∣ing grounded on no colour of reason, and swearing ne∣uer to enslaue himselfe to them by such a concession, hee dismissed his Archbishop to return them his peremp∣tory answere. (56) Neither were the Barons lesse resolute in performance of their vow and message, appointing The Barons in open rebellion. for Head vnto that huge and heady rout, Robert Fitzwalter, whom they enstyled Rog. Wend. MS. The Marshall of Gods Army and holy Church: who first assayling Northampton Castle, after fifteene dayes fruitlesse fury, departed to Bedford, whose Will. de Bello. Campo. Castelan being a Confederate gaue them easie entrance; but the Londoners (displeased with the King for burthening k Mat West. them with taxes) not onely admitted them, but n ncijs. . in∣uited them by request, to enter their City by night: where hauing that Key (as it were) of the land in their dispose, they by their VVendo r. MS. threatfull letters not onely drew most of the Nobles from the King, but also had almost lockt him out of his Regall Seat. To preuent which outrage, by gentle messages intrea∣ting of the Barons a place and day of meeting, who thereto designed Betwixt Wind∣sor & Stanes. Runingmead, ( Glouer Cata∣logue of honor. p. 954. but Mat. West. saith quod interpreta , Pratum . since called Coun∣sel-mead, for such consultations of State,) they thither came Rog. de Wend. M. S. with armed multitudes out of all the Kingdome beyond all number, that the King, Paris. hist. ma. seeing his power far inferiour vnto theirs, was constrained to 15. a e Iunij. Paris. grant them their vttermost desires, not onely for Liberties, (spe∣cified in See these Char∣ters at large in Wend & Paris. Magna Charta, and Charta foresta,) but also for a kind of sway in the Gouernment, by twenty fiue selected Peeres, to whose commaunds all the o∣ther Barons also were bound by oath to bee obsequi∣ous. Thus one of the greatest Soueraignes of Chri∣stendome, was now becom the Paris. twenty sixth petty king in his owne Dominions; as appeared that very night, when all the rest following the pompous streame of the new vpstart-Kings, left their Soueraigne vix 7. . VVend . MS. onelie with seuen Gentlemen to attend him. What mar∣uaile, if high disdain herof pierced his swelling heart, sitian both bodily & ghostly: and not onely forgaue bey he gaue a Legacy, Decem Libra terrae. Paris. gladly all his mortall persecutors (holding that a mater, though very difficult to flesh and bloud, yet salutary to the Soule) but also sent command to Henry his sonne to doe the same: to whom hee caused all present, to Idem. sweare fealty, as to the Heyre of his Crowne, and sent his letters to all his Officers abroad, exhorting them to assist him. And Ibidem. thus hee commended his soule to God, and his Body to bee buried in Worcester Church, where the Bishop solemnly interred it, by the Kings He died on S. Lukes night, 14. Cal. Nou. Godwins Catalog of B. appointment, neere the Body of Wolstan, a saincted Bishoppe renowned for constant fidelity to his Prince against the rebellious Nobles of In the Raigne of William Rufus his time: with which kind of men, King Iohns gouernment had beene miserably encombred. (62) This, being the Catastrophe of his Tragicall Raigne, might also haue beene the close of his Sto∣ry, The manner and cause of King Iohns sicknesse. had not the suddenty of his death, exacted some search into the cause of his sicknesse. Such Authors as touch the matter but in generall, content them∣selues with saying, he dyed of a Ioh. de Walsing . griefe, or a Polydor. feauer, or a Tho. Otterborne flux, or a Mat. West. surfet; but those who haue entred into the particulars, insist on such a Surfet, as wher∣of both griefe, feauer, and flux were most probable effects and Symptomes. For comming (say Chronicle of S. Albans, MS. Sundry English Chronicles, MS. Caxtons Chron. they) from the Washes to Swinshed Abbey, (being of the Cisleaux Order, which of old he had much incensed) hee added new matter of offence, as he sate at meat, when, in speech English Chron. MS. of his enemies too large prouision, hee sware, if hee liued but halfe a yeere longer, he would make one halfe-penny loafe as deare as As deare as 12. ob. Lecestrensis. as 12. d. Otterborn s 20. d. Polychrö. s 20. t. Caxton. twelue: which to preuent, a Monke of that holy habit, whi∣ther in loue to Lewis, or hate to the King, or pitty on the Land, presenting him with an enuenomed Cup, (whereof the King commanded him to bee his Ta∣ster) became the Diabolical Instrument of his own and his Soueraignes destruction. This relation, de∣liuered by Monkes, and men of Monkish humour, as a thing so vndenyable, that they auow (at what time they wrote this) Chron. of S. Albans, MS. Caxton & alij. fiue Monkes in that Abbey did sing for this their Brothers soule specially, and so should whiles the Abbey stood, which if it had beene forged euery Child might easily haue refuted; and the re∣hearsall of all circumstances thereof, (of the Kings speeches, of the Monkes conference with his Abbot, of his preparing the drinke with a Toade in the gar∣den, of his dying in the Firmary) might deserue cre∣dite with the greatest Patrones of Monkery; yet Parsons in his Warn-word, Enc. 2. cap. 15 one of them (as if by acquiting Simon of Swinshed, all Yet Iacob Cle∣mens a Monke did kill Henry 3. of France. o∣ther of such Orders were cleared from assasinating of Princes) striueth eagerly, to asperse some late M. Fox his Mar∣tyrolog; Sir Fran∣cis Hastings his Ward-word. Parsons censure of Foxes pictures in his Mart. Relaters hereof, with the blots both of malice & forgery. Wherein is the malice? in adding to the narration, Pictures also of the fact, so to moue hatred to Monkes and their Religion,; whereas of truth, either Monkes, or men of that Religion, were the very first, who not onely so depictured, but also liuely and richly depainted it in their Where the king is limmed with his Crowne and rich roabes, fit∣ting at a banquet and foure Monks in their habites comming to him, whereof one presents him with the poyso∣ned cuppe. Uide MS. of S. Albans i Bibli theca Archiep. Cant. goodliest Manuscripts. Wherein then the Forgery? in adding to Caxton, that Parson ibidem. his Abbot gaue him absolution for the same before hand, there being no such matter at all, nor any mention thereof in the story? No? let the very story speake; Caxton Chron. The Monke went to the Abbot, and was shriuen of him, and told the Abbot all the King had said; and prayd his Abbot to assoile him, for hee would giue the King such a drinke that all England should be glad thereof and ioyfull: th yode the Monke into the Garden, &c. Yea far∣ther, Lecestrensis. one Monkalleadgeth, an inducement for the Abbots assent therto, for that the King had sent for the Abbots sister (a faire Prioresse) with purpose to haue deflowred her. Yea, but the Story it self is char∣ged with By Parsons loco Cit . noueltie, the first author thereof being but An. 1483. and all other former Writers making no mention of it. This if true, were somewhat, and doubtlesse, it is as true as the former: for how could hee bee the first Author, when not onelie Borne in the raigne of Henr. 3. Ranulph the Monke of Chester, Cl t, A. 1336 Iohn of Tynmouth, and He ended his story An. 1420. Thomas Otter∣bourne the Francistan Fryer, recorded it as vulgata. a fame ge∣nerally receiued; but sundry other ancient stories, as Iohn of Lichfield, the Monke of Leicester, & Scala Mun∣di (to omit other Hist. de gestit Reg. Ioh. MS. in custodia D. Rob. Cotton. English Chroni∣cles, MS. namelesse Authors before Ann. 1483,) so confidently auouch his poisoning at Suin∣shead, that vnpartiall Ioh. Maior. Georg Lillius Caxton & alij. after-Writers, though friends to Monkery, made no scruple to beleeue it. And why should they not, sith an K. Henry the 3 Author, more anci∣ent and vnexceptionable then all the rest, (euen king Iohns Sonne and Successor in his Kingdome) auerred it, Paris. hist. ma. when, the Prior of Clerken-well saucily telling him (being then in that house) that as some as hee ceast to doe Iustice towards his Prelates, hee should cease to be a King; the King enraged with his trayterous threat, replyed; What? meane you to turne mee out K. Henry 3. ac∣knowledgeth his Father was mur∣dered. of my Kingdome, and afterward to murder me, as my fa∣ther was dealt with? (63) But not to trouble our selues with refuting a Gooses gagling against Foxes true relation; ea∣sie it is to obserue the hatred of Monks against that King, both in thus procuring his death then, and his Monkish slanders against K. Iohn. dishonour (a second death) in their slanderous in∣uentions euer since. For, whereas he Rog. de VVend. MS. writ by some of his Bishops to certaine forraine Princes, for aides a∣gainst his faithlesse Rebels; the Monkes charge him, that hee counterfeited his Bishoppes Seales, and writ a∣broad, that all Englishmen were become. Infidels and Apostates from Christs faith, and therefore such should come to subdue them and take their possessions: Mat: Paris. when he said, a Stag which hee kild, had neuer the lesse fatte, though he neuer heard a Masse; they charged him hee doubted of the Resurrection of the dead; P. Vergil. and in saying, hee neuer sped well after his yeelding to the Pope, that hee said hee was vnfortunate since hee was re∣conciled vnto God: that, In Record. Turr. London. when hee gaue leaue to a seruant of his owne, to enter any religious Order, he gaue him leaue to bee of what Religion and Faith hee list. That moreouer, Mat. Paris. hee offered his King∣dome to a Sarazen, and would embrace the Tur∣kish faith, though this tale were told by one Robert of London (a Lib. S. Alban. MS. in vit. Ioh. Abb. wicked Masse-Priest, or rather a Mon∣ster, M. Paris. hauing a face like a Iew, with one arme long, and another short, his fingers deformedly growing toge∣ther two and two,) with such senseles improbabilities, as, Ibidem. that hee found that Moorish King reading of Saint Paules Epistles, and that hee refused the Kingdom of England being offered him, with the like. That last∣ly Paris. A. 1226. it was reuealed to a Monke, King Iohn was in Hell; though a Poet for so saying, is by M. P. ( Idem in vit. Iohan. who de no doubt of King Iohns saluation) censured for a Reprobus versifi∣cator. Paris. in vit. Ioh. K. Iohns princelie des. Reprobate. These all are demonstrations of so in∣credible hatred, as should rather alleuiate their Au∣thors credite, then the Kings; whose Raigne had it not fallen in the time of so turbulent a Pope, so am∣bitious Neighbour- Princes, so disloyall Subiects, nor his Story into the handes of exasperated Writers, hee had appeared a King of as great re∣nowne, His Acts of de∣uotion. as misfortunes. His works of deuotion in∣feriour to none; as his Foundations declare at Nic. Triuet. MS Beau∣ley, Cambd. Brit. in Berkshire. Farrington, Cambd. Brit. in VViltshire. Malmsbury, and Campian hist. of Ireland, l. 2. c. 1. Dublin, and that other for Nunnes, at Godstow by Oxford, Triuet. M. S. Walsingham. His ciuill Acts. for which, some haue interpreted that Prophesie of Merlin as meant of him; Sith Virgin giftes to Maids he gaue, Mongstblessed Saints God will him saue. His Acts and Orders for the Weale-publike were beyond most: hee being eyther the first, or the chiefest, who appointed those noble Formes of Ciuill gouernment in Houeden. Polydor. Stow. London, and Ex Record. & Charti Ciuitat. most Cities, and Incorporate Townes of England, endowing them also with their greatest Franchises; The Cambd Brit. in Striueling. first who caused Sterling money to bee h re coyned; The Cambd, Brit. in Ordinib Ang. first, who orday∣ned the Honourable Ceremonies in Creation of Earles; The first, who Houed. Paris, Vit Arch. Cant. in Hubert: setled the Rates and Mea∣sures for Wine, Bread, Cloth, and such like Necessa∣ries of Commerce; The VVendouer MS. Paris. first, who planted English Lawes and Officers in Ireland, and both annexed that Kingdome, and fastned Wales to the Crowne of Eng∣land, therby making amends for his losses in France. Whose whole course of life and actions, wee cannot shut vp with any truer E loge, then that which Rog. H ed. MS. Cit ex hist. Eulo∣gi apud Fabi∣an & Fox. an ancient Author hath conferred on him: Princeps qui∣dem Magnus erat, sed minus foelix; atque vt Mari∣us, vtramque fortunam expertus; Doubtlesse, he was a Prince more Great then happy, and one, who, like Ma∣rius, had tried both sides of Fortunes wheele. His Wiues. (64) Alice, the first wife of King Iohn, was the eldest of the two daughters, and heires apparant at that time of Humbert the second, Earle of Maurien, now called Sauoy: her Mother was Clemence daugh∣ter of Berthold the fourth, Duke of Leringen, who had been the diuorced wife of Henry the Lyon, Duke of Saxonie. This marriage was in their childhoode cōcluded by their Parents at Mountferrant in Auerne, in February, Anno, 1173; he should haue had with her, her Fathers Earledome, but all altered by her vn∣timely death; and after ensued the death of her Mother, the new marriage of her Father, and issue male of the same, whereof the Dukes of Saxonie are descended. (65) Isabel, his second wife (by Houeden in K. Iohn. some called Hawisia or Auis) though the See Glouers Catalogue of Honour, p. 363. & p. 134. youngest of the three Sisters, yet was in regard of this marriage, the sole Heire of William Earle of Gloucester, sonne of Earle Robert, the Naturall sonne of King Henry the first; her Mother was Hawis the daughter of Robert Bossu Earle of Leicester. Shee was married vnto him when hee was Earle of Mortaine, in the first yeere of his bro∣ther Richards raigne: and after ten yeeres hauing no issue by him, was (the first yeere of his Raigne) diuorced from him, vnder pretence of Consanguini∣ty, and married to Geffrey Mandeuill Earle of Essex, and lastly, to Hubert de Burgo Earle of Kent; but died without any Issue by them. (66) Isabel also his last wife, was daughter and heire of Aymer Earle of Angolesme; her Mother was Alice daughter of Peter, Lord of Courteney, fifth son of Lewis the Grosse, King of France. Shee was marri∣ed vnto him in the first yeere of his Raigne, & crow∣ned by Hubert Archbishoppe of Canterbury, 8. Id. Octob. Anno 1200. and suruiuing him, was married to Hugh Brun Earle of March, and Lord of Lusig∣nian and Valence in Poytou, to whom first she should haue beene married, but yet (as seemeth) continu∣ed her affection to him till now. By him shee had di∣uers Children, (greatly aduanced by the King, Hen∣ry 3. their halfe brother, and as greatly maligned by his Subiects) Hugh Earle of March and Ango∣lesme, Guy of Lusignian, slain in the battell at Lewise, William of Valence Earle of Pembroke, Aymer of Va∣lence Bishoppe of Winchester, Geffrey of Lusignian L. of Hastings. His Issue. (67) Henry, the eldest Sonne of King Iohn, and Isabell his last wife, was borne at Winchester, 1. Octo∣ber, 10. of his Fathers Raigne, Anno, 1208. K. Iohn dying at Newarke, ( Mat. Paris. VVendou. whither hee was broughtina Horselitter from Swynshead,) the Barons malice was ended, their offence amended, Lewis of France reiected, and the yong Prince seated on his Fathers throne. (68) Richard, his second son by the same Queene, was borne the next yeere after Henry; by whom af∣terward hee was made Knight, created Earle of Cornwall, and appointed Earle of Poytou. After the death of William Earle of Holland, Emperour of the West, hee was by the Electours chosen to succeed him in the Empire, and crowned King of Romanes, & of Almayn at the City of Acon in Germany, by Conrade Archbishoppe of Coleyne, Maij 27. being the Ascen∣tion day, Anno 1257. deceasing at the Castle of Berkhamsted, April 20. Ann. 1271. the 13. yeere of his Empire, his body was buried in his Monastery of Hayles in Gloucestershire, but R ssus VVarwi∣canus. his Heart at Oxford in Reuly Abbey (founded by him) vnder a Pyramis of admirable worke. Hee had three wiues, the first was Isabel daughter of William Marshall Earle of Pem∣broke, widdow of Gilbert Clare Earle of Gloucester; by whom hee had issue, Henry slaine at Viterbo in I∣taly, and Iohn, both dying without Issue. His second wife was Senches, (daughter of Raimond Earle of Prouince, & sister to Queene Eleanor his brothers wife) who was crowned with him at Acon, and had issue by him Edmund Earle of Cornwall, and o∣thers. His last wife was Beatrice, Niece to the Arch∣bishoppe of Coleyne, who seemeth to haue suruiued him, and to haue no Issue by him. (69) Ioane, the eldest Daughter and Child of K. Iohn and Queene Isabel his last wife; was the first wife of Alexander the second, King of Scots, married vnto him in Yorke, Iunij 25. Anno 1221. who returning into England to visite her Brother, deceased at Lon∣don, and was buried in the Nunnery at Tarent in Dor∣setshire, 4. Martij, in the 21. yeare of her Brother king Henries raigne in England, and the 23. of king Alex∣ander her husbands in Scotland, Anno 1236. (70) Eleanor their second daughter, was first mar∣ried to William Marshall the yonger, Earle of Pem∣broke: and after his decease without issue, and se∣uen yeeres Widow-hood remarried to Simon Mont∣fort Earle of Leicester, (sonne of Simon Earle Mont∣fort in France, by Amice Daughter of Robert Blanch∣man Earle of Leicester) who maintaining the Ba∣rons warres against King Henry her brother, was slaine at the battaile of Euesham, in the 19. yeere of her brothers raigne, 1265; after whose death, shee and er Children were forced to forsake England; she died in the Nunnery at Montarges in France. Henry her eldest sonne, was slaine with his father at Eueshan: Simon, the second, was Earle of Bigorre, and ancestor to a Family of Mountfords in those parts of France. Almaricke, her third sonne, was first a Priest, and Treasurer of the Cathedrall Church in Yorke, and after a Knight, and a valiant seruitour in sundrie warres beyond the Seas. Guy the fourth Sonne was Earle of Angleria in Italy, and Progenitour of the Mountfords in Tuscaine, and of the Earles of Campo bachi in the Kingdome of Naples. Richard the fift sonne, remained priuily in England, and changing his name from Mountford to Wellesborne, was ance∣stor of the family of Wellesbornes in England. She had also a daughter named Eleanor, borne in England, brought vp in France, and married into Wales to Prince Lewellen ap Griffith. (71) Isabel, their yongest daughter, was born, An. 1214; when shee was 21. yeeres of age, shee was married (being the 6. and last wife) to the Emperour Frederick the second, at the City of Wormes in Ger∣many, 20. of Iuly, 1235. Shee had issue by him, Henry appointed to bee King of Sicily, and Marga∣ret wife of Albert, Landgraue Thurin: shee was Empresse 6. yeeres, and died in Childbed, Decemb. 1. of her husbands Empire 31. of her brothers raign 38. Anno, 1241. (72) Iane, or Ione the daughter naturall of King Iohn (by Agatha Daughter of Robert Ferrers, Earle of Darby) marryed to Lewin Prince of Wales. Anno 1204. her Father gaue with her the Castle & Lord∣shippe of Elinsmore in the Marches of Southwales; she (like a most louing Child) gaue her Father secret in∣telligence of the Treasons intended against him by the Welsh and English. (73) Geoffrey Fitz-Roy, a base son, who transpor∣ted some Souldiers into France, when Archbishoppe Hubert forbad the King his father to goe thither. (74) Richard, who married the daughter & heire of Fulbert de Douer, who built Chilham Castle in Kent, which Castle hee had with her, and had Issue by her, of which som families of good esteem are descended. stant Lords, at Newarke, where the Generall assem∣bly for that seruice was appointed. The whole Ar∣my Mat. Paris. after the Musters, rested there some dayes, which they spent not in vanities, but in deuotions & receit of the Sacrament, humbling themselues be∣fore the offended Maiestie of God; and so all of them (saith Paris) being prepared, resolue eyther to return victorious, or to die in defence of their coun∣try, their Soueraignes right, and their owne Liber∣ties, and possessions, all which seemed now to lie at stake. To giue them the greater edge and spirite, Wallo with great solemnity accurseth Lewis and his Lewis and his fol∣lowers accursed. Coadiutors; and thus the Army marcheth towards Lincolne, and the Lewisians there in siege of the Ca∣stle: the King himselfe being left with a strong guard at Stow (about eight miles short of Lincolne) accom∣panied Molinsh. with Wallo and others, there without perill of his person to attend Gods pleasure, in the euent of the enterprise. () Vpon their approch, if the Counsell of er de Quincy & Robert Fitz. Walter. some English Lords had beene followed, the Lewisian Ar∣my had issued forth of the City, & giuen them bat∣tle in the opē field; but the Earle of Perch (the French Generall) thinking the Kings party to bee greater then it was, for that the Noblemen and Bannerets thereof had each of them two Ensignes, the one born with themselues, the other aduanced among the The policy of K. Henries friends in their march. Carriages, which doubled the shew of their num∣bers; they did thereupon change that course, clo∣sed the Gates of the City, and plyed their endea∣uours against the Castle more fiercely then before. The Earle of Pembroke therefore lets Falcasius slip in at the Castle-posterne with his Arbalasters, whiles others breake vp the South-gate of the City, at which the Kings Army most couragiously entring, and they of the Castle sallying out in Flancke of the Enemy, scattered and vtterly defeated the Lewisians. The Earle of Perch their Generall, being enuironed with the Royalists, and willed to render himselfe, sware that hee would neuer become Prisoner to a∣ny English: vpon which refusall he was run through the sight of his helmet into the braines, and so dyed without speaking any word. In this conflict (being The feareful end of the Earle of Perch. on Saturday in Whitson-weeke) the force of natu∣rall propension was apparent; for notwithstanding the fierie resolutions of the Kings People, yet when The Kings Ar∣my hath a strange victory, called Lewis Fair. they saw the faces of their kinsmen, friends & coun∣trimen on the other side, that fury relented so strōg∣ly, that the most part of the reuenge fell vpon the Horses, and not vpon the Horsemen, whom onelie they laboured to make their Captiues. The whole riches of the Lewisian Campe, & of the City of Lin∣colne, became the booty and spoile of the Kings Ar∣mie, whereupon this discomfiture was called Lewis Fair; Neither did the Clergy of the place escape, for the Popes Legate had commaunded that they also should be rifled to a penny, as persons excommuni∣cated in partaking with Lewis. The Chase was but coldly & fainedly followed vpon the flying Barons, otherwise not a man could haue escaped; wherein Rog. de Wend. M. S. yet the chiefest Barons were taken, with about Mat. Paris. 400. Knights, besides Esquiers, and of other sorts with∣out note or number, though Walsingham. Ypodig. Neust. some say that this number of Knights were slaine, & matrons and wo∣men of the towne flying by boate, which they had no skill to gouerne, were drowned. Such as esca∣ped the fight were not therefore past the danger; for the Country people fell vpon them as they fledde, killing great numbers, so that almost all the footmen tooke vp their last lodgings before they could reach to London, where Lewis was. The Marshal of France, the Chastellan of Arras, and about two hundreth The perillous e state of Lewis. Knights came safely thither, but were not otherwise then sowerly welcome of the Prince, who laid vpon their cowardise the losse of all the rest. His feare of being taken Prisoner iustly encreasing, hee fortifies London by the best meanes hee can, and dispatcheth Posts into France for more reliefe. This great victory was much the stranger, if (as Wend. MS. Paris hist. some write the fame went) that onely three were slaine vpon both sides, the Earle of Perch, one of Du-Brents Knights, and an obscure fellow belonging to some, or other of the Barons. (8) The Kings Gouernour after the victory rode presently with the gladsome tidings in the heighth of speed to the King and Legate, who with teares of ioy gaue God thankes. But the noble Earle not lea∣uing his worke imperfect, seekes to embarre Lewis from forraging about London. Meane while by the diligence of Lady Blanch the wife of Lewis, Eustace the ruffianly Apostata, (who of a Monke becom∣ming a Ypod. Neust. Demoniacke) was now vpon the Sea with a fresh supply of men and munition bound for Lon∣don; But God was no better pleased with these, then with the other scatterlings at Lincolne. For the Eng∣lish Nauie, hauing the wind of the French, sunke di∣uers Rog. de Wend. MS. Mat. Paris. of their shippes by tilting at them with the yron Prowes or Beakes of their Gallies; vsing also vnsla∣ked lime in dust or powder, which they threw into Eustace and the French succours defeated at Sea: the faces of their enemies, and blinded their sight: so were the hopes of Lewis for any present succours ab∣solutely frustrated. Eustace himselfe, found after long search, and drawne out from the bottome of the Pumpe in a French shippe, at Douer had his head cut off, though Stow in Henry 3 some say hee was slaine by Richard, a base-sonne of King Iohn. The newes of which suc∣cesse being brought to the King, did not more reioice him, then they wounded Lewis, for the losse was not onely great in men, but in all sorts of riches and prouisions. To giue now no rest to Lewis his decli∣ning fortunes, the Earle of Pembroke with a mighty Army besieged London, and Lewis therein, aswell by Water as by Land; seeking to driue him by penu∣rie London besieged. to render the City. It came to capitulation, and in an Ilet in the Riuer of Thames, not farre from Stanes, the King, Wallo the Legate, and William Marshall the Kings Gouernour, met with Lewis & the Barons to finish the Peace: for Lewis had pro∣mised to doe as Wallo and the Earle would deuise, so that it might not tend to his dishonour or scan∣dall: Heades or Articles of the agreement which Lewis sware vpon the Gospell to performe, were, 1. Articles of peace between Henry and Lewis. That Lewis, the Barons, and other his partakers should stand to the iudgement of the Church (whose censures they had now some yeeres contemned) and from thence∣forth bee and remaine true to the same. 2. That he and his should forthwith depart the land; neuer to return again with a purpose to doe harme. 3 That he should doe his best to draw his Father to make restitution of all such things in France as belonged to the King of England, and that Lewis when himselfe was King should quietly part with them. 4. That Lewis should immediately render to King Henry all holdes and places taken in the warre. On the other part, the King, the Legate and the Earle sware; 1 That the King should restor▪ to the Barons and others, all their rights and inheritances, with all the Liberties formerly demanded of his Father. 2. That none (of the Layty) should suffer dammage or reproch for taking part on either side. 3. That Prisoners should bee released, &c. Whereupon Lewis with his adherents was formally by Wallo absolued from the sentence of Excommunication, and so they ranne on all sides in∣to embracements, and parted in the kisse of Peace. The Doct. Pow. hist. Cambr. p. 278. Welsh, who had held with the Barons, were left out of this Conclusion, being thereby laid o∣pen to spoile. Thus was Lewis Iob. Til. Chron. driuen out of Eng∣land, whom the Earle of Pembroke brought to the Sea-side, and the Realme was cleared. (9) There are Paul. Aemil. in Phil. 2. who write how that Lewis had a great summe of money paide him for restoring the Hostages; but Mat. Paris whom Hollinsh. in H. 3. some cite to that purpose, affirms no such matter in any prin∣ted Copy. Reason surelie is vtterly against it; for when euen the life of Lewis was after a sort in King Lewis had no money granted to him by this composition. Henries hand, with what sense can it stand that the King should set all the French free without ransom; and ye imselfe pay money for the Hostages? which also were not his, but the Hostages of his ene∣mies the Barons; so that, if money were due, it must haue come from them, not from the King, who both in honour and profite was rather obliged to the contrarie. Writers of that very time doe in plain wordssay; The Pouerty of Lewis was such, that he was Rog. Wendouer. M S. Math. Paris. The same Math. Paris. at A. D. 1227. Saith that King Henry charged the Lon∣doners for hauing giuen Lewis 5000 marks at his de∣parture forcing them to giue him as much. compelled to borrow fiue thousand pounds of the Londo∣ners, to set him out of England: and therfore that o∣ther seemes nothing else but a vaine gloze to salue the honour of Lewis, who was plainly driuen out of England, after so high hopes with losse, sorrow, and eternall disgrace, which the French are so sensible of, that they scarse seeme to write of the whole action, otherwise then Enguer de Mon. Gagwin. Paul. Aemil. Iob. Tili. An. 1218. laying the misfortune of Lewis vp∣on the Barons mutability. (10) The Realme of England purged of those for∣raine dregges, was not therfore presently freed from other manifold encombrances, such as after so great a tossing of all lawes and things diuine, and humane, doe ordinarily flote vp and downe, like the froth & working of a troubled Sea. For diuers men presu∣ming vpon their former seruices to the State, or thinking the old bad world would either continue still, or soone returne, if iustice grew confident a∣gainst Trespassors, or for what other corrupt mo∣tiues soeuer, did dare intollerable things. The Rog. de Wend. M. S. Mat. Paris. prin∣cipall Lords of this misrule, were William Earle of Aumarl, Falcasius de Brent with his Garrison Soul∣diers, Robert de Veipont, with others, who hauing had the Castles and possessions of certaine Bishops and Great men, either to keepe in trust, or otherwise by iniquity of the times conuerted violentlie to their vses; did still with-hold the same, both against the minds of their lawfull owners, and the Kings ex∣presse Prohibition. Among others, Robert de Gau∣gi defended the Castle of Newarke (being the Fee of the Bishoppe of Lincolne, as was also the town it self) against the Kings Armie, conducted by the So ancient Writers call him and well might. Great Marshall Earle of Pembroke, for eight dayes, and did not first yeeld the place, before (by mediation of friends) the Bishoppe paid to Gaugi one hundreth pounds. There was in that great Earle, a perpetu∣all care to conclude things without bloud-shedde, wherein shined his Christian piety and morall wis∣dome, there being no other so safe way to settle disordered humors. The greater was his losse both to the King and State by his death An. 1219. soone after en∣suing, whose In the Temple-Church in Lon∣don. monument yet remaining, doth not so much eternize his memory, as that well-deserued Paris ad an. 1214. saith. Geruasius de Melkel y made these verses. Epitaph, the Epitome of his noble vertues; Sum quem Saturnum sibi sensit Hybernia, Solem Anglia, Mercurium Normannia, Gallia Martem. Irelands Saturn, Englands Sunne am I, The Mars of France, and Normans Mercurie. He left behind him fiue Sonnes, all Earles of Pem∣broke successiuely, and dying without issue; his fiue Daughters aduanced by great marriages, brought as great aduantage to their husbands issue, by the inhe∣ritances of their issuelesse brethren. (11) The King (gouerned after Marshals death, by Peter Bishoppe of Winchester, and such Hollinsh, p. 202 other, Ann. 1220. An. Reg. 5. whom the Bishoppe had procured to ioyne in ad∣ministration of publik affairs) seeming now to haue a setled and calme estate, resolues (for good hopes sake) to bee crowned againe; which was perfor∣med by Stephen Archbishoppe of Canterbury at West∣minster King Henry crowned againe. with the attendance and confluence of all the Prelates, Peeres, and People. Vpon the* Satur∣day before his Coronation, the Mat. Paris. Walsingham. Westminster Church enlar∣ged by Henry 3. new worke of the Abbey Church at Westminster, (Paris calles it the Chappell of our Lady,) was begunne, whereof the King himselfe in person laid the first stone, as if hee ment the world should know, his intention was to consecrate his future actions to raise the glory of God. This calme but new beginning, was almost Ann. 1221. as speedily distempered and disturbed by sodaine stormes; by reason that, while the King kept his Christmas with great royalty at Oxford, in the com∣pany of the Prelates and Peeres of England, William de Fortibus, Earle of Aumarl, incited by Falcasius de Brent, and the like riotous Gentlemen, sodainely departed frō the Court without leaue, & (whither it were vpon discontentment, because the King had against the Earles will the last yeere taken Wend. M S. Paris. hist. ma. some Castles into his hands, or out of an euill ignorance how to liue in quiet) he mannes the Castle of Biham, victuals it with the Corne of the Chanons of Brid∣lington, spoiles the Towne of Deeping, and vnder shew of repayring to the Parliament, seiseth on the Castle of Fotheringhay, committing many other fu∣rious riots in contempt of the King, and breach of his peace; many Ypodig. Neust. others in other places follow∣ing his lewd example. Yet at length the Earle com∣ming in vnder the conduct of Walter Archbishop of Yorke, was at the suite of Pandulph (who succeeded Wallo in the place of Legate) pardoned; and the like hurtfull clemency was extended toward his Complices and Retinue, whom the King (in regard belike of some former better deserts) set free with∣out punishment or ransome. And to preuent any further disturbances of that nature, Hubert de Burgh Earle of Kent, for his rare integrity and fidelity (ap∣proued in all King Iohns troubles) was also made go∣uernour of the Kings Person, and Chiefe Iustitiar of England, with the generall allowance of all the States. What need the land then had of a seuere procee∣ding, wee may iudge by this, that Foulk de Brent held the Earledomes of Northampton, Oxford, Bed∣ford, Mat West. and Buckingham, with the Castles and Holds; Philip de Marc, the Castles of Peke and Nottingham, Nottinghamshire and Darbishire; and others detai∣ned other portions, without any other right, then that which the iniquity of the late tumults gaue. (12) It was no small addition to the troublesom∣nesse of this time, that certaine D. Pow. bist. Camb. Lords of Wales, and (as Mat. Paris. some say) Prince Lewelin himselfe, desirous to ridde their Marches of the English, rose in Armes, & laide siege to the Castle of Buelt, which inuited king Henry to draw thither with an Armie; but the worke was made easie by the voluntary departure of the Welsh; vpon the fame of the Kings approch: which appearances of some ensuing stirres, moued the king to thinke of strengthning himselfe with faithfull al∣liances; and not long after, Alexander King of Scots came to Yorke, (who in the yeere Ro Wend. MS. Mat. Paris. hist. ma. before had met King Henry at the same place) and there tooke to wife the Lady Ioan King Henries sister; and Hu∣bert de Burgh, in presence of both the Kings marri∣ed the Lady Polyd. Vergil. Margaret sister to Alexander; Boetius H t. Scot. 13. saith, that two great Lords of England married two sisters of King Alexander at that place. About which time, Tho. VValsing. in Ypod. Neust. Isabel Queen Dowager of Englād, with∣out the leaue of her sonne the King, or of his Coun∣cell, crost the seas, and tooke to husband the Earle of March in France. The young King supposing his estate at home now somewhat setled, and his eyes beginning to grow cleare-sighted by the bene∣fite of experience, forgets not to looke about his af∣faires abroad; and first sends Polyd. Verg. lib. 16. Hollinsh. p. 203. Sauarie de Malleon to bee his Lieutenant in Aquitaine, where yet the English held the greater part, and dispatcheth Am∣bassadors to Philip King of France, for restitution according to the Articles with Lewis: whereunto Rog Wend. and Mat. Pa . place this Ambassage at An. D. 1223. answere was made that nothing ought to bee resto∣red which by right of warre had beene atchieued; but (as it seemes) there was a Truce for Ypod. Neust. fowre yeeres agreed vpon betweene the two Monarches, concerning the County of Poictou. (13) The State both of Church and Common-wealth in those troubled daies, seeme to haue much resemblance; euery man daring to attempt in either, what his own audaciousnes would suggest, or others conniuency permit. But Stephen Archbishop of Canterbury (who himselfe was lately the ring-leader of disorders both in State and Church) is now bee∣come very diligent in his Prouinciall Synode at Ox- to, in rage of this vnexpected reuocation, like a braue Romane threw the Popes letters into the fire, yet durst not disobey the Contents. And whereas the message it selfe had beene scanned and sifted to the very branne, both here and in In Concilio i∣turicensi. Mat. Paris. France, and iudged to sauour of so vniuersall an oppression, as might cause a generall discession from the Church of Rome; the King in presence of his Prelates and Peeres, turned off the Popes couetous demaund with this thrifty an∣swere: The King puts off the popes demaunds. Mat. Paris. The things which the Pope would perswade vs vnto, doe stretch themselues as farre as the Christian world is wide, and because England is but an Out-Angle thereof, therefore when we see other Kingdomes giue vs an example, hee shall then finde vs the more forward to obey. (21) That difficultie so auoided; the King was earnestly bent to make a voyage in person to the aide of his brother Earle Richard, who pursued the affaires of Gascoigne; which though by the late Earle of Sarisburies death it receiued some maime; yet by the fortitude and counsell of other noble persons, it did still prosper. This intention and de∣sire was staide by the receit of letters out of France, which declared the Earle his brothers health, and the good successe of affaires. The King (some say) among his Counsellors of State, had one William de Perepound a great Astrologer, who fortold that Lewis King of France should not preuaile; and this affir∣mation did the rather withhold him at that present. There is who Polyd. Vergil. l. 16. Mat. Pa is. writes, that King Henry (vpon the Popes letters) forbare to attempt any thing in France at that time, lest he should hinder Lewis, who was then vpon an enterprise against the remaines of the Albigenses in Languedoc, Prouince, and the parts a∣bout. These men were traduced for Heretikes, and What kind of Heretikes the Albigenses of Waldenses were. Frater R ynerius, de Ualdensibus. so condemned by the See of Rome; but what their Heresie was, a * Fryer (who writes against them,) re∣ports, saying, they were of all other the most pernicious Sect; for antiquity, some holding they were from the Apostles time; for generality, there scarse being any Nation where they are not; and lastly, for shew of piety, in that they liue iustly before men, and beleeue all things touching God aright, & all the articles of the Creed, The Master he∣refie of the Albi∣genses. only they blaspheme and hate the Church of Rome. No maruail if this horrible heresie did trouble his Holinesse; and therefore, whereas his Predecessor, and himselfe had kept much adoe in Christendome, to excite men to take the Signe of the Crosse, and warre against the Turke, (which the Fryers did perswade men vnto, teaching, that Apud Auenti∣num. whosoeuer were polluted with any hai∣nous offence, as Parricide, Incest, Sacrilege, hee was presently acquited both from the sinne, and the punish∣ment of it, if hee thus tooke the Crosse vpon him,) now, because the Earle of Tholous, and his people entertai∣ned the foresaid Heresie, the Crosse, and holie warres The holy warres denounced a∣gainst Christian Princes. were by the Pope denounced against them. Of which Earle yet let vs heare the iudgement of ano∣ther Math. Paris. Fryer then liuing. Those (saith hee) who thus tooke the Warres and Crosse against him, did it more for feare of the French King, and the Popes Legate, then for zeale of Iustice; it seeming to many a wrong thus to infest a faithfull Christian man, and one who with many teares desired the Legate to examine the faith of euerie one of his Cities, and if any one held against the Catho∣like faith, hee would punish him, according to the iudge∣ment of the Church, and if any City should resist him, hee would enforce it to make satisfaction. As for himselfe, hee offered to bee examined by the Legate touching his faith, and if hee were faulty, hee would make satisfacti∣on to God and the Church. But all these things the Le∣gate scorned, nor could that Catholike Earle find anie fauour, vnlesse hee would for sake his Inheritance, and abiure it both for himselfe, and his heires for euer. These were the Heretikes against which Lewis was now imployed by the Pope, and King Henry the while Math. Paris. commanded to surcease from impeaching his holy enterprize. Wherein Lewis had spent a moneth in the siege of Auinion, and endured (for all his sacred Crossings) maruailous losses, by a terrible plague de∣deuouring his Army, by a strange kind of venemous flies, dispatching many, by a sodaine drowning of The Popes cros∣sings attended with few bles∣sings. a great part of his Armie; and lastly, by being him∣selfe Mat. Paris. poysoned by The Earle of Campaigne, and the Popes Legate, were publiquely char∣ged of adultry with Lewis his Queene. apud Mat. Paris. one of his Earles (an vnchast Riuall of his Bedde) though it was giuen forth of him (as Ranalph O terbourne & a∣lij. Roger Wend. M. S. Math. Paris. of his late Enemy King Iohn, whom some thinke that Lewis his friends did make away) that hee died onely of a Flux. (22) The newes of the French Kings death se∣conded with sure relations of sundry discontent∣ments, and open factions vnder the young King (who was but Til us. Aemylius. Walsing: saith 14. Paris. scarce 10. about twelue yeeres of age) bred an hope in King Henries mind, that now the time was come, wherein hee might recouer those ancient inheritances which his Forefathers held in France: and to aduance his hopes, he had his mother Queene Isabel (wife to the Earle of March in those parts,) an earnest sollicitor. Peter Duke of Britaine was the principall man who tooke offence that himselfe had not a chiefe hand in directing the young King Lew∣is; Likelyhoods for a warre with France. but his prudent mother Queene Blanch Paul. Aemil. in Iud. 80. weak∣ned his party by drawing his brother Robert Earle of Dreux from him; and albeit the Duke had re∣paired the breach, by affinitie with the Earle of Champain, (one of the twelue Peeres of that Realme, to whom the Duke marrieth the Ladie Blanda his daughter and heire,) yet was the Earle driuen by a short warre to continue quiet. The Duke hereup∣on castes himselfe vpon King Henrie; Sed sera aux∣ilia Anglica, the English aides come slowlie saith Aemy∣lius. Aemylius. These and the like inducements moued the King to send Walter Archbishoppe of Yorke, with others, to the chiefe men of Normandie, Angiou and Poictou, that by large promises they might procure them to acknowledge Henrie for their King, or by partakings, facilitate their reduction to the English Souereigntie; who accordinglie prosecuted their emploiment. (23) These opportunities for that designe, mo∣ued the King to bethinke how to gather money, to An. 1227. The King begets enemies at home by raising mony to make warre abroad. furnish so chargefull an enterprize; whereby while he sought to prouide to recouer that which was lost, he ministreth occasion to hazard that which he had. The onely great man in Court now was Hubert de Burgh: For the King protesting himselfe of age to gouerne without a Tutor or Protector, did princi∣pally conferre with him about all his most weightie affaires. Hence grew more enuy against Hubert, and perill to the King. From Rog. de Wend. MS. Mat. Paris. the Londoners (besides the granted aides of a fifteenth, which all degrees were subiect vnto) he wrung fiue thousand Markes, for that they had (as was alleaged) to his preiudice, The King per∣haps had this summe for the things which Fablan saith hee granted. The Charters of liberties re∣uoked and can∣celled: giuen Lewis the like summe. In the Parliament at Ox∣ford, by aduice of Hubert his Lord Chiefe Iustice, he re∣uokes the Charters of Liberties, which now for about two yeeres had been practised through the Realme: pretending, that at the time of their Grant the King was vnder age, and had then no liberty either of his person or Signature; though otherwise, the royall power of the English Monarchie neuer pleads pupillage or mino∣ritie. It serued the turne for the time, and all men were faine to pay, what Huberts Mat. Paris. Peace in France frustrates the English designes for France. pleasure was to as∣sesse, for obteining the new Seale. The fortune of such Arts, whereby they were wont to fill Princes Treasuries, was not alwaies without repentance to the Authors, and Authorisers. The Clergie was com∣pelled (vnder paine of Papall Censures) to pay the Fifteenth, not only for their temporall goods, but also for their Ecclesiasticall; and yet in the end, (after so much tossing of the People,) the Kings Ambassa∣dors returne out of France, without hauing effected that which they went about, so that the whole en∣terprize quailed. For Queene Blanch by sweet and prudent courses, so preuailed among the factious, that there was left no place for Henrie to take sure hold vpon. The Duke of Britain (who expected the English succours not till the Spring,) was so neerely prest, and almost opprest, with a winter war, that he thought himselfe beholding to his bro∣ther Robert Earle of Dreux, for procuring his peace though it were with such a condition, as euer after, left vpon him, the by-name of Mauclerk or Male∣doctus. He Mat. Paris, ad An. 1234. Scriptores Brit. apud Paul. Aemil. in Ludou 9. acknowledged the Dutchie of Britain, to be the Fee of the Crowne of France, and that by right it ought to hold thereof; this acknowledgment, because against all apparant truth and Record, procured to him that By-name. Such conclusion at this present had King Henries French designes. Our Rog. de VVend. MS. Mat: Paris. at A. D. 1234. auncient Authors write, that this dishonourable homage was done long after, and with an halter about his necke, at such time as the King of England refused to goe in person to his succours, but offered foure Earles, and other competent Forces, which hee re∣fused, as harbouring a reuoit in his bosome, and tur∣ned Pyrate. (24) The euill will which the other great Lords secretly harboured against Hubert, (whose Enuy the Kings fauour in Yet Walsingham names him Earle of Kent before that Ceremony of girding him with the Sword. creating him Earle of Kent had lately encreased,) now openly discouered it selfe, vpon this occasion. Richard Earle of Cornwall, the Kings brother, (lately returned with honor out of Gascoigne,) had seized into his hands a certaine Manour, then in the tenure of one Waleran a Dutch- Gentleman, (to whom King Iohn, for his good ser∣uices had formerly giuen it,) which hee alleaged was parcell of his Earledome of Cornwall. The King hereupon directs his letters to his brother, comman∣ding him to come immediately, and shew a reason of his fact. He doth so, and without any pleaders helpe defended, as iust, the seisure which he had made, con∣cluding, among other words, that hee was ready to stand to the iudgement of the Kings Court, and Peeres of the Realm. When the King, and the Chiefe Iustitiar heard him name the Peeres of the Realme, they (su∣specting his bent that way) were exceedingly offen∣ded; and (said the King) eyther restore the Manour to Waleran, or thou shalt depart out of the Kingdome, neuer to returne: at which peremptory sentence, the Earle boldly (but too rashly) answered; that hee nei∣ther would giue his right to Waleran, nor without the iudgement of the Peeres depart the Realme. The Wend. MS. Mat. Paris. Earle in this heate returnes to his lodging; thence (vpon surmise that Hubert had perswaded the King to lay hold on him) he posts to Marlebourgh, where find∣ing William Marshal the young Earle of Pembroke, The Barons in Armes at Stam∣ford. hee enters into a fast confederacy, ratified by oath; and Ranulf Earle of Chester is easily drawn to make another. Letters thence flying about to all their friends, at Stanford there assembled vnto them, the Earles of Gloucester, of Warrenn, of Hereford, of War∣wicke, Earle Ferrars, many Barons, and an huge multitude of armed men. Their strengthes being in likelyhood able to beare out their darings, they ad∣dresse a bold message to the King, by which they re∣quire him in lofty Phrase, to make presēt amends to his Brother for the wrong hee had done; the fault whereof The Barons re∣bellious message to the King. they imputed not to him, but to the chiefe Iustitiar: and that if he did not without delay restore the Charters of Liberties, which hee had cancelled at Oxford, they would driue him by dint of sword to giue them therein competent satisfaction. The King seeing it no safe time to deny their requests, appoints to meet at Northampton in August next; where the Earle of Cornwall (vpon his Associates resolute demaund of the King) had large amends of any iniury sustai∣ned, his Patrimony being augmented with large accessions. The moderation and equanimity of the King (terrified by his Fathers example) peaceably finished this contention (the matter of the Charters being for the time husht, as seemeth) which might otherwise haue cost many thousand liues, and haue hazarded the ruine both of King and kingdome. (25) That daunger was not a little augmented The Welsh in Armes. by the insurrections of the Welsh. The King had giuen the Castle of Mountgomery to his most trusty Counsellor Hubert de Burgh; the Garrison of which place, issuing out, meant to stocke vp the Trees, and shrubbes, which grew neere vpon an high-way leading through a great wood of Quinque Leuc ∣rum. Mat. Par . fiue leagues long, that trauailers (ordinarily there spoiled) might passe more safely. The Welsh not suffering that waste, vi∣olently assayled the Workemen, and not without slaughter on both sides, draue them into the Ca∣stle; which drew the King (who euen in litle mat∣ters vsed to make one) to come thither in person, who, with a competent strength, giues not ouer, till hee had with fire, and other force, consumed the whole Forrest. From whence hee peirceth far∣ther into Wales, and consumes with fire a place cal∣led Rog. VVend. MS Math Paris. Ceri saith D. Powel in Hist. Cambr. Cridia; where whiles the King is building a Castle to bridle them, Mat. Paris. Lewelin drew thither his forces, where many were slaine on both sides, and a man of speciall worth William de Hist. Cambr. Brausia (or de Bruse) by the Welsh intercepted, as he went to forrage in the Country; Rog. Wend. MS. Mat. Paris. many great persons there in the Kings Armie being secretly confederated with Lewelin. By which trecherous practise, victualles grew so scarce, that the king was compelled to yeeld to a very dishonourable peace, the conditions wher∣of were: that the King should raze to the ground the new Fort now almost finished; that This William was afterward hanged by Lew∣elin for lying with his wife, as is reported i Mat. Paris. ad An. 1230. though else∣where he saith it was by reason of Hubert de Burghs letters to Lewe∣lin. Mat. Paris. ad An. 1232. William de Bruce should still remaine Prisoner till the Welsh thought good; that Lewelin should giue the King toward his expenses three thousand Markes. (26) These home-bredde garboyles thus appea∣sed; whereas Ambassadors had formerly repayred to the king out of Gascoigne, Poictou, and Norman∣die, to offer him their seruices for recouery of those his inheritances, if himself would com in person with a royall Armie, hee about Michaelmas is now rea∣dy at Portsmouth for the exploit; whither all his Nobles were come with so great a multitude, not onely out of England, but out of Ireland, Wales and Galloway, as none of his ancestors euer had. Many were the motiues which encouraged the king to this attempt, but none greater then the busie workings of Queen Dowager his mother. Lewis king of France had created his brother Alfonse Duke of Poictou, commaunding the Lords of that Country to doe their homages to him; one of these was Hugh Earle of March, now husband to Queene Isabel, who because shee had once beene the Wife of a King, and now the Mother, disdained that euen her present husband, though but an Earle, should doe homage to a Subiect, and thereby her selfe (bearing the stile of a Queene) seeme inferiour to the Lady Ioan, wife of Duke Alfonse. The Earle was hereupon Queene Isabels practises for her Sonne against the French. drawne to a refusall of homage; and the like spirit shee had breathed into the hearts of the princely fa∣mily of Lusinian, whose Ancestors had been Kings of Ierusalem and Cyprus. Nor thus contented to haue plotted a party, for her Sonne among the French, she is charged to haue sought by poyson to make riddance of Lewis himselfe, and that her Agents for that purpose were discouered, and executed. But Queene Isabel falsly charged. Aemylius shall pardon vs, if we herein credit not his iudgement, as also in thinking her the Author of suborning Assasines to murther the King; for that wee find him singular therein, the Nich. Guilles Chr. Fran. receiued opi∣nion being, that they were sent vnder-hand by the Sarazens out of Asia, to take away the daunger which they foresaw was comming, in regard King Lewis was so deuoutly addicted to Christian piety, and the hatred of Mahomets Infidelity. There were also at the same time great Diuisions among the The noble form of warre among the old English praysed by stran∣gers. French Nobility; but the English (saith Aemylius himselfe) wrought not by treachery, but after the manner of faire warre, which they first by defiance denounced, and then did openly prosecute with sword in hand. (27) The King of England being thus prouided of men, munition, and other necessaries fitt for the field, and now ready to embarke; there was not shipping sufficient to transport halfe the Company. Earle Hubert in the Kings displeasure. Which enraged the King so farre, that turning him∣selfe to Earle Hubert, (vpon whom hee charged the blame,) he called him ranke old Traitor, affirming, that hee had of purpose beene slacke herein, as in other things, in regard of fiue thousand Marks, with which the Queene Dowager of France had (as he said) embri∣bed him, and withall ranne at him in great fury with his drawne sword, but Ranulph Earle of Chester and others stept betweene, and saued the King from so foule a blemish, who soone after receiued him into grace againe. But that assembly was dispersed by the arriuall of a Mat. Paris cals him Henrie Earle of Britain, Walsing. Peter Duke of Britaine. great man out of Britaine, a prin∣cipal confederate with the English against Lewis, who shewed the vnseasonable time of the yeare, and o∣ther reasons; and the enterprize thereupon adiour∣ned to the Spring. So after Easter hee transports from Portsmouth with a full Armie into Britaine. Ann. 1230. The The great hu∣mility and cha∣rity of K. Henry. Ypod. Neust. same day in which hee set saile from England, himselfe did in person, visite the poore and feeble, and dealt large Almes, not refusing to kisse the sicke and le∣prous. The successe of this voyage is so diuersly reported, that without preiudice to an obseruant Reader, it might be all left out. Much certainely was not done. The King of Englands purpose Rog. de Wend. MS. was to haue marched through Britaine (where many re∣ceiued him) into Poictou; and as Polyd. Vergil. li. 16. Lib. Statu . ad A. R. 20. Hen. 3 some write hee did so, and tooke homagein Gascoigne. To em∣peach this passage, the King of France lay with a great Armie at Angiers, and the King of England at Nants in Britaine, expecting the repaire of more force. Fulk Paganel a noble Norman, with about Polyd. Vergil. l. 16. saith but forty. sixty valiant Knights perswaded the King of Eng∣land, it was easie for him to reduce Normandie to his obedience; but Hubert de Burgh diuerted the King from acceptance of that enterprize. The Nor∣mans therefore made an ill iourney and an vnluc∣ky, for Mat. Paris. they preuailed not with King Henry, and for their conspiracy were disseised at home by King Lewis. But whether it were by losse in battle (wher∣in, if any battle were at all, some say the Paul. Aemil. French had the better, taking about foure thousand of the English,) or otherwise, this is agreede on, that af∣ter the wast of infinite Treasures, and the great di∣minution of his numbers, the King of England re∣turned Roger Wend. M. S. Math. Paris. Walsingham. in Ypodig. Neust. without accomplishment of his purpose; leauing for the defence of Britaine, the three great Earles of Chester, Pembroke and Aumarl, with forces answerable. (28) It is not vnlikely that the dangerous rebel∣lion of the Irish, hastned his returne; for the King of Connaught and his Irish, seeing the King and the Earle of Pembroke (who as Heire to the great Strang∣baw The Irish at∣tempting to recouer their Country from the English, miscarry. had goodly possessions in those parts) wholie embusied in the enterprise of Britaine, had inuaded the Kings people, with a purpose and hope, vtterlie to expell and amoue our Nation from among them: but their deuises proued mischieuous to themselues, that rebellious King himselfe being taken Prisoner, not without the losse of many thousands of the I∣rish. The Welsh also soone after brake out againe, whose Prince Lewelin, (in reuenge of those Welshmens heads, which Hubert de Burgh had cruelly caused to An. 1231. bee strucken off in cold bloud, and presented to the King,) had burnt certaine Churches and Gentle∣women in them; for which, at Math. Paris. Oxford in the pre∣sence of the King, all the Nobility, and Clergy, hee was solemnly excommunicated; and the King there gathering a great Army, in person went to represse the Welsh, though not without losse. (29) Another Garboyle thereafter no lesse di∣sturbed the whole land, the Math. Paris. Insolency of the Ro∣mans (who were charged to haue wrought innumera∣ble confusions and infinite grieuances to the King, his Kingdome, Peeres and People) stirring vp multitudes through the Land, by a common consent, to seeke by force to shake off the importable yoke of their oppressions. It was alleadged by these reformers, Idem ibid. that they had vnder hand the Kings Letters Patents, the Lord Chiefe Iustices assent, the Bishop of Londons countenance, and the Shiriffes aide in sundry Shires, wherby the armed troupes took heart euery where, violently to seize on the Romanes Corne, and their other wealth; which booties they imployed to Rog. de Wend. M. S. good purposes, and for reliefe of the poore, the Romans the while hiding their heades, for feare of loosing them. And though the King, on the Popes com∣plaint thereof, seemed to mislike the outrage, yet had the King himselfe no lesse cause to bee moued with the insolency of the Pope, then were his subiects of those Popelings. For that very time the See of Canterbury being void, Ralph Neuill Bishop of Nor∣wich was elected by the Monkes, and gladly ap∣proued by the King, whose Mat. Paris. most faithfull Chan∣celour hee was, an vnshaken pillar of truth, doing right to all without delayes, especially to the poore, without declining to the right hand or the left. But the Pope being told he was a Royalist, and one that would ioine with the King and whole Kingdome (who now all strug∣led to shake off the Popes seruitude,) and would to the death sticke to that law, and those Appeales, which Ste∣phen Langton solemnly before the Altar in Saint Paules Church vrged against King Iohns submission to the See of Rome; his Election (as being a person very dan∣gerous) was presently pronounced void. Where∣upon the Monkes choose a second, and him the Pope misliked, for beeing too old, and soft spirited, then a third was elected, a man of eminent learning, a Student in the Vniuersity of Oxford, and him also the Antiquit. Britāni∣ca in vit. Edmunds Pope reiected; neuer resting till they had chosen Edmund of Abington, a man more pleasing to the Romane palate. But the King seeing the Great Em∣perour Fredericke, euen this very time whiles hee Mat. Paris. in Hen. 3. was winning the Kingdom of Ierusalem from Infidels, so Turkishly in his absence deposed from his owne Empire by the Pope, vpon a priuate spleene; no mar∣uaile, if in this his vnripe age, and distracted gouern∣ment, hee feared to draw on himselfe by any op∣position, so mercilesse an enemy. So that for the time these indignities were winked at in these parts: in France also by the wisedome of Paul. Aemil. Queen Blanch, and mediation of the Archbishoppe of Reims, and Philip Earle of Bollein of one part, and the Earles of Three yeeres truce with France. Ro. Wend. MS. Mat. Paris. An. 1232. The memorable deiection of Earle Hubert. Britaine and Chester on the other, a three yeeres ces∣sation from mutuall hostilities was ratified by oath, betweene the French and English. (30) Hubert de Burgh Earle of Kent, Chiefe Iu∣sticiar of England, hauing with few rubbes hitherto, enioyed the most inward loue and fauour aswell of this King, as of King Iohn, seemes now to haue run the Stage of his best fortunes. For the King (vpon occasion of such inrodes and spoiles, as the Prince Lewelin continually made in the Marches of Wales) being aduertised by Peter Bishoppe of Winchester, and certaine other of the Councell, once for all to giue an end to those braues and insolencies of the Welsh, complained; that hee was not able, in regard of his wants; saying, that his Treasurers told him, all the rents of his Exchequor would doe no more then scarce maintaine apparrell, houshold and ordinary Almes∣deedes. This was not vnknowne to the Bishop, and the rest of that faction, who watched this opportu∣nity of purpose to lift the Earle of Kent out of fa∣uour: wherefore they boldly answered the King: that if he were poore hee might thanke himselfe, who gaue away to others such Honours, Custodies, and Dignities, The causes of the Kings wants seene into. as were vacant, alienating them from his estate; that hee was onely to be called a King in name, rather then for a∣ny riches which he had; that his Ancestors, magnifi∣cent Princes, abounding in all sorts of worldly glorie, and wealth, heaped to themselues inestimable treasures, out of no other meanes, but the Rents and Profites of the Kingdom. (31) The King stung with this iust reprehensi∣on, beganne (by their instructions) to call the She∣riffes of Shires, Baylifes, and other his Officers to a strait account, for all such receites, as appertained to the Exchequor, thrusting some out of their places, and wringing out of all their full Polyd. Verg. lib . VVendouer. MS. spunges, store of coine, till hee satisfied himselfe both for the arrera∣ges and interest. Out of Ralph Briton Mat. Paris. Pol. Verg. l. . Treasurer of his Chamber hee screwzed a thousand pounds, and also put him from his place, into which (by the Bishoppe of Winchesters suggestion, who now predo∣minated in Court) hee substituted Peter de Oriuail a Wend. MS. Poictouine, the Bishoppes Mat. Paris. Nephew or Sonne, if Paris say true; and so, saith hee, the Kings coffers otherwise empty and leane, were by these means stuffed againe, though not to their full surfet. For these were but preparatiues to a farther scrutinie and ran∣sacke, intended against the Earle of Kent, whom (vp∣on the Wendouer. MS. Bishoppes suggestion) the King remoued from the Mat. Paris. Proto-Iustitiarishippe (or high office of his Chiefe Iustice) and put in his place Sir Stephen Se∣graue a Knight onely in name. Then is a strict and captious account demaunded of the Earle of Kent, for all such things as he was in any sort chargeable with; as, 1. For such receipts or debts, as were due to King Iohn, or to this King Henry himselfe: 2. For The principall cords in the scourge prepared for the Earle of Kent. the meane profites of such lands, as the King was sei∣sed of, from the day of the death of the first great William, Earle of Pembroke, his Iustitiar and Mar∣shall, whither those lands were in England, Wales, Ireland, or Poictou: 3. For such Liberties or free Customes which the King had in Forrests, Warrens, Counties and else where, and how they were kept or alienated. 4. For such things as the King lost by Huberts negligence: 5. For the wronges and dammages offered to the Romane, and Italian Clerks, and to the Popes Nuncios against the Kings will by authority of Hubert, who would take no order to correct the misdoers, as by vertue and na∣ture of his place hee was obliged: 6. For the ma∣ny escuages comming by Carrucages, gifts and pre∣sents, or for the rents of Custodies belonging to the Crowne. (32) To all which heades, the Earle answered, that hee had the Charter of the Kings Father, by The Earle of Kents defence disallowed. which hee was freed from giuing any account ey∣ther for things passed, or to come, and that hee had giuen such proofe of his fidelity vnto King Iohn, as he would not endure to heare him make an account. Pe∣ter Bishoppe of Winchester replyed hereunto, that such a Charter after the death of King Iohn had no force, and therefore the Fathers Charter, and graunt of Pri∣uilege, was no reason why he should not stand accoun∣tant to the Sonne. This defence for money dangers in this sort trauersed or auoyded, they labored to draw Articles or cà∣lumniations of treason obiected. him in for his head, by charging him with sundry Articles sounding treasonable; as, 1. That Hubert had disswaded the Duke of Austria from matching his Daughter with the King who sought it; 2. that he had hindred the King from entring vpon forrain lands to him belonging, whereby the King, Peeres, and People consumed their Treasures vainely: 3. that hee had enticed the Daughter of the King of Scots (whom King Iohn had entrusted to his cu∣stody, meaning himselfe to marry her) & traiterou∣sly defiled the noble yong Lady, whom he married in hope to bee King of Scotland in her right, if shee suruiued her Brother: 4. that hee had stolne out of his Iewel-house a precious stone of wonderfull va∣lue, A precious stone to make a man inuincible, if you l st beleeue it. whose vertue was to make him who had it, in∣uincible in Battle, & that he gaue that stone to Lew∣elin prince of Wales, the Kings enemie: 5. that he by his letters had caused Lewelin to hang William de Breuse. (33) The Earle much preplexed with these ac∣cusations (whither true or false) could hardly ob∣taine a short respite to make his answere: Thus; that The Earle takes Sanctuary: Hubert (say Wendouer. Mat. Paris. the Monkes) who for loue of the King, and defence of the Kingdome, had prouoked the hatred of all the great Lords, now being forsaken of the King, is left sole and solitarie, without friends or comfort. One∣ly Luke Archbishoppe of Dublin, neuer fosooke him, but with prayers and teares besought the King on his behalfe, but could not bee heard against so great opposites, on so great pretenses. When the cry was thus vp, and that the world saw it was no su∣perficiall displeasure, into which the Earle was faln with the mutable King, there rise forth many accu∣sations (sauouring of much malignity) round about, vpon hope to oppresse & bury Hubert vnder them Other malicious Articles obiected. for euer; as, 1. that he had poisoned the two noble Earles of Salisbury and Pembroke; 2. that hee had also procu∣red Falcasius de Brent, and Richard Archbishop of Can∣terbury to be made away; 3. that by Sorceries and En∣chantments, hee had drawne the King to fauour him a∣boue all other; 4. that in the victory gotten against the French by Sea, hee forceably tooke many Prisoners from the Kings Sailers, and made his benefite of their ransoms, contrary to right, and that hee had spoiled and disinherited many; 5. that hee had without triall vniustly put to death Constantine, for which excesse the Citizens of Lon∣don The hanging of Constantine obiected. required iustice against the said Hubert. The King hereupon makes Proclamation through the City, that all such as could charge Hubert with any wrong; should repaire to Court, and there receiue immedi∣ate redresse. This strange course of proceeding did so appale and terrifie the Earle, that hee forthwith fled to the Priorie Church of Merton in Surrey, where among the Chanons, hee sheltered his head The Earle of Kent takes Sanctuary. for a time. (34) The King with his Prelates and Peeres mee∣ting at Lambeth, at the On Holyrood day, 14. Sept. day appointed for Huberts answere, hee (being made to beleeue that the King would put him to a most soule death) durst not ap∣peare, or peepe forth of his sacred refuge. The Londoners were assembled in Armes (by the Kinges commaund) to the number of about twenty thou∣sand vnder banners displayed to dragge the Earle out of Sanctuary: but vpon the Earle of Chesters wiser Counsell, the prey was taken out of the hands of a bloudy multitude (who mortally hated him for Constantines death) and they returned againe to their City. The Archbishoppe of Dublin still per∣forming the office of a true friend, ouerslips not this occasion, and by his importunity obtayned day for Hubert, till about Twelfe-tide then next ensuing, and the King for his assurance, during the Interim, giues him letters Patents. Hubert thinking himselfe secure for the present, is now vpon his way toward his wife at the Abbey of Saint Edmund in Suffolke, but his enemies so preuailed by their sug∣gestions, that Sir Godfrey de Crancumb Knight, with three hundred armed men, was sent to apprehend the Earle in Essex. Hee hauing intelligence of their approach, fledde into a Chappell at Fab. Cone. MS. Brentwood, The Earle again takes Sanctuary. which adioyned to his lodging; from whence those rough Souldiers haled him (hee holding in one Rog. Wend. M. S. Mat. Paris. hand a Crucifix, and in the other the Sacrament) and sent for a Smith to make for him shackels of y∣ron. But when the Smith vnderstood, that it was for Hubert de Burgh Earle of Kent, he refused, vtte∣ring such words (if Mathew Paris doe not Poetize) The honest and noble mind of a poore Artificer. as did well shew that honourable thoughts are som∣times found in the hearts of men, whose fortunes are farre from honour; for hauing first drawne a deepe sigh, hee said; Addit M. Par. ad VVendou. Doe with mee what yee please, and God haue mercy on my soule; but as sure as the Lord liues, I will neuer makeyron shackles for him, but will rather die the worst death that is. For is not this A pithy speech of that Artificer. that most loyall and couragious Hubert, who so often hath preserued England from being destroyed by strangers, & restored England to England? He who faithfully and con∣stantly serued his Soueraigne Lord King Iohn in Gas∣coigne, Normandy, and else where, that he was com∣pelled to eate the flesh of horses, whose high courage euen Enemies admired? he, that so long defended Douer Ca∣stle, the Key of England, against all the exquisite sieges of the French, and by vanquishing them at Sea, brought safe∣ty to the Kingdome? What need I rehearse his excellent doings at Lincolne and Bedford? Let God be iudge be∣tween him and you, for vsing him so vniustly and inhu∣manely, repaying good with euill, nay, requiting his most excellent deserts with the worst recompence that can be. But Sir Godfrey, and his blacke band regarded not such speeches, but otherwise binding the Earle hard, they set him on horsebacke, and so conuayed him to the Tower of London. (35) This breach of Sanctuary being made knowne to Roger Bishoppe of London (whose Dio∣cesse it was) he confidently tels the King, that if the Earle were not restored to the Chappell, hee would excommunicate all the Authors of that outrage. The Earle is accordingly restored: but the Sheriffes of Essex and Hertford, at the Kings commandement, The Earle re∣stored to the Sanctuary from whence hee was taken. with the powers of their counties besiege the Chap∣pell so long, that at last (they hauing cast a Trench about it that none might goe in or out) the Earle was compelled to come forth and render himselfe, bearing all things with an equall mind, as▪ one that had a cleare conscience before God, which hee professed to haue. While the Chappell was thus beset round, *Ro. Wend. M. S. Mat. Paris. the Kings indignation was so violent, that hee for∣bad all men once to make mention of Hubert in his hearing. No maruaile then if it bee said, that the Princes indignation is death. The Archbishoppe of Dublin neuerthelesse was not deiected, but with The Archbishop of Dublin a faith∣full friend to Hubers. praiers and teares besought the King, who remained as yet inexorable, Huberts enemies possessing his soule and senses. Hubert therefore is againe impri∣soned in the Tower. There was no sacrifice as it The Earles trea∣sure deliuered to the King. seemes could appease the Kings i e, but that of the Earles Hoord of gold, and other riches, which the Knights Templars had in their custodie vpon trust, & without Huberts consent refused to deliuer. Hubert therefore willingly yeelds; which when the Deposi∣taries did giue vp, the value seemed incredible. This hoording perhaps was Huberts crime, whereof be∣ing thus purged, he had hope to recouer out of these deadly pangs and conuulsions of fortune, and him∣selfe to bee made capable of curing. Well, the king obtains this precious booty, but his enemies would haue his bloud also; saying, sith hee was conuicted of theft and fraud, it was meet he should die a most shame∣full death. It seemes, they thought, that the verie finding of so much treasure was a conuiction of fraud in the getting, and that the King must bee in∣terpreted to haue lost, whatsoeuer the Earle had gained. But the displeasure of the King was mol∣lified with this golden balme, for hee answered them thus; Hubert from his childhood hath (as I haue heard) faithfully enough serued my vncle King Richard, The King relen∣teth towards the Earle, and will not take his life. and my Father King Iohn, and if he haue done ill towards me, hee shall neuer therefore die an euill death. For I had rather be reputed a foolish or a negligent King, then a cruell Tyrant, or a bloudy man toward him, who hath long serued mee and mine ancestors; nor will I weigh more his euill deedes, which are not as yet manifest, nor proued true, then all his good deeds, which are plainelie knowne to the Realme, and to vs all. Hereupon Hu∣bert had all such lands granted vnto him, as eyther King Iohn had giuen, or himselfe had purchased. There vndertooke for him to the King (as sureties) the Earles of Cornwall, and Warrenn, Marshal & Ferrars, and himselfe was committed to the In Wiltshire. Castle of Deuises, there to abide in free Prison, vnder the Custody of foure Knights, belonging each of them to one of these foure Earles. This Court-storme thus in part ouerblowne, let vs take our standings, to view what other weather followed, and what counte∣nance of things in this Kingdome did next present it selfe to the world. (36) The King being naturally, as it seemes, addi∣cted to repose himselfe vpon some one mans coun∣sell, was now wholy swayde by Peter de Rupibus An. 1233. An. reg. 17. Bishoppe of Winchester, who had therefore wrought the Earle out of grace, that hee might soly raigne, and predominate in the gentle King. Which the better to effect, the Bishoppe procures him to dis∣place the Wend. MS. English Officers, and in their roomes to surrogate Poictouines and Britons; who comming o∣uer to the number of about two thousand, he stuffes his Castles with them; and (in briefe) did as it were wholy entrust himselfe, his treasures, strengthes, and the Realme to them. So that Math. Paris ex Reg. VVend. Iuditia commit∣ , leges, ex legibus, pax discordanti∣bus, instit . Iudgements were com∣mitted to the vniust, Lawes to the Out-lawes, Peace to Wranglers, and Iustice to wrong-d ers. Such as would haue praied redresse for these abuses, were interrup∣ted, and put off by the Bishoppe of Winchester. Among them who were remoued from their places in Court, was one Sir William de Redune a Knight, and Deputy Marshall to Richard Earle of Pembroke. This was to the Earle very displeasant, which ioyned with The king by ad∣uancing stran∣gers discontents his Nobles. a consideration of the publike cause and danger, he associates vnto him certaine of the great Lords (as was the fashion of those Lording times, vpon euery discontent,) and in the Company of them aduan∣ceth confidently to the King, whom in the hearing of many hee reproueth; for that he had, through sini∣ster aduise, called in the Poictouins, to the oppression of the Realme, of his naturall subiects, of their Lawes and Li∣berties: humblie therefore hee beseecheth him that hee would spedily reforme such abuses, which threatned the imminent subuersion both of the Crowne and Kingdome: which if hee did not, himselfe and other Lordes, would so long withdraw their attendance, as he enter∣tained Strangers. The Bishoppe hereunto makes answere; That the King might well and lawfully call in what Strangers himselfe thought good, for the defence of the Crowne and Realme, and such, and so many of them, as might be able to compell his proud and rebellious people to due obedience. When the Oracle would The English Peeres confede∣rate against the strangers. speake no otherwise, they departed from Court greatly discontented; firmely promising one to the other, that in such a cause which did so touch them all, they would like men stand together while anie breath was in their bodies. (37) Those who were now most potent about the King, nothing sorry for the discontentment of so great a Peere as the Earle Marshall, but counting it a part of their strengthes, to vse the regall power toward the weakning of the English, nourish in the King his auersion. The minds of men sufficientlie inclining of themselues, to doubt the worst vpon such diuisions, had their feare increased by sundrie prodigies of strange thunders and raines, but espe∣cially of foure redde Parhelions (or resemblances of Fiue Sunnes in the skie in April. Wend. MS. Mat. Paris. the Sunne) besides the Sunne it selfe, (appearing a∣bout the parts of Hereford and Worcester) from mor∣ning till night in the Skies: and indeed much trou∣ble immediatly ensued aswell in England as Wales, & Ireland. The Poictouins, and other Strangers thus bearing the sway, so as the Kings person went guar∣ded with troupes of such, the Earles and Barons being by the Kings commaund summoned to ano∣ther Parliament at Oxford, refused to come. While The Barons contemne the kings Summons. the King was there, one Paris cals him Bacum. The franke speech of a Prea∣cher. Robert Bacon, who vsed there to preach before the King and Prelates, freelie told him, that if hee did not remoue from him Peter Bi∣shop of Winchester, and Peter de Riuallis, he could neuer be in quiet. The King did hereupon a little come to himself, & Roger Bacon a Clergy-man also of a pleasant wit, did second Roberts aduise, telling the King that That is, Rocks and Stones. Petra and Rupes were most daungerous things at sea, alluding to the Bishoppes name, Petrus de Ru∣pibus. The King therefore (as he had the happines in his mutability, to change for his more security) taking that good aduise of Schollers, which he would not of his Peeres, summons a Parliament to be hol∣den at In Iuly. Westminster, giuing the world to know with∣all, that his purpose was to amend by their aduise, whatsoeuer ought to be amended. (38) But the Barons, considering that still there arriued sundry strangers, men of warre with Horse and Armour, and not trusting the Poictouine faith, The Barons se∣cond contempt of the kings com∣maund. came not, but presumed to send this traiterous mes∣sage to the king, that if out of hand hee remoued not Peter Bishop of Winchester, and the Poictouines out of his Court, they all of them, by the common assent of the The traytero errand to the king. kingdom, would driue him, & his wicked Counsellors to∣gether out of it, and consult about creating a new Soue∣raigne. The king (whom his fathers example made more timerous,) could easily haue beene drawne, to haue redeemed the loue of his naturall Liegemen, with the disgrace of a few strangers; but the Bishoppe of Winchester and his friends infused more spirite into him. Whereon, to all those whom hee suspected, the King sets downe a In August next. day, within which they should deliuer sufficient pledges to se∣cure him of their loialty. Against that day the Lords in great numbers make repaire to London, but the Earle Marshall (admonished of danger, by his sister the Countesse of Cornwall) flies backe to Wales; and chiefly for want of his Rog. de VVend. MS. presence nothing was con∣cluded. The King not long after is at Gloster with an Armie, whither the Earle and his adherents requi∣red to come, refused; the King therefore burns their Mannors, and giues away their inheritances to the Poictouines. (39) This Rebellion had not many great names in it, but tooke strength rather by weight then num∣ber: The Earle Mar∣shal in Armes. the known Actors were the Earle Marshal, the Lord Gilbert Basset, and many other of the inferiour Nobles. The Bishoppes Arts luckt from him, the Kings Brother, and the two Earles of Chester and Lincolne, (who dishonourably sold their loue Mat. Paris. for a thousand Markes,) and otherwise, as it seemed, se∣cured the rest: neuerthelesse, these may well bee thought, not to haue borne any euill will to their now forsaken confederate, the Earle Marshall, who tooke himselfe to handle the common cause; cer∣tainely hee handled his owne safety but ill, as the e∣uent shall demonstrate. The Earle hearing these Confederates himselfe with Lewelin Prince of VVales. things, contracts strict amity with Lewelin Prince of Wales; whose powers thus knit together, by ad∣uantages of the Mountaines, were able to counter∣poize any ordinary inuasion. To the Kings aide, Baldwin de Gisnes with many Souldiers came out of Flanders. The King now at Hereford in the midst of his Forces, sends from thence (by Winchesters counsell) the Bishoppe of Saint Dauids, to defie the Earle Marshall; how farre soeuer this word defie extends it selfe, sure it seems that the Earle hereupon vnderstoode himselfe discharged of that obligation, by which hee was tied vnto the King, and freed to mak his defence. The King notwithstanding after some small attempts, and better considerations, did *Rog. Wend. MS. Mat. Paris. promise and assume, that by aduise of his Coun∣cell all that was amisse should (at a The Sunday after Michael∣mas. Hubert de Burgo escapes into Wales. day appointed) bee rectified and amended. About which time, Hubert de Burgo, hauing intelligence that the Bishoppe of Win∣chester (who was a Poictouine) Thom. Westm. Roger Wend. Mat. Paris. plotted his death, escaped out of the Castle of Deuises (where he was prisoner) to a neighbour Church, but was haled from thence by the Castle-Keepers. The Bishop of Sarisbury (in whose Diocesse it happened) caused him to bee safe-restored to the same place, from whence by the Earle Marshall, and a Ypod. Neust. troupe of ar∣med men his friends, hee was rescued and carried into Wales. (40) The King, at the day and place appointed, holds his great Councell or conference with the Lords; but nothing followed for the peace of the Realme; it was not an ordinary passage of speech, which hapned there betweene the Lords, and the Bishoppe of Winchester. For, when the English Bi∣shops and Barons humbly besought the King, for the honour of Almighty God to take into grace his natu∣rall Subiects, whom (without any triall by their Peeres) hee called Traitors: the Bishoppe (offended it seems, at Peeres) takes the words out of the Kings mouth, and answeres; That there are not Peeres in England, as in the Realme of France, and that therefore the King of England, by such Iusticiars as himselfe pleaseth to or∣daine, may banish offenders out of the Realme, and by iudiciall processe condemne them. The English Bishops relished his speech so harshly, that with one voice they threatned to excommunicate and accurse by name the Kings principall wicked Counsellors; but Winchester appealed; then they accursed all such as alienated the heart of the king from his naturall subiects, and all others that perturbed the peace of the Realme. (41) The Earle Marshall, this while had by force resumed a Castle, which he had a little before sur∣rendred to the King, which stirred the King to ga∣ther his forces at Glocester, and thence to aduance towards Wales. But the Earle had politickly barred the Country of al Prouisions, for man and beast, that the King was faine to strike aside to Grosmont Ca∣stle; where the Earle, with his Confederats and the D ct Pow hist. Cambr p. 289. power of Wales, so awaited their time, that assai∣ling the Kings Campe vnawares, there were taken about fiue hundreth horse, with the Sumpters, ri∣ches, and carriages of the Armie; vpon which losse (his men also greatly scattered) the King leauing Viz. Ioh. de M nmouth. Ralph. de Thorney. two noble Gentlemen with the Poictouins, to make good the Marches against the Welsh, returned more empty and inglorious then before. The Earle found them worke, whom the King had left behind; and (as hee was a man of no lesse courage then deepe witte,) whereas Baldwin de Gisnes (the valiant Flemish knight) with a thousand Horsemen, thought to haue surprized him, who hauing but a tenth part of that number, came to view the Castle of Mon∣mouth; the Earle alone defended himselfe against The Earles great courage and agi∣lity. twelue of his enemies; and when his horse was co∣wardly slaine by them, he pitcht one of them by the legge out of the Saddle, and leapt into it himselfe, neuer giuing ground till his Arruie came to the res∣cue, and obtained a faire victorie, with the slaugh∣ter and captiuation of many Poictouines and others. His other exploits in and about Wales, were not few nor vnfortunate; if it were not onely in this, (as what indeed could be more grieuous or vnglorious to a noble mind?) for that his Soueraigne was vpon the contrary side. (42) The King about this time, to strengthen his life and State, with the prayers of Beneficiaries, and other deuoted affections, founded the Now the Rolles in Chancery Lane, Stowes Suruay. house of Conuerts, where such as forsooke the Iudaicall Superstitions, had prouisions for maintenance vn∣der a sober rule and ruler; he also erected and en∣dowed a Saint Iohns Hospital by Mag∣dalene Colledge, the first stone whereof was laid by the ing himselfe. Rossus Leolines opinion of K. Henries Almesdeedes. Mat. Paris, D. Powel. hist. Camb. pag. 292. famous Hospitall at Oxf rd, both for the en∣tertainement of Forrainers and Pilgrimes, (who thither much frequented,) and for reliefe also of such as were diseased: So that Leoline Prince of Wales, (the Earles chiefe Confederate) when hee was threatned sore, if hee would not liue in quiet, did not speake more magnificently of charity, then honourably of the King; I more feare (quoth hee) the Almesdeedes which the King dooth, then all the men of warre which hee hath, and the whole Clergy, put together. (43) The Earle Marshall encreasing in strength and hatred against such as were the Kings reputed Seducers, makes spoile and booty on their posses∣sions, An. 1234. An. reg. 8. and ioyning with the power of Leoline, puts all to fire and sword, as farre as Shrewsburie, part whereof they burnt to Ashes, and sackt the resi∣due. The Rog. VVend. King then at Gloster for want of sufficient Forces, departed thence (greatly grieued) to Winche∣ster, abandoning those other parts as it were to wast and ruine. It therefore seemes, that he was not The King giues way to the fury of the rebellious. growne stronger or richer, by the displacing of Hu∣bert Earle of Kent, and the rest, and by taking new into their roomes, who commonly bite and sucke hard till they haue glutted themselues, (if at leastwise there be any satietie in auarice) whereas the old of∣ficers, hauing prouided in a sort for the maine chance, haue the lesse reason to be grieuous. (44) Therefore the Lions skin not being large enough for the Bishoppe of Winchester, and his facti∣ous purposes, they piece them out with the Foxes case; an ineuitable stratageme is deuised. The Earle Marshall had in Ireland all the ample Patrimonies of his Grandfather, the famous Strangbow. To make that member of his strengthes improfitable, if not also pernicious, they deuise certain letters di∣rected to Maurice Fitz-Gerald (Deputie Iustice of A practise to ru∣ine the Earle Marshal. Ireland) and other principall men, who held of the Earle. In them they signifie, that Richard, once Marshall to the King of England, was for manifest trea∣son by the iudgement of the Kings Court, banished the Realme, his Lands, townes and Tenements consumed with fire; other his Hereditaments destroyed, and him∣selfe The pestilent te∣nour of the let∣ters. for euer disinherited; that if vpon his comming thi∣ther, they did take him either aliue or dead, the King did giue them all the Earles lands there, which now were for∣feited by vertue of his Attainture; and for assurance that the said gift should continue firme and good, they, by whose aduise the King and Kingdome were gouerned, faithful∣ly vndertooke. To these letters (which the Monkes call bloudy) they caused the King to set his Seale, as they themselues also (being eleuen) did theirs; vp∣on receite of which lines, the parties signifie backe vnder the seale of secresie, that if the Contents of those letters were confirmed by the Kings Letters Patents, they would performe that which was desired. The Letters patents bee made accordingly, and Ro. Wend. MS. Mat. Paris. hauing fraudulently gotten the Great Seale from Hugh Bi∣shoppe of Chichester, Lord Chancellour, who knew not thereof, they make them authentike with the impression. (45) The Kings mind therefore being still exul∣cerated towards the Earle Marshall, hee grieuously charged Alexander Bishoppe of Chester, that he had Alexander Bishop of Chichester clea∣reth himself from disloyaltie. too much familiarity with the Earle, affirming that they sought to thrust him from his throne; the Bishop to cleare himselfe from so hainous a scandall, puts on his Episcopall habite, and solemnly pronounceth all those accurst, who did but imagine a wickednesse of so foule a nature, against the Maiesty or person of the King: and thereupon by the intercession of other Prelates, hee was receiued into grace. The King was The English Bi∣shops deale with the King about redresse of the common euils. then at Westminster; where Edmund the Archbishop of Canterbury elect, with other his Suffragan Bishops, bewailing the estate of the kingdome, present them∣selues before him, telling him, as his loyal Liegemen, that the Counsell of Peter Bishop of Winchester, and his Complices, which now he had, and vsed, was not found nor safe, but cruell and perillous to himselfe and his Realme. First for that they hated and despised the Obiections a∣gainst the Bishop of Winton and the Poictouines. English, calling them Traitours, turning the Kinges heart from the loue of his people, and the hearts of the people from him; as in the Earle Marshall, whom (be∣ing one of the worthiest men of the land) by sowing false tales they draue into discontentment; 2. that by the Counsell of the same Peter, his Father King Iohn first lost the hearts of his people, then Normandie, then other lands; and finally, wasted all his treasure, and almost England it selfe, and neuer after had quiet; 3. that if the Subiects had now beene handled according to Iustice and law, and not by their vngodly counsels, those present troubles had not hapned, but the Kinges lands had remained vndestroyed, his treasures vnex∣hausted; 4. that the Kings Councell is not the Coun∣cell of Peace, but of perturbation; because they who can∣not rise by Peace, will raise themselues by the trouble, and disinherison of others; 5. that they had the treasure, Castles, Wardships, and strengthes of the Kingdome in their hands, which they insolently abused to the great hazard of the whole estate, for that they, made no con∣science of an Oth, Law, Iustice, or the Churches censures. Therefore we, ô King (said they) speake these things faithfully vnto you; and in the presence both of God and man, doe counsell, beseech, and admonish you, to remoue such a Councell from about you, and (as it is the vsage in other Realmes) gouerne yours by the faithfull and sworne Children thereof. The King in briefe answe∣red hereunto, that hee could not sodainely put off his Councell, and therefore prayed a short respite, till their accounts were audited. Meanwhile the behaui∣ours The outrages of the Marshalline faction. of the Marshalline faction (hauing this backing at Court) grew more and more intolerable: for while the King was at Huntingdon, the Lord Gilbert Basset and others, set fire vpon Alekmundbury, a Towne belonging to Stephen de Segraue, the flames whereof were seene of the owner, being then with the King at Huntingdon. They also tooke prisoners vpon the Welsh Marches, and according to the Law of VVarre (which, saith one, is Quae exlex est. Math. Paris. lawlesse) did put them to their ransomes. (46) Nothing had hitherto preserued the King The King facile in taking and lea∣uing fauourites. more, then that hee could, without great griefe for∣goe any fauourites, if hee were neerely pressed; the contrary quality whereof hath beene the cause of fi∣nall desolation to so many Princes. For albeit the choice of Counsellors ought to bee free, yet by com∣mon intendment, they should bee good; or howso∣euer Of Princes Coun∣sellors and Fauourites. they are, or are not, it is madnesse to hazard a Crowne, or leese the loue of an whole Nation, ra∣ther then to relinquish or diminish a particular de∣pendant. The rights of amity ought neuerthelesse to remaine inuiolable, but in such distance, that the publike be not peruerted, nor interuerted for a pri∣uate. The King therefore, in this point not vnfor∣tunate, commaunded Bishop Peter to betake him∣selfe to his residence at VVinton, without once med∣ling in affaires of State; but against Peter Riuallis The king re∣moues the Bishop of Winchester and others from his Councell. England purged from Poictouines. his Treasurer, hee was so vehement, that he sware, hee would plucke out his eyes, were it not for reue∣rence of holy Orders; commaunding also their Poi∣ctouines to depart the Realme, neuer to see his face more. (47) Then are the Archbishop of Canterbury with the Bishops of Chester and Rochester sent into Wales to pacifie things there. But the inuincible Earle Marshall had now crost the Seas into Ireland, to take reuenge for the spoiles and disseisures, which his hired enemies had made in his lands there; by whose plots, according to that secret agreement, hee was finally taken, and died of a wound giuen him in The Earle Mar∣shal dieth in Ireland. the backe, as hee with admirable manhood defen∣ded himselfe. His Body was buried in Kilkennie, (which pleasantly-situated Towne our Soueraigne, King Iames erected into a City,) where himselfe in his life had appointed, in the Oratorie of the Mino∣rites: in which Town, as yet some small tokens of this great name are remaining; for in the East win∣dow of the Abbey-Church of S. Iohn Baptist, and in the Abbey of S. Dominicke, the ancient Armories of Partie per pale, Or & vert, ouer all a Lyon ram∣pant, gules. Marshal, Lord of Kilkenny, are yet extant. The Patri∣mony of this Earle was shared by the Contractors according to the purport of the Letters patents: but when the King heard of his death, hee (to the won∣der of all that were by) brake forth into teares, be∣wailing The king laments the Earles death. the losse of so braue a Knight, affirming that he had left no Peere behind him in the Kingdome. A bles∣sed King, saith Paris; to loue euen those who had offen∣ded him. (48) The Archbishoppe of Canterbury with the Ann. 1235. other Bishoppes, repaired to the King at Glocester, vpon their returne from Leoline Prince of Wales, who pretended hee could not conclude, till the King had receiued into grace such of the banished No∣bility, with whom himselfe had beene confedera∣ted during the late displeasures. The King hereupon The king cals home his rebels. moued with Pittie, sends forth his Proclamations, that all such as were outlawed or proscribed, should bee at Gloucester vpon a certaine day, there to be re∣ceiued into the Kings fauour againe, and to haue restitution of their inheritances; but lest they might suspect any euill measure, it was ordered that they should bee in the Churches protection, and come vnder the safe-conduct of the Archbishoppe and the other Prelates. Thither at the time and place limited doth Hubert de Burgo Earle of Kent (and lately chiefe Hubert de Burgh is reconciled. Iusticiar of England) repaire; vpon whom, by me∣diation of the Bishops, the compassionate King looks gratiously, receiuing him in his Armes with the kisse of peace; in like sort was the Lord Gilbert Bas∣set, and all others of that fellowshippe, receiued into fauour, their seuerall liuings and rights fully resto∣red; and both Hubert and Basset admitted to bee of his Councell. And, that nothing might bee wan∣ting to make the ioy vniuersall; Gilbert, Brother to the late Earle Marshall, had the whole Earldome Gilbert brother to the late Earle Marshal hath his brothers lands & honours. conferred vpon him with all the lands and rights thereof wheresoeuer, notwithstanding the foresaid treacherous conueyance; whom also the King made Knight at VVorcester, and deliuered into his hands the Rod of the Marshalship, according to the custom. Howbeit in all these points the King may seeme but to haue temporized (as thereto driuen by ouer-bearing inducements) or else greatly afterward to haue changed his iudgement, because hee open∣ly at one time Math. Paris. ad An. 1239. called the said Richard a bloudy Trai∣tour, and caused this Gilbert to bee forcibly kept out of the Court vpon a Christmas day. (49) Vpon this reconcilement the practise, by which the late great Marshall was destroyed, and his possessions dismembred, came to light; the co∣py The practise to destroy the late Earle Marshal openly read. of the letters, which had beene sent into Ireland, being by commandement of the Archbishoppe of Canterbury, openly read in the presence of the King, the Prelates, Earles and Barons. It moued teares in all of them; the King with an Oath affirming that hee knew not the contents of the said letters, though by the vrging of the Bishoppe of Winchester, Riuallis, Segraue, Passeleu, with other of his Coun∣cell, hee had caused his Seale to bee put vnto them. At the sound of Summons to make their seuerall appearances, the Malefactors take Sanctuary, the Bi∣shop and Peter de Riuallis in Winchester Church, Se∣graue in Leicester Abbey, Passeleu in the new Temple, and others otherwhere. In the end, vpon the in∣tercession of Edmund Archbishop of Canterburie, who piously endeauoured to extinguish all occasi∣ons of further dissention in the Kingdome, and vn∣dertooke they should haue a lawfull triall, the delin∣quents appeared at Westminster before the King, who Rog. de Wend. M. S. Math. Paris. sate in person with his Iusticiars vpon the Bench. Peter de Riuallis was first called (for the Bishop came not,) whom the King shot through with an angrie eye, saying; O thou Traitour, by thy wicked aduise, I The king sits in Westminster with the Iudges on the Bench. was drawne to set my Seale to these treacherous letters for the destruction of the Earle Marshall, the Contents whereof were to mee vnknowne; and by thine and such like counsell, I banished my naturall Subiects, and turned their minds and hearts from me. By thy bad counsel, & thy Complices, I was moued to make warre vpon them to my irreparable losse, and the dishonour of my Realme, in which enterprize I wasted my treasure, and lost many worthie persons, together with much of my royall respect. Therefore I exact of thee an account aswell of my trea∣sure, as of the custodies of Wardes, together with many o∣ther profites and escheates belonging to my Crowne. Pe∣ter denying none of the accusations, but falling to the ground, thus besought him. My Soueraigne Lord and King, I haue beene nourished by you, and made rich in worldly substance, confound not your own Creature, but at leastwise grant mee a time of delibe∣ration, The king himselfe giues sentence on the Bench. that I may render a competent reason for such points as I am charged with. Thou shalt (said the King) be carried to the Tower of London, there to deliberate till I am satisfied. He was so, Stephen de Segraue, the Lord Chiefe Iustice (whom the King also called most wic∣ked The Bishoppe of Winchester went to Rome, for hee was in Pope Gre∣gories Armie, against the muti∣ned Romans, say both Wendouer and Paris, ad An. 1 35. Traitour) had time till Michaelmas to make his accounts, at the Archbishops and other Bishops humble entreaty; and for other matters, he shifted them off from himselfe, by laying the blame vpon such as were higher in place then hee: into whose office of Chiefe Iustice, Hugh de Pateshull is aduan∣ced. The like euasion Robert Paslew had, by leauing the fault vpon Walter Bishoppe of Carleil, who was aboue him in the Exchequer: and thus were these ciuill enormities reformed, not without reducing store of Coine to the King. (50) As those continuall turmoiles, and plagues of the Sword, much afflicted the land, so this was the third yeere, wherein God inflicted also for sin, the plague of famine, whereby the poore did misera∣bly perish, there being no Samaritan to pay for their The diuine vertue of charity actually commended by God. barbouring, or to annoint their wounds with the oyle of consolation. Our Authors, to make ma∣nifest, how odious the mercilesse heart is in the sight of God, relate a storie of that time with pro∣testation, that they doe it, left so memorable an ex∣ample should be in time forgotten. Certain Of Alboldes a village in Cambridgeshire. poore, while as yet the Corne was greene, pluckt the eares in the common fields, to sustaine their liues; where∣upon the Owners call on the Priest, to curse all such as had so done: but one in their company adiured A miraculous conf sion of hard heartednesse toward poore Christians. the Priest in the name of God to exempt his corne from the sentence, saying, it pleased him well, that the poore driuen with famine, had taken his corne, and so commended that which they had left to God. The Priest, compelled by importunity of the rest, was entred into the sentence, when by a terrible in∣terrupting tempest of thunder, lightning, wind, haile, and raine, all the corne-fieldes about were desolated, as if they had beene troden downe with Horse and Cartes; that no kind of beast or fowle would feed vpon the corne thus laid. But (as say our Authors out of the Mat. 5. 7. Scrip∣ture) seeing God hath a care of the liberall. they who are pitteous find mercy, that honest and compassionate hearted man, found all his corne and grounds (though interlaced with theirs,) altogether vntoucht and vnharmd. Wher∣upon (say they) it is more cleare then any light, that as glory to God on high is sung of Angels, so there is peace on Earth to men who are of goodwill. This dearth was in An. 1235. An. reg. 19. France and Gascoigne aswell as in England. A Iewish impiety may well be annexed to want of Christian Charity. There were brought be∣fore the King at Westminster seuen Iewes, who cir∣cumcised a Child, and purposed in contempt of The Iewes con∣spire to crucifie a child. Christ and Christianity) to haue crucified him in Easter at Norwich. (51) These now calmer times, were made more happy, by the marriage of the Emperour Fredericke The Emperour marrieth the kings sister. with the Lady Isabel, the King of Englands sister, a beauteous young Lady about twenty yeeres of age. The messengers arriued in March with the Em∣perours letters, closed vnder a Seale of gold; and there were sent to conduct her ouer, the Archbi∣shoppe of Colein, and the Duke of Louain. The King brought her to Sandwich with about three thousand horse in his traine; and being imperially furnished with all worldly abundance, shee tooke shipping in May, and in one dayes and one nights space arriued at Antwerpe, a City of the Empire, & was euery where most magnificently entertained; her sweet humility, and excellent beauty, draw∣ing The magnificence of the Nuptials. all to loue and honour her. At the solemnitie of her At Wormes in August. marriage were present three Rog. de Wend. MS. Mat. Paris. Kings, eleuen Dukes, thirty Marquesses & Earles, besides the num∣ber of great Prelates. On whether superstition, or obseruation, of the Emperour is noted at this marri∣age, that he forbare the Empresses company, till a certaine howre, which his VVisards or Astrologers Marriage consū∣mated by calcula∣tion of the Stars. had assigned, and in the morning hee caused her to bee carefully tended as a woman with child, and sent word to his brother the King of England, that hee should haue a sonne, so skilfull or confident hee was; and God did fauour his iudgement, for it proued so. This Imperiall affinity gaue a Rog Wendouer in hist. MS. in Biblioth D. Roberti Cotton. Baronetti. wor∣thy Historian occasion here to display and embla∣zon the Maiesty and glory of the English Princes; but amongst them all, none were higher aduanced then the Children of King Iohn, one of whose sons was now a K. Henry 3 of King, the other afterward chosen to be an Richard king of the Romans. Emperour, and one of his daughters a Ioan Queen of Scots. Queen, this other (here mentioned) an Isabel. Empresse. And here doth VVendouer end his history, to whom we haue hitherto been beholding for his labours, sorry wee can enioy his good company no longer. (52) There were spread through England about this time certaine Romane Vsurers called Quasi Capientes vrsi, deuouring Beares, quoth Paris. Caurfini, who had entangled the King himselfe, most of the great men, and all others as had to deale with the Court of Rome, in their cunning snares. Their first entrance into England was some few yeeres past, when the Pope requiring the Mat. Parid. tenth of all moueable goods in England, Ireland and Wales, towards his wars against the Emperour Fredericke, sent Stephen his Nunce hither to collect it, Idem ad An. 1227 who brought with him that race of deuouring-Monsters vnder humane shape, called the Ibidem. Popes Marchants, vnder colour of Richard late Earle Marshall) to commit that Math Paris seth this word. as∣sassinate vpon him. This execrable wretch hauing beene a Courtier, and one of the Kings Polyd. Virg. lib. 16. Armiger quidam literatus, saith Par , but pag 566 hesame M. Paris a th his name was Clement, and a Clerke. Knights, supposing to haue found the King in his owne reti∣ring Bed, had about midnight gotten in at the Chamber window; but God (in whose special pro∣tection, the liues of Princes are) disappointed him, for the King was elsewhere in bed with his Queen. Neuerthelesse he gaue not ouer, but with naked knife in hand, sought vp and downe in some other Chambers. One of the Queenes Margaret Biset. gentlewomen (sitting late and very deuoutly at her booke by can∣dle-light,) at sight of the furious villaine, with her shriking noise wakened the Kings seruants, who starting out of their Bed, laid hands vpon him; & af∣terward The Traitor drawne in sunder with horses. he was drawne in peeces with horses at Couentree. And worthily: for (as Holinsh. p. 123. a vulgar Chro∣nicler hereupon saith truly,) in wounding and killing a Prince, the Traitor is guilty of homicide, of parricide, of Because Kings are annointed. Christi ide, nay of Because in holy Scriptures they are called Gods. Deicide. William de Ma∣risco, who was saide to bee the instigator of this Treason, knowing his danger, became a Pyrate & fortified the Isle of Lundey in Seuern, where hee did much mischiefe, the situation of that little I∣land being Mat Paris. d A. D. 1242. inexpugnable. At length hee was sur∣prised therein, and sixteene of his Complices, who all of them after conuiction were put to death at London. William to the last gaspe denying his pri∣uity to the former treasonous attempt of killing the King. About the time of the Kings danger at Woodstocke, the Legate was in very little better case at Oxford, where being at first honourably by the V∣niuersity Paris. entertained in Ousney Abbey, the pride of his Romans there proued so intollerable, that a troupe of the yonger Students, prouoked therewith to arme themselues, not onely slew the Legates owne brother, but would haue done the like with the Legate him∣selfe, whom they termed an Vsurer, Symonist, Rent∣raker, Idem. Money-thirster, peruerter of the King, subuerter of the Kingdome, enriching strangers with spoiles of the English; but hee lurking in the Belfrey, at midnight escaped ouer the riuer (not without danger of drowning) and fled to the King for his protection. For which outrage, the King sending the Earle of Warren with an armed band, In Walling ford Castle. imprisoned about 30. of the offen∣ders, and the Legate interdicted the Vniuersity, till all the Bishops of England (purposely 16 Iunij. Lo ini. Paris. meeting in a Sy∣node) pleaded for the Vniuersity, as being the second of Christendome: to whose importunity the proud Legate would not condiscend, vnlesse all the Bi∣shops would yeeld to goe on foot with the Students from Paules Church to the Legates house, (which was about a mile,) who there vngowned and vnshod, should hum∣bly craue absolution; which accordingly they perfor∣med. (60) The Legate was (not long after) called home by the Pope, Mat. Paris. vpon notice of the scandall daylie Ann. 1239. giuen in England, by the vnsatiable auarice of the Ro∣manes: but by the earnest workings of the King, who feared lest his great ones would rise against him, hee was detained as a necessary euill to esta∣blish the good of Peace. For it was in a manner ta∣ken vp for a fashion among the Lords, to glorifie themselues with the senselesse multitude, by sedi∣tiously disparaging and taxing the Kings discretion and gouernment, being farre too gentle and ami∣able for spirites so peruerse and insolent; which might well force his louing nature, to seeke kind∣nesse and aduise among strangers, seeing he could not haue it for any his deserts among the home∣borne. Great faults in the Lords to∣wards the King. A great reason why (perhaps) he did some few things rashly and passionately enough: it be∣ing a thing forceable to distemper a very wise man, to haue so many imperious censors to obserue his actions, and few to humble their abilities to obse∣quious seruices, all bearing themselues rather like Tutors or Controllers, then like Subiects or Counsellors. About which time, one William an ordinary Calumniator, and accuser of great men to the King, was for that impious practise con∣demned to die; though hee sought to peece out his dayes by the helpe of new appeachments and false criminations; but that being discouered, he Worthy iustice done vpon a Court-Rat or Promoter. was hanged vpon a Gibbet in London. Now also the King beganne to smell out the vndirect and false dealing of his beloued Legate, whose familiar friend (Peter Saracen) being taken Captiue by the Emperour, and to pay 10000 l. Sterling for his Math. Paris. ransome; the shamelesse Legate counselled the king to bind himselfe and his Crown for that payment. Wher∣by the King perceiuing what toiles were laid to entrap him, (the Romanes not caring what losse happened to the Kingdome, so they might be gainers) (wore in great rage, that it repented him he had euer admitted the Le∣gate into the land, to dissipate the wealth thereof. But the Bishoppes of the land meeting in Councell at London, to redresse the oppressions of the English Church, tolde the Legate flatly, that the Romanes importu∣nity had so long exhausted their Church-goods, that they would no longer endure it. These English repentan∣ces seeme somewhat too late; but that prouidence which the King of Scotland soone after vsed, was, as more tempestiue, so more commendable, when meeting the same Legate (for now into Scotland he is going to gather coine) he denied him entrance in∣to his Kingdome, telling him, he was the first Legate which euer entred that Kingdome; yet by intreatie to saue the Legates credite, hee was permitted; first making a declaration, that his entrance should ne∣uer goe for a President of any after; whereto the Legate should put his Seale at his departure; but hauing gotten what hee came for, he sodainly stole away without leaue of the King, and carried his wri∣ting with him. By all which vile and indigne vsa∣ges, a man might thinke the Church of Rome did purposely striue to draw the hatred of all nations against her; especially, sith (as we shewed) the Greekes were fallen from the Romane vnion, so now the Church of Antioch had both excommunicated the Pope, the Church and Court of Rome, and chal∣lenged Allegations for Antioches Pri∣macy aboue Rome. the Primacie aboue the Pope and the Romane Church, as being an ancienter See, wherin S. Peter first sate Bishoppe for seuen yeeres; and more excellent and deare, sith there Peter liued with loue and reue∣rence, whereas both he and Saint Paul were continu∣ally persecuted in Rome; which Church was now also defiled with Simonie, Vsurie, Auarice, and other hainous offences. (61) But (doubtlesse) it was worthy of reproofe in the King; that after so manifold trials of faith and constancy in Hubert Earle of Kent, hee should Hubert Earle of Kent tost with a new Court∣storme. now againe afflict his honourable old-age with re∣uiuall of accusations, when hee rather ought to haue tendred him as a Father. Among other the Articles (engines of vexation) which the King bent against him, these were 3. new ones, by which any reasonable man may take a scantling of the rest. 1 That Hubert had taken the money out of the barrels which were sent for the reliefe of Rochel and Poictou, and Strabo. stuffed them with sand. 2. That to dissuade a great La∣dy from marriage with the King, he had said the King A strange de∣scription of a king. was a squint-eyd foole, a lewd man, and a kind of leper, deceitful, periured, more faint-hearted then a woman, on∣ly terrible to his owne friends; and vtterly vnfit for any faire or noble Ladies company. 3. That at Wodstocke, when the King was alone, he rusht in with a naked knife to murder him: Which and many other accusa∣tions the Earle did modestly and cleerely refute. But with the last (being most wicked of all) he was so greeued, that making low obeisance to the King, he could not forbeare to say, that hee was neuer trai∣tor to his father, nor to him, which by Gods grace did wel appeare in the King: as if he should haue said, (quoth Paris) That if the Earle would haue beene a Traitor, the King had neuer obtained the Crowne. This seemes to haue beene a publike triall, vpon a Suit or Acti∣on of trespasse, brought against the Earle by the King in the Kings Bench, at which triall the King himselfe was also present. But howsoeuer the Earle answered, hee was condemned to giue to the King Ypod. Neust. foure his Mat. Paris. dearest Castles, Blanch Castle, Grosmount in Wales, Skenefrith and Hafeld; and then also (as it seemes) hee was Cambden Brit. in Kent. this man died An. D. 1243. depriued of his Title of Earle. (62) After so many mischiefes patiently broo∣ked, at last the King vpon receipt of letters from An. 1240. the Emperour (whom as his brother in law, hee was loth to offend,) commanded Otho the Popes Legate, in regard of the great enmities betweene the Pope and Emperour, to depart out of England. England a most Christian Coun∣try. There was also strait commandement giuen to the Italian Vsurers, to leaue the most Mund ssimam terram. Paris. pure earth of his Realme (meaning that his owne people was most innocent and free from such a sinne,) but (saith Paris. one, who durst write any thing hee thought) by giuing the King money, which is too much vsed to iu∣stifie the wicked, they for a great part remained still, as loth to forsake such fat pastures. And the Legat himselfe also staied so long, till the Pope by wily in∣ducements and Imperatoris li∣ter apud Paris. forged calumniations had drawne the King, both to relinquish the Emperour his bro∣ther in law, and to suffer the Papall Excommunica∣tion to passe here against him, and money also to be gathered to his impeachment. A briefe taste of all the Popes proceedings against this glorious Empe∣rour, we may take from the Nobilitie of France, who An. 1241. (when the Pope offered the Empire vnto Robert the French Kings brother) in their grand Councell refu∣sed to accept it, charging the Pope with the Spirit of au∣dacious rashnesse, for deposing the Emperour, not conui∣cted of any fault, and whom a Generall Councell onely ought to censure, not the Pope, to whom no credit ought to be giuen, being his Capital Enemie. For that themselues knew he was a vertuous and victorious Emperor, and one who had in him more religion then the Pope had Our Le∣gat Ottho (who now at length is gone) was no sooner departed, but Peter of Sauoy the Queens Vncle arri∣ued, to whō the King gaue the Earldome of Richmōd, and entertained otherwise most magnificently. This and the like largesse to strangers, drew on the King much euill will, who also in fauour of his Queene, procured her Vncle Bonifacius to be chosen Arch∣bishop of Canterbury in place of Edmund a Saint, thoughdy∣ing an Exile in detestation of the Popes oppressi∣ons. Edmunde, who weary of his life in England, by reason that he could not redresse the Popes detestable exactions and oppressi∣ons, made choise of a voluntarie Exile at Pountney in France, where he died with the honour and opinion of a Saint. (63) The Kings imploiments hitherto haue (al∣most wholly) been taken vp either in the impatien∣cie An. 1242. A reg 26. The King goes to recouer Poictou. of ciuill disturbations, or in the too-patient suf∣ferance of some forraine greeuances, nourished within his Kingdome; which gaue him perhaps lit∣tle leasure, minde, or meanes, to pursue any trans∣marine designe. But now better prouided with money, then with men, (and yet not sufficiently with money) he takes shippe immediatly after Easter towards Poictou, where the Earle of March (now husband to Queene Isabell his mother) expected his arriuall. Hee committed the Gouernment of the Realme in his absence to the Archbishoppe of Yorke. Thirtie Hogsheads or Cadum. Barrels fraught with sterling money were shipt for that seruice. There also went with him Richard Earle of Cornwall, (who was returned with much honour out of the Holy∣land not long before) and seauen other Earles with about three hundreth Knights, besides other souldi∣ers. To resist the English, the King of France (who The French Kings preparati∣ons to resist. had giuen Poictou to his brother Alfonse) assem∣bled an Armie royall of foure thousand men of Armes, excellently wel appointed, and about twen∣ty thousand choise Souldiers; with a thousand Carts to carrie their other necessaries. King Henrie vnderstanding that the King of France lay before Frontenay, (a Castle belonging to the Earle of March,) seeking to force it by assaults, sent a messen∣ger of defiance to him as a breaker of Truce. Lewis a most iust and valiant P ince, denied that euer hee brake the truce, but that the King of England by ma n∣tenance of his Rebe s, did rather seeme to i ringe the Peace. Neuerthelesse hee offered (so as the English would not protect his enemies the Earle of March and others) to giue him Poictou, and a great part of Normandy, in satisfaction of his Vide s pra at his de ing from England. Fathers Oath, and moreouer, to enlarge the last truce with a longer terme of yeeres. These so honourable, safe, and profitable conditions, by the practise of the Poictouines (who feared the French Kings indignation would proue too heauie for them to beare, if the English aban∣doned their cause) were vnfortunately refused. (64) When the French King heard hereof, it re∣pented him that he had humbled himselfe so farre; telling his Lords, that he neither feared his Cosen of England, nor all his forces, but onely that Oath, A most Christian feare of the Christian King. (for restoring of the lands in France) which his fa∣ther made when hee was in England. This scruple did so trouble the Kings mind, on the behalfe of his dead Father, that hee would admit no comfort till one of his Lords told him, that the King of Eng∣land, by putting Constantine Fitz-Arnold to death, for hauing spoken some words in honour of King Lewis (his Father) had first broken the truce. This satisfied the French. That whole businesse is thus concluded by Io. Tili. Chron. Tilius; Hugh Earle of March ouer∣come with the pride and perswasions of his wife sabel, would not doe homage to Alfonse the French Kings bro∣ther: for shee was a cause to draw the English thither, where things thriuing on his part but meanely, Hugh is constrained in the end to doe both homage and fealty vn∣to Alfonse. This onely must be added, that he did vnfaithfully prouide for his priuate safety with∣out the knowledge of the King of England, at such time as he Math. Paris. pretended otherwise. (65) This treacherie lost the King all Poictou, for whereas he principally tooke care for money, Isabel Queene D ger forgeth writings to draw her sonne the King into France Mat. Par. p. 570 presuming vpon the Earle for men, when it came to the point, the Earle was not onely not prouided, but sware by the throat of God, he neuer promised any such matter, and denied he had set his Seale to any wri∣ting concerning such promises, and that if any such sealed writing were (as the King and his brother the Earle of Cornwall affirmed) their mother his wife had forged it. They were now in sight of the French Host before Tailbourg in Xainctoing when this improuident ex∣postulation was made. The King of England mani∣festly seeing his perill, and hauing by his brother Earle Richards mediation (whom many of the French did greatly honour because he had by com∣position Poictou lost by the Eng sh. been a meane at his arriuall to free them from the Saracens in the holy-land,) raised his camp by night, and retreated with much more hast then good speed. Not long after this, the faire Citie of Xainctes in Xainctoing, vpon displeasure conceiued by the Cittizens against the King, because he had gi∣uen the same to the Lord Hugh his halfe-brother (sonne to the Earle of March) first contriued a perfi∣dious Xaincts also and Xainctoing reuolt so closelie, that if first the said Lord Hugh, and then Guy de Lusinian his elder brother, had not in good time signified the danger, the King and all the English had been surprized by the French. There was none (among all the mutable Poictouins) found respectiue of honor and loyaltie, but onely one called Hertold, Captaine of the famous Castle of Mirabell, who in great sorrow repaired to the King of England, praying counsell and assistance, where the King with a downecast looke gaue him this answere: Thou dost see (ô Hertold) that my forces are scarce sufficient to defend my selfe. Our Lord and The French Earle of March compared by the King to Iudas. Hertold an ex∣ample of loyalty. Sauiour was betraied by his Disciple Iudas, and there∣fore who shall be safe? Behold the Earle of March, whom I tooke and reuerenced as my Father, hath giuen a pernicious president. I haue trusted in a staffe of reed, and the splinters thereof haue wounded my hand. Thou art the only man who hast behaued thy selfe honestly: whatso∣euer therefore thou doest tossesse of mine by any iust title, take it to thee as thine owne, I giue it thee: Prouide other- want could make him forget his magnificence, and bountie, hee caused the East-part of the great Church at Westminster to bee taken downe, and by aduise of expert Workmen newly to bee buil∣ded and ioyned to the West. The effect of the Kings expedition into Wales was, that after he had The effect of the kings iourny into Wales. fortified the Castle of Gannocke in North-Wales, vpon the passage into Anglesey, and by the Irishmen wa∣sted that fertile Iland, hee was himselfe enforced by sharpenesse of the weather, and for want of victuals to returne about the end of October, ha∣uing taken all courses hee could to sterue the Welsh, forbidding the Irish vpon pain of death to bring any reliefe into Wales; and left that they of Cheshire, or the neighbour parts should giue them any succour, hee so spoiled them of all their pro∣uisions, that they were scarse able to feed them∣selues; and if the Welsh compelled by famine ventred out of their strengthes or fastnesses, in or about Snowdon, the Garrison Souldiers of Gan∣nocke were ready to intercept and kill them; and on the other side the Lords of Brumfield and Pow∣ys, though Welshmen, Hist. Camb. held with the King, so that they were miserably straitned. The King pawnd his Iewels to his brother Richard at this iourney for 3000. Markes, which holpe to piece out the charge thereof. Paris hath a long list of great names, which dying about this time, left neither name, nor issue to preserue the memory of their Greatnes; but none so strange as of the Marshals, fiue breth∣ren of them successiuely Earles of Pembroke, and all dying issulesse; which he attributeth to the iudge∣ment A iudgement of God on a with∣holder of church lands. of God, for the iniquity of their Father, and of themselues, who would neuer restore certaine Manours, which their Father in warre-time had ta∣ken in Ireland from the Bishoppe of Ferus, an holy Irish man, who often required restitution, and for want thereof, did put them vnder Gods curse and his. Gyr ld. Cambren. One doth indeed obserue, that the Irish Saints are vindicatiue; but certainely the exam∣ples of punishments for Sacrilege, and violent extor∣tions are terrible in holy Scripture; and most feare∣full was the sentence it selfe which Gods Prophet pronounced against Ahab for 3. Reg. cap. 1. vers. 21. Naboths vineyard; agreeing with the very plague which this yeare fell vpon the house of Marshall. (72) The Popes furie was now so much infla∣med against King Henry and the English, for so dis∣gracing An. 1246. A. reg. 30. him publikely in the Generall Councell, Mat. Paris. that hee vsed lofry threats, if once the Emperour were quelled, to tame England also; and whetted on the French King, to enter on the land, promising him all the helpes of the Church and Papall power. But the iust King, not The French King reiecteth the Popes motion as vnchristian. only refused so vniust an offer, (as hauing no title to England, themselues also knit by kindred, and by truce, their Queenes being sisters, the attempt bloody for Chri∣stians, &c.) but further ratified the former truce, and enlarged it with the addition of more yeers, be∣cause King Lewis was prepared to make warre a∣gainst the Infidels, which voyage King Henrie would not hinder, but aduance. And that nothing might disturbe the peacefull life, with which the King of England was most delighted, Dauid Prince of Wales departed out of the vale of the dying, (as Paris elegantly Dauid Prince of Wales. saith) into the vale of the dead. The King seeing all things quiet and safe about him, doth now conuert his whole cares to the reformation of the inward maladies of his dominions, calling the estates of the land together for that purpose. To whom he there deliuered in writing, sundrie Articuli super Gr amin. a pud Paris. Articles of the greeuan∣ces and oppressions of his Kingdome and the Church. 1. that the Pope extorts great Contributions of the Cler∣gy, without the Kings assent, against he rightes and liberties of the Kingdome. 2. that Patrons cannot bestow Church liuings on fit men; but the Pope giues them to his Romans, who can speake no English, ( r celebrate diuine seruice, nor preath, nor keepe hospitalitie, nor c e for soules, &c.) but only begger the Land with carrying away the Coine. 3. that the Popes Prouisions and Pensi∣ons are vnsufferable. 4. that Englishmen are d awne forth of the Land to end their causes. 5. that the Pope by his non obstante ouerthrowes Oathes, Customs, Char∣ters, Graunts, Statutes, Priuiledges, Rights, &c. whereupon, the King, Bishops, Nobles, Abbots, and Priors, did all write See their seue∣rall Letters in Paris. their seuerall complaints to the Pope, requiring speedie redresse of those infinite wrongs to the King, the Kingdome, the Clergie, the No∣bles, and the People, who would rather die, then thus daily endure those oppressions. Notwithstanding sundry Prelates (either out of ambition or feare) vnderhand furthered the Popes desires, when secretly he craued an annuall tallage of the Clergie for maintenance of his Souldiers; and that the State should take no notice thereof, the Pope caused his Agents to make them Math. Paris. swear not to reueale this their Contribution to any man liuing for the space of halfe a yeere. Yet the King came to the knowledge thereof; and sent forth his writs, forbidding vnder great penaltie that the money should be carried forth of the Land. This the Kings dis∣pleasure was much augmented vpon the returne of his messengers from the Councell of Lyons, who re∣lated how proudlie the Pope reiected the iust complaints of the State, saying, the King himselfe did Frederize, and holding his People as Schismaticks. Which incensed the King to publish his Proclamation in Euery Citie and Towne, that none of his subiects should dare to con∣tribute any money to the Pope: but it came to no effect, for that some Epis∣coporum. Mat. VVest. Popizing Bishops and ambitious Clerks (of his Councell) fearing the Papall threats, where no cause of feare was, drew him to leaue his purpose woman∣ly, which he manfully vndertooke. (73) The Bishop of Worcester (a principall worker herein) was said to Paris. haue had authoritie from the Pope to interdict the land, which perhaps was it which the King so greatly feared, and which the Monke said, was not worth the fearing. The Earle of Cornwall also with others (who fauoured not the Emperour Fredericks cause) laboured to change the Kings minde, so that the wonted extortions were as current as euer; insomuch that a Iohannes Anglicus. Cardinall truely told the Pope, that England was to the Pope as Ba∣laams Asse, which being so often wronged, spurgalled, England the Popes Asse. and cudgeld, it was no maruaile, if at length shee opened her mouth to complaine: and for themselues and their Romane Court, they were like Ismael, Genes. 16. 12. euerie mans hand against them, and theirs against euery man. But if we should so often insist on the relation of this King∣domes Ann. 1247. distresses, as the popes endlesse Corrasions from yere to yeere, and the States remedilesse com∣plaints giue vs occasion, wee should but cloy the Reader with rufull matter, which Mat. VVes . Math. Paris. Ioh. London, &c. Monks them∣selues haue mournefully and copiously endited vn∣to vs, and set forth the too seruile affections of our owne Ancestors, who still entred new consultati∣ons about the disease, but neuer brought the medi∣cine vnto a perfect receipt. For vpon fresh angariati∣ons from Rome, the King In Crasti Pu∣rificationis. againe assembles his State to thinke of redresse, Ibidem. the common-wealth, as well of Laity as Clergie, being brought to the point of vtter deso∣lation, as the like was neuer heard in any age, whereof they againe made their lamentable complaint to the King, whose duety it was to protect the land from such wrongs and dangers. Their only remedy was, againe to write letters to the Pope, which slender meanes he could as slightly put off; and though (to stop the clamour for the present) he promised neuer to send any Legats into England, but on entreaty of the State, yet daily did he send his raking Clerks, with the power, though not the Title, and Ensignes of Legates, both into England and Ireland, so to delude the King, and still purloine his Subiects. (74) The State of the Kingdome still requiring An. 1248. A. reg. 32. reformation, there assembled againe at London cer∣taine Prelats, Earles and others, at the Kings com∣mandement, where after so much purloyning by o∣thers, now the Kings owne errand and affaires was to get money for himselfe. But they (who gaue such way to the Popes collections) were now all close-handed, and open mouthed; for, besides their vndutifull vpbrayding the King with some ouer-sights, The seditious Nobles exposlu▪ l te their gree ances with the King in stead of granting mony. they vntruly and seditiously charged him to haue done contrarie to the example of his mag∣nificent Predecessors, in that his chiefe Iustice, Chancel∣lour and Treasurer were of his owne choosing, and not by the Common Councell of the Realme, as they ought. The King inwardly touched herewith, yet seeing no o∣ther helpe, promiseth redresse and change for the better. Whereunto they answered; that they would expect a while with patience, and as the King shall carrie himselfe toward them, so will they performe their bey∣sance to him. So the meeting was adiourned from that Candlemas till Midsommer; at which time al∣so there was nothing done, but all parts rose discon∣tēted. The cause of that discōtentment was, for that the King, instead of satisfying their audacious de∣mands, answered them, That they sought to bridle him at their surlie pleasures, proudlie forbidding that in him, which was lawfull for themselues. For that euerie priuate man may vse, what, and whose Counsell he list; euerie ma∣ster of a familie preferre or remoue what officers in his house he list; which yet they sancily denied vnto him, their Lord and Soueraigne, as if Seruants and Vassals were to rule their Lords; whereas indeed he is no King but a ser∣uant, who must bow at others becke. That therefore he would neither place nor displace either Chancellour, Iusti∣ciar, or Treasurer as they thought good. Neuerthelesse hee required money at their hands, to recouer such forreine lands as concerned aswell them as him, to see it done. Hereupon the Parliament brake vp, and the King was left to furnish himselfe otherwise so well as hee The king driuen to sell his Iewels and Plate to the Londoners. could, euen by sale of his Iewels, Plate and other precious stuffe, after a dishonourable manner. (75) The affaires of Gascoign (which one Guasto A. D. 1249. An. reg. 33. de Biard had greatly troubled) by the manhood and wit of Simon Earle of Leicester were now brought Simon Earle of Le cester returnes with honour out of Gascoign. into better quiet, which made his presence (being returned, as it seemeth for more supplies, which went againe with him) very acceptable in the Court of England. The King intending to furnish that en∣terprise afresh against the comming spring time, left no meanes vnthought of, which either by Art or strong entreatie he could vse, to replenish his exhau∣sted Coffers. In which he embased too much the Royall name and dignity, telling some (and perhaps truely) whose bountie he craued, that it was more almes to ayde him with money, then one that went beg∣ging from dore to dore. Meanewhile the king neglects not his administration of Iustice; for, whereas the whole Countie of Hampshire swarmed with felons and murtherous robbers, himselfe so ordered the Hampshire purg∣ed of theeues by the King him∣selfe sitting in iudgement. matter, sitting in person in Winchester Castle, that the infamie and danger of those places were clea∣red by hanging the Offendors; many of which were very wealthie, and some the kings owne seruants. Walter de Clifford also (a Baron of the Marches of Wales) for enforcing an officer (whom he had other∣wise A. D. 1250. A. reg. 34. handled badly) to eat the kings writ, waxe and all, ran so farre into the kings displeasure thereby, Walter Clifford makes an officer eat the kings writ, wax and all. that while he liued, he was made the lesse able to feed himselfe; paying to the king a very great sum of money, and hardlie escaping without confiscati∣on of his whole patrimonie. The king desirous to be friends with the Citizens of London, to whom of late he had beene ouer-hard, publikely reconciled himselfe vnto them, whom for that cause he had commanded to appeare at Westminster, and there immediatly receiued the badge of the Crosse at the hand of Boniface Archbishop of Canterburie; but whatsoeuer his intention was, it neuer came into action on his part. In the meane time contrarie to his Fore-fathers example, he so much abridged the expences of his house, and his Almes, that he vnder∣went The king lesse∣neth the charge of his Houshold. some dishonourable imputation. Neuerthe∣lesse he wisely wound himselfe out of many a Mer∣chāts debt; whereto he wrung great helps from the Iewes, (as the ordinary Clippers and defacers of his Coyne,) and the forgers of seales and Charters; from one of whom hee had at times drawne thirtie Thirtie thou∣sand markes wrung from one Iew in a few yeeres. thousand markes Sterling, besides two hundreth markes in gold. (76) It seemeth an inseparable qualitie in his nature, to bee extreamly violent, in doing whatsoe∣uer hee had a mind to doe, and that sometime with∣out the due respect to secular Maiestie; as in the Course hee tooke for aduancing his halfe-brother Aethelmare to the Bishoprick of Winchester. For not contenting himselfe to haue sent his messengers to the Couent by them to worke the election, hee came thither in person, where the Chapter being set in the Cathedrall Church, hee entred, and pla∣cing himselfe in the Presidents seat, makes to them The king prea cheth to the Co∣uent. a speech in the nature of a Sermon, taking for his Theme those words of Dauid: Iustice and Peace kisse each other. Whereon hee shewed them, That, whereas Iustice belonged to him, and to such as had the rule of Na∣tions, and to the Clergy calmnesse and Peace, both these should that day kisse together, if they elected his brother for their Bishop: For which he gaue them many reasons, but concluded, if they did otherwise, they should feele his Princely displeasure. When therefore they published to the King their Choise, they did it with this reseruation (because Aethelmare was to remaine vnder the title of the Elect of Winchester, for that he was not a Priest) if such an election might stand by law, or lawfull fauour. But the Pope, who meant to make his aduantage hereof, as well as the King, exacted of him for confirmation of the same election, fiue hun∣dreth Markes of Church reuenewes, to be passed o∣uer vnto the Earle of Burgundies sonne a childe; which makes Paris. the Monke to breake forth into this bitter lamentation; O Pope, the Chiefe of Fathers, why dost thou suffer thus the Christian world to be defi∣led? worthily, worthily, therefore art thou The pope was now fled from Rome for feare of the Emperour. driuen out of thy owne Citie and See, and like a runnagate and another Cham, art inforced to wander vp and downe. ô God, thou God of iust reuenge, when wilt thou drawforth thy sword to imbrue it in the blood of such oppressors? Though in these vniuersall abuses, the Pope would neither redresse himselfe nor others, yet God raised vp a stout and learned Prelate, Robert Grostest, Bi∣shop of Lincolne, who vndertooke to reforme the Monks and Friars; but they (who knew R e was from the beginning Liuie. Asylum Latronum) appealed to the Pope. Whereupon the aged Bishop going to his holinesse, tolde him that all offenders escaped, by his ope∣ning his bosome to such as brought him bribes; who snap∣ping him vp with angrie Countenance and speech, sent him home with reproach. The Pope was at this time at Lyons, where not long after the Coūcel brea∣king vp, Cardinal Huge made a Sermon of farewell to the Citizens; wherein, amongst other benefites which the Popes lying in their City had brought them, he told them this was a He calles i profitable Al s. deed. Paris. Principall, that whereas at their comming there were three or foure Whore-houses in the Lyons, now at their departing they left but one, but indeed that reached from the East-Gate of the City to the West. Whereby wee see, France had some part of the Popes Almes, as well as England. (77) The King now whollie intent vpon en∣crease of treasure, neither gaue any rich presents ac∣cording An. 1251. A strange de∣scription of the Kings par mony or pouerty. to the ancient Custome of England, and al∣so shortneth yet more the allowances of his House∣hould and entertainements, without any regard to Maicstie or rumor. And to spare his owne charge the rather, he inuites himself sometime to this man, and sometime to that, but no where contenting himselfe with his diet & hospitage, vnlesse both he, his Queene sonne Edward, yea and chiefe fauou∣rites in Court, were presented with great and cost∣ly gifts, which they tooke not as of Courtesie, but as due. This was the vnhonourable face of the Kings estate at that time. But in the depth of his wants and rigour of his Parcimonie, he could not shut vp himselfe against the suites and aduancement of his Poictouines and Pr ncois, so that it was become a common murmur in England; Our inheritance is con∣uerted to aliens, and our houses to strangers. The mat∣ter seemed the more grieuous, for that their pride and violence were intollerable. About this time the clause Non obstante (brought in first by the Pope) was taken vp in England by the King, in his grants and other writings, as Notwithstan∣ding any former commandement. Non obstante priore mandato, Non obstante Or former pri∣uiledge. antiqua libertate, &c. This our ancient Author cals an odious and detestable clause: and Roger de Thurkeby Iustitiar, fetching a deepe sigh at the sight thereof, cried out both of the times and it, saying, Mat. Paris. it was a streame deriued from that sulphureous fountain of the Clergie. (78) Another of the Kings Iusticiars, and a lear∣ned Knight, Sir Henry de Bath, (whose Lady, be∣cause herselfe was well descended, filled him with pride,) was so confidently greedy, the better to satisfie her ambition, that in one circuit, hee ap∣propriated to himselfe aboue two hundreth pound lands. Corruption in Iustice (which must needs be su∣spected to be there, where excessiue wealth is gotten by the Officers of Iustice) is but a sandie ground-worke of a vainely-hoped greatnesse, and may well bee re∣puted in the number of crying sinnes; and this mo∣ued a Knight, Sir Philip de Arci, to appeach him Sir Philip Darey appeacheth Sir Henry Bath a bri∣bing Iudge of treason. before the King, both for vnfaithfulnesse in his of∣fice, and treason against the King. The King had no hold of himselfe, after hee was once throughly kindled. Bath knowes it, and therefore writes to his wiues friends to come strong in his defence, that the King should not dare to call him to his triall; yet withall hee seekes all secret meanes how to appease the King; who vnderstanding of this combination, was the more enflamed. The Earle of Cornwall his brother could not appease him; no, not though hee knit vp his intercessions with these minatorie words; Wee must not forsake Gentlemen in their right, nor in preseruing the peace of the tottering Kingdome. In March there was holden a Parlia∣ment The disorderly weake and vio∣lent carriage of trial . at London; there the King caused Bath to bee sharpely prosecuted. Thither Sir Henry Bath repairs, strongly attended with Knights and Gentlemen of his owne friends, and his wiues, to daunt the edge of Iustice, which he deseruedly feared. The accusa∣tions were many, (for all mē were called to say what they could against him,) and among all, these two, most hainous: that he troubled the whole Realme, and stirred all the Barons thereof against the King, so that a generall rebellion was to be feared, (which one of his fellow-Iusticiars did openly testifie:) that hee had for reward discharged a conuicted Malefactor out of prison without punishment, in preiudice of the King, and to the perill of his associate Iusticiars. The King was so enra∣ged herewith, that seeing no other way to punish him, being so strongly backed, hee mounted into an higher place then before, and cries out, Whosoe∣uer kils Henrie de Bath shall be quit of his death, and The King pro∣scribe Sir Henry Bath. I here doe acquit him; and presently departs. Neuer∣thelesse, although hee left behind him many men, who would haue readily executed the Kings terrible doome; yet by the wisdome of Sir Iohn Mansel, (one of the Kings priuate Councellors) they were restrained. His wordes are worthy to bee remem∣bred; Gentlemen, an friends, it is not necessary for vs Sir Iohn Mansel stayes the Kings seruants from killing Bath. to put that presently in execution which the King hath in his anger commanded. It may bee when his wrath is ouerblowne, hee will bee sorry hee said it. Moreouer, if any outrage be done to Bath, loe here are his friends who will take all sorts of reuenge. Sir Henry escaping thus from so present a danger, found meanes vpon promise of Two thousand Marks. money and great mediation of friends, to obtain his peace & safety; for at thi me, Iustice and all things grew saleable. The North-East part of Wales was committed to Alan de Zouch, who had it in Farme for eleuen hundreth Markes yeerely, whereas Iohn de Gray (whom he supplanted in the place) paid but fiue hundreth: so Additam. ad Math. Paris. An. 1252. miserable Wales was let out to such as would giue most. (79) Alexander the third, succeeding his Father in the Kingdome of Scotland, comming in Christ∣mas to Yorke, there espoused, though very young, Alexander the third King of Scots espouseth the Lady Marga∣ret. the Lady Margaret, daughter to King Henry. There were present the two Kings in person, with a most choice multitude of either Nation, the English be∣ing in number aboue a thousand Knightes, be∣side greater States, as Prelates, Earles and Barons, and of the Scots about sixe hundreth Knights and Gentlemen, all of them well appointed. There was also two Queenes, the Mother of the Bride, (who was to be Queene) and the widow or Queen Dowager of Scotland, who for that cause was retur∣ned out of France, attended vpon in royall manner with many Lords and Gentlemen of France. The Scots were lodged in one place of the City by them selues. Vpon Christmas day the King of England gaue the order of Knight-hood to the King of Scots, and at the same time to twenty others richly ap∣parrelled. Vpon the next day the princely couple were espoused. Take a scantling of the cheere and multitude of guests by this. The Archbishoppe of Yorke, who was Prince (as it were) of the Northerne Six hundreth Oxen spent at one meale. parts (and the common host of all that most noble fellowshippe, which cost him about foure thousand marks) gaue toward that feast six hundreth fat oxen, all which were spent in the first generall seruice; and whatsoeuer the vaine Mat. Paris. Stage-play of the world might afford eyther for pompe or delight, was there all enioyed. More worthy to bee remembred, then that magnificent gluttonie, (the natural vice of these our Nations) was the orderly and no childish acti∣on of the young Bridegroome, in reconciling Philip Louell (whom King Henry had latelie fined and dis∣courted for taking Bribes) to the King his Lord. K. Alexander vndertaking the businesse, and finding The young King of Scots a suter to the King for bringing Philip Louel into fauour againe. a fitte time, presents himselfe to the King of Eng∣land vpon his knees, holding vp his hands, neither would hee rise, though earnestly requested, but with a gesture which seemed to draw teares of ioy and loue from the eyes of such as Circumsedentium sate round a∣bout, prosecuting his intent, saith; My Lord King, your Maiesty knowes, that though I my selfe am a king, and through your goodnesse honored with the girdle of Knight-hood, yet that I am withall both a Child, aswell The most witry and princely in∣ inuations of the young king, to the king his fa∣ther in Law. in age as in knowledge, and also an Orphan, my father being dead, and my mother leauing me, though at your sending for, she is now pleased to bee present; therefore from henceforth, and for euer after, I here doe take you, both for Father and Mother, that you may supply both their wants, and with your paternall care help & protect all mine insufficiencies. The King scarse a∣ble to refraine from tender teares, or to hold down his throbbings, said no more but onely this one word, Willingly. The princely Child replied ther∣upon: I will make experiment of that, and know it by proofe; seeing you haue graciously heard mee hitherto, in trying whether I shall reape the effect of my first suit. Philip Louel re∣conciled to the king. Then hee declared his request, and had it; so that Lo∣uell was afterward Treasurer. (80) The State and fidelity of the Gascoignes was so desperately shaken and plunged by the re∣uenges which Simon de Montford (to whom the king had giuen the gouernment of their Country for sixe yeeres,) had exercised vpon them, for that they had accused him to the King of tyrannous & pro∣ditorious dealing, and affirmed, that his name ought Simon Earle of Leicester rather to be called Si∣non, as the Gas∣coigns said. rather to bee Sinon then Simon, that but for the vent of their wines, (in which respect their sub∣iection to England was verie beneficiall to their Common-weale) it was thought they would ge∣nerally haue reuolted. But the King though rea∣die thus to leese Gascoigne, would yet needs hope to obtaine Normandie, and his other lands in France without blowes. The King of France (whose con∣science was wonderfully tender and sincere) had indeed written out of Palestine to that purpose, as thinking King Henries title was better then his owne: but the French, among whom their Kings misfortunes in the losse of Damiata in Aegypt, (which was wholy Per Papa aua∣risia to infortunium. Paris ascribed to the Popes auarice, who for money released those who should haue aided him,) had brought him into lesse regard then his excel∣lent vertues merited, did vniuersally and constant∣ly refuse, adding, that before the King of England The Kings hope to recouer Nor∣mandie frustra∣ted. should haue any more land among them, hee must passe through a thousand sharpe Lances, and a thousand bloudy Swords when the Lances were burst. On the other side, the King of England was but in little credit with his people: for, whereas (by an agree∣ment betweene the Pope and him,) the Tenths of the Clergie through England during three yeeres should haue beene receiued toward his charges in his pretended iourney to the Holy-Land, yet in a generall assembly at Westminster very few were drawne to giue their names to that seruice, not∣withstanding that two Bishops and the Abbot of Westminster laboured in their Sermons all they could to stirre the people to that martiall Pilgri∣mage, and though the King himselfe in all their view took a most solemn oth, that within three yeere he would set forward; the onlie reason of their vnwil∣lingnes growing vpon suspition, that he onely sought (as the Pope had giuen him example) to draw by this colour the treasure of the Realme into his hands. This their diffidence of sinceritie in him, made him the rather incline to foster and fauour strangers, & that with a kind of peruicacie, though himselfe by manifold neglects of his word, had worthilie bred that diffidence. (81) The King could more hardlie find follow∣ers in such an enterprise, for that his people had no The common o∣pinion of the Kings designe for the holy Land. conceit of his valour, but said: What reason encoura∣geth him, who was neuer trained vp in Martiall disci∣pline, nor hath managed an horse, nor drawn a sword, nor charged a staffe, nor shooke a Target; to hope for a triumph ouer the Sarazens, against whom the Cheualrie of France hath miscarried? or wherefore dreames hee of recouery of more land, who could not keepe that which he had in for raine parts? concluding, that he was a man onely borne to draine their purses, to empty his own, and to multiplie debts. This was the opinion of men, & behind his backe; but not onely of men, for Isabel Countesse of Arundel, widow of Henry Earle of A∣rundel, a young Lady receiuing the repulse at the Kings hands in a matter which shee alleadged to be A perilous bolde Dialogue be∣tween the Coun∣tesse of Arund. l and the King. hers in equity, durst say thus to his face: O my Lord King; why doe you turne away from iustice? we cannot now obtaine that which is right in your Court; you are placed as a mean between God and vs, but you neither go∣uerne vs, nor your selfe, neither dread you to vexe the Church diuersly, as it hath not onely felt in present, but often heretofore. Moreouer you doubt not manifoldlie to afflict the Nobles of the Kingdome. The King fi∣red at so free a speech, with a scornefull and angry countenance, answered with a loud voice; O my Lady Countesse? What? haue the Lords of England, be∣cause you haue tongue at will, made a Charter, and hyred you to bee their Orator and Aduocate? where∣vnto the Countesse replied: Not so my Lord, for they haue made to mee no Charter, but that Charter which your Father made, and which your selfe confir∣med, swearing to keepe the same inuiolably and con∣stantly, and often extorting money, vpon promise that the Liberties therein contained should be faithfully ob∣serued, you haue not kept, but without regard to ho∣nour or conscience broken. Therefore are you found to be a manifest violator of your faith and oath. For where are the Liberties of England so often fairely engrost in writing? so often granted? so often bought? I therfore though a woman, and all the naturall loyall people of the Land, appeale against you to the Tribunal of the feare∣full Iudge, and Heauen and Earth shall beare vs wit∣nesse, that wee are vsed vniustly, and God the Lord of reuenges right vs. The King abashed at these words asked her, if shee did not looke to obtaine her suite vpon fauour, in regard shee was his Kinswoman? whereun∣to shee answered: That seeing hee had deni d that which the Law gaue, how could shee hope to obtain her suit by fauour? Therefore (said shee) I doe appeale to the presence of Christ, against also those your Councel∣lors, who bewitch and dull your iudgement, and draw you out of the path of truth, gaping onely after their own commodity. But the King (saith Paris) remained incorrigible, and the Lady lost both her charges, hopes and trauell. (82) Thus harsh were the former yeeres to the King and Kingdome: let vs see what more gentle An. 1253. An. reg. 37. or rougher accidents rise vnto vs in the next. But it then the first little better appeares; for the King hauing bought out the time which Simon de Mont∣fort had in the gouernment of Gascoigne (which now he giues to Prince Edward) was truely aduertised, that Guasto de Biard was turned Spanish, and labored The king of Spaine claunes Ga coign. by all the meanes hee could to plucke that part from the English obedience. Alfonse K. of Spaine, claimed the same by vertue of a Charter made ther∣of by Henry the second, confirmed by Richard and Iohn Kings of England. Simon Earle of Leicester thus displaced, to let the world see that hee would not Simon Earle of Leicester refu∣seth high honour in France to a∣uoid the suspiti∣on of disloialty to England. for any preferment incurre the suspition of disloi∣alty, refused most honorable offers, which, (after the death of Lady Blanch, Queene Dowager, and Rectrix of France,) the French Nobility made him, if he would with his counsell and Force helpe to su∣staine that Monarchie, while Lewis their king was absent. In the meane time the king of England (all old matters being buried in obliuion, vpon hope of future amendment) for aduancement of his mar∣tiall Pilgrimage had large aides granted him in Par∣liament; but vpon condition that hee should now at last, once for all, submit himselfe to gouerne by a Law, not at his pleasure, confirming the Charters of Liberties, against the breakers whereof a most solemne curse was pronounced by the kings assent. The Archbishoppe, Bishoppe, and the rest of the Magna Charta confirmed, help the king to mony. Prelates pontifically apparelled, pronounced that curse with Tapers burning, which when they had throwne away vpon the pauement, where they lay extinguished and smoking, the King (hauing laid his hand on his breast all the while,) sware to keepe all Liberties vpon pain of that execratory sentence; as he was a Man, a Christian, a Knight, and a King The kings oath to obserue that confirmation. annointed and crowned. The businesses of Gascoigne soone after called him to a neerer warre, whether vpon his promise made to the Gascoigns, he set saile, leauing his sonne Prince Edward, and his kingdome to the gouernment of his Brother, the Earle of Corn∣wall, and the Queene his wife: his arriuall there gi∣uing a light and stay to all the affaires therof. Such Holds as held against him hee reduced to obedi∣ence, but with too faulty a Clemency sparing most open Traitors, whereas if an Englishman had offended, he was sure to smart for it, and that rather more then lesse. (83) His feare now was, lest the Gascoigns should draw in the Spaniards, and relinquish his Soueraign∣ty. The king reque∣steth the king of Spaines sister to be giuen for wife to his sonne Edward. To preuent this, hee verie prudently and sea∣sonably sent Ambassadors to Alfonse King of Spain and Castile, to desire that the Lady Elianor his si∣ster, might be giuen in marriage to Prince Edward. The motion was well approued, and besides that they brought Letters Patents from the King of Spaine, in which, among all other Clauses it was conteined, that the King of Spaine did quit his claime and whole right, which by vertue of any Grants from Henry, Richard and Iohn Kings of England, he had, or The King of Spaine quitteth his claime to Ga coigne. ought to haue. Hereupon hee sends both for his Sonne (whom the king of Spaine desired might be conuaied to him, onely with a noble intent to see and doe him honour) and for his wife the Queene. Among other Acts of sincerity and loue, Alfonso sent to the King of England good aduise: that, af∣ter the example of good Kings and Princes, he should be The king of Spaines aduise to the king of Eng∣land. a Lambe toward his Subiects, and Seruitour Lion to Aliens and Rebels. Simon Earle of Leicester with a gallant Troupe of Souldiers offered his seruice to the King, who admiring the Earles charity, receiued him with all ioy possible: at which reconcisiation to a better estate, and to gouerne them, who haue willing∣lie His most noble protestation. elected me, for their Lord, in modest, iust and honou∣rable maner. These words exhaled ioyfull teares from off many of the hearers, and the Ambassadors returned to deliuer the newes of this acceptance, who from thenceforth was King of Romans, that is Emperour elect, which title is vsed till they receiue the Crowne imperiall; though to all other purpo∣ses he is Emperour, so that King of Romans seemes The king of Romans what and who. to answere to the Title of Caesar, which vnder the ancient Roman Emperours was giuen to the heire apparent of the Empire or Coadiutors. After the German Ambassadors were gone, the King permit∣teth his brother to send some ouer to sound the truth of the Electors and Peoples affections, which The English tongue in the dayes of Mathew Para agreeable to the Dutch. (in regard the English were originally Germans, and by late affinitie incorporated, and for that English (saith Paris) was in a sort agreeable to the Almain tongue) they found entire, and with that certitude returne. The King of England hereby seemed to haue his designes for recouery of Normandy, great∣lie strengthned, the Almaines and French hardlie brooking one the other; but howsoeuer, sure it is that his brother the new King, had occasion to spend the golden Oyle, which was so long in gathe∣ring, to maintain the light of this Imperiall lampe; and without question hee might bee liberall, for he was reputed to possesse so much ready coine, as would euery day for tenne yeeres afforde him an hundreth marks vpon the maine stocke, without The huge sums of ready money which Richard King of Romans had of his owne at his Election. reckoning his rents & reuenues in Germany, and the English dominions. The Earl 6. Cal Iun. di Ascension . was soon after crow∣ned King of the Romans, at Aquisgraue, by Conrade Archbishop of Colein, with great pompe & solēnity. (90) In the meane time, while his brothers royall preparations were in hand, the King being for a weekes space at the Abbey of S. Albans, cer∣taine masters of Oxford brought a great complaint against the Bishop of Lincoln, for some encroach∣ments vpon the Contra antiqua statut & liberta∣tes. Paris. ancient liberties of that Vniuersitie, to whom the King was gratious and assigned a day; & Matthew Paris, whom the King in honor of his learned paines, admitted euery day to his table, and Chamber, said to him vpon this Complaint; Mat Paris. in hist: ma ori. The Vniuersity of Oxford the se∣cond Schoole of the Church next Paris. prote∣cted by the king My Liege, for Gods loue haue a care of the shaken State of the Church. The Vniuersity of Paris (the Nurse, and mother of so many holy Prelates) is not a little disqui∣eted. If as the same time the Vniuersity of Oxford should be disturbed, which is the second Schoole of the Church, yea the fundamental base thereof, it is greatly to be feared, least the whole Church do fall to ruine. Whereunto the King made answere, God forbid that should happen at all; but chiefely in his daies. Which the Parlia∣ment then at hand, he accordinglie prouided for, to their contentation. The memory of the King seemes by this to haue beene excellent, for beside that hee recounted to Paris all the Kings of England which had beene Canonized Saints, all the Princes Electors, and great Princes of Germany and France, he called to minde the names of about two hun∣dreth and fifty Baronies in England. (91) At this Parliament, (which was exceeding great) holden at London, the King in sight and view of all the people, brings forth his younger sonne Ed∣mund attired like an Italian of Apulia, (which Coun∣try The King com∣mend the cause of his sonne Ed∣mund for the kingdome of Si∣cilia. is a member of the Kingdome of Sicilia) and vsed this speech: Behold here good people, my Sonne Ed∣mund, whom God of his gracious goodnesse hath called to the excellencie of kingly dignity; how comely and well worthy he is of all your fauors, and how cruell and tyran∣nicall Note that by this it appeares Edmund was not deformed a Hen∣ry 4. did after∣ward alleage. they are, who at this pinch, would deny him effectu∣all and timely helpe, both with aduice and money. The summe of all was to draw a vast contribution from the Clergie for atchieuement of this shadow (it pro∣ued no better) into his Coffers. Neuertholesse he ob∣tained a grant of aboue fiftie thousand Marks, vpon couenant that the liberties of the Realme should be really and finally once for euer established: which was done. There were present in this Parliament six Archbishops, Canterbury, Yorke, Dublin, Colin, Messana in Sicilia, and Tarentum in Apulia. The politike Ger∣mans knew what they did in choosing Richard their King, for they saw a cloud of gold and siluer would dissolue it selfe into showres among them at his ar∣riuall; and all elections of strangers turne to their profit, because none is chosen that relies wholly vp∣on the rents of the Empire. (92) It was a worthy care in this King, that when A. Do. 1258 A. reg. 42. by the prouision of his brother Richard King of Ro∣mans, there arriued in the riuer of Thames fiftie saile of German Ships, laden with corne to relieue the great dearth, which then raigned through the Land, he caused proclamation to be made, That no Citizen of London should buy any of that corne to store vp, which they were wont to doe, to the intent they might sell it the dearer afterward, to such as wanted. But no warning, The practise of Londoners to engrosse corne forbidden by the king. praiers, aduises, nor sense of wants were able to make him frugall of his expense; whereby he was miserably streightned, neither would the Laitie in Parliament contribute anything, but (hammering some great attempts in their thoughts) in plaine words concluded, That they neither would, nor could any longer endure such (they called them) extorsions. Moreouer they there vttered many greeuances, and Simon Earle of Leicester complained of the dishonor and iniury done him by William de Valence, calling him Traitor; so that against the Session to be holden vpon prorogation, he, the Earle of Glocester, and Marshall, confederated themselues and (pretending the feare of strangers the Kings fauorites,) determi∣ned to come strong to Oxford at Saint Barnabas day. The Barons combine. They also sent messengers to the King of France, praying at least so much assistance, as that he would not hinder the good purpose which they held of ordeining and setling the troubled estate of England. They had also taken order to watch the Mat. Paris. pag. 940. Ports a∣gainst strangers. Thus they prepared to abate (as it seemed) or banish the loftinesse and insolencie of Poictouines and of other Forreiners, by whom the King was powerfully lead, for they despaired of re∣dresse at his hands, who like another Proteus (as Pa∣ris saith) tooke all shapes vpon him to serue his turnes, and then slipt out at his pleasure, no promi∣ses, or ties being strong enough to hold him. These were the beginnings of bloody euils, and the seede∣sparks of those factious fires which afterward brake forth, from the sight and sense whereof, many thou∣sands were taken by death, whose mortall stroake of pestilence raged ouer England, specially among the poore through scarcity of food. (93) When the time appointed for the Parlia∣ment at Oxford was come, the seditious Earles and Barons (with whom Pontifices, ne di∣cam Pharisai, &c. Mat. West. sundry Bishops had taken Coun∣sell against the King the Lords annointed) repaired thi∣ther, and sternely propounded sundry trayterous Articles to the King, to which they required his as∣sent. The chiefe points were, That the King would vnfainedly keepe and obserue the Charter of liberties, which he had so ofen granted, and sworn to maintaine in∣uiolable; That such a one should be in the place of Chiefe Iustitiar who would iudge according to right, without respect to poore or rich, &c. Then they renewed their confederacie, solemnely swearing, That neither for life nor death, nor loue nor hate, they would be arawne The Barons take an oath among themselues. to relent in their purpose, till they had cleared England (in which themselues and their Forefathers were borne) from vpstarts and aliens, and had procured laudable Sta∣tutes. Those turbulent Nobles had yet a further plot, then all this; which was first broached (saith Mat: Westminster) by the disloyall Bishops, which Mat. West. was, that 24. persons should there be chosen, to haue the whole administration of the King and State, and yeerely appointment of all great Officers, reseruing onely to the King the Primos accubitus in canis &c. Mat. West. Ibidem. The prouisions of Oxford. highest place at meetings and salutations of ho∣nour in publike places. And because they would not be crossed in their purposes, they * came exquisitely ar∣med and appointed, that so the King and his Aliens should be enforced, if they wold not willingly assent. To al these their ordinations the King and Prince Edward was en∣forced to sweare, for feare of perpetuall imprisonment, the traiterous Lords hauing by an Edict, threatned death to all that resis ed Whereupon all the Peeres and Prelates tooke their Corporall Oath to be faithfull in this their infidelitie, and made all who would abide in the Kingdome, to sweare they would stand to the try∣all of their Peeres: the Archbishops and Bishops so∣lemnelie accursing all that should rebell against it. The Mat. West. Mat. Paris. Monkes themselues detesting this impudent trea∣son, aske with what forehead, especiallie Prelats, durst thus impaire the Kinglie Maiestie, expreslie against their sworne fidelitie to him? This coniuration they so prosecuted, that when William de Valence the Kings halfe-brother, denied with Oathes to render vp any Castle which was giuen him, the Earle of Leicester, and the rest of the Barons answered, they would either haue his Castles or his head. This violent procee∣ding so terrified the Poictouines, that sodeinely they left Oxford, and shortly fled into France, where also the Barons had made them odious. Hugh Bigod, brother to the Earle Marshall, was made chiefe Iu∣stitiar. The people, seemed wholy theirs, which made the Barons so rough and peremptory in all their conferences, that when the Lord Henrie sonne to the King of Almain, refused to combine or take their oath, without his Fathers consent, they round∣ly bad him know, That if his father himselfe would not hold with the Baronage of England, he should not haue a furrowre of earth among them. And least anie thing which might tend to their securitie, should seeme to be omitted, they vsing the Kings name, comman∣ded London to stand vpon her guard, by keeping their Cities gates carefully shut, & by maintaining strong watches night by night, vpon pretence of danger to the Realme through the practises of stran∣gers, and after they dispatched thither certaine fit A∣gents, who in the Guilde-hall made known their commission, which was directly to vnderstand, whe∣ther they would i utably adhere to the Barons and obey The City of Lon∣don oines with the Barons to re∣d sse the king∣dome. their constitutions, by manfully aiding and effectually sup∣plying them in the common cause. Whereunto the Ci∣tizens condescended, binding themselues thereunto vnder the publike seale of London. (94) The Barons did as yet forbeare to declare, what those reformatorie Prouisions should be, be∣cause the Earle of Gloucester (a principall man among them) was in danger of death, whose sicknesse did perplex & suspend their proceedings, & the maner of his maladie did put them in doubt of their owne safeties, making them grow in distrust of their Cooks, their butlers, and sewers, for the Earle his body break∣ing out into pustules, and his haire, nailes, teeth and skinne it selfe, falling away, was (as many others, of which some died) thought to be poisoned. But whi∣ther they were or no, the Poictouines and strangers had the blame laid vpon them, to make them the more o∣dious to the Commons. But the Earle partly recoue∣red his health in time by the benefit of medicines and diligent attendance. The Mat. Paris p. 951. poisons were said to haue beene tempered in the house of Elias a Iew afterward baptized. The King himselfe perhaps would not haue beene sorry, if that he, Simon Earle of Leicester and some few others of the Barons had beene with God, for howsoeuer his body was among them, yet his heart was not at quiet, which in this wise well ap∣peared. For being in the moneth of Iune vpon the riuer of Thames in his barge, the aier sodeinly grew darke, and there ensued a terrible shower with thun∣der and lightning, of which the king impatient com∣mands himselfe to be set on land at the next place which was Durham house, whereas then, the Earle of Leicester lay. The Earle being thereof certified The King feares the Earle of Lei∣cester more then thunder and lightning. came out to entertaine him, saying, Sir why are you a∣fraid? the tempest is now past: whereunto he answered with a seuere looke: I feare thunder and lightning aboue measure, but by the head of God, I doe more feare thee then all the thunder and lightning of the world. Whereunto the Earle replied: My liege, it is iniurious and incredi∣ble, that you should stand in feare of me, who haue alwaies beene loyall both to you and your Realme, whereas you ought to feare your enemies, such as destroy the Realme and abuse you with bad Counsels. The Barons therefore re∣maining firme in their first purpose, send messengers abroad to will all such as had beene wronged by the Kings halfe-brothers and other Poictouines and stran∣gers to present their greeuances to the Barons, and to prosecute them. Moreouer (because sundry other petty-tyrants of the English nation, encouraged by their example, had exceeded their limits, in oppres∣sing their inferiours) they procured the King to Commissioners to certifie what oppressions in euery Countie. appoint foure Knights Commissioners in euerie shire, to enquire of all such iniuries, and certifie the same vnder their seales within a certaine time li∣mitted. (95) The Barons in the meane time neglect not their enterprize, at whose instance (principally of Officers put from their places. Hugh Bigod the new chiefe Iustitiar) Philip Louel the Kings Treasurer, for abuses committed in the Kings Forrests and game about Stony-Stratford, and many Officers of the Exchecquer, were likewise re∣moued, to giue roome to such as the Barons better li∣ked. The Sherifs likewise of Shires, their practises, and extortions, were diligentlie seene into, and it was The abuses of Sheriffes noted and prouided against. ordeined, that as well the giuers as takers of bribes should be seuerely punisht. The welsh seeing these und proceedings in England, the peace & reflorish∣ment whereof they feared, labored for reconciliation but could not then obteine it. (96) Richard King of Romans, hauing a desire to A. Do. 1259 A. reg. 43. The King of Ro∣mans suspected of the Barons, arriues in Eng∣land takes an oath. see the King his brother, and his lands in England, not without a purpose to bring an Armie, or such a num∣ber of men as might greatly strengthen the King a∣gainst the Barons, as they suspected, was aduertised that they prouided for his resistance aswell by land as sea. This made him, his wife, and sonne, to lay aside that purpose, and to arriue in a priuate ma∣ner at Douer with a small traine, in which there were onely two Earles, and about nine Knights. The king met him with great congratulation at the Sea side, but nor King, nor hee could bee suffered to enter in∣to The King not suffered to enter his own Castles. Douer Castle, because (forsooth) it was the prin∣cipall Key of England; for the safegard whereof they openly exacted an Oath of him at Canterburie in this manner. The holy Gospels being laide vpon the Pulpet in the Chapter-house of Canterbury, the Ba∣rons reuerently brought in thither the Kings of Eng∣land and of Almaine; then Richard Earle of Glocester (for Simon Earle of Leicester was gone with others into France, to deale with the King and States there∣of about a perpetuall league) standing in the midst openly, and in humble sort cals Richard King of Ro∣mans vnto him, by the name onely of Richard Earle of Cornwall, who obeyed accordingly, to whom hee distinctly ministred the Oath following: Heare all men, that I Richard Earle of Cornwall sweare vpon the holy Gospels, to bee faithfull and forward to re∣forme with you the Kingdome of England, hitherto by the counsell of wicked men too much deformed. And I will be an effectuall Coadiutor to expell the Then the Barons too. Rebels and troubles of the Realme, from out the same. This oath will I obserue vpon paine to forfeit all the lands I haue in Eng∣land. On the other side (had the King known how to vse it) there fell out such dissention between the Earles of Gloucester and Leicester, that Leicester de∣parted from England discontented, saying, he tooke no ioy to liue among men so mutable and deceitfull. Neuerthelesse such meanes were vsed, that these two chiefe Captaines of the Barons, brake not forth into any farther diuision. Thus whiles the Barons v∣sing the Kings name, disposed of all things, and Simon de Montfort Earle of Leicester, was gone with others to transact with the French about an indissoluble league; the King himselfe through desire not to Polyd. Vergil. lib. 16. be interrupted with forraine matters, if warre should rise at home, or through want of money or better aduise, was induced (if not betrayed) to an act of little honour, though it carried with it the face of profit and setled quiet. (97) For (the affaires of the realm thus strange∣ly The King sailes ouer into France to demand resti∣tution of Nor∣mand e. managed) the King in person sailes ouer into France, there to demand a peaceable restitution of such Signiories as Philip & Lewis (Father of this Lew∣is) had iniuriously withdrawne from his father King Iohn. The French replied, that no restitution was due for many respects, specially, because the Guil. Gemeticēs. anci∣ent grant made to Rollo the first Duke of Normandy, was not voluntary, but extorted by feare and force of Armes, in the dayes of the weake state of France. The King hauing Ypodig. Neust. no disposition to recouer his claimes by battell, and destitute of money where∣with to wage an Armie, but principally for that his owne Peeres and people stood on their guard against him, did Pol. Verg. l. 16. vnwillingly ratifie a conclusion; the Arti∣cles whereof were, that the King of France should quietly hold the Dukedom of Normandy, and Earle∣dome of Angiou ( Paul. Aemil. Iohn Tilius. Ypod. Neust. Mat. Paris. Main also, Tourain and Poictou) for Polyd. Verg. saith 15 0000. Crowns in hand, and 10000. Crowns yeerely, in name of Tribute. three hundreth thousand small pounds of Tou∣rain, and vpon promise to receiue other lands to the yeerely value of twenty thousand pounds. Polydor saith, that the reputed limits of the English Pale in France, were from thenceforth the riuer of Charent in Xanctoing, and the mountaines Pyrenaees; and that hee should peaceably haue Angoumois, Quercy, and Limain, being Countries marching vpon Gascoigne, in lieu of the rest, yet so as the King of England should Iohn Tilius. hold them of the Crowne of France by homage and fealtie. Vpon these Articles the king acquitted, and for euer renounced all his challenge to Normandy & the other lands, and thenceforth abridged his Stile, and changed his Seale, vsing a Scepter in place of a Sword: whereon these Monkish and mockish verses were written. Est M. CCLIX. vtinam concordia, foelix, Andegauis, Picta-uis, Neustria, genterelictâ Anglorum, dantur tibi France, Sigilla nouantur, Nomina tolluntur, fugit Ensis, Sceptra geruntur. M CCLIX, God grant firme peace thou fix, Poictou, Angiou, Normans, to France range yon, New Seales are made; old Styles forsaken, Downe laid the Blade, Scepters vp taken. (98) The King (at these vnworthy rates) hauing secured himselfe from the French, labours to vindi∣cate A. D. 1260. A. reg. 44. the Regall power out of the vsurping Barons hands (whose ouer-toppings at home had driuen him to those forraine indignities,) alleadging, that the Oath which his sonne and hee had taken at Ox∣ford, was voide, in regard it was compulsorie, that the Barons also, who pretended the profite of the Realme, sought onely their owne honour and gain, Ann. 1261. An. Reg. 45. contrary to their decrees. For his more security Polyd. Vergil. l. 16. he takes the Tower of London, preparing force by the helpe of his brother King of Romans. There follow∣ed a grieuous perturbation of the Realm, although at this time it brake not forth into the extremity, Armes being laid downe for a little space. Edward the Kings eldest sonne would not trauerse the oath he had made at Oxford, but held with the Ypod. Neust. A. D. 1262. An. Reg. 46. Barons for the present. The King, the Queene, and his se∣lected friends, still remaine vpon their guard in the Tower; where hee (in the yeere before) had burst The King seifeth the ancient stocke of the Crowne. vp the locks of the ancient Depositum, or dead stocke of the Crown, to employ against the Barons. Peace was notwithstanding brought about againe by the Queenes speciall diligence; and Douer and Roche∣ster Castles (whither hee went in person) are deliue∣red vnto him. This makes him resolue to pursue the Barons; the rather also for that the French King (who much condemned the Barons vniust courses) had promised his assistance. Henry therefore thrusts out the Barons Chancellor, & Chiefe Iusticiar, pla∣cing Walter Mertō & Philip Basset, men of much more loyall affections in their roomes. The Barons hea∣ring of this, hasten in Armes to Winchester, where the King was, who (hauing intelligence by his faith∣full Clerk, Sir Iohn Mansel) got back into the Tow∣er of London. The King of France was made Vm∣pire The Barons driue the King from Winchester. in the quarrell. The Addit. ad Par. cause was heard at Ami∣ens, where hee gaue iudgement with the King of England against the Barons, pronouncing all the Sta∣tutes A. D. 1263. An. Reg. 47. and Acts made at Oxford, to bee vtterly void: prouided neuerthelesse, that the Charter of Liber∣ties which King Iohn had made to the English nation, should in no sort bee thereby infringed. This pro∣uiso animated Simon Earle of Leicester, and the Ba∣rons, Simon Montfort in apparant fault. to maintaine all the Statutes of Oxford, (be∣cause they were pretendedly founded vpon that Charter) notwithstanding that iust iudgement which King Lewis had giuen. The secret confede∣racy with Lewelin Prince of Wales, ministred to the Barons no little encouragement; who about this time wasted the Dominions of Prince Edward in the Marches of Wales. This iudgement of the French King did much disaduantage the Barons, of whom diuers being drawne with perswasions, gifts, and promises, reuolted from Simon Montfort. There was now a taking of Townes and Prisoners on all hands. Prince Edward (who now was wholy for his Father in despite of the Barons) takes the Castel of Bristol, and fines the City at a thousand pounds. Simon Montfort executeth his greatest reuenges vp∣on the Queenes friends which were Aliens, not spa∣ring the Kings. Marching forward, he recouers Glo∣ster A. D. 1264. An. Reg. 48. Castell, enters Worcester and Bridgenorth; lastly, surpriseth the Ile of Ely, subduing that fastnesse or fenny strength to the Barons vse. Sir Iohn Mansel the Kings Councellour, fearing the euent of things, flies secretly from the Tower where the King was. Henry sonne to the King of Almain, was after this taken by the Barons. Meanewhile Prince Edward fortifies Windsor Castle with strangers. Mutuall wearinesse at length begat a desire of peace, and the Additam. ad Mat. Paru. King had yeelded that the Statutes of Oxford should stand: but the Queene was vtterly against it, not without cause; for it did enfeeble the arbitrati∣on which the French King had made. The Queenes opposition in this point was knowne to the Londo∣ners; which put the baser sort into so lewd a rage, An intollerable villany offered by rascals to the Queene. that shee being to shoot the Bridge from the Tow∣er toward Windsor, they with durt and stones and villanous words forced her to returne. Prince Ed∣ward vnder the conduct of the Bishoppe of Worce∣ster, came from the Castle of Bristol (by reason of quarrell betweene his men of warre and the Bur∣gers) and contrary to his promise entred into Wind∣sor Castle; but afterward going forth to meet Si∣mon Montfort at Kingston vpon Thames, with purpose to offer peace, the said Simon got Windsor Castle, & would not permit him to depart. At London yet in a Parliament, matters were pieced againe, and the Kings side grew stronger dayly. (99) There were with him his brother King of Romans, his sonne Edward, William de Valence (whom Prince Edward had brought out of France) Iohn Co∣myn The Scots aide the King. of Scotland with a multitude of valiant Scots, (whose King was Henries sonne in law,) Iohn de Ba∣liol Lord of Gallway, Robert de Brus, &c. with whom hee marcheth from London to Oxford, where the Rendeuou of his friends and forces was appointed. The king takes Northampton & many chiefe . The King meaning to make that place (where his chiefe blow was giuen him) his chiefe seat to con∣sult for remedies, dismissed thence all the Students, by reason of their multitude, W. Rishāger MS. i Bibliotheca D. Rob. Cotton Baronetti. being aboue 15000 (saith William Rishanger who then liued) of those only whose names were entred into the Matriculation booke, amongst whom being so many young Nobles, the King doubted how they might bee affected to the Barons. Whereupon many of them went to Nor∣thampton, where then the Barons were strong; and thither the King comming with his hoast, and brea∣king in at the Towne-walles vpon Passion Sunday, en∣countred his enemies, amongst whom the Chron. M. S. Fox in . Hollinsh. Stu∣dents of Oxford had a Banner by themselues aduanced right against the King, and they did more annoy him in the fight, then the rest of the Barons: which the King (who at length preuayled) had vowed sharpe∣ly to reuenge, but that his Councellors told him, those Students were the sonnes and kindred of the Great-men of the Land, whom if hee punished, euen the Nobles who now stood for him, would take Armes against him. The King there tooke Simon Montfort the younger, and foureteene other principall Barons and Milites vexilli∣feros. Knightes Banerets, forty other Knights, besides Esquiers, &c. Encouraged with this successe, hee aduanceth the Standard royall toward Nottingham, burning and wasting the Barons lands wheresoeuer hee came. To diuert this tempest, Simon Montfort hastneth to Lon∣don, and attemptes the taking of Rochester Castle, which Iohn Earle of Warren defended for the King: who comming to raise the siege, takes Kingston Ca∣stle, which belonged to the Earle of Gloucester; then vnexpectedly falling vpon such as maintained the siege of Rochester, while Simon was absent, kils verie many, and scatters the rest. Then seiseth hee the Castle of Tunbridge, and therein the Countesse of Gloucester, whom, notwithstanding he nobly set at large, as professing not to warre against Ladies; from thence the Cloud of power borne vpon the winges of indignation, speedes to Winchelsea, and receiues the Cinque-Portmen to grace, setling at last in Lewis, where himselfe rested in the Priorie, and his sonne in the Castle, whither the Barons sent letters to him, protesting their loyall obseruance to his person, but all The Baron letters. hostisity to their enemies which were about him. (100) But the King flaming with desire of reuenge, sets slight by these vowed (but fained) fidelities; and The kings letters returnes a full defiance as to Traitors, professing that hee takes the wrong of his friends, as his owne, and their enemies as his. The King of Almaine, Prince Edward, The king of Al∣maines letter, & Prince Edwards. with other of the Kings chiefe friends, sent their like letters of defiance. The Barons, loath to let it come to the hazardous and vnkind triall of steele, (though The Barons send the second time. they then encamped about sixe miles from Lewis,) not acquitting themselues in this repulse, iterate their message, with an offer to pay to the King thir∣ty thousand pounds, in satisfaction of such hurts as their people had done through the Realme; so as the Statutes of Oxford might stand. The king of Almaine (whose honour they had toucht, and spoild part of his inheritances) hindred all harkening to any their offers. (101) It came to a battel; wherein Simon de Simon Earle of Leicester takes the kings of Eng∣land and of Almaine in the battel at Lewis. Montford commands his traiterous Army to weare white Crosses on breast and backe, to shew they fought for Iustice; great was the effusion of bloud on both parts; chieflie of the Scots vpon the Kings side, & of the Londoners vpon the Earles side; whose Batta∣lion, (lead by the Lord Segraue,) Prince Edward most furiously charged, and had the execution of them for about foure miles, which he pursued the more blou∣dily, in reuenge of the extreame disgrace which they had offered vpon London Bridge to the Queene his Mother, and after that the Garrison of Tunbridge fol∣lowes, and slew many at Croyden. But while the Prince spent himself in that reuenge, his Father (who, hauing his Horse slain vnder him, had yeelded him∣self prisoner to Simon de Montfort) his vncle the king of Romans, and others great Peeres were taken, and the whole hope of that day lost. There fell in all on both sides, about fiue thousand. Prince Ed∣ward returning from the slaughter of the Londoners, ed at Westminster on the Northside of the high Al∣tar, vnder a faire monument of stone, with his Por∣traiture, and the armes of him and others of his house, and manie noble houses of that time. (108) Richard the third sonne of King Henry and Queene Elenor, (bearing the name of his vncle Rich∣ard, King of Romans Almaign,) deceased in his youth, and lieth at Westminster, enterred on the south-side of the Quire. (109) Iohn the fourth sonne of King Henrie and Queene Fleanor, (bearing the name of King Iohn his grandfather,) deceased yong, and at Westminster his bones lie enterred with his brother Richard. (110) William the fift sonne of King Henry and Queene Eleanor, is mentioned by Thomas Pickering, (a Priest of the monastery of Whitby in Yorkeshire, who liued in the time of King Henrie the sixt, and wrote a large Genealogie of the Kings of England, and their issues,)'and that he dying in his childhood, was bu∣ried within the new Temple, by Fleete-streete in London. (111) Henry the sixt sonne of King Henry and Queene Eleanour, is also reported by the same Picke∣ring, to haue died yong, and to be buried at Westmin∣ster. (112) Margaret the eldest daughter of King Henry and Queene Eleanor, borne the twentie sixt yeere of her Fathers raigne. 1241. was the first wife of Alexander the third, King of Scotland, married to him at Yorke, An. 1251. by whome shee had issue, A∣lexander and Dauid, (who died both before their Fa∣ther without issue,) and Margaret Queene of Norway, wife of King Erike, and mother of Margaret the heire of Scotland, and Norway, that died vnmarried: shee was Queene twenty two yeeres, liued thirtie three, deceased before her husband, in the twenty third yeere of his Raigne, the first of her brother Edwards in England, and was buried at the Abbey of Dunferin∣ling in Scotland. (113) Beatrice the second daughter of King Hen∣rie, and Queene Eleanor, was borne at Burdeaux in Gascoigne, Iune. 25. An. 1242. of her Fathers raigne 27. At the age of eighteene yeeres, shee was married to Iohn the first Duke of Britaine, (sonne of Iohn the last Earle of the same,) and had issue by him, Arthur Duke of Britanny, Iohn Earle of Richmont, Peter, and Blanch married to Philip, sonne of Robert Earle of Ar∣toys; Eleanour a Nunne at Amsbery, and Marie married to Guy Earle of Saint Paul: when shee had beene his wife twelue yeeres, and liued thirty yeeres, shee de∣ceased in Britany, in the first yeere of the Raigne of her brother King Edward, and was buried at Lon∣don, in the Quire of the Grey Fryers within New∣gate. (114) Catherine the third daughter of King Henry and Queene Eleanor, was borne at London, An. 1253. of her fathers raigne 37. Nouemb. 25. being Saint Ka∣therines day, whose name was therefore giuen vnto her, at the font, by Boniface Arch-Bishop of Canterbu∣rie, her mothers vncle, who christened her, and was her Godfather. Shee died yong and at Westminster her bones lie enterred, with her brother Richard and Iohn, in the space betweene the Chappels of King Edward and Saint Bennet. EDVVARD THE FIRST, LORD OF Monarch 47 Edward 1. IRELAND, AND DVKE OF AQVI∣TAINE, &c. THE FORTIE-SEVENTH MO∣NARCH OF ENGLAND, HIS RAIGNE, ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER X. E Dward, who followed K. Henry in wearing the English Crowne, but far Ann. 1273. out-went him in all regall vertues, was abroad at the time of his fathers death, still pursuing his high desires for the Holy Warres: wherein what he performed, (being yet but a Prince,) against the publike enemies of Christians, it shall not bee impertinent to touch, before wee come to his actions as a King; hauing already re∣membred, with what valour and felicity hee had subdued his Fathers domesticke enemies, setled the peace of his Kingdome, and reestablished the raines of Soueraignty in his Fathers hands, which those potent Rebels had formerly extorted. (2) King Lewis of France, whose perswasions had enflamed this noble-spirited Prince to associate him in this glorious quarrell, hauing first set forth for the enterprise, lay now in siege of Tunis in Africa; where Prince Edward with all his forces arriuing, the French King (greatly reioycing in his wished Prince Edward at Tunis in Afri∣ca. presence,) together with the King of Nauarre, and other Princes of his Army, went forth to meet him, and receiued him in the kisse of Peace. This place which they beleaguered, was (as then) not great, yet by reason of the situation, Paul. A yl. in Lud. 9. it greatly impeached the Christians in their passages through those Seas; be∣ing built out of the scattered ribs, and wasted ruines of that mighty and famous City Carthage, riual once in Maiesty and Ambition with ancient Rome, as con∣tending with her about the Empire of the World. Therefore to secure the Mediterranean Seas, it Mat. Par. was thought necessary to beginne that enter∣prise for Asia, with this in Africa; but not long after Lewis yeelding vppe his holy Soule to God at the siege, and sicknesse (by reason of the heates in those Regions, for it was August) raig| of homage) to seize vpon the whole Fee of the said Prince, marcht with an Armie into Wales; his good fortune there was accidentally augmēted by a prize, which foure shippes of Bristol tooke about the Isles of Sillie, wherein the daughter of Simon Montfort late Earle of Leicester, (who, according to a secret contract betweene their friends, went to be giuen in marriage to Lewelin) and Aimericke her brother were surprised, but shee found honourable vsage of the King her neere kinsman. (11) Meanewhile, Lewelines affaires, by the man∣hood and diligence of Pain de Alias Cam rcijs Canusijs, and others, A. D. 1278. who had takē West-Wales in, & broght it to the Kings peace, thriuing but poorely, and the saide Prince feeling the foundations of his safetie beginning ma∣nifestly to faile, and shrinke from vnder him, Lanquet. in Epit. Chr ex Tho. Walsing. sued for peace, and had it vpon such termes, which in likely-hood were not (as Hist. ngl. l. 17. Polydor Virgil would haue it seeme) granted by King Edward, lest he should leese his cost, and care, by warring against bogs and moun∣taines. In the conditions of Peace (which was procu∣red Fabian. with great difficulty) the most remarkeable (as carrying the shew of a farre greater riches in the possession of the Welsh, euen at that time, then some preiudicated can easily beleeue) Dauid Powel. Pag. 334. & 335. were these. 1. That the Prince should pay to the King for his peace and goodwill, fifty thousand pounds sterling, the Thom. Walsing. in Edw. 1. and in Ypod. Neust. pay∣ment whereof, should bee in the Kinges will and grace; that is (as wee conceiue it) how much thereof the Prince should pay or not pay, and when. 2. That the said Prince should haue the Isle of Anglesey in Fee-farme of the King, to him, and to the lawfull is∣sue of his body in generall taile, for fiue thousand Marks readie money, for Or in Garsuma, as some vse the word. gressom, or a fine in hand paid, & the yeerly rent of a thousand Marks. The rest of the articles (being about eight,) amounted to so much as a plain Conquest, or dissolution of the Prin∣cipality of Wales, after Lewelins death, who was to en∣ioy the same, during his time vpon conditions. (12) Now whereas the said Lewelin had three Brethren, Dauid (whom King Edward fauoured) Ow∣en, and Rodericke, it was enioyned to him at this conclusion (made by the Lord Robert Tiptoft, and certaine other Da. Pow. p. 336 Commissioners, vpon eyther side appointed) that hee should appease and satisfie his said Brethren: but because Dauid was afterward a principall Actor in the calamities which fell vpon himselfe, his house, and his Country, we must not neglect to speake somwhat particularly of him. This Gentleman for some causes, Tho. Wals. flying into England from his Brother Lewelin, for his faithfull seruice to the State of England, was there honoured (con∣trary to the manner of his Nation) with the order of Knighthood, and receiued also, by the bounty of King Edward, for his maintenance, the Castle of Denbigh, with lands to the yeerly value of one thou∣sand pounds, and the Daughter of the Earle of Der∣by (being then a Widow) to wife: with all which boun∣ty, the King did but entertaine a reuealer of his secrets, as Fabian. in Ed. 1. An. 1279. some (not improbably) doe affirme. The State of Wales thus composed, and the Castle of Da. Pow. p. 336. Abe∣ristwith (which seemes to bee the same, that by Tho. VVals. Fabian. an∣other is said to haue beene built in West-Wales at Lā∣pader Vaur) being built by King Edward for assuring those parts, the King (as he was munificent, and roi∣all) the more to tie Lewelins faith, gaue vnto him the Lady, of whose surprise at Sea we haue mentio∣ned, to be his consort, honouring the Nuptials with his owne presence, and his Queens. And whereas Alexander King of Scots came about the same season into England to treat with Edward concerning im∣portant affaires, and had formerly sent to the Welsh warres, certaine aides of the Scots, the said Alexander being iealous (on his Countries behalfe) that those aides might bee interpreted, to haue beene sent vpon duty, obtained letters testimoniall from King Scottish aides protested not to bee sent of duty to K. Edward, but of loue. An. 1282. Edward, declaring that they were not sent of duty, or in respect of seruice due. (13) Though King Edward were thus desirous to gaine the Welsh- Nation rather by his largesse, then puissance, hauing so honourably vsed Lewelin, hee could not yet retain their hearts; for whether it were (which Da. Pow. p. 336. some, to amoue the note of ingratitude, & turbulency from them, affirme) for that there was partiality vsed by the English officers in distribution of iustice vpon the Marches, or (which seems to some as likely) for that they aspired in vaine to their ancient liberty (being miserably seduced with certaine Poly. Verg. l. 17. blind pro∣phesies) the Welsh betooke themselues afresh to Armes: for Dauid himselfe, whom the King had laden with so many benefites and graces, became to them a principall leader, and to giue them full assu∣rance of his fastnesse to their cause (reconciling him∣selfe to his brother the Prince) he sodainely and trea∣cherously vpon Palme-Sunday seised the Castle of Tho. VValsing. Hawardin, surprising Roger de Clifford, a noble & famous Knight, whom the King had dispatched in∣to those parts, as Iusticiar of all Wales, and slaying such vnarmed men as offered to resist that violence, whence marching, hee laid siege together with the Prince his brother, to the Castle of Ruthlan. Da. Pow pag. 337. Rodolan, doing many outrages, and killing all such as they could reach, yea som (as it is said) whose ransomes Arc . of Cant. apud Da. Powel. Pag. 339. they had taken, though against Lewelins mind. And while King Edward spent his Easter at the Vises in Wiltshire, and afterward visited the Queene his mother, who liued in the Nunnerie at Ambresberie, the Welsh, vnder diuers Captaines, had taken sundry of the Kings Tho. Walsing. strengthes and Castles in diuers parts. There are extant the Da. Pow. p. 336. Copies of certaine grieuances, exhibited to Iohn Archbishoppe of Canterbury by the Welsh, at such time as of his owne accord (so say the said Co∣pies) hee interposed himselfe (without the Kings leaue) to settle their quiet; which Articles in shew, (for the answeres of the English are not set downe) containe indeed sundry great abuses; but the fate of Wales had now inuolued them all in a desolating warre, and made them vncapable of reliefe. For after the Archbishoppe had trauelled in person to the Prince of Wales, being then in Tho. Walsing. Snowdon, and retur∣ned without any Conclusion made, Antiq. Brit. in vit. Iob. Peckam. comming vn∣to Oxford, hee there sent out the lightnings of Polyd. Verg. l. 17 ex∣communication against him and his seduced adhe∣rents: Wee say seduced, because they did capitulate in such sort, as if they had beene able to make their party good. (14) But though the old Brittish Principality was now to expire, yet it must bee confessed, that as Lew∣elin A. D. 1283. had an end vnworthy of his bloud, being rather vnfortunately slaine, then otherwise, so on the o∣ther side the same hapned not without reuenge: for at one encounter in open field, Gilbert Earle of Glo∣ster lost William Valence (a yonger Cosen of the Kings) slaine in the fight, and foure other Knights, though at the same time also, many of the Welsh left their bodies dead vpon the earth, together with the victo∣ry to the English: but the day certainely which they had of King Edward himselfe, may not bee forgot∣ten, in which the Welsh slew the Tho. Walsing. King Edward repulsed by the Welsh. Lord William de Audeley, and the Lord Roger Clifford the yonger, and got foureteene Ensignes from the English Armie, K. Edward being enforced to enter into the Castle of Hope for his safety. These things, though not con∣temptible, but rather certaine deceitfull fauours, v∣suall when the ruine of a Nation is by God decreed, could not vphold the cause. For first the Prince, ha∣uing vpon some occasion withdrawne himselfe with some few others from his Army, which then was in the land of Buelth, was set vpon by two principall Gentlemen, Iohn Giffard, and Edmund de Mortu∣mar, with their Forces, and there by the hand of one Dan. Pow. p. 374. Adam Francton was runne through with an Horse∣mans staffe, who at the first being vnknowne, had his head strucken afterward off, and presented to King Edward, at whose commandement it was Tho. Walsing. crowned with Iuie, and set vp for a certain time vp∣on the Tower of London. (15) This (saith the Pag. 374. History of Wales) was the end of Lewelin, betrayed by the men of Buelth, who was the last Prince of Britaines bloud: and with him ( Polych. li. 7. Tho. Walsing. whom one Versifier calleth the Captaine, the praise, the law, and light of Nations, and another defaceth with as many ignominious attributes) the liberty of that people did also die. For it was not long but that King Edward subdued in a manner all Wales, & reseruing to himselfe the Coast-Towns & strengths toward the Sea, distributed the In-land Countries to the Lords his followers: therein prudently fol∣lowing the counsell of Augustus, who thus vnder pre∣tence Cambden. in Comitat. Flint. of defence for the Prouinces, had the brideling of all their forces at his pleasure. Neuerthelesse the whole flame was not as yet extinguished, for Dauid the Princes Brother, and Polych. l. 7. c. 38. chiefest firebrand in this fa∣tall An. D. 1284. combustion, was at large: who being taken & brought to King Edward at the Castle of Ruthlan, could not obtaine admission to his sight or speech, but was amanded, and sent Prisoner to Shrewsburie. Thither the King, hauing setled the State of Wales, repairing to a Parliament which he had summoned, there to bee kept after Michaelmas, caused Dauid (ha∣uing first had a Legall triall Tho. Walsing. ad A. D. before certaine Iusti∣ciars for that cause appointed) to bee seuerely put to death, by Ra l. Cestr. in Polych. l. 7. hanging, heading and quartering, whose head was set vp at London, and his quarters in foure other principall Cities of England, to the terrour of all ingratefull and disloy all persons. The Welsh line thus thrust from the Principality, King Edward vpon Saint Marks day had a sonne borne vnto him in Wales at Caernaruon, who also was called Edward, and raigned after him; and that with the birth of a new Lord, the Welsh might bee inured to A. D. 1285. new lawes, the King established (by example of K. Iohn his Grandfather in Ireland) the English lawes and offices among them. (16) But the King that hee might not seeme for∣getfull of his French affaires, repayred into France, where hee obtained sundry fauours, though they A. D. 1287. continued not long, and sate in person there with the French King in his Parliament at the City of Paris, as a Lord or Peere of that Realme, in respect of such lands as hee had in those parts. Nor may A. Do. 1289. here bee forgotten an Act of singular munificence, and charity in this renowned King, for the redemp∣tion Tho. VValsing. of Charles Prince of Achaia, sonne and Heire of Charles King of Sicilia, who had some yeers before beene taken in a battell at Sea before Naples, by the Gallies of Sicilia, fighting on the behalfe of the King of Arragon: for whose speedier enlarge∣ment, K. Edward disbursed thirty thousand pounds sterling, and gaue his owne Knights in hostage, till Charles had sent in his two sonnes, Robert and Lew∣is, as pledges to Alfonse king of Arragon: which done, Pol. Verg. l. 17. King Edward returned into Gascoigne, and there tooke vpon him the Crosse, in full purpose to finish the iourney which once he had vndertaken, and had in part performed against the Sarazens. (17) In the meane time, to purge England (whi∣ther hee was now returned) from such corruptions, King Edward confiscates the Iewes, and fines his Iusticiars. and oppressions, as vnder which it groaned, and not neglecting therein his particular gaine, hee banished the Iewes out of the Realme, confiscating all their An. 1290. goods, leauing them nothing but money to beare their charges. And whereas they by their cruell v∣suries had one way eaten his people to the bones, & his Iusticiars (like another kind of Iewes) had ruined them with delayes in their suites, and enriched them∣selues with wicked corruptions, hee (like a father of his Country) put all those from their offices who were An honourable way to enrich a King. found guilty (and they were Tho. Walsing. almost all) and punished them otherwise in a grieuous manner, being first in open Parliament conuicted. The particulars whereof, by reason of the most iust and commendable example, Iohn Stow ex Adam. Merius. Chron. Dunst. &c. we will not thinke needlesse (the order of naming them only changed) to recapitulate here. Sir Ralph Heugham, Chief Iustice of the higher Bench, 7000. marks. Sir Iohn Louetot, Iustice of the lower Bench, 3000. marks Sir William Brompton Iustice, 6000. markes. S. Salomon Rochester, chiefe Iustice of Assises, 4000. M. S. Richard Boyland, 4000. Marks. S. Thomas Sodentone, 2000. Marks. S. Walter de Hopton, 2000. Marks. S. William Saham, Iustice, 3000, Marks. Robert Littelburie, Clerk, 1000. Marks. Roger Leicester Clerk, 1000. Marks. Adam de Stratton (beside other riches incredible) 32000. Markes. But with one Sir Thomas Weyland the Kings Stow in Edwa. chiefe Iustice, (being found belike most false) he dealt farre more sternely, for he not only sei∣sed vpon all his moueable goods and Iewels (which he had done to others) but also vpon his immouea∣ble, and banisht him moreouer out of the Kingdome. At which time the King constrained all his Iustices to sweare, that from thence forth they would take no pension fee or gift of any man, except only a break∣fast, or the like present. O diuine and still necessary se∣uerity, onely able to breake the pernicious combination of men that vnder the profession of law & offices of Iustice make merchandize of honor, iustice, law, and conscience, which cannot in the end but ring forth ruine, and con∣fusion. (18) That tempest now, which * Thomas Ersilton, a Scottish Rimer, is said to haue obscurely propheci∣ed, Scottish affaires, Hect. Bo. trans. lib. 13. alluding to the troubles of Scotland by reason of King Alexanders death; hapned about these times; which raised so great, and bloody contentions, that it had almost blowne vp the regalitie of that king∣dome by the very rootes. For when, by the violent fall from his horse, King Alexander had most vnfor∣tunately lost his life, that Realme was wofully desti∣tute of any apparent heire, sundry persons stāding in competition for the same. These things were thought to be foreshewed from heauen by many Hect. Bo. lib. 13. fearefull presages, as extraordinary Meteors, Flouds, Fires, and Pestilence. But King Edward intending to sway that affaire, and being vpon his way toward the borders, the death of his royall consort, and Queene, which he lamented while himselfe did liue, called him backe to the celebration of her funerals: as her ex∣cellent A. D. 1291. virtues did well deserue: To our Nation shee was a louing mother, & (saith Walsing. one) the Column, and pillar (as it were) of the whole Realme. In her ho∣nour the King her husband (who loued her aboue al worldly Creaturs) caused those many famous As Charing Crosse, and at Wal∣tham, S. Albans, Dunstaple, &c. tro∣pheis, or crosses to be erected, wheresoeuer her noble coarse did rest, as it was conueyed from Lin∣colneshire to buriall in Westminster. Nor coulde any thing, but the respect to other weighty matters, now presently in hand, with-holde our pen from paying to her memory a farre more copious com∣mendation. A. D. 1292. (19) Those mourning offices as mournfully per∣formed, the King repaires into Northumberland, whi∣ther the greatest, and sagest persons of the Scottish na∣tion being come, He . . li. 14. themselues hauing sought to him, Edward makes claime to the superiority of Scotland, and requires that the Competitors woud quietlie assent to his award, alleaging that the Crowne of that Realme was held of him: for more credit to which assertion he vouched sundry Marian. Scot. VV . Mal. Henry Hu . Ro. Houed. &c. books, and actss, whereunto the Scots replied, Tho. VValsing. in Edward. 1. That they were igno∣rant, that any such superiority belonged to the King of England: neither could they make answere to such things without a King the head, vpon whom it lay to heare such a denunciation, and protested, that other answere they ought not as then to giue, in regard of their Oath, which after the death of Alexander their King they had made one to the other, and the same to keepe vnder paine of excommu∣nication. Whereupon the King deliuered to them his letters Patents, in which he acknowledged, that the comming of those Scots, on this side the water of Twede, should not be at any other time vrged to pre∣iudice them, for comming againe into England: that is, That their example should not so be drawne to an argu∣ment of King Edwards right ouer them, as if they were to come againe vpon dutie; so prudentlie iealous were these Patriots of their Countries liberty. (20) The names of the Competitors were these, ac∣cording to Walsingham: Erick, King of Norway; who ap∣peared by his Attorneys; Florence, Earle of Holland; Robert le Brus, Lord of Annandale; Iohn de Baliol, Lord of Galway; Iohn de Hastings, Lord of Abergeuenny; Iohn Comin, Lord of Badenaw; Patrick de Dunbar, Earle of March; Iohn de Vesci, on his Fathers behalfe; Nicholas de Sules; William de Rosse. These all peacea∣bly Tho. Walsingh. Ranul Higd. Polychr. lib. 7. submitted themselues, for so much as concerned their seuerall titles to the Scottish Crowne, to the finall a∣ward and arbitration of King Edward, passing thereof an authentick Instrument vnto him; who hauing gi∣uen caution to restore the realme of Scotland, (within a certaine prefixed time,) to that party to whom the Crowne thereof should be adiudged, had seisin deliue∣red to him, the better to put the sentence in executi∣on, or (say the writers of that nation) they giuing him Bellendens transl. of Hect. Boe. lib. 14. power to constraine the parties to stand to this sen∣tence. The whole carriage of which weighty busi∣nesse, being so diuersly related and censured by the writers of both nations, (though for the present it be not material, both Kingdoms now blessedly acknow∣ledging one absolute Superiour) wee will so trace the steps of truth in a middle way, as resoluing neither to impeach the action of that glorious vmpier, nor pre∣iudicate the right of our noble sister nation. The State of Scotland now was not without manifest perill; for the Scots Hect. Boe. lib. 14. denying that their Kingdome was in anie point subalterne to the Crowne of England, and King Edward either perswaded that it was so, or resoluing and plotting now to make it so, would not neglect the aduantage of this So Boniface cals in his letters to king Edward. Akphalisis or want of a known head in Scotland. (21) Vpon full ventilation therefore and scan∣ning of all rights, the maine doubt rested vpon Lord Brus and Baliol, for the residue might seeme rather to affect the honour of hauing pretended title in blood to a Diademe, then to haue colour to contend with either of them. Great was the aduise, and delibera∣tion (as there was cause) which King Edward tooke therein, for not trusting to his owne iudgement, hee caused (saith Hect. Boe. lib. 14. Hector Boetius) twelue of the best Clerks or learned men of Scotland, and twelue of England to concurre as Assessors with him in that great decision. (22) While this weighty cause was in debate∣ment, A. D. 1293. there fell out deadlie strife betweene the Eng∣lish and Normans, occasioned by one of them casually slaine by the English; which mischiefe the King of France forwardly nourisht, as thirsting for the dutchy of Gascoigne, which best he might attain by troubling the forreine affaires of King Edward, whom they saw now entangled at home in so weighty emploiments. Whereupon the Normans slew sundry of the English, and hung vp one vpon the mast of a Shippe, whom they had taken at Sea: but, ere long after, threescore A famous Sea∣victorie of the English against the Normans English ships encountring with two hundreth saile of Normans, laden with wines, after a most bloody bat∣tel (wherein many Thom. Walsingh. aith 1500. thousands of the French were slaine) tooke, with their whole fleete, their full re∣uenge, and brought them into England. (23) At last yet King Edward returning to Ber∣wicke, hauing with him the said twenty foure Asses∣sors, Hect. Boe. lib. 14. as it were a iury of either nation, Edwardi ad Pap m apud Tho VValsingh. and, with the good will and assent of the Scottish Lords, gaue so∣lemne iudgement with Baliol, as being descended of the eldest daughter of Dauid, Earle of Huntington, a Iudgement gi uen by king Ed∣ward. yonger sonne of Scotland; whose issue (the line of the elder brother being extinct) was to inherite, without question. But the strife being betweene the descen∣dents of the said Dauid, of which the Lord Robert Bruce was also a principall, reasons of importance were produced, which drew many mens iudgements, lib. 14. cap. 1. to incline to him, as hauing a neerer interest to that Crowne. But according to the sentence, Baliol was solemnly crowned King of Scotland vpon S. Andrews day, and, in Christmas following, repaired to King Ed∣ward, A. D. 1294. at Newcastle vpon Tyne, and Hect. Boet. transl lib. 14. Cap. 2. there (against the minds of many Scots) did homage vnto him for the whole Kingdome of Scotland. (24) Meanetime the French King pursued the re∣uenge of the Normans, demanding restitution, and ci∣ting King Edward iudicially to appeare to answere such wrongs, as were done in Aquitaine: who, (desi∣rous to settle his owne affaires at home, or, as some write, Polychr. eager vpon a match for himselfe in France) while he discouered either his vnwillingnes to ap∣peare in that kind, or to warre, suffered himselfe by a French deuise, to be meerely deceiued, and put out of his possession of Gascoigne, to the great mischeife, and disaduantage of the English: whereupon K. Edward highly incensed, called a Parliament at London, where Iohn king of Scotland was present; and had the full con∣sent A. D. 1295. of the whole Realme, to regaine that honestlie by the sword which was craftilie gotten away by a cunning trick, Ypod. Neustr. renouncing to the French his homage for Aquitain. Wales also was at the same time full of troubles; but the fires of rebellion, there rashly kindled, were, not long after, quencht with the blood of the Actors, and thousands of their Complices. (25) Baliol hauing thus obtained the Crowne A. D. 1296. of Scotland, and finding his party, by the homage which he had made to King Edward, much empai∣red among the Scots, who greatly repined thereat; for regaining their loues, Tho. UUals. attempted a secret combi∣nation with the French against the English; which Edward ignorant of, and Hect. Boe. li. 14. requiring him by vertue of his homage to aid him with all his powers against the King of France, Tho. VVals. discouered (by Baliols delaies, and trauerses) the said conspiracie. Whereupon he aduanced forward against the Scots with a puissant armie to Newcastle vpon Tyne: The first blood which was drawne was of the English, of whom, the Scots Tho. Wals. Polyd. Verg. lib. 17. saith but one hundreth. slew almost one thousand in a village vnder the lea∣ding of one Robert de Ros, who had fled from King Edward: The City of Carlile likewise was assaulted, and the County of Cumberland spoiled by seuen Earles of Scotland, and their companies, which to Ed∣ward was not greatly displeasing, (as was said) for that the first hostile acts were done by them, whom he had a full purpose to subdue, that at last he might bee sole in Albion; which, had not God reserued for other times, we might wonder he effected not. (26) King Edward therefore presented himselfe A. D. 1297. before the strong Towne of Berwick with a mighty host, there to auspicate his entrance to a conquest of Scotland; and, after summons sent to the Towne, a∣bode one whole day, without offer of violence: The Townesmen refusing to render, had a victory of the English Marriners, who rashly entring, with twentie and foure Ships into the harbour, were repelled with the losse of foure of their vessels, which was soone reuenged by the forceuble taking of Berwick, where Tho. UUalsingh. Berwick taken by king Edward. Hector Boetius saith, there was exercised great lib. 14. cruelty by the English. In the Towne, the Flemish Merchants (who were smothered by the English with fire) had a very strong house in the maner of a Tow∣er, from whence they leueld, at the entring of the English, with darts, and iauelins, one of which casual∣ly slew Richard of Cornewal, a gallant Gentleman bro∣ther to the Earle of Cornwal, which, in an army hea∣ted with former contumelies, for the Scots vpon the slaughter and repulse which they had made of the English marriners, published certaine rimes in deri∣sion, as ( Fabian. VVhat wenys King Edward with his Longshancks, To haue wonne Berwicke, all our vnthancks? &c.) together with the remembrance of many fresh shrewd turnes, might stirre vp bloody effects. After the Towne was thus taken, the Castle after stood not long out, but rendred it selfe. Tho. VVals. Sir William Dowglas, captaine therof, was detained prisoner, and (as Fab. some write) Sir Robert Bruce: others were suffered to de∣part, vpon oath, to beare no armes from thenceforth against the King of England. The losse of this im∣portant Berwick the key of Scotland. Towne, and Castle was very great, for it was the key, and common Bulwarke of Scotland. (27) While the English, at this place, were busie to cast a very deepe ditch, to hinder the sodeine in∣roades of their enemies, Iohn King of Scotland sent two religious men to the King of England with Tho. Wals. let∣ters; in which, alledging that he was by Oath bound to defend his owne kingdome, and people, he renounced his ho∣mage, and fealtie, as extorted by violence, and void in it selfe, being made without assent of the three estates of his Realme. The resignation was admitted, King Edward commanding his Chancellor to record the same for perpetuall memorie, as a iustification of his procee∣dings. (28) The Scots hereupon, vnder the conduct of the Earles of Bucquhan, Menteth, Strathern, Ros, A∣thol, Marr, and other of their nobility, made an incur∣sion into England, whence with the spoiles of two re∣ligious houses, and other booties they returned: But Patrick Earle of Dunbarre came to King Edwara sub∣mitting himselfe; and the Castle of Dunbarre (by this submission being vnder King Edwards protection) was regained by Scots: For recouerie, or surregaining whereof, the King sent Iohn Earle of Surrey, and Sus∣sex, and William Earle of Warwick, who were entertai∣ned with battel by the Scottish nation, of whom the English, Tho. Walsingh. Hect. Bo. l. 14. Fabian. after cruell fight, obtained a victory of great importance, the chase holding about eight miles, in which the slaughter was not small. The siege of Dunbarre being reinforced. King Edward had it yeel∣ded vnto him, at his comming, wherein were taken three Earles, sixe or seuen Barons, besides many knights, and Esquires, which were all sent prisoners to diuerse Castles of England, and (if some say true) not put to the sword (as Hector transported perhaps with hatred to Edward writes) contrary to his word, and faith giuen. (29) King Edward knowing as well how to vse a victorie, as to get it, hauing a present spirit vpon all aduantages, and turnes of fortune, takes the Castle of Rocksbrough, and (for a finall end to this affaire) marcheth to Edenburgh it selfe (the chiefe Towne of Scotland) which Hect. Boet. l. 14. Polyd. Virg. lib. 17 Tho. VValsing. was shortly rendred: Then tooke they Striueling also, and draue Baliol to the Bellind. transl. of Hect. Boe. lib. 14. Castle of Forfar: where Iohn Comin Lord of Strabogie submitted himselfe to King Edward. About this time there came to the English campe great numbers of Welsh souldiers, with whom he releeued many of the Eng∣lish Welsh aid against Scotland. Irish aid against Scotland. footemen, tyred with seruice, sending them backe into England. Thither also came the Earles of Vlster with bands of Irish. (30) The King of England prospering thus, pas∣seth with his army ouer the Tho. VVals. Scottish Sea, where while he kept the feast of Saint Iohn Baptist Polyd. Ver. li. 17. at Perth (or Saint Iohns Towne) there came messengers from Baliol, and the Lords his factors, to sue for mercy, which was granted vpon condition, that they should render themselues to him as his subiects. lib. 14. Hector Bo∣etius saith, that after this agreement (wherein Tho. VVals. An∣thonie Bishop of Durham was vsed) Iohn Comin brought Baliol, void of all kingly habiliments with a The Baliol re∣signes. white rod in his hand, to the English campe at Mon∣tros, where he resigned his whole right that he either had, or might haue to the Crowne of Scotland, into king Edwards hands, and made thereof a formall Charter in French, and at the same time also (for feare of life) gaue his sonne Edward for hostage, and assu∣rance of his fealtie; by which final disclaime, the Lord Bruces right might seeme now vnquestionable. But this resignation being thus made, king Edward re∣turnes to Berwick, where Bellind. transl. of Hect. Boe. lib. 14. ca. 3. all the Nobles of Scotland (at a Parliament there holden) were sworne to be loy∣all, and true subiects to king Edward for euer after: and Tho. Wals. hereof a solemne instrument was sealed by the said Lords (of whom Iohn Comin of Badenaw was first) bearing date at Berwick in the twentie fifth yeere of the reigne of their Souereigne Lord King Edward. (31) Iohn the late King, was sent to the Tower of London, and there was honourably attended, hauing liberty for twenty miles about. The Scottish Lords were confined within Trent, ouer which Riuer they might not passe toward Scotland, vpon paine of life: The custody of Scotland was committed to Iohn de Warrenn, Earle of Surrey and Sussex, and the Trea∣surershippe thereof to Hugh de Cressingham, but William de Ormesby was ordained Iusticiar, with this particu∣lar commandement, that hee should take the homa∣ges and fealties of all such as held lands of the King. And the more to shew his purpose, vtterly to dis∣solue the distinct Regality of Scotland, and to vnite it to the English Monarchie, as hee had done Wales. hee tooke out of Edinbrough the Crowne, Scepter and Cloath of Estate, offering them vp at Fabian. Saint Edwards shrine in Westminster, if the Author mistake not, for at Saint Thomas at Canterbury, Tho. Walsingh. hee offered vp Ba∣liols Crowne saith another; and (besides many other Acts tending to the abolishment of the Scottish Name, which Bellind trans. lib. 14. cap 7. Hector relates, as the burning their Records, abrogating their lawes, altering their forms of diuine seruice, and transplanting all their learnedst men thence vnto his Vniuersity of Oxford,) hee tooke out of the Tho UUals. Abbey of Scene the Cambden in Scotland. . 709. saith it was a stone inclosed within a woodden Chaire. Marble Chaire, in which the Kings of Scotland were wont to bee crow∣ned, and sent the same to Westminster, for Priests to sit therein at Celebration. This Chaire is the same vpon which was engrauen, the famous Propheticall Distichon: Ni falat fatum, Scoti quocunque locatum Inuenient lapidem, regnare tenentur ibidem, If Fates goe right, where ere this stone is pight, The Regall race of Scots shall rule that place. Which by whomsoeuer it was written, we who now liue, finde it happily accomplished. But these great Acts of this yeere brought to the Commons of England small commodity, vpon whom the charge of the warres lay heauily, and it is not often found, that the people gaine much by their Princes Conquests. (32) The force of Scotland with a greater force being thus for the present broken, who would sup∣pose, An. 1298. that it could once again haue lifted vp the head, and that chiefly by the particular vertue of a priuate man, as it after hapned? which hee had the more opor∣tunity to doe, for that the King of England was di∣uersly diuerted by occasion of warres in Gascoigne for recouery of his owne, and for aid of his friends in Flanders, whom the French did afflict in hostile manner. The Captaine of the reuolted troupes in Scotland, was one William Wallace (the sonne of Bellendens transl of Hect. Boet. l. 14. c. 4. Sir Andrew Wallace of Cragie Knight, though some Tho. Wals. Polyd. Verg. lib. 17 vp∣on hearesay, write contemptibly of his course of life, as of a publike robber) who, by the assistance of such as were outlawed, for refusing to doe their homage to King Edward, draue William de Ormesby (the Kings Iusticiar) out of Scotland. Which King Edward hearing, discharged Iohn Comin of Badenaw, and the Earle of Bucquhan from their confinement, to the entent, that hee might by their endeuours, the sooner settle matters, but withall hee gaue Iohn de Warren Earle of Surrey commission to leuie an Ar∣my: and the king (loath to bee hindred from his other destinations) easily yeelded to such requests as were propounded on the Scots behalfe for that time. The voyage which hee had then in hand, was to transport from Winchelsea an Armie, to assist the Earle of Flanders his confederate. (33) England at this time was not without great discontentments, which Humphrey de Bohun Earle o Hereford and Essex Constable of England, and Roger Bigot Earle of Norfolke, Marshall of England, did countenance; for present satisfaction whereof, the King yeelded (among other things) to confirme Magna Charta, and Charta de Foresta, and that there should no Subsidie nor taxation bee leuied vpon the people, without the consent of the Prelates, Peeres, and people. But before this time, and while the King was absent out of the land, the Scots vnder the leading of VVilliam VVallas, put to Tho. VVals. Hect. Boet. lib. 14. Polyd. Vug. l. 17. flight, the Earle VVarren and all the English Forces which were with him, taking them at aduantage, as they were passing ouer a narrow Bridge, neare vnto the Castle of Striuelin: the slaughter of the English was not smal. There Hugh de Cressinghām Treasurer of Scotland for King Edward, feel in battell, whose dead body for speciall hatred borne vnto him, the Scots did flea, diuiding his skinne among them. The King hea∣ring of this ouerthrow, commands the Lordes of England by his letters to bee ready to assist the said Earle VVarren (his Custos or Guardian of Scotland) with their Forces, in the Octaues of S. Hilary at Yorke, and also to proclaime such of the Scottish Lords as came not thither, enemies of the State; but they kept themselues within Scotland, and came not. Whereupon the English Captains marched to the rescue of the Castle of Rocksbrough, whence VVilliam VVallace fled vpon notice of their approach to raise his siege. But King Edward (aduertised of these ac∣cidents) hauing taken a truce for two yeeres with the A. D. 1299 King of France, by mediation of Bonifacius the Pope, who interposed himselfe (non tanquam Iudex, sed a∣micabilis Compositor, saith VValsingham, not as a Iudge, but as a friendly Composer, made hast into England, where his presence was extremely wanting: but in his way home, at a Towne called Tho. Wals. Ardeburg, all the Scots almost, which hee had brought with him to serue in the Flemish warres, forsooke him, and went to Paris. (34) After his arriuall in England, hee summoned a Parliament at Yorke, giuing the Scots a day to ap∣peare thereat; which they not doing, nor acknowled∣ging that they ought to doe, hee entred with a mightie Army into their Country, his Nauy laden with vi∣ctuals coasting along; which by contrary winds be∣ing holden off for a time, put the Scots the rather in hope of victory, by reason of the scarsity of proui∣sions among the English; but three dayes before the Scots appeared, the shippes came, and plentiful∣ly refresht the fainting souldiers. Hereupon the king led forward his people, and vpon the next morning, a terrible showt being heard from the Scottish host, the English ranne to armes; but the kings horse (af∣frighted with the sodaine tumultuous noise) as hee was putting foote in stirrup, threw him to the earth, and striking with the hinder heeles, brake two of his ribs; who neuerthelesse vpon the same horse procee∣ded in person to the battell. VVillam VVallace, who had wonne to himselfe, by many his hardy enter∣prises a singular opinion among the Peeres, and people, hauing set his Scots in array (whose numbers far exceeded the English) vsed euery where this short speech vnto them in stead of Orations, I haue brought you to the King, hop gifyee kun. For their more secu∣rity, hee had Tho Walsingh. The bloudy o∣urethrow at Pawkirke. fixed betweene them and the English, certaine Pales or stakes, bound together with ropes, which the English Vauntguard brake downe, and came to strokes. The first which fled, were the Scot∣tish Horsemen, leauing their Infanterie, or battels of foote, open to that great destruction which fol∣lowed, the victory resting clearely to the Eng∣lish. (35) Our Scottish Hect. Boet. l. 14. Author writes, that by rea∣son of emulation against VVallace, the Scots burning in mutuall hatred, made the enterprise easie to their enemies; which as it may bee verie true, so certainely there was scarse anie battell betweene the two Nations, in which more Scottish bloud was spilt then in this, for thereof Vniuers. Cosin. lib. 2. Sebastian Munster seemes to meane, saying, that there were slaine threescore and ten thousand, which though wee take not to bee the true number, (for some haue Tho. VVals. Ypod. Neustr. Reu. Cest. Polychr. lib. 7. threescore thousand, Fabian, & Harding. others not so many) yet shewes it that the slaughter was vast, as it could not otherwise bee, the Scottish footmen va∣liantly Polyd. Ver. lib. 17. Hect. Boet. l. 14. fighting as it were to the last man. Bloud worthy to haue beene shed on both sides, against another kind of enemy, then Christians, the deformity of which effusions may iustly represent to vs the blessed estate of our now setled vnion. This victory was obtained by the English vpon Saint Mary Magdalens day, at a place called Fawkirke: from which VVilliam Wal∣lace, opening his way with his Sword escaped. The Welshmen deserued ill of the King at this iourney, for that they foreslowed to charge vpon the Pallisa∣do, or fence of the Scots, in hope (the English being vanquished, which by the inequality of their num∣bers, they presumed would happen) that them∣selues might ioyntlie with the Scots, execute vpon King Edward the hatred, which they bare him for the Tho. VVals. euils hee had brought vpon their nation. After this victory the King tooke sundry places, and re∣turned into England by Carlile. (36) The two yeeres truce formerly taken be∣tweene the English and French, was now, by the A. D. 1300. interceding of Boniface Bishoppe of Rome, turned to a setled peace, who (among other things) brought it about, that K. Edward should marry the French kings sister Margaret, and Edward the kings sonne, the same kings daughter, though (saith Walsingham) hee aduanced not the good of his Realme by this match in a∣ny point. To this affinity were added the greater strengthes of a domesticke quiet, for the king (whom wars had together made renowned, & aged) graciou∣sly & wisely yeelded to confirm such grants of laws and liberties, as the Earles and Barons (the preten∣ded Conseruators of the Peoples interest,) did de∣clare, were by his promise to bee confirmed to them at his returne from Scotland: and which hee accordingly did, in a Parliament holden at London, vpon prorogation, in Quindena Paschae, where for their fuller satisfaction hee Tho. Wals. left out this Clause in the end, Saluo iure coronae nostrae, sauing the right of our Crowne: and what at this time was wanting, he made vp afterward in a Parliament at Stamford. (37) But that he might not seeme willing to de∣ny the Pope any iust request, or not to know the The Baliol set at liberty. sweetnesse of an others freedome, he deliuered to the hands of the Popes Nuntios, Iohn the late King of Scotland, (vpon their assuming for King Edwards in∣demnity,) whom they conueied to his inheritance in France, where (vpon euery side vnfortunate) he re∣mained as vnder the note of a false seducer, and of a periur'd person in king Edwards iudgement, and with out anie part of his regall office ouer the Scottish na∣tion; who found that the peace which King Edward made in other places, did but turne to their more grieuous affliction; for albeit they had gotten Striue∣lyn by surrender of the English, and began with an immortall desire of their ancient Liberty, to assem∣ble again vnder William Wallace, yet the time was not come of their deliuerance; for King Edward (accor∣ding as it was formerly appointed,) hauing accom∣plished his marriage with the French Kings sister at Canterbury, made it his whole affaire, to finish the annexation of Scotland to the Crowne of Eng∣land. (38) He therefore accompanied with his sonne, and a dreadfull Army, pursued the matter so close, that whereas the Scots had gotten together againe in exceeding great numbers, vnder their seuerall Cap∣taines, (whose Hect. Boe. lib. 14. Enuie had caused Wallace to giue vp all such authority, as the commonwealth of Scot∣land had formerly granted vnto him, for preseruati∣on of their freedomes,) and flying before King Ed∣ward, whose fortune in warre had worthily made him terrible; that day (in Walsinghams iudgement) had beene irrecouerably fatall to the Scottish name, if the English had beene able to haue followed them in their Armour, ouer their bogges and mountaines, or that the Welsh had with their naturall nimblenesse supplied the same. Sure it is, that Edward held himselfe so fast in possession, that hee neither would grant the Scot∣tish Lords their Baliol to raigne ouer them, (which they requested saith Walsingham) nor suffer them to redeeme such lands of theirs, as hee had giuen to the English among them. (39) Armes failing, and the Scots hauing made their way in the Court of Rome, procured inhibito∣ry The Pope in∣terposeth his authority for the reliefe of Scot∣land. letters from the Pope, which were brought by one Lumbardus into Scotland: but the King swea∣ring a Per sanguinem Dei. terrible oath, said, that he would not desist. Ne∣uerthelesse the Scots, after a few dayes, requested the King to let them liue in peace till they had taken counsell of the Peeres, and of the King of France, threatning that otherwise the Pope would take the matter vpon him. But the King with a disdainefull smile answered: Haue you done homage to mee (as to the chiefe Lord of the Kingdome of Scotland) and now suppose that I can be terrified with swelling lies, as if (like one that had no power to compell) I would let the right which I haue ouer you to slip out of my hands? Let me heare no more of this, for if I do, I swear by the Lord, I will consume all Scotland from sea to sea. On the o∣ther side, the Scots did boldly enough replie, That in this cause they would shed their bloud for defence of iu∣stice, and their Countries liberty. (40) About this time the King made his sonne Edward, (who was borne at Caernaruon) Prince of The constancy of the Welsh∣mens loue to the first English Prince of Wales. Wales, and Earle of Chester, which so greatly conten∣ted the Welsh, because (in regard of his birth place) they held him as one of theirs, that when all friends did afterward forsake him (as the following raigne will shew) they alwayes stucke most loyally vnto him, expressing wonderfull loue and affection, and bewayling his heauy fortunes in wofull songs, which neither the dread of his enemies, nor length of time could euer make them to Tho. UUalsingh. forget. (41) But, in the matter of Scotland, the King not to seeme altogether to neglect the Court of Rome, ad∣dressed thither the Earle of Lincolne, and the Lord Hugh de Spenser with manifold complaints against the Scots, and iustification of his owne proceedings; how beit at the Popes request, he granted them truce from Hallowmas to Whitsontide. This very yeere, Cassan King of Tartars gloriously slew one hundreth thousand Turkes in a battell vpon the plaine of Da∣mascus, and was baptized therupon, as acknowledging the victory to come from the sonne of God: the ioy wher∣of filled England, as other the partes of Christen∣dome. (42) The iustice of the English Armes against the Scots, being now againe directly impugned by the A. D. 1302. Papall letters, comprehending sundry arguments on the behalfe of that Nation, King Edward in a Par∣liament at Lincolne published their contents, and by consent of the whole representatiue body of the Realme, returned a copious defence of his whole proceedings, with protestation, first, that hee did not exhibite any thing as informe of iudgement, or triall of his cause, but for satisfaction of his holy Fatherhoods con∣science, and not otherwise. But whereas the Pope had required the King to stand to his decision for matter of claime, hee writes, that thereunto hee would make no answere, as hauing left that point to the Earles and Peeres of his land: who with one mind directly signifie, that their King was not to answere in iudgement for any rights of the Crown of England before any Tribunall vnder Heauen: and that (by sending Deputies or Atturneyes to such an end) hee should not make the said truth doubtfull, because it mani∣festly tended to the disinherison of the said Crown, which with the helpe of God, they would resolutely, and with al their force maintaine against all men. So Polyd. Verg. lib. 17. A. D. 1303. ceased that Action, and the sooner also, for that Bonifacius had much to doe at home, by reason of some great con∣trouersies between the French and him. Meane time Sir Iohn Segraue, Lord Segraue, a renowned Souldi∣er, was sent Gouernour or Custos into Scotland, with an Army, after the Truce expired, which at the French Kings instance, King Edward had yeelded vnto for a time; Iohn Cumin, who had also beene a Competitor for the Crown, was chosen by the Scots Hect. Boe. lib. 14. for their Gouernour. (43) We may not here ouerpasse a victory (at Rosse∣lin) which the Writers of that nation celebrate, wher∣in the English were by them ouercome, howbeit A. D. 1304. there is in our Writers much variety in that relation. It is the saying of Hector Boetius, that the English were about three for one, our ancient and later authors say that the Scots had farre the Thom. VVals. Abington. Tolyd. Virg lib. 17 more people; he af∣firmes, that it was in the plaine field, ours that it was Thom. Walsingh. an Ambush; he that the Scots did put to flight, and tooke the spoiles of three whole battels, in either of which were Bellind. transl. of Hect. Boe. lib. 14. cap. 6. 10000. English, ours, that the Scots by reason of their multitudes did onely ouerbeare the Vauntgard, from which the nearest of the other bat∣tels was Pol. Virg. lib. 17. foure miles off. All agree in this that the Lord Iohn Segraue (Ralfe Confrey saith Hector) who had the point or voward of the English (whose Ge∣nerall he also was) by diuiding his army into three parts for their better reliefe, weakned so his whole force, that thereby, and his vnaduised forwardnes (impatient to stay for his other powers) he gaue oc∣casion to the Scots of such a victory. They had al∣so taken the person of the said Lord Generall, but Abington. Sir Robert de Neuilc, who with others was at diuine seruice, hearing therof, came with his troups of horse, rescued Segraue, slew many, put many to flight, and brought away backe the rest of the prisoners, with∣out Tho. VValsing. the losse of any one man of his owne. The said Scottish Chronicle makes no mention of William Walleys, at this discomfiture of the English, but giues the whole glory thereof to Cumyn, and to Simon Fra∣ser: whereas we attribute all to Walleys, and make no mention of the other, with farre lesse wrong to the immortall deserts of Walleys; for he vndoubtedly, was the only man, who kept vp Scotland, till neere the time of deliuerance. (44) The Scottish Nation (as Bel endens transl. lib. 14. Cap. 6. Hector reports) had for their warrant in conscience, and iustification of resi∣stance, the Popes iudgement, who vpon ripe deliberation in their matter, decreed (saith he) that the Scots had iust action of battell in defence of their liberties against King Edward: who not much esteeming the doome of that Oracle, vpon the other side was perswaded hee might proceed to subdue them wholy to his domini∣on: and therefore, (vpon report that the Scots were not only vp in Armes) but encouraged to greater at∣tempts by this late successe,) came in person with a dreadfull host, piercing therewith Belindens transl . lib. 14. cap. 6. through all Scot∣land, from one end thereof to the other; from Rocks∣brough to Catnes, which is the farthest point in the length of that Land, being about three hundreth miles: whither he marched by small iourneys, not an enemie appearing with power to empeach him. For they, vnable to make head, being so continually wa∣sted, did either for their safetie betake themselues to the woods, and Mountaines, with their Walleys, or wholly submitted themselues, Hect. Boet. lib. 14. cap . swearing to be true to king Edward, there being in al Scotland but one Ca∣stle (the Castle of Striueling) which stood out, and that also (vpon King Edwards returne from Catnes) was Tho. VValsing. absolutely surrendred to him; and therefore no great cause, why Hector should call King Edward false Tyrant for committing the Captaine and Garrison of that Castle to sundry Prisons: So that had not God in his eternall prouidence, fauouring the liberty of that people, ordeined some inaccessible places, and naturall strengths, where no Armie could march nor be maintained, the Scots had in all liklihood perpetu∣ally vndergone the same fortune, which we the Eng∣lish were brought into, for want of the like, by Willi∣am the first, and his Normans: (45) Therefore let prophane discourses (with their Father Epicurus and Lucretius) blush and tremble, as of∣ten as they shall dare to insin ate any thing against Gods wisdome in the Fabrick of the world, as if the Craggy, and desert places, thereof, had no vse in nature, when (omitting all other reasons of their being) the con∣seruation of kingdomes, and nations was thus by them effected. We had an Mat. Par . Herward in the Conquerours time, as well as the Scots had a Walleys in this; and we might perhaps at this houre haue beene without French mixtures, if God had prouided our Country of such Wastes, and deserts as either they or the Welshmen did enioy, who for manie hundreths of yeeres, after the ruine in Saint Peters Church at Westminster, the twentieth day of Nouember, in the first year of his Fathers raign, Ann. Dom. 1272. in the same place, and vnder the same Tombe where his brother Iohn lies with his picture also in the Arch aboue it. (60) Alphons, the third sonne of Edward and Queene Elenor was borne at the Towne of Maine in Gascoigne, as his father and mother were in their returne towards England from Ierusalem, Nouember 23. in the second yeare of his fathers raigne, 1273. hee deceased at Windsor, August 4. in the twelfth yeere of his age, 1285. and was buried at Westmin∣ster in Saint Peters Church by Saint Bennets Chap∣pell, where his body lieth vnder the Tombe of his Brothers, Iohn and Henry, his Image also there por∣traied with theirs. (61) Edward, the fourth sonne of King Edward, and Queene Elenor, was borne April 25. in the thir∣teenth yeere of his fathers raigne, 1284. at Caernar∣uan in Northwales, and after the death of Lewelin ap Griffith, in regard of the place of his Natiuity, was by his fathers Creation, with the consent of the Welsh made Prince of Wales, the first of the sonnes and heires apparant of the Kings of England, that bare that Title, which afterward became ordinary to most of the rest: hee was also Earle of Ponthieu and Chester, and being made Knight by his father at Lon∣don on Whitsunday, in the thirty fourth yeere of his Raigne, 1306. succeeded him the same yeer in the Kingdome of VVales. (62) Elenor, the eldest daughter of King Edward and Queene Elenor was borne at Windsor in the fifti∣eth yeare of King Henry her Grandfather, shee was married with all Ceremonies of Proxie to a Depu∣ty for Alphons King of Arragon, sonne of King Peter, who deceased A. Do. 1292. before the solemnizati∣on of marriage, leauing his Kingdom to his brother Iames, and his new wife to another husband, who was married at Bristow in the two and twentieth yeere of her fathers raigne, 1293. to Henry the 3. Earle of Barrie, whose Earledome lay in the East∣borders of Champaigne in France. Shee had Issue by him Edward Earle of Barrie, from whom descended the Earles and Dukes of that Country, whose inhe∣ritance by Heires generall deuolued to the Kings of Arragon, and from them again to the Dukes of An∣iou that were Kings of Sicill. Henrie another sonne of hers was Bishoppe of Troys in Champagny. Helen her Daughter was marrird to Henry Earle of Bloys; and Ioan to Iohn Warren Earle of Surrey, she was his wife fiue yeeres, and deceased 27. of her fathers raigne, A. D. 1298. (63) Ioan the second daughter of King Edward, and Queene Eleanor, was borne in the first yeere of her fathers raigne, 1272. at a City in the holy land sometime named Ptolomais, commonly called Acon and Aker, where her mother remained during the warres that her father had with the Saracens: Shee was, at eighteene yeeres of age, married to Gilbert Clare called the Red, Earle of Glocester and Hereford, by whom shee had issue, Earle Gilbert slaine in Scotland without issue; Eleanor, married first to Hugh Spencer (in her right, Earle of Glocester,) and after to William Zouch of Ricards castle. Margaret, first maried to Peter Gaueston, Earle of Cornwal, after to Hugh Audeley Earle also of Glocester; and Elizabeth Lady of Clare, married first to Iohn son and heire to Richard Burgh, Earle of Vlster in Ireland, mother of William Burgh Earle of Vlster, and Grandmother of Elizabeth, Dut∣chesse of Clarence; secondly, to Theobald Lord Ver∣don, and lastly, to Sir Roger Damary. This Ioan sur∣uiued her husband, and was remarried to Sir Ralph Monthermere a Baron, father to Margaret the mo∣ther of Thomas Mountacute Earle of Salisbury, of whom the now Vicount Mountacute is descended; shee liued thirty eight yeeres, and deceased in the first yeere of her brother King Edwards raigne, and is buried at the Fryer Austines in Clare. (64) Margaret the third daughter of King Ed∣ward and Queene Elenor, was borne at the Castle of Windsor in the third yeare of her fathers raigne, and of our Lord, 1275. When shee was fifteene yeeres of age, shee was married at Westminster, Iuly 9. in the eighteenth yeere of herfathers raign, A D. 1290. to Iohn the second, Duke of Brabant, by whom shee had issue Duke Iohn the third, father of Margaret, wife of Lewis of Mechlin Earle of Flanders, and mo∣ther of the Lady Margaret, the heire of Brabant and Flanders, who was married to Philip Duke of Bur∣gundie. (65) Berenger the fourth Daughter of King Ed∣ward & Queen Elenor, was born the 4. of her fathers raigne, An. 1276. as Iohn Eueresden the Monke of S. Edmundsburie in Suffolke, hath recorded in his booke of English Annales, but other mention there is none, but onely from him: whereby it is likely that shee did not liue to be married, but that shee died in her childhood. (66) Alice the fifth Daughter of king Edward and Queene Elenor, is by Thomas Pickering of the Monastery of Whitby, (who wrote the large Gene∣alogie of the Kings of England and their issue) re∣ported to haue deceased without Issue. (67) Marie, the sixt daughter of king Edward and Queene Elenor, was borne at Windsor, April 22. in the eight yeare of her fathers raigne, 1279. and at ten yeeres of age, A. D. 1289. September 8. shee was made a Nunne in the Monastery of Ambres∣berie in Wiltshire, at the instance of Queen Elenor her Grandmother, who at that time liued there in the habite of the same profession, although her Parents were hardly enduced to yeeld their consents to that course. (68) Elizabeth, the seuenth Daughter of king Ed∣ward and Queene Elenor, was borne at the Castle of Ruthland in Flintshire, in the thirteenth yeere of her fathers raigne, An. 1284. When she was foureteen yeeres of age, shee was married at London to Iohn the first of that name, Earle of Holland, Zeland, and Lord of Freezeland, who died within two yeeres af∣ter without Issue, and shee was remarried to Hum∣frey Bohun Earle of Hereford and Essex, Lord of Brek∣noke, and high Constable of England, by whom shee had Issue Iohn and Humfrey, both Earles successiue∣ly after their Father; Edward, that died in Scotland without issue; and William, who being created Earle of Northampton, while his Brothers liued, after their deceases, was also Earle of Hereford and Essex, Lord of Breknok and high Constable of England, and fa∣ther of Earle Humfrey the tenth of that name, and last of that house, who died without Issue male: she had also by him two daughters, Elenor married to Iames Butler Earle of Ormond, and Margaret to Hugh Courtney the first, Earle of Deuonshire. Shee was this Earles wife foureteene yeers; liued thirty three, deceased in the ninth yeere of the raigne of king Edward her brother, A. D. 1316. and was buried in the Church of S. Iames, at the Abbey of Saffron VValden in Essex. (69) Beatrice, the eight daughter of King Edward and Queene Elenor, bare the name of Beatrice Dut∣chesse of Britannie her fathers sister: she is by some Genealogists mentioned to haue liued till she was marriageable, but yet no mention being made of her match, it seemeth she died vnmarried. (70) Blanch, the ninth daughter of king Edward, and the last of Queene Elenor, is so mentioned by Thomas Pickering, and some others, but not at all by Thomas Ebraham a Monke, who made a Pedegree of the Kings of England, but shee is by the rest re∣ported to haue died in her childhood. (71) Thomas, the fifth sonne of king Edward, and the first of Queene Margaret his second wife, was borne at a little village in Yorkshire called Brotherton, Iune 1. in the nine and twenteth yeere of his fathers raigne, Ann. 1300. hee was created Earle of Nor∣folke, and Earle Marshal of England, which Earle∣domes the last Earle Roger Bigod, leauing no Issue, left to the disposition of the King his father. He had two wiues, of which the first was Alice the daugh∣ter of Sir Roger Hayles of Harwich in Suffolk, by whom hee had issue Edward, who married Beatrice the daughter of Roger Mortimer the first, Earle of March, but hee died before his father without Issue; and two daughters, Margaret twice married, first to Iohn Lord Segraue, by whom shee had Elizabeth Dutchesse of Norfolke, wife of Iohn Lord Mow∣bray (from whom the Mowbrayes & Howards Dukes of Norffolke, and Earles Marshall descended;) second∣ly, to Sir VValter Manny a Knight of Cambray, and by him had Anne wife of Iohn Hastings the elder Earle of Pembroke, and mother of Earle Iohn the yonger, that died without Issue; his yongest daugh∣ter Alice was married to Sir Edward Montacute, and had by him three daughters, Elizabeth and Ioan mar∣ried to VValter and VVilliam two of the Vffords, and Maud that died vnmarried. The second wife of this Earle Thomas, was Mary the daughter of VVilliam Lord Ros, and widow of Sir Ralph Cobham, who sur∣uiuing him without Issue by him, shee was marri∣ed the third time to VVilliam Lord Brerose of Brem∣ber. (72) Edmund, his sixt sonne by Queene Marga∣ret, was borne at Woodstocke in Oxfordshire, August 5 in the thirtieth yeare of the raigne of his Father, A. 1301. Hee was created Earle of Kent, and married Margaret daughter of Iohn, and sister and sole heire of Thomas Lord VVakes of Lydel in the Coun∣ty of Northampton, by her he had Issue two sonnes and one daughter: Edmund his eldest sonne was Earle of Kent after his father, and died vnder age without wife or issue: Iohn the yonger was Earle also after his brother, he maried Elizabeth the daugh∣ter of the Duke of Gulike, and died like vise without Issue; His daughter was Ioan, for her beauty called the faire Maid of Kent, first maried to William Mounta∣cute Earle of Salisbury, and from him diuorced, and remarried to Sir Thomas Holland, in her right, Earle of Kent, and by her, father of Thomas, and Iohn Hol∣land Duke of Surrey, and Earle of Huntington: and lastly, shee was the wife of Edward of Woodstocke, the Blacke Prince of Wales, and by him, mother of King Richard the second. This Earle Edmund was be∣headed at Winchester the 1 . of March, in the fourth yeere of King Edward his Nephew. (73) Eleanor the tenth daughter & fifteenth child of King Edward, and the last child of Queene Marga∣ret his second wife, was borne at Winchester the sixt day of May, in the fiue and thirtieth, and last yeere of her fathers Raign, being the yeere of our Lord 1306. shee deceased in her Child-hood, and was buried in S. Peters Church at Westminster, by her brother Iohn, Henry and Alfons, vnder the monument before na∣med with her picture ouer it. EDVVARD THE SECOND, LORD OF Monarch 48 Edward II. IRELAND, AND DVKE OF AQVI∣TAINE, &c. THE FORTIE-EIGHTH MO∣NARCH OF ENGLAND, HIS RAIGNE, ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XI. T Hat the Mind is not de∣riued from Parents, cer∣tainely the second Ed∣ward (called of Caeernar∣uon) might (if nothing else) abundantlie shew, being of a most valiant, wise and fortunate fa∣ther, an vnlike sonne; yet not to beginne our description of his courses, with preiudice of his per∣son, we will so temper our stile, that by his owne actions sincerely related, rather then by any ver∣ball censures the man may bee iudged. This can∣not be denied, that whereas from the Conquest till his time, England though it endured (by Gods iust iudgements) many bitter, sad and heauy stormes through some headinesse, ambition, or other sicknes∣ses of mind in the Princes thereof, yet had she Men to sway and gouerne her, and those distempers were as the perturbations incident to vigorous dispositi∣ons; whereas vnder this Edward, who could nei∣ther get nor keepe, it seemed to endure the leuities of a Child, though his yeeres, being about twenty and three, might haue exempted him from so great infancie of iudgement, as his raigne discouered. (2) Neuer came Prince to the crowne with more generall applause then he: so great hopes of doing well, his Victorious father, Edward of Thom. de la Moor. VVinchester had left vpon him, besides the right of succession, whose last warning and terrible adiurations you haue heard: with the Tho. VValsing. vtter contempt and breach whereof, to the destruction of himselfe, and his friends, hee in a manner auspicated his gouerne∣ment. (3) After that Edward had in his best maner pro∣uided for the Pol. Virg. lib. 18. affaires of Scotland, where (at Dom∣frees) many of the Scottish Hect. Boe. lib. 14 Bellind. his tran. lib. 14. cap 9. Lords did their homage to him, as they had to his Father; the first taske which hee gaue of his future behauiours at home, was a rigorous reuenge taken by him vpon Walter de Langton Bishoppe of Chester, Treasurer of England, and principall Executor of the last Will of the de∣ceased King, whose body was not as yet interred, but by the care of the Executors, conueied with fu∣nerall pompe to VValtham, and (after sixteen weekes) to VVestminster, where vnder a plaine monument the same at this present rests. The Bishoppes crime was a kind of good freedome, which hee vsed in the late Kings daies, in Thom. Walsingh. grauely reprouing the Prince for his misdemeanors, and shortning his waste of coine by a frugall moderation; and particularly, Fabian. A. R. 28. Edw. 1. for that he had complained of Peirs Gaueston, wher∣upon ensued Prince Edwards imprisonment, and the others banishment, and therefore comming now to the Crowne, hee arrested the Bishoppe by Sir Iohn Felton Constable of the Tower, and imprisoned him in Wil. Packington apud Iohn Stow. VVallingford Castle, seising vpon all his tem∣porall goods and The Abbot of Saint Albans was compelled to pay great summes which hee ought to the Bishop, and the king acquited him. Lib. Monast. S: Alban. MS. A. D. 1309. credites, there being not a man in the Realme who durst speake a word on his be∣halfe, (so great displeasure hee had conceiued, see∣king vtterly to ruine him) till afterward by means of the Papall authority, hee was restored, and in a faint sort reconciled. (4) The thing which suited best with his youth∣full affections, to wit, the marriage of young Isabel, daughter of Philip the Faire, King of France, he per∣formed with wonderfull magnificence at Bolein, at which solemnity were present besides all others, The King of France Father to the Bride; The King of The meeting of 5 Kings and 4 Queenes. Nauarre his sonne; The King of Almaine; The King of Sicill; Marie Queene of France; Margaret Queene Dowager of England, her daughter; The Queene of Nauarre. There was also present (as no Sunne-shine but hath shadow) Tho. de la More. Peirs of Gaueston, the beloued Minion of this Edward, whose reenter∣tainement the dying King had so seriously forbid∣den, whom notwithstanding, together with his own new wife, he brought into England. (5) This fatall fauourite of this young King was a stranger borne, but a Tho. Wals. Gentleman, and (in regard Peirs de Gaueston described. of good seruice done by the Father of Peirs in Gas∣coigne, Ypod. Neust. brought vp (at old king Edwards owne ap∣pointment) with this Prince: from whom not to derogate in any point, as if hee had without some appearances of worth and value embraced Peirs, it is certaine (by that which a Tho. de la More Knight and seruitor of this very King hath left written) that he had a sharpe witte in a comely shape, and briefly, was such an one, as wee vse to call very fine; Neither yet was he vn∣hardie in Arms, but of commendable performance, whereof (saith de la Moore) hee gaue proofe against the Scots, (to whom Be ind. transl. lib. 14 cap. 9. hee was alike hatefull as to the English) till hee was recalled to satisfie such as (saith their Courtier) did enuie his graces, and good suc∣cesse; but of his Christian or morall vertues (which onely make men truly commendable) there is great silence in Authors, though not of his vices, wherof wee shall haue occasion enough to speake hereaf∣ter. (6) At the Coronation of the King and Queen, (which the Lords would haue empeached, had hee not promised reasonably to Act. & Mon. p. 459. satisfie them about Gaueston) none was Tho. de la More neere to Peirs in brauery of ap∣parrell, or delicacie of fashion, which (and for that the King gaue him Tho. VVals. S. Edwards Crowne to carrie in that pompe,) greatly encreased the offence of the Lords against him: But hee that (hauing a King to backe him) knew no other means to extinguish ha∣tred, but by daring it to the vttermost, spared not afterwardes to scoffe and reproach the principall Peeres, Tho. VVals. in fine Edw. 1. calling Thomas Earle of Lancaster, Stage-plai∣er; Aimerie de Valence Earle of Pembroke, Ioseph the Iew, because hee was pale and tall; and Guy Earle of Warwicke, the blacke dogge of Ardern: all whom, and others, he at a Idem Tho. Walsingham in Edw. 2. Turneament by him proclaimed and holden, handled vilely. (7) But King Edward was dayly more and more possessed with the familiarity of Peirs, who to esta∣blish his interest in the vnprudent Prince, by sensu∣alities and riotous practises, filled the Court Polyd. Virg. with buffons, parasites, and the like pernicious instru∣ments, drawing Edward from the thought of al great enterprises, in accomplishment of his fathers will, or discharge of his particular dutie, to all sorts of vn∣worthy vanities, and sinnefull delights; while him∣selfe in the meane space reuelled in all outward feli∣city, wasting the riches of the Kingdome, or conuer∣ting them to his priuate vses. For (fearing belike that the time might come againe to vndergoe ba∣nishment) hee transported much treasure into for∣raine parts, and much hee had to transport; for not onely by the Tho. Walsingh. lib. S. Alban. MS sale of his fauour with the King, to which there was no speeding approach but by Gaue∣ston, (who vsed to peize the gifts, more then the cau∣ses) but also by the kings prodigality, hee had what∣soeuer could bee powred vpon him: for (though it might seeme incredible) he both gaue him his iew∣els and ancestors treasure, and Chr. Dunstab. euen the Crowne it selfe of his victorious father; not sticking to professe, that (if it lay in him) hee should succeed him in the kingdome. (8) The Lords (who for reuerence of the King sate downe by their priuate iniuries, in hope there would A. D. 1311. Peirs de Gaueston Earle of Cornwall banished for euer be a season, in which their Soueraign might by time∣lie and sweet admonitions recouer the vse of him∣selfe,) not thinking it tollerable to bee now any longer silent, (and the rather, lest that Peirs, farther a∣busing his greatnesse, should Tho. VValsin. bring in Forreiners, not onely to the preiudice of the English lawes and customes, but of their authority also and places,) pre∣uailed so much with the King, in a Parliament hol∣den at London (where sundry prouisions concerning the liberties of the people, and execution of Iustice, were enacted, and by corporall oath confirmed by the King himselfe,) that among them, the decree of Gauestons perpetuall banishment, was by the king (ouercome with a meere necessity for satisfaction of the Kingdome, to whom the said Earle of Cornwall was odious) vnwillinglie suffered to passe; and the king was thereupon regratified with a Subsidie of the twentieth part of the subiects goods. The king also tooke his Oath not to reuoke the said Earle of Cornwall frō banishment (if it may be called a banish∣ment) wherin S. Th. de la More he had the kingdom of Ireland entru∣sted to his charge, and for the securing thereof against rebels, was furnished with men & money by the king. (9) Yet forgetting, that those affections, which The Earle of Cornwal reuoked. oftentimes deserue praise in a priuate person, are subiect to much construction in a publike, and neg∣lecting both his deceased fathers so solemne adiura∣tions, and also his owne oath, as carelesse of the sequele, hee cals Earle Peirs home, with whose loue hee was most fondly, and most passionatelie transported, and (as if hee had receiued some di∣uine benefite) gaue him most ioyous welcome at the Castle of Flint in Northwales, and Iohn Stow. Tho. VVals. Tho. de la Moore. bestowed vpon him for wife Ioan of Acres, Countesse of Glocester his sisters daughter, resoluing with himselfe to retaine his Gaueston, maugre all his Earles and Barons, or (for the loue of him) to put his Crowne and life in perill when time should serue. In which, whether the king or his fauourite shewed lesse discretion, it is not at the first sight easily determinable; it be∣ing as vnsafe for the one, with so offensine behaui∣our, to affect immoderate shew and vse of grace, as for the other, to the iniury of his name and realme to bestow the same. (10) The contemptibilitie and vanitie of this ef∣feminate argument detaines vs longer, then for the Is the third time banished, and returnes. qualitie thereof were fitting, did not so much mis∣chiefe issue out of it. For Peirs (of his owne nature insolent) being thus (aboue reason, or his own dare∣ings) aduanced to alliance with the bloud royall, was so far from all amendment, as hee rather seemed to striue to outgoe himselfe in his former courses, con∣suming so much of the kings treasure and meanes, that he had Tho. VValsingh. not wherewith to defray ordinarie char∣ges, or to pay for the necessaries of his Court. The young Queene also tooke herselfe not to be a little wronged by this vngracious mans predominancie, & thereof sent her complaints to the king of France her father, which concerned iniuries in the highest kind, as in her bed (the King being drawne by Gaueston to Act & Mon. p. 460. Fabian. adultery) and in her honour and Tho. Walsingh. maintenance. Whereupon the Peeres of the land, animated by the King of France, so confidently dealt with Edward, that his Earle now the third time did abiure the Realme: but (the King of France and his enemies making forraine parts vnsure for him to abide in) he returned in Christmas to the generall perturbation of the Kingdome, and to his owne certaine ruine, for that the Barons (his aduersaries) had gotten him ba∣nished with this Prouiso, Act. & Mon. 461 colom. 1. Tho. VVals. that if at any time after∣ward hee were taken in England, hee should be forth∣with apprehended and suffer death. But an Angell from heauen could not seeme more welcome, then this most faithful friend (as that Tho. de la More. Courtier cals him) was vnto King Edward, who Continuator Triuet. MS. forthwith aduanced him to be his principall Secretary. (11) Vpon report of Gauestons returne, the chiefe Lords, aswell Ecclesiasticall as temporall (Walter Bishoppe of Couentree excepted, Tho. VVals. who allowed the Kings affections towards Gaueston; and procured him to breake the former agreements, which were made and sworne in the Parliament at London,) consulted vpon a desperat course of reformation in this point, and made choise of Thomas Earle of Lancaster to be their leader. This Thomas was sonne of Edmund Earle of Lancaster, Leicester and Ferrers, second sonne of Henry the third King of England, and in right of his wife (after her fathers decease, which hapned about this time) Earle of Lincolne, Salisburie, and (besides many other great Lands in Yorkeshire, Cumberland, and Wales) hee had the Earledom of Iohn Stow. Artoys in Pi∣cardy, so that without comparison hee was the grea∣test subiect of the Kingdome. (12) The Issue of which combination before we pursue, wee may not here in our way ouerslippe a strange alteration both here in England, and in all Christendome, by the vniuersall extinguishment of the Order of the Templars, wrought about this time by the procurement of the French King, who being so gracious with Pope Clement, that formerly Nic. Triuet ad an. 1306. In those dayes it was thought the Pope might be an heretike. hee sent Ambassadors to craue of his holinesse with great impor∣tunity, that the bones of his Predecessor Pope Boniface might bee burnt as being an Heretike; so now also he so farre preuailed with him, that in the Councel at Vienna this so highly esteemed Order, was vpon clear proofe of their generall odious sinnes, and scarse cre∣dible impieties, vtterly abolished through Christen∣dome. The French King Fox Martyr log. pag. 460. caused 54. of that Order, together with their Great Maister to bee burnt at Paris; and though that King hoped to conuert all the Lands of that Societie to his sonnes vse, whom hee intended to make King of Ierusalem; yet the Pope and Councell annexed their possessions to the Order of the Knights Hospitalers, called commonly Knights of the Rhodes. Notwithstanding, in England (where such Papall commands went not alwayes for lawes) the heires of the Donours, and such as had en∣dowed the Templars here with landes, entred vpon those parts of their ancient Patrimonies after the dissolution of the Order, and (saith our Tho. de la More. Courtier) detained them vntill not long after, they were by Parliament wholly transferred vnto the Knights of the Rhodes, Iohn Stow. Ypod. Neust. or of S. Iohn of Ierusalem. (13) King Edward was now at Yorke, and Earle Thomas, according to that which had beene conclu∣ded among the combined Lords, who resolued to A. D. 1312. trie all extremities, rather then any longer to endure Peirs Ga eston, (as being perswaded while that King∣bane breathed, peace could neither be maintained in the Realme, nor the King abound in treasure, nor the Queene enioy his loue) sent humble Thom. Walsingh petitions by honourable messengers to their Soueraigne, re∣questing him to deliuer the man into their hands, or to driue him from his company out of England. But the selfe-wild King Act. & Mon. pag. 461. col. 1. preferring the dearenesse of one stranger before the loue of the whole Realme, would not condiscend. (14) Afterward, Peirs (whom Polyd. Virg. li. 18 the Earles pursu∣ed with an Armie) being Chron. R. Auel∣burie. Tho. de la More. Tho. VVals. entrusted for his safe∣guard to Aimerie de Valence Earle of Pembrok, was left by him but one night at a Village or Manour called Dathington betweene Oxford and Warwicke, (being a place neither Tho. de la More farre enough off, nor strong enough) pretending to haue conuaied him on the next day to the Castle of Wallingford, the said Aimerie in the meane space departing to lodge with his Countesse, who lay hard by: but, the said Aimerie conniuing thereat (as our Tho. de la More. Courtier chargeth him, who also writes, that hee tooke a solemne oath before the king to doe his best to safe-conduct Gaueston, the king purposing in the meane time to labour his peace with the Lords Ran. Cestr. l. 7. c. 41. vpon any conditions) Guy Earle of Warwicke with his people surprised him the same night, and took him to his Castle of Warwicke, where in a place called Blacklow (afterward Act. & Mon. pa. 462. Gaueshead) his head was stricken off at the commandement Tho. de la More. and in the presence of the Earles of Lancaster, Warwicke, and Hereford, Tho. VVals. as of one that had beene a subuerter of the lawes, and an open Traitour to the Kingdom. In which bold attempt, themselues (who yet preten∣ded so much standing for the liberties of the land,) did most vnaduisedly infringe a Capitall branch of the same Franchises, in putting to death an Earle, and so deare a friend of the Kings, Continuator Nich. Triuet. without any iudi∣ciall proceeding by triall of his Peeres, which caused a la∣sting hatred betwixt the King and his Nobles. (15) There wanted nothing now to King Edward but present meanes to reuenge the bloud of his friend, or rather of his halfe-selfe, the lacke wherof did encrease the sorrow he tooke for his death; which being well knowne to the Lords, they resolued not to lay downe Armes, till they had prouided for their security, and the performance of all such points, as concerned the temperament of the Regall power, that (vnder colour thereof) the Nobles themselues might finger some part of the Soueraigne gouernment. The King was then at London, and the Lords at Dun∣staple: but by the continuall interdealings of the Prelates, and of Gilbert Earle of Glocester, who stood neutrall, the kindling displeasures were for the pre∣sent allaied, vpon condition that the Lords should restore to the King all such things, once belonging to Peirs Gaueston, as they had taken at Newcastle, which they accordingly did. (16) King Edward neuerthelesse, as if his soule were ouercast with some blacke cloud, continued Edward of Wind∣sor borne. mourning, till it pleased God to enlighten the world with the birth of a young Prince, whose no∣ble Acts did afterward redeeme all the blemishes wherewith his Fathers infelicities had darkned the brightnesse of the English name, and at this present cleared the mind of the sorrowfull King his father: for Ran. Cestr. lib. 7. cap. 41. Fabian. vpon Saint Brices day, Isabel his Queene brought forth her first sonne at Windsor, which caused great reioycing through the Kingdome. Her French kind∣red and friends (which were there in good numbers of either sexe) & among them as chiefe, the Queens owne brother, Lewis the French Kings sonne, would haue had the Infant at his Baptisme named Lewis, but the English Lords would Act. & Mon. 462. Col. 1. not permit, who ther∣fore was after his Fathers and Grandfathers name, called Edward. This was hee who afterward ray∣sed the honour of English Cheualrie to so high a point, by his famous victories in France and else∣where. (17) The euill will which the King bare in his mind against the Barons for their ouer-ruling his affections, and the death of Gaueston, by sundry bad offices and sycophancies of the Tho. VVals. French at Wind∣sor was rubd so hard vpon, that it grew raw againe before it was halfe healed. Therefore in a Parlia∣ment at London the king sharpely charged those pre∣sumptuous Lords with their contempt against him in the spoiles they had committed at Newcastle, and (which most afflicted his languishing spirit) in taking, and wickedly killing Peirs Gaueston. To all which, they stoutely answered, Act. & Mon. that they had not offended in any point, but deserued his roiall fauour, for that they had not gathered force against him, but against the publike enemie of the Realme, &c. How beit, to preuent the feared mischiefe of ciuill Armes, by the working of the young Queene, of the Prelates, and Earle of Glocester, the Lords in open Court at West∣minster humbled themselues to the King, praying grace; and the King granted to such of them, as would desire the same, his gracious pardon. The whole house of Parliament seeing the kings wants, of their own accord granted a Fifteenth; & al parts hereupon returned with ioy and peace, but not long after the Lord Guy de Beauchampe Earle of Warwicke, who in this Parliament was appointed to be of Priuie Coun∣cell with the King, deceased, being (as by the Barons wel-willers Tho. Wals. it was said) impoisoned by such of the Kings secret friends as did maligne him. (18) The mischieuous effects of the Kings for∣mer misgouernment, beganne now most perillouslie A. D. 1313. Scottish affaires. to discouer themselues. For the Scots his neighbours, who could not bee ignorant of all such griefes and maladies as festred in the heart and entrals of Eng∣land, had long since made their timely vse thereof, adhering so to the vndaunted Bruce, that by degrees hee had gotten a great strength, and was againe pub∣likely receiued, and obeied for King of Scotland, from most places whereof hee Tho. de la Mor. This according to Hector Boeti , lib. 14. hapned A. D. 1309. draue the English, and (in contempt of Edward) committed great spoile by slaughter of People, burning of Townes in Nor∣thumberland, and other Acts of hostility. The prin∣cipall charge of Scotland for King Edward had beene entrusted to the Lord Iohn Cumin a Scot, Earle of Bucquhan, whom Hect Boet. l. 14. Geo. . King Robert had vanquished in battell, and was now (while Edward sate bewitched with most vnworthy languishments) grown potent, sending his Brother Edward Bruce to besiege the Ca∣stle of Striuelin, which was in the hands of the Eng∣lish. (19) The King of England awakened out of his slumbers with these Alarums, marched thereupon with a very great Armie toward the said Castle. It An. D. 1314. King Edward with a mighty Army in Scotland pleaseth Hector Boetius (putting off, as it were the Historian) to report maruellous thinges of the num∣bers of Souldiers which came with King Edward in this iourney; for (if he say true) there were not few∣er then one hundreth and fifty thousand horsemen, and as many thousand footmen; and that we may not suspect the multitude to bee far greater then ei∣ther the cause required, or the realm of England could well afford, hee informeth vs, that besides the Eng∣lish there were in his aid at this time, Hollanders, Ze∣landers, Brabanders, Flemings, Picards, Boloners, Gas∣coignes, Normans, with much people of many o∣ther Regions; and that besides these three hun∣dreth thousand men of warre, there were infinite families with their women, children, seruants, and houshold-stuffe: but because other Writers doe in∣genuously grant, and containe probable matter en∣ough for the honour of the Scottish Nation in this iourney, wee will as neare as wee can, (being things to vs neither vp nor downe, in regard of the long time since these hostilities hapned,) truely and free∣ly, though briefly informe our selues hereof. (20) The Earles of Lancaster, Warren, Warwicke, and Arundel (the greatest Peeres of the land) Tho. Wals. refused to attend their King in this seruice, for that hee had delaied to ratifie the points of their desired liberties, and prouisions for the pretended better gouernment of England, by himselfe so often consented vnto. In which as their loyall affection cannot bee much ad∣mired: so it is certaine, that King Edward hereby vndertooke that voyage with farre the lesse force ey∣ther of men or counsell. Neuerthelesse his hoast was great enough (if numbers did sway in such affaires, more then religion, discipline, and valour,) to haue effected more then it selfe did suffer. But King Ed∣ward and his people rather seemed to goe toward a Wedding or a Triumph, then to a battell, Tho. de la Mort Tho. Walsingh. Polyd. Verg lib. 18 Bellind. the Scotish transl. of Hect. Boe. lib. 14. cap. 11. adorning themselues with all sorts of riches, gold, siluer, and the like toies, in a kind of wanton manner, correspon∣dent to the humour of the Prince whom they fol∣lowed. (21) In this iourney it was made manifest, what true and sober valiancie could effect against light brauery and insolency. King Robert lodged with his forces (being inferiour in numbers to the English) not farre off, where was nothing but a religious, Hect. Boet. deuout and modest care, quickned (after manifold calamities, with a most noble desire to recouer the libertie of their Country, and to settle the same in∣to the hope whereof they were the rather erected by a fresh victorie, which they had obtained that day vpon certaine of the English Tho. UUalsingh. Hect. Boet. lib. 14. horsemen. King Edward on the contrary part nothing esteeming so sleight a presage, resolued vpon the very next (being Mid∣sommer, or Saint Iohn Baptists day) to take a terrible reuenge vpon the Scots: but how to effect the same the care was not excessiue; for in his Campe, Th. de la Mo . Was∣saile, and Drinkehaile were thundered extraordina∣rily, as accounting themselues sure of the victory: which kind of impiousselfe-trust, if God Almighty did not sometime scourge with iust and terrible confusions, what outrages would not bee exe∣cuted. (22) Farre otherwise the Bruces Army: which by his commandement spent Bellind. trans . lib. 14 cap. 1. the euening in ma∣king humble confession of their sinnes, that they might (saith our Author) bee ready on the morrow to receiue the blessed Sacrament, as accordingly they did: Moreouer to leaue nothing vndone which might aduance their cause; the Scots had digged before their Battalions, certaine Hect. Boet. lib. 14 ca. 11. trenches or dikes Tho. de la More three foot deepe, and three foot broad, which (hauing fixed Hect. Boet. l . q supra. sharpe stakes in them with their points vpward) they couered so with Th la Mo . hurdles, that footemen treading warily) might passe, but not troupes of horse. Next to Gods anger against the English, (whom courtly Pride and Sloth had now ef∣feminated) this stratageme was the cause of their ruine: for whereas they reposed much vpon their Cauallerie, in these Pit-falles, the fury of their charge was intercepted and broken, the riders being mise∣rablie slaine by the Scots, whom King Robert mar∣ching formost on foot, had presented most coura∣giously to the enemy. (23) The King of England not altogether care∣lesse, neither yet by his care able to doe much (as The English o∣uerthrowne at Bannock bourne. one whom God was not well pleased with) had or∣dered his battels with some aduise, but vpon the dismall and vnexpected discomfiture of his horse in those mischieuous holes or ditches, was enforced, (after some troubled resistance) to leaue to the Scots the greatest victory that euer they had before or af∣ter. Tho. VVals . Hardly could K. Edward bee drawne to flie: the courage which it became such a Monarch to haue then first disclosing it selfe, till by his friends hee was enforced to seeke his preseruation by that more necessary then noble meanes, and with him (besides others) the Lord Hugh Spencer (whom our Tho. de la M . U s . Courtier cals a aint hearted Kite) betooke himselfe to like remedie. (24) All things proued vnfortunate to the Eng∣lish in this iorney, for when they perceiued their Ca∣uallerie thus miserably ouerthrowne in the ditches, they shot their arrowes compasse, with purpose to kill or gall such Scots as came to the execution, but did them little or no harme, as they who were armed in the fore-parts, and in stead of that, Tho. de la Mo . slew their friends, whose backes being toward them were vn∣armed. (25) The losse fell much vpon the Noblest, for there were slaine in this Battell, Hect. Boet. l. 14. Tho. de la Moore. Ypod. Ne st. Gilbert Earle of Glo∣cester (a man of singular valour and wisdom) the Lord Robert de Clifford, and besides other Lords, about Tho. Wals. se∣uen hundreth Knights, Esquiers, and men of Armo∣ries. Of the rest the slaughter could not bee but great, though much the lesse, in regard the Scots fought on foot. Hector saith, that there were not slaine fewer then fifty thousand English, no Writer else, that hitherto wee can meet with, exceedes the fifth part of that number; the riches gotten by spoiles and ransomes of the English, were doubtlesse very great. Among the number of prisoners, the principall was H y de Bohun Earle of Hereford, but recouered af rd by exchange for King Ro∣berts wife, who all this while was detained in Eng∣land. This battell was fought at Banocksbourne neere Striuelin in Scotland. (26) From this ouerthrow King Edward esca∣ping to Berwicke, King Robert (who to his great glo∣ry, as hauing himselfe beene trained vp among the English, vsed such as were taken prisoners with sin∣gular Ypod. Neust. humanity) sent thither to him the bodies of the Earle of Gloster, & Lord Clifford, that they might receiue honourable interrement among their owne friends. But Edward (vnder whose vnfortunate lea∣ding the English name sustained so great dishonour and dammage) withdrew to Yorke, resoluing (therein onely Princelike) to assemble new force, and either to bee reuenged, or to die. But Polyd. Ver. li. 7. cap. 41. An. D. 1314. all enterprises and attempts of that nature miscarried, for aboue twelue yeeres after; insomuch that great feare raigned a∣mong the Northern̄e English, who lay open to the first brunts and violences of the Scots, ouer whom many faire dayes shone. And to augment the ca∣lamities of the North, many of the disloiall English Tho. Walsingh. Ypod. Neust. conspired with the enemie, and iointly spoyled the west parts of Northumberland, nothing being secure, but that which wals defended. (27) God, to humble the English, who through long prosperities had forgotten both themselues & him, drew not backe his heauy hand so; for seldom A. D. 1315. The woful estate of England vnder the three plagues of Sword, dearth and pestilence. hath so terrible a famine beene heard of here, as suc∣ceeded to this ouerthrow: so that for moderation of prices, a Parliament was assembled at London: but (saith Walsingham) as if God had beene displeased at the said rates (which not long after were repealed) Tho de la More. Tho. VVals. things grew scarser day by day: and the dearth was generally such, that vpon Saint Laurences Eue, there was scarsely bread to be gotten for sustentation of the Kings owne family. This famine which lasted about two yeeres was accompanied with much mor∣tality of people. (28) But neither the dishonours taken in Scotland, nor innumerable afflictions and discontentments at home, made Edward suspend the celebration of his Gauestons funerals; whose Body with great pompe hee caused to bee transferred from the place of his Gauestons fune∣rals. former buriall, (which was among the Friers Prea∣chers at Oxford) to Kings-Langley in Hertfordshire, where hee in person with the Archbishoppe of Canterbury, foure Bishoppes, many Abbots, and principall Churchmen did honour the exequies, but few were present of the Nobility, whose great sto∣mackes would not giue them leaue to attend. Some∣what also to sweeten these generall acerbities, Lewe∣lin Bren and his two sonnes, were brought vp priso∣ners to London, hauing burnt many towns vpon the Marches, and committed some murthers with their Welsh adherents. A. D. 1316. (29) Meane-while the state of the Kingdome was miserable, there being no loue betwixt the King and the Peeres, nor any great Tho. UUals. care in him or them of the common affaires; neuerthelesse they assembled at a Parliament in London, where no great matter was concluded: for the famine and pestilence en∣creased. The famine was growne so terrible, that horse, dogs, yea men and children were stolne for food, and (which is horrible to thinke) the theeues newly brought into the Gaoles, were torne in peeces, and eaten presently halfe aliue, by such as had been longer there. In London it was proclaimed, that no corne should be conuerted to Brewers vses, which Act the King (moued with compassion toward his Nation) imitating, caused to bee executed through all the Kingdome; otherwise (saith Walsingham) the greater part of the people had died with penury of bread. The bloudie flux or dissenterie caused through raw and corrupt humors engendred by euil meat and diet, raged euery where, and together with other maladies brought such multitudes of the poorer sort to their end, that the liuing could scarse suffice to bury the dead. (30) The King was now in so great dislike and An. D. 1317. distrust with the Lords and Barons, that they would not appeare at Clarendon, where hee held a great Councell. To augment this fatall auersion, a cer∣taine Knight belonging to Iohn Earle Warren, stole away from Caneford in Dorsetshire, the wife of Tho∣mas Earle of Lancaster (chiefe of the Lords faction) not without the Kings consent (as it was said) and brought her to the said Earle Warrens Castle at Ri∣gate, with great pompe, and in despight of the Earle; whom one Richard de Saint Maurice, a wretched, lame, and bunchbackt Dwarfe challenged for wife, pretending that he was formerly contracted, and had lien with her, which she (the greatest and noblest In∣heretrix of her time) did openly confesse, to her im∣mortall infamie, incurring alas (saith Walsingham) the publike note of a most filthie strump t. This defor∣med Elfe (hauing mighty seconds) durst hereupon claime the Earledomes of Lincolne and Salisburie as in her right, and in the meane time, the name and ho∣nor of Thomas the great Earle was baffold, as it were, by a light and wicked woman. (31) The parts of England beyond Humber, were now more and more afflicted; for such as till then had opposed themselues against the Scots in defence of the Country, perceiuing all things left at large, in stead of Protectors became Tyrants, Tho. VValsing. saith our Author; of defenders, destroyers; and of valiant Champions, treacherous Chapmen; so that as be∣tweene the hammer and the anuile, the Scots vpon the one side, and these false English on the other, all was lamentable, and brought in a maner to nothing: and this face of things continued there about foure yeeres. (32) Neither did the King seeme to haue any will or power to relieue the common calamities, but rather to conuert his whole both wits and for∣ces vpon reuenges against the Lords, who vnder pre∣tence of their extorted prouisions, manifestly with∣drew their loues, seruice and duties from him. wher∣fore feeling himselfe thus weake and disfurnished, he besought the spirituall assistance of Pope Iohn the two and twentieth; who thereupon sent certaine Cardinals to set all things in quiet without bloud∣shed. Betweene the King and Earle of Lancaster they established a peace, who, in a Tho. de la More. certaine plaine neere Leicester met, embraced and kissed each other; but when they could not worke the like with the Scots, they put that Country vnder Interdict. (33) For they (as it is the manner of prosperity) An. D. 1318 Edward Bruce king of Ireland vanquished by the English, and slaine. after the victory at Banocksbourne, which clearely got them Scotland, did beginne to bethinke them∣selues of gaining new Empire in Ireland. Thither Edward Bruce Brother of King Robert had passed with an Army, procuring Bellind. . lib. 14. cap. 12. Tho. Wals. himselfe to be crowned King thereof by fauour of some of the Irish Nobility, whom neuerthelesse about three yeeres from his first entrance, the English vnder the conduct of the *Th. de la More. Archbishoppe of Armagh, and of Iohn Lord Brinnin∣gham *Pol. Virg. lib. 1 . Iusticiar of Ireland, valiantly encountred, where, together with his late vsurped Kingdome, hee lost his life. There were slaine in that battell many honourable Scots, besides the new King Edward, and aboue Tho. Wals. fiue thousand others: his head was cut off Tpod. Neust. Polyd. V g. lib. 18 at Dundalke (saith VValsingham) but Hector Boetius writes that he was slaine in the battell it selfe. Thus did God temper one with another, and the iust re∣ioycement which the Scots had conceiued of their so happie victory ouer the English at Banocksbourne, was sowred with this losse. (34) But King Robert (as a most expert and vigi∣lant Prince) did not suffer this ioy to continue long to the English, for by practise with one Hector. Boet. lib. 14. Tho. Wals. Pol. Virg. lib. 18. Peter Spal∣ding to whom King Edward had entrusted the kee∣ping of Berwicke, hee recouered it from the English, saith Cap 17. Harding, By treatie, with Peace, Spalding, and treason; after it had remained twenty yeers in their possession; which when King Edward thought to haue wonne againe, the Scots diuerted him from the siege, with incursions and slaughters of his peo∣ple in other parts of England, not failing much of surprising the Queene in a village not farre from Yorke, where she soiourned during the siege at Ber∣wicke, the plot being laid, and drawne▪ between the Scots and some perfidious English, whom King Ro∣bert had mouied for that purpose. But Spalding af∣ter the treason done had the reward of a Ioh. Stow. Harding c. 172. Traitour, for King Robert put him to death. (35) To giue some breathings after these so ma∣nifold troubles, a truce was agreed vpon and con∣firmed The beginning of ciuill wars. betweene the two Kings of England and of Scotland, for the space of two yeeres, which brought forth confusion and not refreshment. For thus it hapned; The King vpon the commendation of the Tho. de la More Lords themselues, had made Hugh de Spenser Lord Chamberlaine, who being at the least of equall in∣solence, vices, and ambition to Gaueston, so wrought that hee succeeded in short time to all the graces of familiarity and power which euer Gaueston enioyed, as in like sort to all his hatred and enuie. Hugh his father an ancient Knight, the better to strengthen his sonnes courses, was likewise imploied, and grew in speciall fauour with the King, who afterward also created him Earle of Winchester, but the father in manners vnlike to the sonne, was ruined rather by a naturall tendernesse, then any malicious will. The sonne, as hee was of shape most louely, so the verie spirit it selfe of pride and rapine, carried him to all sorts of intollerable behauiours and oppressions, that Gaueston might with good reason seeme to be wished for againe. Against these two, who wholy swayed the vnfortunate King, Thomas Earle of Lancaster, The Spensers ba∣nished. and in a manner all the Barons of the Kingdome, (who meant the King should loue none but with their leaue) did swell with such impatience, that (not contented with the wast of their lands) they ne∣uer rested till (by the terror of ciuill Armes) those two fauourites (father and sonne) were banished; they thus reuenging vnder publike pretexts both publike iniuries and Tho. VValsin. their owne. (36) In all contentions which hapned betweene the King and his Lords, Queene Isabel had euer hi∣therto A. D. 1321. beene a maker of Peace, doing therein wor∣thy offices, but the euill starres of the Earles of Lancaster and Hereford would not suffer her to con∣tinue any longer so: for the Queene being denied lodging one night at the Castle of Leedes in Kent, which belonged to the Lord of Badlesmere (one of the Earles faction) she withdrew her good conceite, and was an author to the King of presently reuen∣ging that dishonour, who vpon her complaint, came in person with many thousand Souldiers before the Castle, tooke the Holinsh. p. 331. col. 2. Captaine, and put both him and all the men therein to shamefull death. Moreouer, longing to bee righted against the Lords for their late insolencies, marched on to Circester taking many Ca∣stles, and besieging others: The Lords (who little suspected any such sodaine assaults) prouiding in the meane time for their defence. (37) Thither repaired to him (at his commande∣ment) Hugh Spenser the sonne, who had houered vp∣on the Sea, expecting from thence the successe of King Edward pursues the Lords. Polyd. Verg. li. 8. A. D. 1322. things vpon the land. The Lords, who had falne from their Soueraignes good conceit, and wanting now their wonted Mediatri the Queene, lay open to all the mischiefe which enemies could work them by the King, who (as taking his regall power and au∣thority to be in danger) resolued wisely and manful∣ly, to die in the quarrell, or to bring the Lords to be at his commandement. Meane time the iudgement giuen against the Spensers was reuersed as erroneous, and their reuocation decreed at London by the Tho. de la More. Arch-bishoppe of Canterburie and his Suffragans. (38) The Lords not all of a like temper began to misdoubt, and many of them forsooke their Chiefe; (the Earle of Lancaster) and rendred themselues to the King, or were apprehended; among which were the two Rogers Mortimers, who were commit∣ted * Tho. VValsingh. Tho. de la More. to the Tower of London, and others to Wallingford Castle. The faction weakened by this defection made head in the North, vnder the Earle of Lanca∣ster, who now was to sight for his life. Thither the King marcheth, and with the onely shew of his Ar∣mie, made the Earle to flie from Burton vpon Trent, whose forces in their retreat or flight behaued them∣selues outragiously. (39) But Gods heauie displeasure, and the Arme of the Kings power left them not so: for at Burrow∣brigge, Humfrey de Bohun was slaine by a Welshman, who thrust him into the body with a Speare from vnder the Bridge; and the Earle of Lancaster him∣selfe with other principall men, Barons and knights, to the number of aboue Th de la More. fourescore and ten were taken prisoners, by a man of small fortunes, Andrew de Herckley Captaine of the City of Carleil, and Sir Simon Ward, Tho. Wals. Captaine of Yorke, who with great for∣ces out of those parts, stopt their farther passage at Burrowbrigge, as the Kings forces tooke all safegard from them behind. (40) The third day after their apprehension, the Tho. VValsing. Execution of Nobles. King in person being set in iudgement at Pontfract, and with him Edmund Earle of Kent, Aymerie Earle of Pemb ke, Iohn de Warren Earle of Surrey, and a∣mong Holinsh. p. 330 col. 2. others, the Lord Hugh de Spenser the Father, as also Ypod. Neust. Hugh Spenser his sonne; the Earle of Lan∣caster was brought before them, and had sentence pronounced against him Tho. de la More. by the said Andrew de Herckley (created afterward Earle of Carliel) and the Kings Iusticiar, the Hollinsh. p. 331. col. 1. Lord Maplesthorpe, as against an Arch-Traitour; neuerthelesse, for reuerence of his bloud (being the Kings neere Kinsman) drawing and hanging were remitted vnto him, but his head was stricken off the same day without the Towne of Pontfract. (41) Nor satisfied herewith, the King gaue full way to reuenge, putting to shamefull death, by draw∣ing, * Act. & Mon. p. 463. col. 2 Iohn Stow. hanging, and (as some write) Tho. Wals. quartering in sun∣dry places, all the Barons (the Lord Roger D'amarie onely excepted, who died of his naturall death) with sundry Baronets and Knights taken at Burroughbrig and elsewhere. The Lord Badlesmere (at whose house this tragicall fire beganne) was executed at Canterburie. And that so great and mighty a man as Thomas Earle of Lancaster, should not seeme to die without a bloudie complement sutable to his con∣dition; there were hanged and quartered vpon the same day at Pontefract Holinsh. p. 331. col. 2. fiue or Ioh. Stow. sixe Barons; and the next day at Yorke were hanged in yron chaines, the Lords Clifford, Mowbray, Dey-uill; and others af∣terward * Act. & Mon pa. 463. col. 2. Fabian. in other places, to the number in all (though all of them not Barons) of Continu. Nich. Triuet. MS. twenty and two, the chiefest Captaines of the Realme suffered death for their disloyalties. Threescore and twelue Knights * Tho. de la Moore saith but about 18. and 5. bani∣shed. more were dispersed into sundry prisons, who (saith De la Moore) vpon fines paid had afterward their Liberties. (42( As for the said Thomas Earle of Lancaster, there are so many reasons why he cannot reasona∣bly The quality of Earle Thomas de∣scribed. be iudged either a good subiect or a good man, that we may worthily wonder why some at that time should repute him a Saint. Certainely, the wise and discreet old Writers are not so opinionated of him; but note his priuate life for R l. Higden. Mo st. Cestren Polych. l. 7. c. 42. vicious, himselfe to be nothing S. Th. de la More & Polych. ib. valorous, and of the publike Thom. Walsingh. not well deseruing, omitting his contumelious behauiours toward the King his Soueraign Lord in his discom∣forts, which as Walsingham forgets not to relate, so thinkes he that the like was worthily vsed toward that Earle himselfe, who, when hee was brought pri∣soner to Pontfract (his owne Castle but then surren∣dred) the whole multitude derided, and called him in scorne King Arthur: by which name hee was de∣signed (as Holinsh. p. 329. col. 2. some write) in the Scottish Cypher inter∣cepted, prouing a conspiracy with Scots: but the very shoppe, where his and the other Barons original Treasons were forged, was the Parliament house, wherein from time to time, they forced on the King presumptuous and treasonous Ordinations, where∣by the Peeres challenged, Continu. Nich. Triuet. MS. not onely to reforme the Kings house and Councell, and to place and displace all great Officers at their pleasure, but euen a ioint interest in the Regiment of the Kingdome together with the King, which William Inge (a Iudge of the Common-Law) with other like sticklers, traiterou∣sly perswading them to be according to Law. (43) Of his ill deseruings toward the common-Weale (who for the good thereof could not disgest a∣ny indignity) let this bee a kind of demonstration: for when King Edward hauing by strait siege brought Tho VVals. ad A. D. 1319. Berwicke neere to termes of yeelding, chanced once to breake forth (after his vaine manner) into these words; The Lord Hugh Spenser shall be captaine of the Castle, when it is taken: the Earle forthwith with o∣thers of his affection abandoned the seruice: by rea∣son of which departure, it was thought that Berwicke was not as then obtained, Continu. Nich. Triuet. MS. and that the enemy ther∣by had great aduantage in all their attempts. The names of such Barons (besides Banerets, and some few others of special note) as perished by hatchet and halter for this businesse, as out of so great variety of Writers wee could now gather them were, At Ioh. Stow. Chron. Wil. Risan∣ger. apud VVal . Pontfrait, Thomas Earle of Lancaster. The Lord Warren Lile. The Lord William Tochet. The Lord Thomas Mandute. The Lord Henry de Bradburne. Thom. Walsingh. The L. Williā Fitz-Williā the yonger. The Lord William Cheyney. At Iohn Stow. Yorke. The Lord Roger Clifford, son of that Robert Lord Clifford, who was slaine by the Scots with Gilbert Earle of Gloster, at the battell of Banocksbourne in the seruice of this King. The Lord Iohn Mowbray. The Lord Iosceline Deynuile. At Gloster. The Lord Hollinsh. p. 331. col. 2. Iohn Gifford- At London, The Lord Tho. VValsingh. Henrie Teyes. At Windsor, The Lord Frances de Holinsh. p. 331. col. 2. Aldenham. At Canterburie, The Tho. VValsing. L. Bartholmew de Badlesmere, The Hollinsh qu. supra, and Fabian. L. Bartholmew de Ashburnham. Neuer did English earth at one time drinke so much bloud of her Nobles in so vile manner shed as at this, which, whatsoeuer could bee pretended (as doubt∣lesse their offence was capitall) yet all was taken to be done as in the quarrell of the Spensers onely, nor was it vnreuenged, as will appeare: in the mean space their enemies not contented with their bloud, pro∣cured also the Fabian. Holinsh. p. 332. c. 1. confiscation of their estates and inhe∣ritances. (44) King Edward thinking that this exploit had made him terrible aswell to the Scots, as it had done to the English, marcheth with a mighty hoast into Scotland, from whence not long after (for want of vi∣ctuals King Edward endangered by the Scots. ) hee was compelled to returne without the honor of any atchieuement, and being Tho. de la More. Tho. Wels. vpon his re∣turne, was sodainely by Scots assailed in the night, ve∣ry narrowly escaping in his owne person, and with a few saued himself by flight, leauing his Tpod. Neust. treasure & furniture for pillage, and so came sorrowfull to Yorke. Iohn de Britain Earle of Richmond, was taken prisoner by the enemy, and the rest of the Coun∣try defaced with destructions as farre as to the wals of that City. (45) Thus Tho. de la More passed this yeere, to the English full of losse, reproach, and lamentation, by reason of their intestine discord and the shambles of their Nobles: to the King infamous, and hatefull also for his vnfortu∣nate iourney into the Northern parts, &c. But these bloudy and tempestuous winds blew some to profit; for Fabian. during the space of about fiue yeeres after, the fortune of the Spencers hugely encreased, and the Queenes decreased, who (for her relenting toward the Lords, & expressing some dislikes of these ranck∣ly-growing weeds) was grown to beare a share in the persecution. And that these with such like violent men working vpon the Kings inclination, were the onely Authors of that sharpe reuenge taken vpon the Lords, for their particular and inglorious enrich∣ment (for what else can we call the same, since that they betraide thereby their Soueraignes Crown and Life to speedie destruction?) let it by this in part ap∣peare, and moue the world the rather to pitty the seduced. (46) Among them who were condemned for ri∣sing with the Earle of Lancaster, there was one of a A. D. 1323. Ki g Edward most bitte ly vpbraids the Earle of Lanca∣sters death. meane Familie, for whose life neuerthelesse, because hee had once serued in Court, and was pleasing to some of the Grands, or Potent fauourites therein, many interceded, and pressed the king so farre on his behalfe, that he brake out into these Walsingham c them verba imperij. most vehement words; A plague vpon you, for cursed whisperers, malici∣ous backe-biters, wicked counsellors, entreat you so for the life of a most notorious knaue, who would not speake one word for the life of my neere Kinsman, that most no∣ble Knight Earle Thomas? Had hee liued, wee and our whole Realme should haue had speciall need and vse of him. This fellow the longer hee liues, the more villanies he wil commit, as hauing already filled my Kingdome with his desperate outrages. By the soule of God hee shall therefore die the death he hath deserued. (47) By this then it is euident, that these trage∣dies against the Lords were exploited by others; in which it is plaine that this King (otherwise so deuout to God, so noble and so full of naturall good pro∣pensions) was fatally ouer-wrought by wicked coun∣sell; though hee therein bee inexcusable, for good nature (as wee call it) cannot satisfie for publike er∣rours. But the condemned man was forth with put to death accordingly; the King being most highlie offended, that none had entreated him on the Earles behalfe, whom (saith Walsingham) he did in wardlie loue. Neuerthelesse, he had not long before crea∣ted the elder Spenser Earle of Winchester, and deckt the plume of his fortunes with a toppe-feather taken out of the said late Earle of Lancasters estate, that is to say, with the Castle and honour of Tho. VValsin. Donington, par∣cell of the Earledome of Lincolne. Hauing thus farre shewed the originall of the mischiefe, wee will hasten now to the last Act or Catastrophe of our Edwards tragedie, onely wee will first remember some inter∣curring matters. (48) You haue heard before, how that the Car∣dinals sent from the Pope, had (in fauour of the Eng∣lish) put Scotland vnder Interdict; wherefore King Robert now at last dispatched the Bishop of Glascow, and Thomas Randolfe Earle of Murrey to Rome, for ob∣taining release and absolution, but they returned without effecting it. Whereupon King Robert mo∣ued to haue a truce for thirteene yeeres, which King Edward accordingly granted, and the Pope Pol. Vir . lib. 1 . then ab∣solued the Scots. The matters of Scotland seemed thus to be sufficiently prouided for during that time, and the rather for that somewhat before the moti∣on for truce, the King had caused the newly created Earle of Carlile Andrew de Herkley to be degraded, hanged, drawne and quartered for treason, which hee was conuinced to haue entred into with the Scots, vpon Tho. Wals. whom he had before done speciall ser∣uices, as hauing for that cause the Castle and Citie of Carleil committed to his gouernment. The truce with Scotland being thus confirmed, the King makes his progresse through the Ypod. Neust. Counties of Yorke and Lancaster, and the Marches of Wales, from whence the late seditious had their nourishments, taking wise & carefull courses for ministration of Iustice there, and preuention of like inconueniences, by punishing their Authors seuerely. And Iustices Chron. Dunst. apud Iohn Stow. void of all corruption, were appointed else-where. (49) In the meane space, the new King of France Charles the fifth, a most earnest enemie to the English A. D. 1324. An. Reg. 17. The I. Roger Mortimer escapes out of the Tower mens possessions there, sought occasions of quarrell with King Edward, who while hee consuled at home how to order that affaire, the yong L. Roger Morti∣mer, one whom the Diuell saith our Tho. de la More Courtier) re∣serued to kindle new dissention with, and to stirre vp a most miserable ciuill warre, hauing corrupted his Keepers, or (as some others write) hauing potioned them with Ypod. Neust. a sleepy drinke, escaped out of the Tow∣er of London, getting ouer clearely without any em∣peachment into France. (50) The Spensers both father and sonne, the one thus created Earle of Winchester, and the other Earle of Glocester, aspiring to the fulnesse of command, and desirous to leaue nothing in their eye, which might stumble their sway with the King, failed not to beget immortall enmities both against themselues and the King. The Queene tooke their carriage so heinou∣sly, because (besides other things) they had abrid∣ged her meanes of maintenance, (while themselues abounded in all riches and magnificence) as shee complained S. Th. de la More That the daughter and sole heire of the king of France was married to a gripple miser, and that being promised to be a Queene, shee was become no better then a waiting woman, liuing vp∣on a pension from the Spensers. (51) Thus was the matter, and as it were, the Em∣brion, of their common destruction laid, and begun in the impotencie of a womans will, to helpe out the which with shrewd drifts and directions, they encrease her side with Adam Bishoppe of Hereford, by stripping him out of all his Temporalties as a Traitour, for that hee had supported the Morti∣mers in the Barons quarrell. This Adam (saith our Knight) was a man of most subtle witte, and in all worldly pollicies profound, daring to doe great things and factious withall, who for this cause con∣ceiuing deepest hate, and therefore easily growing deare to the Queene, made a great secret party. To which Henrie Burwash Bishoppe of Lincoln, who (for like causes) had beene kept from his temporalties (about two yeeres) ioyned himselfe. Neither would the Spensers auarice suffer them to weaken the mul∣titudes of their enemies, for they sold the Kings gracious fauour to such as had beene in the Barons quarrell, at so great rates that they by granting a∣way lands and Manours to the said Lords Spensers for their pardons &c. verie many of the Nobles were empouerished. To be short, the royall pow∣er being in the hands of the Spensers, and Roger Bal∣dock Chancellour, or of their Creatures and Fauou∣rites; this other faction had the generall discontent∣ments of the Realme to worke vpon for their ad∣uantage. (52) The King thus guiding himselfe, and ha∣uing sent his Brother Edmund Earle of Kent (vpon An. D. 1325. notice of the first troubles) with Forces into Gas∣coigue, who gaue some little stay for a time to the French proceedings, till they might otherwise bee prouided for, it came to this point at last: that whereas the King had a purpose to haue gone in person into France, the Spensers who were afraid to bee seuered from his person, the onely reuerence whereof they knew to bee their safegard, and yet not daring to attend him thither, or stay behind, Tho. Walsingh. per∣swaded the King contrary to the minds of all the rest, that the Queene (who sought it) should goe and negociate her husbands affaire in France. She did so; and whereas before her departure, things were in great extremity betweene the two Nations, insomuch that all the French were banished out of England, not they who were attendant on the Queen her selfe in neerest place being spared, all matters by her negotiation and suite were quieted; vpon con∣dition that King Edward should giue to his sonne Ed∣ward of Windsor (afterward King) the Dutchy of A∣quitaine, and Earledome of Pontine, for which the king of France was pleased to accept his said young Ne∣phewes homage. (53) This was done, and the Prince sent ouer for that purpose to his mother, to the vtter vndoing of the King his Father, and of all his fauourites. For the heire of England being in forraine parts, among the contrary faction, all the consultation was (vnder colour of ruining the Spensers,) to accomplish far∣ther matters. The Prince, hauing (at Boys de Vincens) done his homage for that Dutchie and County to his vncle Charles de Valois King of France, was (as also the Queene his mother) sent for backe by the King about Michaelmas; but the Queenes conspiracie be∣ing not yet ripe, shee deferred to obay, detaining her sonne still. (54) There went ouer with the young Prince, among many others, Walter Stapleton, Bishoppe of Polyd. Verg. li. 18. Excester, who perceiuing into what familiarity the Lord Roger Mortimer was growne with the Queene, which Tho. Wals. seemed greater then either stood with her honour or dutie, and seeing both him and other of the Kings enemies, and fugitiues enioy that priua∣cie in counsell, which was assigned to himselfe, who was now (as being none of theirs) Th. de la More. excluded, retur∣ned secretly (though vnsent for) into England, faith∣fully (as it became a good man) declaring his know∣ledge. (55) The King now clearely beholding his er∣rour in his dangers Polyd. Ver. li. 18 The Queene and Prince proclai∣med Traitors. solicited the King of France to send home his wife and sonne, but that not succee∣ding, he caused them Tho. VVals. Polyd. Verg. lib. 18. Fabi n. Their death plotted by the King. openly in London to be pro∣claimed enemies of the Kingdome, banishing them with all their adherents out of the same. For his more assurance also hee caused the Ports to bee most nar∣rowly watcht. Finally, to draw all his dangers to a short dispatch, there was (as was supposed) a plot laid for M. Fox. Act. & Mon. p. 464. col. 1. making away the Queene and Prince, but Gods will was to frustrate it. (56) The Queen, on the other side, fearing that the Ypod. Neust. Spensers gold had laid traines to blow her whole proceedings vp in France, kept herselfe out of the way, till with the Prince, the Lord Roger Mortimer, and other their adherents, they were safely gotten into Henault: There might bee some other reason also and necessary to moue Queene Isabel to depart out of France, beside the doubt of that kind of cor∣ruption in the Peeres thereof: as to turne off a warre from thence being her natiue Country, which for her cause was afflicted in the Sea-strengthes therof; for Sir Iohn Oturwin, Sir Nicholas Kiried, and Sir The English scowre the nar∣row seas. Iohn de Felton, with the Nauie of the Ports, and of o∣ther places, had by commission from the King so scowred the narrow Scas, that they within a short time brought into England as lawfull prize, Tho Wals. an hun∣dreth and twenty Norman shippes or vessels. Moreo∣uer, whereas those two Bishoppes which the Pope had sent, were returned sorrowfull out of England, not onely without doing any good on her behalfe, but also without hope of doing any, shee might ea∣sily be perswaded that the sword must doe it, or no∣thing. (57) But in Henault shee found most honourable and louing welcome of the Earle, where, therefore An. D. 1326. A. reg. 19. (without the consent or aduise of the Peeres of Eng∣land) shee ensured (saith our Tho. de la More. Author) that delight and terrour of the whole world, her sonne, being then about foureteene yeeres old, to Philippa the said Earles daughter, and with the money of her portion waged souldiers out of Henault and Germany, to tran∣sport into England. There her friends expected her arriuall dayly, of which the Bishoppes of Hereford and Lincolne were not meanest: Her men and Na∣uie being now readie, shee with her sonne the Prince, the Lord Edmund Earle of Kent his vncle, Harding. c. 176. Aimerie de Valence Earle of Pembroke, the Lord Iohn of He∣nault, the Earle of Henaults brother (a valiant Gen∣tleman) the Lord Roger Mortimer, and many other English-men of name and note, with aboue two thou∣sand and seuen hundred Henowayes and Germans, vn∣der the leading of the said Lord Iohn, arriued at Or∣well in Suffolke vpon the Friday before Saint Micha∣els day. (58) Her arriuall being reported to the King (who was, poore Prince, not onely destitute of friends and The kings pro∣ceedings after the Queenes arriuall. meanes, but as it seemes, of courage, and counsell al∣so) it did not at first seeme credible. The truth ap∣pearing, he demaunded assistance of the City of Lon∣don, whose answere was, That they would honour with all dutie, the King, the Queene, and Prince, but would shut their gates against forreiners, and traitors to the Realme, and with all their powers withstand them. In this answere the King and his few friends reposing no assurance, he committed an errour worse then that former of sending his sonne out of England, by retiring himselfe into the West, with his insepara∣ble fauourites the Spensers, Baldocke and others there, to raise a force against the Queene: but before hee went, hee left his other sonne, the Lord Iohn (cal∣led of Eltham) in the Tower of London with the Coū∣tesse of Glocester, the Kings Neece, wife to the yon∣ger Spenser Earle of Glocester, committing the Tow∣er it selfe to Sir Iohn de Weston, who was well proui∣ded of men and victuals. Hee commanded all men also to destroy and kill the Queenes partakers, none excepted but her selfe, her sonne, and Edmund Earle of Kent, the Kings brother by the Father, and that none, vpon paine of death, and losse of all that they might leese, should aid or assist them: and that hee should haue a thousand pound, who did bring the Lord Mortimers head. Thus tooke hee his last leaue of London, and in a maner also of his Rule or Domi∣nation. (59) On the contrary part, there repaired to the Queene the Earle Marshall, and Henry Earle of Lei∣cester, the Bishops of Lincolne, Hereford, Ely, and of Barons, Knights, and armed Souldiers no small multitude, whom aswell to retain, as to draw more, letters and rumors flew about, declaring (though falsly) that the King of France had in the aide of his sister sent so many Dukes, Earles, and others, that England could scarse suffice to feed them. This, for such whom the opinion of warlike strength would winne: but those whom shew of Religion might moue, it was as cunningly, and as falsly spread, that the Pope had excommunicated all such as did take armes against the Queene, and (the more to Thom. de la Moor. countenance the fiction) that two Cardinals im∣ployed about the Premisses, were seen in the Queens Campe. Then was it proclaimed that the causes of her comming were to deliuer the Realme from the misleaders of the King, which were named to be the Spensers, Roger Baldock Bishoppe of Norwich, Lord Chancellor and their Fautors; all others to be Ypod. Neust. safe, and that nothing should bee taken from any other subiect without true payment; but finally, that he who broght the yonger Spensers head should haue two thousand pounds. These things first thus ordered, the Queen with her sonne and whole pow∣er pursues the King (as it had beene agreede by the Councell of warre) taking first her way to Oxford: where the Tho. de la Moor. whole Vniuersity being called together, in the presence of the Queene, the Prince, Roger Mortimer and the rest of that troope, the Bishop of Hereford (the Queenes bosome Counsellor) preach∣ing to them on this Text, 2 Kin. c. 4. v. 19 My head, my head aketh, de∣liuered to them the reasons of the Queens comming with her Army, concluding (more like a Butcher then a Diuine) that an aking & sick head of a kingdom, was of necessity to be taken off, and not to be tampered with by any other physicke. (60) The Londoners in fauour of the Queene, and hatred of the Spensers committed sundry outra∣ges, The Londoners for the Queene. besides bloudy sacrilege in cutting off the Bishop of Excesters head, and some others (whom the King had made Guardian of London) in their popular fury, among the which one of them was a Citizen of their owne Iohn le Marchal, who had beene of the yonger Spensers acquaintance. The Tower of London they get into their possession, placing and displacing the Garrison and Officers therein at their pleasure, vnder the name of the Lord Iohn of Eltham, the Kings se∣cond sonne, whom they proclaimed Custos of the Ci∣ty, and of the Land. They also set at liberty all pri∣soners, which by the popular Queenes commande∣ment was done through the whole Realme: and all banished men and fugitiues were reuoked; who all Ex Hist. quae Brut. dicitur. MS flocking vnto London, brought no small encrease to her forces. (61) Whither in the meane space doth wofull Edward flie? what force, what course, what way takes hee poore Prince? O fearefull condition of so great a Monarches State, when a Wife, a Sonne, a Kingdome are not trusted, and those onely are tru∣sted who had nothing strong, but a will to liue and die with him. The Queene passing from Oxford to Glocester (onward to the siege of Bristow Castle) grew all the while in her strengths like a rowled snow-ball, or as a Riuer which spreades still broader from the fountaine to the Ocean, Verg. Aene. 3 vires acquirit eundo. For thither repaired to her (for the loue of the young Prince) the Lord Percy, the Lord Wake, and others aswell out of the North, as Marches of Wales. But Edward (hauing left the Earle of Winchester, the el∣der Lord Spenser, in the Castell of Bristol for the kee∣ping thereof) meditates flight with a few into the Isle of Lundie in Seuerne Sea, or into Ireland, & while hee wandreth about not finding where to rest safe, his roiall credite, name, and power, (like a Cliffe which falling from the toppe of some huge rocke, breakes into the more pieces, the farther it rolles) are daylie more and more diminisht as they scatter, till now at last they are come vnto a very nothing. After a weeke therefore spent vpon the Sea, Sir Thomas Blunt for∣saking him, and comming to the Queene, he came on shore in Glamorganshire, where with his few friends hee entrusted himselfe to God, and the faith of the VVelsh (who indeed still loued him) lying hidden among them in the Abbey of Ypod. Neust. Tho. de la Moore. Neath. (62) Now had the Queene and her sonne (for his name was abused to all sorts of turne-seruings) The elder Spenser put to death. taken the elder Lord Spenser at the Castell of Bristol, who (without any forme of triall) was cruelly cut vp aliue and quartered (saith de la Moore our Knight) being Tho. VVals. Historia quae Bruti dicitur MS. first at the clamours of the people, drawne and hanged in his proper Armories vpon the com∣mon Gallowes without the City: but his grand∣child Hugolin stood so valiantly in defence of himself within the Castell of Kerfilli, that hee had his life and the liues of all his assistants saued. (63) The King not appearing, Proclamations were euery day made in the Queenes Armie, decla∣ring, Proclamations recalling the king. Tho. Wals. That it was the common consent of the realm that hee should returne, and Act. & Mon. p. 465. col. 1. receiue the gouerne∣ment thereof, so as he would conforme himselfe to his people. This (whether Stratagem or Truth) not preuailing, Henry Earle of Lancaster the late Earles Brother, Sir William la Zouch, and Rhese ap-Howell a Welshman, who all of them had Lands in those parts where the King concealed himselfe, were sent with coine and forces to discouer and take him. The Queene and her people lay in the City of Hereford, the Episcopall See of that great Tho. de la Moor cals him, Omnis bui s mali Archi∣tectum, but the Actor was doubtles Roger Mortimer. The Prince Custos or high keeper of Eng∣land. Arch-plotter of her courses Adam de Orlton, where by aduise and consent of the Lords, her sonne the Duke of Aquitaine was made High-Keeper of England, and they as to the Cu∣stos of the same, did sweare him fealty. And here al∣so the Bishoppe of Norwich was made Chancellor of the Realme, and the Bishoppe of Winchester Treasurer. (65) What will not money, diligence and faire words doe; with corrupt dispositions, euen to euer∣ting of all bands of either religious or ciuill duties? By such meanes therefore the desolate, sad, and vn∣fortunate King, 16 Calend. Decēb. came into his cosen of Lancasters hands, and with him the yonger Lord Spenser Earle of Glocester, Robert Baldock Lord Chancellour and Simon de Reding, there being no regard had to the detention of any other. The King was conueied by the Earle from the place of his surprise to Monmouth, to Ledburie, and so to the Castell of Kenelworth belon∣ging to the Earle of Leicester, who was appointed to attend him, that is, to keepe him safe. The other three, Spenser, Baldock and Reeding were strongly guarded to Hereford, there to bee disposed of at the pleasure of their most capitall enemies. (66) Before whose comming to satisfie Roger Mor∣timer, the Lord Edmund Earle of Arundel, and two Gentlemen Daniel and Micheldene were beheaded at Hereford: The Lord Mortimer was so high in the Queenes fauour, that she could doe no lesse (as weee may suppose) then gratifie him with a few hated heades. But (Mortimer) there will bee a time, when the cry of this, and other bloud sacrificed to thy priuate reuenge (while thou abusest the publike trust) will neuer giue ouer the pursuit, till it hath deseruedly drawne thine in lieu thereof. (67) The Lord Spenser and the rest, Continu. Nich. Triuet. MS. on whom VVilliam Trussell the Iudge gaue sentence of death, The yonger Spenser put to death. being now drawne to Hereford▪ the said Lord being clad in his coat-armour, was most despitefully drag∣ged to the place of execution, where being first hung vpon a gallowes fifty foot high, hee was afterward headed, and cut into quarters; they who brought him to the Queene, hauing the promised summe of two thousand pounds distributed among them for re∣ward. His head was set vp at London, and his quar∣ters in foure parts of the Kingdome. Simon de Reding was hanged ten foot lower then hee in the same place. (68) This Execution (saith Walsingham) was done M. Fox Act. & Mon. pa. 465. col. 1. vpon a Munday in reuenge of the death of Tho∣mas Earle of Lancaster, whose bloud was likewise shed vpon a Munday. Robert Baldock late Lord Chan∣cellor was committed to the keeping of the Bishop of Hereford, who after a time caused him to bee brought vp to Hereford-house in London, where the tumultuous people (not without the Bishoppe of Herefords secret approuement as was said) tooke him violently away, and (though he were a Priest) thrust him into Newgate, where they vsed him so vn∣handsomly, that albeit they had no accusation, but onely for being faithfull to his Soueraigne, where∣with to Tho. de la Moore charge him, he not long after died in pri∣son; to whom (saith De la Moore) might be applied that of Quintilian, Whosoeuer is kild by torment, ouercomes the Tormentor. An. D. 1327. An. Reg. 20. & vlt. King Edward yeelds to resigne his Crowne. Torquentem vincit quisquis occi∣ditur. (69) The mournefull King being at Kenelworth Castle, there repaired thither the Bishops of S. Th. de la More Win∣chester, Hereford, and Lincolne, Tho. Wals. two Earles, two Ab∣bots, foure Barons, Polych. lib. 7. c. 43. two Iustices, three Knights for euery County, and for London, and other principall places (chiefly for the fiue Ports) a certaine chosen number, selected by the Parliament, which then the Queene and her Sonne held at London. The Bishops of Winchester and Lincolne (as it was agreede vpon) came thither before any of the rest, aswell to giue the King to vnderstand what kind of Embassage was approaching, as to prepare him by the best Argu∣ments they could to satisfie the desire, and expecta∣tion of their new moulded common-weale, which could onely be by resignation of the Crowne, that his Sonne (whom the body of the then confused State had elected) might raigne in his stead. (70) When they were admitted to his presence, (the Earle of Leicester being by) they together so Reasons to per∣swade his resig∣nation. wrought him, partly with shewing a necessity, partly with other reasons drawne out of common places, throughly studied for that purpose, that (though not without many sobs and teares) hee finally did not dissent, if his answere were truely reported (which Hist. Bruti MS. som doubt of; vnto the Parliament. Tho. de la More For they tolde him that the Common-weale had conceiued so ir∣reconciliable dislikes of his gouernment, the par∣ticulars whereof had beene opened in the generall assembly at London, that it was resolued neuer to endure him as King any longer. That notwithstan∣ding, those dislikes had not extended themselues so farre, as for his sake to exclude his issue, but that with vniuersall applause, and ioy, the Common-weale had in Parliament elected his eldest sonne the Lord Edward for King. That it would be a ve∣ry acceptable thing to God, willingly to giue o∣uer an earthly Kingdome for the common-good and quiet of his Country, which they said could not otherwise bee secured. That yet his honour should be no lesse after the resignation, then it was before, onely him the common-weale would ne∣uer suffer to raigne any longer. They finally durst tell him, that vnlesse hee did of himselfe renounce his Crowne and Scepter, the people would neither endure him, nor any of his Children as their So∣ueraigne, but disclaiming all homage and fealty, would elect some Polyd. Ver. li. 28 other for King, who should not bee of the bloud. (71) The whole Company sent by the body of State (if it may bee called a Body which then had no * Tho. de la Moor. Head there) from London, where it attended their returne, being placed by the Bishoppe of Hereford, according to their degrees, in the Presence Cham∣ber at Kenelworth Castle, the King gowned in blacke came forth at last out of an inward roome, and pre∣sented himselfe to his vassals, where (as being Priuie to their errand) sorrow stroke such a chilnesse into him, that hee fell to the earth, lying stretched forth in a deadly swown; The Earle of Leicester, and the Bishoppe of Winchester beholding this, ranne vnto him, and with much labour recouered the half-dead king, setting him vpon his feet. As rufull & heauy as this sight was, we read not yet of any acts or effects of compassion expressed towards him at this present; so setled (as it seemed) was the hatred and auersion. The King being now (we cannot say) come to him∣selfe, but to the sense of his misery, the Bishoppe of Hereford declares the cause of their present Embas∣sie, and running ouer the former points, concludes as before, saying, (as in the person of the common-wealth) That the King must resigne his Diademe to his eldest sonne, or after the refusall suffer them to elect such a person as themselues should iudge to be most fit and able to defend the Kingdome. (72) The dolorous King hauing heard this speech, brake forth into sighes and teares, and being (saith his Sir Tho. de la Moore his ser∣uant. most fauourable reporter) more ready to sacri∣fice his body for Christs cause, then once to behold the disinherison of his sonnes, or (through his occa∣sion) the perpetuall disturbance of the Kingdome, (as knowing, saith he, that a good shepheard should giue his life for his flocke,) made at the last his an∣swere to this effect. Pol. Virg. lib. 18 That hee knew that for his many sinnes hee was falne into this calamity, and therefore had the lesse cause to take it grieuously: That much he sorrowed for Tho. Wals. Thom. de la Moor. this that the people of the Kingdome were so exasperated against him, as that they should vtterly abhorre his any longer rule and soueraignety: and therefore he besought all that were there present to Polyd. Verg li. 18 forgiue and spare Tho. VValsin. him being so afflicted. That neuerthelesse Tho. de la More. it was Tho. VValsingh. greatly to his good pleasure and liking, (seeing it Tho. de la More. could none other be on his behalfe,) that his el∣dest sonne was so Tho. Wals. gracious in their sight and there∣fore hee gaue them Tho. de la Moore thanks for choosing him to be *Tho. VValsing. Polyd. Verg. lib. 18. their King. (73) This being said, there was forthwith a pro∣ceeding to the short ceremonies of his resignation, which principally consisted in the surrender of his Diadem and Ensignes of Maiesty, to the vse of his son the new King. Thereupon Th. de la More. Sir William Trussel (as being a Iudge who could fit them with quirks of law to colour so lawlesse and treasonable a fact) on the behalfe of the whole Realme renounced all ho∣mage, and alleagiance to the Lord Edward of Caer∣naruon late King. (74) The forme of that renunciation, as being ob∣solete, you shall haue in the like Polychr. lib 7. c. 43 obsolete words of Treuisa, which was this; I William Trussel, in name of all men of the land of England, and of all the Parliament Procurator, resigne to thee Edward, the homage that was made to thee sometime; and from this time forward now following, I defie thee, and prine thee of all royall power, & I shall neuer be tendant to thee as for King after this time. Which being done, Sir Thomas Blunt Knight, Stew∣ard of the houshold, by breaking his staffe, resigned his office, and declared that the late Kings family was discharged. (75) Edward being thus dekinged, the Embassie rode ioyfully backe to London to the Parliament, with the resigned Tho. VVals. Ensignes, and dispatch of their employment. Here (for that this seems the last houre of his raigne and kingly state) wee will make a stop, referring you for the rest to the next Kings life, vnder whose name and abused authority they were acted. (76) Notwithstanding, wee may not forget in all these doings to call to mind, who it was that sate at the helme of State, ouerlooking, and ouerswaying Queene, Prince and all; to wit, the most ambitious and vindicatiue man liuing, Roger Lord Mortimer of Wigmor: for, as for the Tho. Walsingh. Queene, when shee was (God knowes how farre guilty,) aduertised of her husbands dethronization, shee outwardly expressed so great extremity of passion (notwithstanding that at the same time shee was tolde of her sonnes surro∣gation) as if shee had beene distraught in her wittes: which the Prince her sonne (then about fifteen yeers of age) beholding, hee made an oath, neuer to accept of the Crowne against his fathers good will; and thereupon it was (saith Walsingham a Writer worthie of beliefe) that the said Embassie was sent to Ke∣nelworth Castle, (where the now no more a King re∣mained) to worke his assent, whose answere thereunto (saith Hist. Bruti. MS. another) was by those Messengers related at full, and fuller then in truth it was sent by the King; but the Peeres then in Parliament made their vse there∣of, in procuring such a Prince to take the rule of thē, whom they hoped, by reason of his tender yeeres, themselues should be able to rule and ouermaster. His Wife. (77) Isabel, daughter to Philip the Faire, King of France (sister to Lodowicke Hutin, Philip the Long, and Charles the Faire, all Kings of France) was married to Edward the second, at twelue yeeres of age, in our Lady Church of Bulloigne, the 22. of Ianuary, 1308. Shee was his wife twenty yeers, and his widow thir∣ty, and liued threescore and three yeeres. Shee died at Risings neer London, the two & twētieth of August 1357. and was buried in the middest of the Gray-Fry∣ers Quire in London, the 27. of September following. His Issue. (78) Edward (surnamed of VVindsor) the eldest son of K. Edward and Queene Isabel his wife, was born at the Castle of VVindsor, the thirteenth of October, the yeere of Christ, 1312. and the sixt of his fathers raigne: hee was created Prince of Wales, and Duke of Aquitane, in a Parliament holden at Yorke, Anno 1322. and in the troubles of the Realme and ab∣sence of his Father, in an assembly of Lords met at Hereford, and in presence of the Queen, was made L. VVarden of England by a common decree: vnto whom all the Lords made their fealty, in receiuing an Oath of Allegiance to be faithfull and loyall vnto him as to the Lord Warden of the Realm: and short∣ly after, the Father deposed, hee was crowned King of England, by the name of Edward the third. (79) Iohn (surnamed of Eltham) the second sonne of King Edward and Queene Isabel his wife, was borne at Eltham in Kent, the 15. of August, and yeere of Christ, 1315. and at twelue yeeres of age was cre∣ated Earle of Cornwall in a Parliament, Anno 1327. and third yeere of the raign of King Edward his bro∣ther: hee died in Scotland vnmarried, in the flower of his youth, the tenth of his brothers raigne, and yeere of Christ, 1334. (80) Ioan the eldest daughter, and third child of King Edward and Queene Isabel, was borne in the Tower of London; shee was maried being a child at Barwicke the eighteenth day of Iuly, in the fourth yeere of the Raign of King Edward her brother, 1329 to Dauid Prince of Scotland, sonne and heire appa∣rent of King Robert Bruce, whom he succeeded with∣in one yeere after in the kingdome, being but seuen yeares of age, and was the second King of Scotland of the name of Dauid; shee was his wife twenty and eight yeeres, and being come into England to visite her brother, shee deceased here without Issue, in the two and thirtieth yeere of his Raigne, 1357. and was buried at the Gray-Fryers in London. (81) Elenor, the second and yongest daughter, & fourth child of King Edward and Queene Isabel, was the second wife of Reynald the second, Earle of Gel∣der, married vnto him with a portion of fifteen thou∣sand pounds 1332. being the sixt yeere of the raign of king Edward her brother, who being the Vicar ge∣nerall of the Empire, to the Emperour Lewis of Ba∣n r, created him first Duke of Golder: shee had issue by him Reinald and Edward both Dukes successiuelie after their Father without Issue; the later of them leauing his Dutchie and his wife to his Nephew Wil∣liam Duke of Gulik his halfe sisters Sonne. EDVVARD THE THIRD, KING OF Monarch 49 Edward III. ENGLAND, AND FRANCE, LORD OF IRELAND, &c THE FORTIE-NINTH MO∣NARCH OF ENGLAND, HIS RAIGNE, ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XII. T He sicknesse and wounds which the commonwelth The happy change vnder King Edward 3. sustained by the raigne of the late deposed king, vp∣on the change of her Leach and Physitian, re∣couered not onely health and strength, but beautie also and ornament; and the elements themselues, which in the former times seemed to suffer and sym∣pathize with the publike grieuances of the English, grew Ranulph . Cest. Thom. Walsingh. gratious and propitious to the vse of man, the Aire becomming more healthfull, the earth more fruitfull, as if Nature herself were priuie to the worth of the succeeding Prince. But this his worth did not display it selfe, vntill hee had plucked the sway of things out of the hands of the Queene his mother, and of that aspiring danger and tempest of England, Roger Mortimer who wholy possessed her. (2) This Edward of Windsor, being not fifteene yeeres of age, when (without any guilty thought in him) his throne was thus established vpon his Fa∣thers ruine, tooke the beginning of his raign by pub∣like sanction at the Tho. Wals. twentith day of Ianuarie, and by direction of such as sought to colour their trea∣sons against their deposed Soueraigne, proclaimed his peace in these words. Edward by the grace of God King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of Aquitaine, to N. N. our Sheriffe of S. Greeting. Because the Lord Edward our Father, late King of England, by the common Councell and Assent of the Prelates, Earles, Barons, and other the chiefe men, and the whole Comminaltie of the King∣dome, did voluntarily remoue himselfe from the gouernment thereof, willing and granting that we as his eldest sonne and heire, should take vpon vs the rule and regiment of the same, and we with the counsel & aduise of the Prelates, Earls & Barons be∣fore said, yeelding therin to our fathers good plea∣sure, and will, haue taken vpon vs the gouer∣nance of the saide Kingdome, and as the manner is, haue receiued the Fealties and Homages of the said Prelates and Peeres. Wee therfore de∣sirous that our peace for the quiet and calme estate of our people should bee inuiolablie obserued, do will and commaund you, that presently vpon sight of these presents, you cause our Peace to bee o∣penly proclaimed through your whole Baily∣wicke, forbidding all and euery one on our be∣halfe, vnder paine and perill of disinherison, and losse of life and limmes, not to presume to violate or infringe our said peace, but that euery one pur∣sue or follow his actions, and complaints without any manner of outrage, according to the lawes & customes of our Kingdome▪ for wee are ready & alwaies wilbe, to administer full right to all & sin∣gular cōplainants, aswel poor as rich in our Courts of Iustice. Witnes our selfe, &c. in the 1 Februa. Calends of February vpon sunday being Candlemas Eue. (3) Vpon the Candlemas day it selfe, the young King receiuing the Order of Knighthood, by the King Edward prouided for warres with Scotland. hands of the Earle of Lancaster, and vpon the same day the Crowne of England at Westminster, Walter Archbishoppe of Canterburie performing the offices accustomed therein, iudged nothing to bee sooner thought vpon then to recouer the honour of his Na∣tion vpon the Northerne enemies, whom his vnex∣perienced youth, and their former happinesse had emboldened; in which preparation while hee was busied, the Queene his mother, and her Mortimer, forgat not other things tending to their owne bene∣fite and assurance. (4) First therefore there was procured for the Queene mother so great a Dowry, that the young Mortimers high practises. King had scarce a Ypod. Neust. third part of the Kingdome left for his maintenance; which excessiue estate, in title the Queenes, in the vse was Mortimars, and from this treasonable defalcation and weakening of the roiall meanes, hee sinewed his owne deuises with authoritity and riches; so that his hatred against Spenser was not on behalfe of the Common-weale, but for that any one should abuse it for his priuate but himselfe. Lastly, when they had cer∣taine intelligence, that sundry great persons and o∣thers, as the whole order of Friers-preachers, tooke pitty of the late Kings captiuity, and seemed to consult for his deliueranco, they knowing that by re∣couery of his former estate, their iust confusion must follow, they resolued to strength n (as men supposed) their other impieties with murther. (5) For albeit the Queene in her outward gestures pretended nothing but sorrow for her Lord & hus∣bands distresse, yet in stead of bringing to him her person (which the deposed Prince did wonderfullie Tho. de la More loue) shee onely sent vnto him Tho. UUals. fine apparrell & kind letters, but contrary to the lawes of God and man, withdrew her selfe from nuptiall dueties, bestowing them (as the fame went, which will blab of Princes as freely as of meaner Dames) vpon the bloudy Adulterer Mortimar, fathering her absence vpon the State, which (she fained) would not suffer her to come vnto him. The desolate Prince was hereupon taken from Kenelworth Castle, by expresse order from the Grafton. young King, at their procurement, for that the Earle of Lancaster (Lord of that peece) was suspected to pitty too much his calamitie. Hee was deliuered by Grafton. Indenture, to Sir Thomas de Gour∣nay the elder, and Sir Iohn Mattrauers, two mercilesse and most vnworthy Knights. Tho. de la More. (6) These two Instruments of the Diuell, ha∣uing conducted him first to the Castle of Corf, then The late King Edward murthered. to Bristol, and lastly in great secresie, and with more villanous despite, then it became either Knights, or the lewdest varlets in the world, as (out of Sir Thomas de la Moore, you may reade at large in the collecti∣ons of Annali. Iohn Stow) to the Castle of Barkley, where af∣ter many vile deuises, executed vpon him in vaine, they Hector. Boet. & mnes. more then barbarously murthered him. (7) Neuer was the fallacie of pointings, or am∣biguitie A bloudie fallacy or Sophisme. of Phrase more mischieuously vsed to the destruction of a King, or defence of the Contri∣uers, then in this hainous Parricide, for it is said that a bloody Sophisme conceiued in these words was sent; Tho. de la Moor Edwardum occidere nolite timere bonum est To shed King Edwards bloud Refuse to feare I count it good. Where the Comma or pause being put after Nolite, bid them not to make him away, but after timere, in∣sinuates a plaine encouragement to the fact. (8) The Sphynx who is said to be the Author of The Actors for∣ced to flie the Country. this ambiguous Riddle, sent by the Lord Ioh. Stow. Mortimar, was Adam de Torleton, who Lanquet. Grafton. Fabian. Tho. de la Moore. vtterly denied any such intention, when the Murtherers for their owne iustification, produced the writing it selfe vnder Queene Isabels Seale, and the seales of the other Conspirators, and therefore the said Bishoppe A∣dam was the cause, why Gorney and Mattrauers were with terrible menaces shaken vp, pursued and out∣lawed, who more pursued with the memory and con∣science of so hainous a Tragedie, fled out of England. Gorney after three yeeres banishment, being discoue∣red at Massels in France, and apprehended, was con∣uaied backe, but had his head taken off at Sea, in his passage, Tho. de la Moor Tho. Wals. lest he should reueale too much at his arri∣uall, but Mattrauers lay hidden in Germanie a long time, doing pennance. (9) This Parricide was committed about S. Ma∣thews day, and (that you may note what confidence The murthered Edwards bodie laid to view. they had in their Art of secret murther, as also an or∣dinary mockage of the people in like cases) the noble body was laide forth, and Walsingham. many Abbots, Priors, Knights, and Burgesses of Bristol and Glocester were sent for to see the same; vpon which, although there appeared no manifest outward sign of violent death, but the skinne all ouer whole and vnbroken, yet the cry of murther could not so bee smothered, but the meanes and manner came to light. This happi∣nesse certainely the poore Prince had, that after his emprisonment hee reformed his life in so pious & Christian sort, that it gaue occasion when hee was dead of disputation, whether Ranulp. Cest. hee were not to bee reputed a Saint, euen as (say our Authors) there was Tho. VValsing. Fabian. the like Question concerning Thomas Earle of Lanca∣ster, though beheaded for apparant Treasons. His body Polyd. Verg. l. 18 without any funerall pompe was buried a∣mong the Benedictins in their Abbey at Glocester, and so (saith Tho. de la Moor. our passionate author) the stately height of the Angels Kingdome receiued this Scholler, and Disciple of Christ, thus rest and spoiled of his English Kingdome. (10) The yong King was now vpon the borders of Scotland with a puissant Armie, where also the The Scots enui∣roned, escape. Queene mother, and Mortimar, with many other Nobles were present, and hauing enuironed the Scots (who had pierced into England with inuasiue armes) in the woods of VViridale and Stanhope Parke, made Adam Merimouth Holinsh. Act. & Mon. sure account of a certaine victorie; but by the trea∣son of the said Lord Mortimer (as afterward was laid to his charge) they were suffered to escape out of that mischiefe, and the young King with griefe returned inglorious after an huge waste of treasure, and peril of his owne person. (11) For while the English hoast thus held the Scots, as it were besieged Sir Iames Dowglasse in the dead of night, with about Froishard. Ypod. Neust. two hundreth swift horse assailed the Kings owne Pauilion, and missed so little of killing him, that a Priest his Chaplaine a stout and Hector Boet. loyall man was slaine in his defence, and Sir Iames escaped backe without hurt, but not without honor for his bold attempt. In the Scots Campe Fox in Acts & Mon. one no∣teth, that the English found fiue hundreth great Oxen and Kine ready killed, a thousand spits full of flesh, ready to be roasted, fiue hundred Cawdrons made of beasts skins, full of flesh, ouer the fire seething, and about Hect. Doct. ten thousand paire of raw-leather shooes, the haire still vpon them. In King Edwards Armie were (as Grafton some write) thirty thousand Archers, and fiue hundreth good men of Arms, which perhaps is one of the greatest hoasts that you shall lightly reade to haue been of our Nation, and the reason was, for that the world conceiued such hope of the young King, that many more went Tho. VValsin. voluntary then con∣strained. All which puissance was notwithstan∣ding thus eluded. (12) About this time died strucken with leprie, Robert Bruce King, and recouerer of Scotland, and the A. D. 1328. Tho. Wals n Edw 3 Hect. Boet. writes that King Robert died 7. Iun. A. D. 1329. An. reg. 24. whom wee haue therein reason to beleeue most approued Warriour of the world in that age, by whose losse it was soone found, how much the vertue and fortune of one man are worth in any Na∣tion. But before hee died, that peace was made with the Scots by the meanes of the Queene and the Lord Mortimer, which is so much dispraised by our Writers, and in the end proued capitall to the prin∣cipall Actor Mortimer. (13) For at this treaty it was that the King (then in his Minority) sealed Charters to the Scots at Nor∣thampton, The peace with Scotland at the Parliament of Northampton. whose contents were contriued by the Queene, the said Lord Mortimer, and Sir Iames Dow∣glasse, without the priuity of the English. There was also deliuered to them that famous Euidence called the Act. & Mon. Ragman Roll, and the King acquited them of Tho. Wals. all Geor. Buchan. Hect. Boet. claime and pretence of right to the Superiority of Scotland, rendring backe sundrie Iewels taken by the English from the Scots, among the which was one speciall, called the Blacke Crosse of Scotland. There was it also granted, that Fox. Fabian. Grafton. all Englishmen should leese their lands in Scotland, vnlesse they would inhabite vpon them, and becom Liege-men to the King ther∣of, besides many other things to the high discon∣tentation (as was the humor of those times) of the English Subiects. Moreouer, vnder the specious colour of restitution of dammages, King Robert was to pay to King Edward thirty thousand Marks ster∣ling, with which (as the meed of treason) the Lord Mortimer was afterward publikely charged, and for the same, and other his crimes was executed as a Traitour. Finally, vpon the seuenth of Iuly, Dauid Bruce Prince of Scotland, a child of seuen or eight yeeres old, and sonne and heire to King Robert, mar∣ried Ioan, sister to K. Edward at Berwicke: by which peace the English were made-obnoxious to some re∣proaches, the Scottish Nation in scorne, calling the said Lady, Iane Make-Peace. (14) And therefore saith one of this part of King Edwards raigne: that drawne aside with euill aduise, by reason of his age, hee committed many foule errors in E. S. lib. 3. com∣mentariol. de rebus gestu. Brit. State, at the beginning of his Gouernment: which is also the generall opinion of all our Writers, whereunto this verse is by Vowels. Holinsh. some applied; Vae pueri terrae, saepissimè sunt ibi guerra, Where Children Rulers are, There oft is woe and war. (15) There died likewise about this time Charles the Faire, King of France, (to whom King Edward had not long before done homage for his Dutchie of Gascoigne) the third and last sonne of Philip the Faire, King of France, by whose decease the Crown of that noble Kingdome, deuolued to this our Edward King of England in right of his mother Queene Isa∣bel: And because vpon this Polyd. Verg. Title king Edward did afterward claime the said Crowne, wee will here once for all instruct you in the iustice thereof. (16) Three sonnes there were of King Philip the Faire, (to wit, Lewis Hutin, Philip le long, and Charles the Faire) who all successiuely raigned in France one after the other; and none of them leauing any Issue, at such time as king Edward made his claime, the whole right seemed to be in Isabel the onely Child of the said Philip which had any issue, for an other sister which shee had died an Infant. (17) The case thus seeming plaine, was not for such accepted by the French, who receiued to the Crowne Philip of Valoys, whose father Charles of Valois was yonger Brother to Philip the Faire, aduan∣cing the Brothers sonne before the daughters son, not following the propinquity or descent of blood, but the meliority of sexe, vpon which ground they had also freshly put by Ioan daughter of Lewis Hu∣tin, preferring Philip le long her vncle. The French in barre to her interest, pretended a fundamentall law or entaile, by which ex Sa ca. which law▪ as their greatest Lawyers since acknowledge, no whit concerneth the French Crowne. Ho tomanni Fran∣cogall a. cap. 8. no woman was inheritable to the Crown of France, and in defence of that opinion with∣stood King Edward afterward with so much losse and calamity, though that very law made Edwards title the stronger ( Chart. Original. Ed. 3 de iure suo in Reg. Gal. as himselfe truely pleaded) hee being the Male, albeit his right descended by the Fe∣male. (18) This Title to so glorious a Monarchy though it accrewed to the English, by this match with Queen Isabel, yet doth Walsingham Ypod Neust. & E w. 2. freely pronounce; That neither that affinity, nor any other contracts with the French, was euer auaileable or brought any benefite to England: which opinion as it may seeme strange, so will it answere a wise Readers paine in the fruit, to obserue through the course of our stories, whether the said graue Writer had iust occasion so to speake or no. Another conceit there was of this Edwards King Edward marries Philip the Earle of Henaults daugh∣ter. marriage with Philippa the Earle of Henaults daugh∣ter, which about this time was consūmated, though Philip de Valoys (king of France by intrusion as our Annales repute him) was her vncle, her mother be∣ing his owne sister. (19) There stood now at home against the stream of the Queene, and her Lord Mortimers absolute sway, some great personages, who did not wholy al∣low their doings, among which was the Kings vn∣cle, Edmund Earle of Kent, whose death they shortly procured. Meane-while the more to despite and dare their ouerlookers, Roger Mortimer was created Earle of the Marches of Wales, at a Parliament holden at Salisburie: at which time also Iohn of Eltham the Kings Brother was made Earle of Cornwall, and the Lord Butler of Ireland Earle of Ormond. From whence the Lord Henry Earle of Lancaster, and sundry other of the Peeres, seeing the King Tho. VValsing. in fine Edw 2. troden (as it seemed to them) vnder foot, did absent themselues, medi∣tating ciuill armes for redresse, who notwithstan∣ding (by the labour of Simon de Mepham Archbishop of Canterbury) was reconciled: This Archbishoppe very worthily also excommunicated all such as had any hand in the sacrilegious parricide of that This worthy Prelate founded Exceter Colledge, and also Hart-hall in Oxford. noble and loiall Prelate Walter Bishoppe of Excester, or any waies violated him, their aiders, complices or abet∣tors whosoeuer. But after the Coronation of Phi∣lip the yong Queene, in another Parliament at Win∣chester, the said Earle Edmund was condemned for conspiring to deliuer his brother, late King of Eng∣land, Edmund Earle of Kent the Kings vncle put to death by practise whom (likely inough by Mortimers practise) he was drawne into an absurd beliefe to bee still aliue. Thus, for deuising to set a dead man at liberty, this noble Earle Edmund the kings half vncle had his head strucken off, though from Tho. Wals. Harding. Noone till fiue at night, hee stood at the place of death without the Castle-gates, none being found to behead him, till a base wretch of the Marshal-sea was sent, and did it: so little conscience did the malice and ambition of his po∣tent aduersaries make of shedding the Roiall bloud, which by Gods iuster iudgement was not long vnre∣uenged. (20) To supply which losse to the regal stemme, with a very large amends, the young Queene Philip An. D. 1329. The Blacke Prince borne. Adam Merim. at Woodstocke in Oxfordshire, vpon 15. Iune, being Friday, brought forth her first begotten sonne, the amiable and famous Edward, by-named (not of his colour, but of his dreaded Acts in battell) the Blacke Prince. King Edward not long after with a small companie went into France, and did homage to Phi∣lip de Valoys for his Dutchie of Gascoigne. (21) Nemesis, or rather Gods vengeance with swift pace did now approach and summon Mortimer to a bloudie account; for the yong King addicting him∣selfe The fall of Mor∣timer. to serious thoughts, and putting on the Man before his yeeres required, easily saw his owne pe∣rill in the others potencie. The Queene his mother (to the common dishonour and griefe of the King∣dome) being generally bruted to be with child by Mortimer, hee vpon ripe aduise sodainely and aduen∣turouslie surprised the proud man at Parliament hol∣den in Nottingham; with whom were taken the L. Geofrey Mortimer his sonne, and Sir Simon de Bedford saith Adam Merimouth Bereford saith Holinshead. Burford saith Stow. Bedford, who all three were sent prisoners to the Tower of London, vnder a strong guard. Which done, the king by common consent of the Parliament tooke into his hands his mothers excessiue Dower, & put her to a narrow pension of Adam Merim. Ypod. Neust. one thousand pounds by yeer, circumscribing her within as narrow Holinsh. limits for her abode, but doing her yeerely the honour and com∣fort of once or twice visiting her, though otherwise scarce thinking her worthy of life, in regard of her priuacie with Mortimer, and his many heinous pra∣ctises. (22) Oh, what enchantments are Honour and Power to the minds of men! how sodainely, and how strangely doe they blow vp the same with the contempt of others, and forgetfulnes of themselues? Certainely the fraile estate of mans constitution is clearelie seene in this high Lord, who drunken with felicitie, and fearing neither God nor man, fell into vtter confusion when least hee feared. The probable manner whereof is worthy the relating. There was The manner of Mortimers sur∣prise at Nottin∣gham. in the Castle of Nottingham (and at this day is) a cer∣taine secret way or Mine cut through a rocke, vpon which the said Castle is built, one issue whereof ope∣neth toward the riuer of Trent, which runnes vnder it, and the other venteth it selfe farre within vpon the surface, and is (at this present) called Mortimers hole; through this, the young King well armed, and Uide Io. Stowes Annals. stronglie seconded, was conducted with drawne swordes, by some his trustie and sworne seruants, (among which was that braue Montacute, whom his vertues vnder this King raised to the Earledome of Salisbury, &c.) vp to the Queenes Chamber, whose dore (so feareles is blinded affection) was vnshut, and with her was Mortimer (the kings Master as the ru∣mor spred him) readie to go to bed, whom with the slaughter of a Knight, and one or two that resisted) they laid hold vpon. This was not reputed a slender enterprise, in regard that in Mortimers retinue were not fewer (they say) then one hundreth and foure∣score Knights, besides Esquiers and Gentlemen. (23) The causes for which hee was condemned in open Parliament at Westminster, these ragged Mirr. of Mag. verses following comprehend, which without any disparagement to their makers iudgement, might ve∣rie well haue beene in Prose, but for breuitie and change wee haue here inserted them. Fiue heinous crimes against him soone were had, First that he causde the King to yeeld the Scot (To make a peace) townes that were from him got. And therewithall the Charter called Ragman; That of the Scots hee had bribed priuy gaine. That through his meanes S r . Edward of Carnaruan, In Barckley Castle most traiterously was slaine. That with his Princes mother hee had lain, And finally with polling at his pleasure, Hadrobd the King and Commons of their treasure. But the most barbarous murther of the kings father, and speciallie the dishonourable peace and contract with the then professed enemies of England, were principallie insisted vpon as hainous treason. He was after sentence ignominiouslie drawne to Tyburne, the common place of execution, then called the Elms, and there vpon the common Gallowes was as igno∣miniouslie executed, hanging (by the kings com∣mandement) two daies and two nights, a publike & gladsome spectacle. There died with him Sir Si∣mon de Bedford Knight, & Iohn Deuerel Esquier, aswell for expiation of the late King Edwards death, as in complement, as it were of so great a mans fall, whose liues doe seldome, or neuer perish single. (24) Now came Scotlands turne about to suffer a∣gaine most grieuous losses and afflictions, an ordina∣rie effect of Childrens gouernment, whether Children in age, or in discretion: for the Lord Edward Baliol hearing of King Roberts death, and the tender age of King Dauid as son and heire of that Baliol, to whom king Edward the first had adiudged the Scotish crown, with such voluntaries as hee could raise (though his Father the Lord Iohn had Hector. Boet. released his claime to king Robert, and though King Edward in fauour of his si∣ster Ioan Queen of Scotland, would not openly at first Ypod. Neust. support him) embarkt himselfe in Yorkeshire, and in∣uaded Hect. Boet. that Realme, where, vpon his landing, he slew Alexander Setoun at Kingorn, and about nine hundred others, putting the rest to flight. Not long after (that no mischiefe might come alone) neere to the water of Ern, at a place called Dupline, where the Earles of Mar and March, with two puissant armies The Balliols two victories against the Scots. of Scots, for the defence of their yong King Dauid lay encamped, the said Lord Edward (whose small numbers, not exceeding three thousand English, the Earles as securely and as fatally contemned, as the English vnder Edward the second had contemned the Bruce and his Scots) obtained of them a wonderfull victorie. Boetius (who neuer, or rarely, leaues any o∣uerthrow purely to the manhood of the English) will needs haue this discomfiture effected by a Camisado, the Baliol and his English with others passing the water of Erne by a Foord in the night, when the e∣nemy little suspected it. (25) The slaughter euen by his report was mi∣serable: for there were slaine (saith he) the Earles of The great slaugh∣ter of Scots at Du∣pline or the wa∣ter of Erne. Marre and Carricke, and three thousand of the No∣ble, beside Commons. Our Adam Merim. Tho. VValsing. Writers agree that this Foord was passed in the night, but that the fight endured from Sunne-rising till three of the Clocke afternoone, and that, besides the Earles of Marre, and Carricke, three other Earles, Menteth, Athol, and Murrey, twelue Barons, eight hundreth knights and men of Armes, beside aboue thirteene thou∣sand other, lost there their liues. Of the English there were onelie slaine thirty and three Scutifers. Esquiers: so that not without cause this victory was attributed rather to power diuine then humane. (26) Yet this was but the beginning of farther The Baliol crow∣ned king of Scotland. calamities to the Scotish Nation, which was in it selfe diuided into factions, the one for Bruce, the other for Baliol. The Lord Edward making vse of his good fortune, got himselfe to bee crowned King of Hect. Boet. Georg. Buch. Scotland at Scone. But king Dauid Bruce with his Queen fled into France to Philip de Valoys, who raigned there, & entertained them with much compassion and ho∣nor, giuing them Castle Galliard for the place of their abode, till fairer fortune shone. Meane-time the Scots sustained new dammages; for a prime man among them, the Lord William Dowglasse, was taken prisoner by the English, not without losse of many his men. Before which time by Adam Merim. Tho. UUals. no honourable meanes the new King of Scotland was driuen to seeke his safety by flight into England. (27) King Edward considering those foiles which his father had endured, and the oportunity of the Berwick besieged by the English. time, neither holding himselfe lyable in honour to that contract made on his behalfe by the predomi∣nant sway of his mother and her Paramour Morti∣mer, as wherein hee tooke both himselfe, and the rights of his Crowne to haue beene wronged in his minority, which in point of gouernement hee was more bound to respect then his Sisters estate, and for that hee was informed that the Towne and Castle of Berwicke belonged to the Crowne of his Realme; hee raised his power, and hauing with him Edward the new-crowned of Scotland, hee laid siege to that Towne and Castel in May. But before hee did this, there is who writes, that he summoned his Rich. Grafton: brother in law King Dauid to doe homage and fealty vnto him, which when Dauid would not yeeld to doe, nor confesse hee ought, no more then his fa∣ther King Robert, hee made that a ground for the iu∣stice of his warre, as reputing the Acts and releases at Northampton void. (28) To the rescues of Berwicke, Archimbald King Edwards victory at Haly∣don-hill. Dowglas Earle of Angus, Gouernour of Scotland for King Dauid, came with a puissant Army, and gaue King Edward battell at Halydon-hill, where with a lamentable slaughter of his people he was vanqui∣shed and slaine. This battell deuoured in a manner all the remainders of the Scottish Nobles which pre∣serued it selfe at Dupline by retrait, or by absence from that field. There Hector Boet. perished besides Archim∣bald, the Earles of Ros, Sutherland, and Carricke, three sonnes of the Lord Walter Steward (whose issue after∣ward raigned in Scotland, when warre and death had made way to that line, by extirpation of the Male-Competitors in the races of Bruce and Baliol) and at least foureteene thousand others, with the losse (say some) of one Knight, and ten other Englishmen. Our Adam Merim. Walsingham. Writers affirm that the Scots were at this battell, threescore thousand strong, and that there Ypod. Neust. were slaine eight Earles, 1500. horsemen, and of the com∣mon Souldiers fiue and thirty thousand; which is not improbable, for so much as Hector confesseth they were stopped in their flight, and put to the sword vp∣on all sides without mercy. (29) Hereupon Berwicke was rendred, which the King of England detained as a supposed parcell Berwicke rendred of his Patrimony, and dismissed the Baliol to the gouernment of the Scottish Kingdome, with sundrie Lords and others of the English. And now the blou∣die tallies and cruell scores seemed euen betweene the two puissant (though then vnkind) neighbour-Nations, and Edward throughly redeeemed the di∣shonour sustained at Banocksbourn by his late father, deliuering his younger yeeres from that contempt, in which his enemies might otherwise haue holden him, as they had done at the entrance of his raign, playing vpon the English with Truffes and Rounds; of which this one is euery where noted; Long beards heartlesse, Painted hoods witlesse, Gay coates gracelesse, make England thriftlesse. Fabian. (30) As for the subornation of poisoning Earle Thomas Randal, and the hanging of Sir Alexander Se∣tons two sonnes, contrarie to faith and law of Arms, at Berwicke with the like staines which Hect. Boet. one would faine leaue vpon this victorious Prince, wee haue found no colour of warrant but his owne liberty of auouching, which therfore our freedome of not be∣leeuing him shall as easily take away and cancell. Nei∣ther would wee so farre haue touched this iarring string of discord betweene these two Nations, but that each out of their owne harms of old, may haue the more true sense of their felicity, by their new har∣monicall concordance. (31) After that the Hect. Boet. Nobles of Scotland had vnanimously confirmed Baliol in the kingdome thereof, and sworne vnto him faith and allegiance An. D. 1333. at Perth, hee repaired to the King of England at Newcastle vpon Tine, where hee Adam Merim. Ypod. Neust. submitted to Ed∣ward King of England, as his Father had done to Edward the first, and with the like successe; for by occasion of such his submission, our Writers say, the Scots (as before they had done) fell off againe, Which auersion, or defection was augmented vpon Hect. Boet. priuate quarrels, and titles of inheritance to lands of great value, betweene powerfull Competitors, and by other particular reuenges, to which a people so continually exercised in fight and battels were not slowlie prone. (32) Notwithstanding all which (the Balliols party hauing once had all the Holds of Scotland at Edward King of England againe in Scotland with an Armie. their commandement, Hect. Boet. fiue onely excepted, Dum∣britaine, Lough ijm, Kildrummie, Vrwhart, and the pile of Lowdon) Edward king of England hauing with him the Balliol, and a sufficient Army, preuailed so much, that there was no appearance of rebellion; whereupon hee tooke backe with him the Lord Edward Balliol late crowned king of Scotland (of whose sted fastnes hee was (saith Hector) alwaies iealous, & returned, leauing Adam Merim. Dauid Cu in Earle of Athol, go∣uernour for the parts beyond the Scottish sea, with sufficient force and authority (as was iudged) to take in such strengthes as yet stood out, but needed not his royall power or presence for their expugna∣tion. (33) The King of England hoping now that all was well there, had newes brought vnto him not The Lord Robert Stewart against the Baliol. long after, at the Parliament at London, that the Scots were out in Armes againe; whereupon hee obtaines aid of money from his Subiects for repres∣sing their attempts, promising to goe against them in person. Hect. Boet. The Lord Robert Stewart, sonne of the Lady Mariorie Bruce, daughter of King Robert (vp∣on whose line the remainder of the Crown of Scot∣land had beene estated) was the man that first lifted vp the head of his Country in this dangerous, sad, and desolate condition (though put into action vp∣on a priuate iniurie done vnto him by the Earle of Athol) to whom diuers did adhere, though the quar∣rel seemed properly to be the said L. Roberts, for that if the Bruces were cut off, his hopes perished in them. The Earle of Murray and he were then chosen go∣uernours for King Dauids party, but by reason of the diligence and power of Dauid Earle of Athol, they were not able as yet to conuene, or effect any thing against the English. neuerthelesse it was not long before they slew the said Earle Dauid. At this Parliament the King of England purposed to Adam. Merim. goe vpon his owne charge into the Holy-Land, and to send the Archbishoppe of Canterbury to deale with King Edwards ouerture for the Holy Land. Philip de Valois King of France, for appointing a cer∣taine time, wherein they two with their vnited for∣ces, might take their voyage thither, from which the desire of obtaining the Crowne of France, vpon the fore-mentioned title, did quickly diuert him. (34) Mean-while, in accomplishment of the Par∣liaments The King of England once more with an Armie in Scotland. expectation, King Edward after Ypod. Neust. Michael∣mas marched againe into Scotland with an Armie, and sent his Nauie to the Forth: The Sea-Force wher∣of▪ spoyled the Coasts on both sides of the Forth, or Scottish Sea, and putting on land in Saint Colms, they spoyled the Abbey; which Sacrilege, Lib. 15. Sacrilege puni∣shed. Hector notes was seuerely punished, the whole Fleete being bat∣tered with tempest, and some of the ships perishing. At another time also the like sacrilege being perpe∣trated there, (hee saith) that the shippe wherein the vnlawfull prize was, sunke sodainely to the Sea-ground without any tempest. The King himselfe comming to Hect. Boet. Perth, to order the Scottish affaires, whiles hee abode there, the Earle of Murray one of the Gouernors was taken Prisoner, who was after Fabian out of the French Stories. Grafton. deliuered vpon Exchange for the Earle of Namur, (whō the Scots by like Art had taken) or as Hector wil haue it, for the Earle of Salisbury. (35) By the mediation of the French, the Scots * Hollinsh. A. D. 1334. King Edward the fourth time in Scotland with an Armie. had a short truce granted them. But about the end of May, the King sent his cosen the Lord Henry, sonne to Henry Earle of Lancaster, with a great Ar∣my to the aid and seruice of the Lord Edward Balliol King of Scotland, which wasted all the Countries a∣bout Perth; where, while they lay, the King with a very small Company came sodainely vnto them, and from thence pierced farther one way then euer his Grandfather Edward had done, suffering fire & death (the common furies of warre) to worke vpon all that might suffer destruction to establish a Con∣quest. Hee marcht vp as farre as Adam Merim. Elgin and Bu∣quhan, and in his return to Marre, Hect. Boet. burnt the Towne of Aberden, in reuenge for Adam Merim. Sir Thomas Rosselin, a Knight, whom the Townes-men thereof had slaine. The Lord Robert Steward had great landes in those Bellind. trans. of Hect. Boet. lib. 15. cap. 7. parts, for Murrey and Buquhan were his, which also the young Prince Edward, many Earles and great Captaines, with a gallant Company of men of war, In Iuly. sailed to Antwerpe, whom Lewis the Emperour met at the City of Colein, where amity was confir∣med, and King Edward was constituted his Lieute∣nant, with full authority to gouerne in his name on this side Colein. By reason of which Vicegerencie King Edward Fabia made out his commandements, and did many things to his aduantage and profit. How∣soeuer it neither lasted long (for Lewis within a while dishonourably reuoked it,) and did vndoubtedlie scarce quit the cost: for the brauery of that meeting was so exceeding great, as Edward easily wan the ge∣neral opiniō of a very noble & puissant king. Histor. lib. 19. Polydor writes, that Edward refused not the office, yet would not exercise the same, because he would not displease Pope Benedict, whose enemy the Bauarian was. (49) This Emperour (whom belike the Pope hated, for being as proud as himselfe) tooke it ill, The King of Englands prero∣gatiue. T . W lsin. (as report went) that the King of England humbled not himselfe (at their meeting) to the kisse of his foot. But it was answered; that the King of Eng∣land was a King annointed, and had life and member in his power, and therefore ought not to submit himselfe, so much as an other King that was not an∣nointed. After his returne to Antwerpe with his new power, hee seriously prosecuted his affaire of confederation with the Lords and people of Dutch∣land, among whom (with great loue and fauour) he and his royall family abode aboue an whole yeere. The principall Nobles which entred into this league against the French were these. The Archbishoppe of Colein Prince Elector; The Duke of Brabant; The Duke of Gelderland, (who had married the Lady Isabel King Edwards owne sister, and about this season was of an Earle created a Duke; The Marquesse of Gulick, &c. And finally, the Hanse townes. (50) The Flemings, being the most necessary part * Polyd. Ver. li. 19 An. D. 1338. The first quarte∣ting of the French Armories with the English. of this association, in regard of their neerenes to the French, would not engage themselues in an offensiue warre against the Crowne of France, vnlesse King Ed∣ward would first assume the Title and Armories of that Realme, as the onely lawfull King therof. This * Adam Me m. Tho. Wals. in Edward. 3. Ypod. Neust. Proposition was throughly debated, and the law of Armes allowing it, hee with the common assent of the Flemings and others, tooke the Stile, and quarte∣red the Flower de Lize with the Leopards, or Lions of England, as here we see annexed; albeit wee see his former Seale also adorned with two Lize or Lillies; whether in token of his mothers French descent, or as a couert note of his own right to the Frenchcrown it is vncertaine. (51) Polydor In Guli l. 1. l. 9 Virgil must haue a warie and fauou∣rable Reader, or hee will bee thought to bee of o∣pinion, that William the Conqueror bare his Leopards quartered, then which nothing is more vntrue, nor more vnlikely. Others againe may suppose, that we haue not here described them according to their right bearing, as certainly according to their present bearing wee haue not; but the truth is, the golden Lillies of France, which now are borne in triangle, were in those dayes born, and aduanced Semi. (52) And whereas the Armories of France are placed here in the dexter and more honorable quar∣ter, The Armes of England set before those of France at the first. Sir Robert Cotton hath such a seale of Q. Is bel. yet there are probabilities, that it was not so at this their first coniunction. For in the* Seale of Queen Isabel (this King Edwards mother) the Armories of England, as being the Armories of the husbands line (and therefore to haue precedence) were marshalled where now the Flower de Luces shine. But whether to gratifie the French, or because that was the more ancient and greater Monarchie, they were in this Kings raigne disposed as here we see. (53) When King Edward had thus assumed the Title and Armes of that Realme, hee published the same vnder his seale, setting the name of England first, and sent his Letters Patents to the frontiers of the e∣nemies Dominions, fixing them vpon the dores of Churches, aswell to declare the right and reason of his doings, as to exempt such from the danger of the comming storme, who vpon this notice would acknowledge him their Lord and rightfull Soue∣raigne. These proclamations or admonishments thus diuulged, he burnt and spoiled the North parts of France vp as farre as Adam Merim. Tho. VValsing. Turwin, though the time of the yeere were very vnseasonable, and contenting himselfe therewith for a beginning, gaue place to the sharpenesse of Winter, returning to the Queen his wife at Antwerpe where hee kept a roiall Christ∣mas. In which City this yeere was Lionel (after∣ward Duke of Clarence) borne. (54) His affaires growing ripe in those parts, he leaues his Queene and Children in Brabant, as an as∣sured pledge of his returne, and about Candlemas shippes himselfe for England; where in a Parliament King Edwards pardons and grants in lieu of his Subiects contributions▪ at Westminster, he obtained liberall aids for suppor∣tation of his intended Conquest. In lieu of which louing assistances, hee granted a generall large par∣don both for trespasses, and of all Aides for making his sonne Knight, and for marriage of his daughter during all his time; forgiuing also all arrerages of Farmers and Accountants till the tenth yeer of his Raigne, and all old debts due to any of his Pre∣decessors. Finally, hee confirmed that famous Magna Charta, and of the Forest with some other. (55) There was no talke now but of conquering France; Musters taken throughout the Kingdom, Armourers and trades of warre (to be cherished euen in the securest peace) were full of employment, and the desire of battell waxt feruent euery where. Meane while to hold the world in suspense of the successe, God distributed the fortune of attempts diuersly. Burdeaux (the capitall City of Aquitaine, and then English) gaue an excellent testimony of her A Strategem of the loyall. loyalty, nor lesse of martiall witte and valour. For the French Armie comming before her, she to abuse their hope, set open her gates, and displayed vpon her Towers the golden Lillies, as if shee were theirs; but the French which securely entred, found little good hospitality. Sir Oliuer de Ingham was Captain and Lord Warden there for King Edward, who with his Garrison-Souldiers, and aide of the inhabitants, slew of them great multitudes, and preserued Bur∣deaux. But in the opposite parts, William Montacute Earle of Salisbury, and Robert Vfford Earle of Suf∣folke, Tho. VValsin. after many honourable deedes performed for aduancement of King Edwards affaire, were by the French taken Prisoners, while presuming too much vpon their courages and fortune, they * ran too far into their danger, at the Towne of Lile in Flanders. (56) But King Edward being ready now to re∣passe the Seas, had certaine intelligence that the Gagiun. Serres. French lay in wait about Sluice in Flanders, to in∣tercept him with a mighty Nauie of 400. shippes; who therefore prepared accordingly, intending to open his way by force. He set saile from Harwich vpon Saint Iohn Baptists Eue, toward the Coast where his enemies attended, strengthning himselfe Tho. Wals. with the Northerne Nauie of England, which the I. Robert Morley brought vnto him, so as hee had in all about two or three hundreth saile. His battels A very great vi∣ctorie at Sea obtained by King Edward. hauing the aduantages of windes and sunne, hee set on the French with incredible furie and force, in the very mouth of the Hauen of Sluice vpon Mid∣sommer day, where beganne a most bloudy and ter∣rible fight, the end whereof set the Garland vpon King Edwards head. Himselfe was Serres, Holinsh. wounded in that fight, and lost Rich. Southw. foure valiant Knights (Mont∣hermer, Latimer, Boteler, Poynings) with sundrie other of his English slaine therein. But the slaugh∣ters of the French party were lamentable, for thir∣ty thousand are confessed to haue perished, not halfe of their shippes escaped vntaken or vnsuncke. A greater glory then this, the English are scarse found to haue atchieued at any battell at sea. (57) The Crowne of France seemed already to bee placed vpon King Edwards Temples, so much was attributed to this great victory, but such a Con∣quest was not the worke of one day. Which King Edward well vnderstanding, refreshed his victori∣ous Armie, and augmenting it with his Confede∣rates forces (which repaired to him on all sides) mar∣ched forth, hauing one of the most puissant hosts that euer any King of England led, as wherein were neere an hundreth thousand Souldiers English, and Dutch. Hee had also in his Company the Dukes of Brabant and Gelder, and many other potent mem∣bers of the Empire, and (as Serres. some write) the im∣periall Eagles displayed in the head of his Armie, as hee that was Vicegerent of the sacred Roman Em∣pire. In this wise hee approached the Northerlie parts of France, where exposing all to spoile & fire, he sate downe with his whole Forces about Turney, meaning to take in the same, aswell to bee a seate of Warre, as place of sure retreat and refuge. (58) Philip, though iustly grieued with his wo∣full losse sustained at Sea, yet to encounter, and crush so great an euill in the first approaches ther∣of, had prouided such an Armie, as beseemed the Maiestie and greatnesse of that renowned Kingdom. Writers speake of an hundreth thousand fighting men assembled vnder his command, and that be∣sides Princes, Dukes, Earles, and other illustrious Persons, there was the valiant old King of Bohemia, and Pol. Virg. lib. 19. Lewis king of Nauarre. K. Edward hearing the same, drew forth his people into the open field with purpose to giue battell: (59) It may seeme a thing greatly tending to King Edwards glory, to remember the Tho. VVals. offer which hee sent to King Philip before hee laid his siege to Turney. In which, without saluting him by any o∣ther title then of Philip of Valors, hee challengeth him, for auoiding the effusion of Christian bloud, to fight with him hand to hand in single battell; or (if that misliked) then each to bring an hundreth to the field, and trie the euent with so small an hazard; or otherwise, within ten dayes to ioyne full battell with all their forces neere to Turney. Whereunto Philip made no direct answere, neither with his ho∣nour could, alledging that the letters were not sent to him, the King of France, but barely to Philip of Valois. Neuerthelesse, hee gaue him to vnderstand, that his meaning was to beat him out of France, ha∣uing hope in Christ (from whom hee deriued his power) so to doe. (60) The honour of the warre in those ages can∣not bee enough commended, in which the noble old formes of hostility were put in practise, by de∣fiances, Heraldes, and publike assignations of day and place of fight, and not by skulking surprises and vnder-hand stealthes, more neerely resembling high-way robberies, then lawfull battell. (61) These two huge hoasts (which had they beene vnited for the good of Christendome, might haue worthily made the Turke looke pale) being now in sight, and the cloud of warre ready in a manner to dissolue it selfe into showers of bloud, doe neuerthelesse without one stroke fall off, and re∣turne to their seuerall Countries, not without the wonder and reioicement of peaceable men, but not of the English and German Souldiers, who pro∣pounded to themselues death with glory, or riches by Conquest and victory, who now had scarse their wages. (62) It is not meet that the name of that person who did performe so blessed an office, should bee concealed. It was a woman of honour (but at that time a professed Serres. Nunne in the Abbey of Fontenels) the Lady Iane of Valoys, sister to this Philip, widdow of William late Earle of Henault, and mother to King Edwards wife; her charitable endeauors were strong∣ly holpen by Ypod. Neust. two Cardinals, who sollicited peace together with her. Great interest of mediation she had in either respect, here a brother, there a sonne in law, and shee failed not to plie them both. The Truce was concluded; the rather for that King Phi∣lip was aduised from all parts, not to set his whole fortunes vpon the Die and chance of a Battell. And Edward (on the other side) meaning nothing lesse, then not to haue prosecuted the war vpon the en∣couragement of his late Sea-victorie, was so desti∣tute of money through the fault of his Officers in England, as hee was the sooner drawne, if not en∣forced to embrace so honest a colour of returning from the siege of Turney; which neuerthelesse did but deferre the miseries of France, not determine them: & whereas that glory, which the vpper hand in this iourney would haue brought, could not haue beene pure and meere vnto him, because the Dutch (whose aide hee vsed) would haue claimed no small share therein, the English Cheualrie onely had the name and burthen of such great Acts as after fol∣lowed. (63) The chiefe Articles of the truce were; That it should endure till Midsommer day then The chief points of the Truce. next ensuing, and that the Prisoners should be set at liberty without any ransome on both sides, vpon condition to render themselues againe, or pay their seuerall ransomes, if peace were not in the meane time concluded. By vertue of this treaty and truce, the Earles of Salisbury and Suffolke were deliuered. Here it troubled our Walsingham. VValsingham, that King Ed∣ward should bee left so destitute, and needy by the a∣uarice or fraud of his officers at home, as for that respect to giue ouer so faire an oportunity, by which hee might as it were by a continued line, and by in∣sisting and pressing vpon the steppes of his late suc- friend to life, gaue life notwithstanding about this The most noble order of the Garter instituted time to an inuention, which as for the present it ser∣ued (he hauing so great vse thereof for his French en∣terprises) as a vehement Incentiue to martiall va∣lour, and a golden band of vnitie, so the same is con∣tinued with likelihood of perennity, and multiplica∣tion of splendor in these our daies. It was the foun∣dation of the English order, worthily called the most noble order of the Garter. The causes why our Edward erected it, are not euident, though there could none be greater or better, then those before re∣cited; Honor expressed by externall and illustrious ensignes, deuised by a victorious Author, and ap∣propriated A. D. 1350. An. Reg. 24. The Patent of the foundation beares date 22. Reg. Edw. 3. saith Stow, who neuerthelesse placeth the first feast thereof at this yeare. to a fellowshippe of most exemplar and eminent persons, being in nature like a flame, to kin∣dle in the apt and worthy, al heroicke affections. The vulgar opinion is, that whatsoeuer the remoter cau∣ses were which moued to this foundation, the neere cause, or the occasion was, a Garter of his owne Queene (or as Cambd. Brit. in Barksh. some say) of the Lady Ioan, Coun∣tesse of Salisburie (wonder of that age for shape and beautie) which slipping off in a dance, king Edward stooped and tooke vp. Such of the Nobles as were present, smiling, and cauillatio∣nibus, Polyd. Verg. l. 19. in Edw. 3. playing in sport with that acti∣on of the Kings, as amouros, hee seriously said, it should not be long before there should Soueraigne ho∣nour be done to that silken tie. Whereupon hee after∣ward added the French Motte, or Symbolicall word HONI SOIT QVI MALY PENSE, aswell in complement of the whole inuention, as in retort or checke of his Courtiers sinister suspition. Polydor Virgil troubleth himselfe to make an Apolo∣gie for the coursenesse of this Originall, if (without iniurie) an office of honorable loue in so renowned a Monarch, may vndergoe the note of coursenesse; but the same Polydor among his other defences ther∣ef truly saith; Nobilitas sub amore iacet. There want not some who coniecture, that he enti∣tuled it the Order of the Garter, for that in a battell wherein he was victorious, hee had giuen the word Garter, for the word or signe. But if credite may be attributed to the originall Pe es D. Gulliel Dethick, Equitem auratum, oli Garter, principa∣lem Armorum Reg . Cambden in Brit. Booke of the Institution, the inuention is deduced from times more ancient, and that when Richard the first King of England, set forward against the Turks and Sarazens to Cyprus and Acon, and waxed wearie of longer delay, while the siege of Acon was with wonderfull care protra∣cted, courage at the length (by the comming of S. George among them as it was thought) quickning in him, it came into his mind to tie about the legs of certaine his choice Knights, a Garter or small thong of leather, the onely stuffe fitte for such a purpose, which hee had then at hand, to the in∣tent that they (as it were by ioint consent) being mindfull of future glory, if they were victorious, might bee stirred vp, to demean themselues nobly after the example of the Romans, with whome that varietie of Crownes or Garlands giuen for sundry causes as honourable Ensignes to the Soul∣dier was in vse; to the intent, that by such incite∣ments, they might shake off sloath, and the spirite of courage might rise, and breake forth the more feruently. (80) And into this opinion of stirring vp vertue thereby, the Cambden. Author of the Britannia seemeth to passe, where hee saith, that King Edward the third founded this Order, to Vt militarem vir em honori∣bus, praemijs atque splendors decora et adoru Martiall vertue with honors, rewards and splendor. (81) There was in the Castle of Windsor (the or∣dained seat of the Order now first to be consumma∣ted) before King Edward did accomplish his inten∣tion, in honour of God, Camd. vbi supr our Lady, and S. George, a Stow in Edw. 3 Chappell erected by King Henry the first, and o∣ther Progenitors of Edward, with an allowance for eight Canons, to whose Colledge this Prince added a Deane, fifteene Canons more, and twenty and foure poore impotent Knightes, with other officers and seruants, as appeareth by his Charter. These were to pray for the good estate of the Soueraigne and Brethren of the most noble Order. The Soue∣raigne and Knights themselues had their particular lawes and constitutions, which they were by solemn oath bound to obserue, of which one Polyd. Verg. in Edw. 3. was, That they should defend and assist one the other: which after∣ward made Alphonse Duke of Calabria receiue the habite of that Order with so exceeding reuerence at Naples, as erroniously thinking himself secured ther∣by from the French, who claimed that Kingdome. But that custome of mutuall assistance (saith Hist. Angl. lib. 26. in Hen. 7. Poly∣dor) was then worne out of vse, and discontinued e∣uery where; for those Italian Potentates who (within the memory of Polydor) being driuen forth of their Country, and imploring aid of those orders, wher∣of themselues were companions, found no suppor∣ture, either from the French or Burgundians, who had formerly elected them. Besides laws and Officers, King Edward also deuised particular Ceremonies & distinctiue habites and ensignements, whereof the principall was the azure Garter, wherein the French Motte of the Order was wrought in letters of gold, and the Garter it selfe fastned a little vnder the left knee with a buckle of gold, in In Concordiae symbolum, saith Camden. token of Concord. There are speciall Manuscript Bookes of the Con∣stitutions, and other things peculiar to this Order, to which (this place being not aptly capable of their recapitulation) wee must referre the curious. Saint George the Ioh. Canta z Imperat. Constant. in Apolog. 3 esteemed patterne of Christian for∣titude, is intituled to the Patronage of this Order, & the beauteous Chappell in Windsor Castle (where his 23 Apr. day is yeerely celebrated) consecrated by King Edward to his memory. The fortune of this inuen∣tion hath beene such, that the most mighty Princes *Camd. quà supra. of the Christian world haue thought themselues most highly honoured, in being chosen thereunto, so that there haue beene about two and twenty for∣raine Emperors and Kings (besides many others of most noble quality) since the first institution there∣of, elected and admitted Companions of the Gar∣ter. The Kings of England are in their seuerall times Soueraignes of the Order, and the whole number of Knights is circumscribed in twenty and six, where∣of the Soueraigne is one. The names of the first twenty and sixe (who are also styled Founders of the Order) you shall finde intabled in our Mappe of Folio 28. Barkeshire. (82) Our Edward Polyd. Verg. hauing thus honoured S. Geor∣ges memory, assigned to his Image mounted in Ar∣mour vpon Horsebacke a siluer Shield with a crosse Gules ( Faer. Qu. C . 1 lib. 1. the deare remembrance of his dying Lord) and Pol. Virg. in Ed. 3. appointed his Souldiers to weare white coats or Iackets, with a red Crosse before and behind o∣uer their Armor, that it was not onely a comely, but a stately sight to behold the English battels, like the rising Sunne to glitter farre off in that pure hew; when the Souldies of other Nations in their baser weedes could not bee discerned. The glory there∣fore of this Order seemed such to one, no Epitha. Thamis. apud Cambd. vnlearned Poet, that in an Apostrophe to Windsor, speaking of the Garter, hee breakes forth into these scarse Hy∣berbolicall verses. -Cappadocis quanquam sis clara Georgicirc; Militia, &c. Far spreads thy fame, wherewith S. Georges knights Hath made thee glorious; where rich-robed Peeres, Whose manly legs the golden garter dights, Combine that light which through all landes appeares. That now Burgundians scorne their Fliece of Gold; The French, th' Escalopt Collar setwith grace; Their Crossed weeds, Rhodes, Elba, Alcala, hold As worthlesse: all macht with thy George, are . (83) Let vs not dwell too long in the lesser things: It was the moneth of Iulie, and King Ed∣ward was now vpon the Sea with about a thousand Serres Saile. No man is said to know whether he bent his course, so well he could trust himselfe, and so wisely free his Councels from the possibility of discouerie. King Edward in France with bloody colours. Froissard. He went not to warre by rote, but by book; Wisdome was Herbenger and marshall of his valour; who shall say he knew not how to conquer? It was not long but he came to anchor in the Hauen of Hogy Saint Vast, in Constantine, a great cape of land or penile in Normandy. His Giou. Villain. land forces did muster twenty and fiue hundred horse, and thirty thousand foote, most of which were Archers. The lights, and glories of his Armie, were the Prince of Wales (then about six∣teene yeers old, who was then by his father knight∣ed) many braue Earles, Lords, Knights, and expert Chiefs, the English going cheerefullie, as hauing got∣ten such a King as answered their warlike dispositi∣ons. The Earle of Huntington had charge of his Nauy: himselfe takes seuere reuenge for the blood of his friends vpon the Norman Townes and people, protesting he sacrificed them Serres. to Clisson, Baro, Percie, and the rest. Their heads were set vpon the chiefe Gate of Carentine, for which cause hee slew all that could be found therein, and turning the whole town into Cinders gaue it to their funerall. He tooke the populous and rich City of Caen, & with his dreadfull host burning and spoiling round about, marched vp almost as farre as the very walles of Paris, brauing King Philip so neere. (74) Who had not slept all this while, but was Polyd. Verg. & omnes. purueied of one of the fullest armies which euer were seene in France. King Edwards people rich with spoile seemed not vnwilling to return. They were now in the enemies Country between the two good riuers of Sein and Some, for they had passed the Sein at Poissie, whose Bridge (as all other betweene Roan and Paris) had beene broken downe by the French, and now (notwithstanding any opposition) in a short space repaired. It was thought fit to seeke passage out of these straights, which could not be by Bridges, for they were broken by the French. This search for passage, was by the enemy interpreted a kind of flight, and Edward could not but be willing to nou∣rish their temerity, to draw them on securely to de∣struction by such a seeming feare. (85) The riuer of Some, betweene Albeuille and the Sea, at a low water hath a passable and grauelile foord, knowne by the name of Blanch Taque; this was discouered to him by one Gobin a prisoner. But the French King (best acquainted in his owne Coun∣trey) to empeach this passage, had before sent thether a Norman Baron of speciall note, one Godmar du Foy, and a 1000. thousand horse with at least 6000. foot; but Edward, (whom as obstacles made impetuous, so nothing could dismay,) enters himselfe into the Foord, Serres crying, He that loues me let him follow me, as one that resolued either to passe, or die. Who can tell the efficacy of such a Generals spirit, but they, who haue had the happinesse to follow vnder the conduct? The passage wan, and Du Foy defeated in a manner, before he was almost fought with, (the in∣comparable courage of his enemies appalling him,) he brought to King Philip fewer by a paire of thou∣sands, then he carried forth, besides terrour, and an euill signe of that which followed. The English, who knew not what it meant to run away, but were before resolued to liue & die with such a Souereigne, had reason now much more to resolue the same. (86) King Edward was neere to Crescie in the The great battel of Crescie. County Ponthieu, lying betweene the riuers of Some and Anthy (which vnquestionably belonged vnto him in right of his mother,) there most vigilantly prouides he for his defence. King Philip, set on fire with this disaster, precipitates to battell for accom∣plishment of Gods anger against France; being the rather drawne, by the vnruly vanity of his huge multitudes, (for by what other words doe *an hun∣dred Serres saith but 60000. or six-score thousand men deserue to bee cal∣ed?) who neuer left ouer-taking one the other, till the view of the English banners and battels put them to stand. We professe that the nature of our vndertakings will not brooke descriptions at large; you shall haue it as we may, that is, as remembring, that innumerable great atcheiuements rest behind, somewhat impatiently attending their relation. (87) Therefore, the holy name of God first ritely The English put into battell. inuocated, King Edward, without shewing the least signe of perturbation, but full of an Heroick assu∣rednesse, had ordered his people in three battels, with their wings and succours. The Vaward dispo∣sed into the forme of an Hearse, where the Archers Frolssard. stood in front, and the men of armes in the bottome, was vnder the yong Lyon of Wales, Prince Edward, and with him many of the prime and sagest Cap∣taines: Beauchamp Earle of warwick, Godfrey of Hare∣court, Holinsh. Graston. The Lords, Stafford, Laware, Bourchier, Clifford, Cobham, Holland, &c. In the second battell were, The Earles of Northampton, and Arundell; the Lords, Rosse, Willoughby, Basset, Saint Albine, Multon, &c. The third and last battell was commanded in cheife by King Edward himselfe, with the residue of his No∣bles and people. In euery one of these battels, be∣side the wings, were a iust proportion of men at armes and Archers, but nothing so thinne and few as some of our Grafton! writers alledge, who mention not aboue 9000. all together, who were at least thrice as many in their whole numbers, and not without need. (88) King Edward closed his battels at their back, (as if he meant to barricado them from flying,) by felling and plashing of Trees, placing his carriages there and other impediments whatsoeuer, hauing commanded Grafton. all men to put from them their hor∣ses, which were left among the carriages. Thus all Not an English∣man on horse∣backe in this battel. waies of safety by flight being preuented, the neces∣sity did vndoubtedly double their courages. Thus placed to the best aduantage, King Edward visiteth the ranckes in person, riding vpon a pleasant Froissard. Hob∣by, (hauing onely a white rod in his hand, as if hee would chastise fortune,) betweene the two marshals of his field; whose very presence, with a few seaso∣nable and vnenforced words on behalfe of God and his right, in steed of long Orations, did inspire the faintest hearts among them with freshest vigour and alacritie. (89) Our writers describe not vnto vs the quality or face of the gound of Crescy where this battel was determined (though verie much doth depend vpon choise of place,) neither the exact figures, or seuerall numbers of euery seuerall battel, their distances, wings or other warlike formes, nor finally what Pallisado, trench, or other deuise was in this or that quarter vsed, to keepe-off and breake the furious charge of men of Armes, before they came at the Archers, principall workemen at this bloody iour∣ney. The culpable ig∣norance and negligence of Generals. But thus lamely are things commended to Poste∣rity, where the Actors themselues take no care to see the particulars orderly and according to the truth delineated; but either are vnlearned, or giue them∣selues to the bodily fruition of their passed trauels, rather then to exercise their minds in profiting themselues and others by such relations as are made with life and art. This we find, that the place of the Englishmens battels was the Towne of Crescie, and Forest, and therefore apt with small labour to be made inaccessible, or at leastwise difficult for horse to enter vpon; that also the English battels were marshalled to the most aduantage for giuing succour one vnto the other; and that there were Poly. Verg lib. 19. Shields or Pauises to shelter our Archers from the Geno∣waies shot. (90) By this time King Philip (whose counte∣nance is Grafton. said to haue changed thereat,) was in sight of the English. Hee had with him the two Kings of Boheme and Maiorea, and almost innumerable other great Princes, Dukes, Earles, Barons and Gentlemen of inferior marke bearing armes; nor those onlie French, but very many of them Almains and Dutch, lest you should suppose, he had drawne away Lewis the Emperour from the friendship of K. Edward, to little purpose. The Serres. night before the battell, there alighted in the French hoast, with intention to lop off one branch of Laurell from the tree of vi∣ctorie (though it fell out to be Cypresse and Taxus) Amie Earle of Sauoy, with a thousand men of Arms; so that all things seemed to concurre to nourish fury for a sodaine ruine. Wee need not describe the order of the French, where disorder was a principall Actor: The Holinsh. King of Bohem, and Charles Earle of Alenzon, King Philips brother German, had charge of the point or vantgard, King Philip himselfe was in the maine battell, and the Earle of Sauoy had chiefe command in the Rere. (92) That is almost ridiculous, which Serres. one writes The Auriflambe of France, and Dragon of Eng∣land. of the etymologie of the Oiliflame (as he cals it) ad∣uanced at this battell, as a signe of taking none to mercie, no more (as he saith) then Oile doth vse to ex∣tinguish fire; when indeed it was an hallowed Sir Tho. de la More, apud Iohn Stow. Ban∣ner of red silke, whereof the French had a wonderfull *Gag . Elements of Armories. high conceit, as of that which was sent from heauen, and called Oreflame or Auriflames. King Edward on the contrary side, is reported for signe of like rigour, to haue erected there his vnconquered Standard of the Dragon-Gules. Lewis of Luxemburg, the most va∣liant old King of Bohemia, being either blind or verie badly sighted, hearing in what goodly order the Eng∣lish (like sober Spartan souldiers) attēded the charge, said plainelie (contrary to their ouer-weening iudge∣ments who had giuen out of their flight,) Here will the English end their daies or conquer. And euen as the first wounds were ready in a manner to bee giuen and taken, behold, God, to let them know he was a∣wake, and that there was one aboue to whom so ma∣ny thousands should within a few minutes appeare, to giue an account of their whole liues till that pre∣sent; hee caused the blacke cloudes to poure down vpon them store of funerall teares, enarching the ayre with a spatious Serres. Raine-bow, and discharging sundry tire and peales of thunder: the Sunne also, at the same time drawing neere to set, would gladly haue hid his face, by thrusting it vnder a partill Hollinsh. Froissard. E∣clypse; but God (who meant good to the English) would not suffer him to withdraw his more neces∣sary office, so that freed from that temporary sha∣dow, he shone directly into the Frenchmans eyes. At the same time also Walsingham. sholes and cloudes of balefull Rauens, and other birdes of prey and rauin, as fore∣shewing the haruest of carcases at hand, came flying ouer the French hoast. (93) The signe of battell being giuen by King Philip, and entertained with shoutes and clamors, all things shewing the horror of war, Drums & Trum∣pets sounding to a charge, Banners flying in the winde, and euery where shining weapons, menacing braue extremitie, reason herselfe acknowledged it onely safe to leaue them to their brute faculties, pas∣sion and furie, and the euent itselfe to God. The French calamities began at their Genowayes, who vn∣der Gio Villam. Carolo Grimaldi, and Antonio Dorta their Coro∣nels, being all of them Crosse-bowmen, were to o∣pen a way for the French horse with their shot. This was the successe of their seruice: Their Crosse-bow strings wet with the late raine, their bodies wearie The Genowayes defeated. with a long march, their rankes (after the English had intercepted vpon Polyd. Virg. l. 19. targets their first volue,) fil∣led with innumerable gappes, occasioned by the The Earle of Alansons furious temerity. fall of their fellowes slaine, or ouerthrowne with home-drawne arrowes, were lastly most outragiou∣sly scattered by Charles Earle of Alanson, at whose commandement (deriued from K. Serres. Philip himselfe) his horse gaue in among thē, to driue them by plaine murther from the honour ofhauing the point, vpon onely pretence that they hindered their race. This hote young Count (contrary to good discipline,) had also otherwise vniustly discontented and disgra∣ced them, euen when they were ready to ioin in bat∣tell, whose bodies (being as most write about twelue thousand) by bearing the first brunt might haue beene of great vse, if in nothing else, but in seruing as buttes and quiuers, to take into them the chiefe first stormes of the English arrowes. Whereas now The first confu∣sion of the enemy they themselues were not onely thus most miserably troden vnder foot, and put to the sword, but many of the French Gallants by that occasion mingled a∣mong them, were ouerthrowne by the English ar∣rowes, who equally pursued the destruction both of French and Genowayes, shooting thickest where the tumult and confusion were greatest. Some Grafton. ras∣cals also following the English Armie, as they saw opportunity, stept in among them, and holpe to cut throates, sparing neither Lord nor lozell. (94) The French men of Armes halfe out of breath with headlong haste, and terribly disorde∣red The French horse charge the English batta∣lions. with the perpetuall stormes of singing arrowes, were now at hand-strokes with the Princes battell; neither was it long, but that the shining Battell ax∣es, Battell. swords, lances, and other weapons of our nati∣on had lost their splendor, being couered with hu∣mane gore, which hauing thirstily drunke out of e∣nemies wounds, they let fall in bloudy teares. The fight was sharpe and fierce: but to what purpose serues writing, if the high resolution of the king of Bohemia should be vnremembred? he (as onely The king of Bo∣hemias high resolution and death. seeking an honourable graue for his old age) put him∣selfe into the first ranke of his owne horsemen, and with full randome charging the English, was slaine with sword in hand, the troupe of his faithfull fol∣lower▪ with their slaughtered bodies couering him euen in death. There lay this Trophea of the Eng∣lish Cheualrie, by whose fall (euidently seene in the ruine of the Bohemian Standard,) his noble sonne, the Lord Charles of Boheme (lately elected Emperor, whilest Lewis was as Lanquet. yet aliue) was wisely warned to prouide for himselfe, the matter appearing de∣sperate. For now was Philip himselfe in person, with the ful power of his Armie, come to the rescues of his brother and friends, who were hard at worke (while they had breath) about their dreamed victo∣rie, but finding the mettall infinitely more tough which they had to deale vpon, then they could pos∣sibly haue supposed, were beaten to the earth in great numbers. The young Prince neuerthelesse was not without danger, though now the second battell of the English, for preseruation of their Prince, dashing in among the enemies, fought most couragiously. (95) Therefore King Edward himselfe was sent vnto, whose battel houered like a tempest in a cloud, King Edward refuseth to aide his sonne the Prince. ouer which, vpon the hillocke of a Windmill, with his helmet on, (which neuer came off till all was done) he iudiciously watcht, beholding the whole field, and ready to enter into the conflict when iust necessity should inuite. You shall heare a most no∣ble answere: The messenger dispatched from the Earle of Northampton and others, Paul. Aemyl. in Philip. 6. Serres. Holinsh. His most noble answere. vpon a tender re∣spect to their young Princes safety, hauing declared to the King, that the Lords required his presence, for that his sonne was in danger, Paul. Aemyl. in Philip 6. Serres. Holinsh. he bad him return and say; Let them send no more to mee for any aduen∣ture that may befall, while my sonne is aliue; but let him either vanquish or die, because the honour of this braue day shall bee his, if God suffer him to suruiue. (96) The Messenger returned, and though hee brought not men to their succours, hee brought such accession of courage and spirite, as hee that should say that King Edward failed them at their neede, should neither vnderstand what belongs to magnanimitie, nor the effect of such a checke from so excellent a Generall: who neuerthelesse, was maturely watchfull o∣uer the good of his childe and people: on the other side King Philip (whose quarrell it was) King Philips person farre en∣gaged, escapes by light. did not forsake the duety of a noble Chiefe: but so long contended in his owne person, till his horse was Serres. Ypod. Neust. Adam Merim slaine vnder him with arrowes, himselfe *twice dismounted, and wounded both in the necke and thigh: but then the Lord Iohn of Henault, Earle of Beaumont, (who had long since quit King Edwards seruice) sets him againe on horsebacke, and the Serres saith, that King Edward came at last to the battell, and vvith his com∣ming made an end thereof. The former words sent to his sonne (which are also in Serres) infinu∣ate nothing lesse. French (out of a loyall desire to his preseruation) cri∣ed to retire him out of the fight, who rather seemed willing to end his dayes in so noble companie: which voice was as it were the vp-shot and last Gaspe of that most cruell conflict, where none as yet were ta∣ken to mercy vpon any termes. After their King had preserued himselfe, the whole power of the French gaue away, and sought to saue it selfe by flight, whom the English, warely fighting v∣pon the defensiue, and loath to hazard such a victo∣ry, by breaking their rancks to pursue the enemie too farre in the night time, (which now was come vpon them,) suffered them to be holden in chase by their owne iust feare, contented to make good their Hollinsh. ground, by standing still vpon their guard according to true discipline. For they saw not as yet the bot∣tome of their danger, and knew that there were so many escaped, as might well serue to ouerwhelme their Army with their multitudes. (97) King Edward seeing the coast for the present cleare of all his enemies, aduanceth with his vn∣toucht King Edward and the Prince meet. battell towards his victorious sonne, & most affectionately embracing and kissing him, said; Faire Sonne, God send you good perse erance to so prosperous beginnings; you haue nobly acquit your selfe, and are well worthy to haue the Gouernance of a Kingdome en∣trusted vnto you for your valour. To which the most cheualrous of young Princes replied in silence, most humbly falling on his knees, before his triumphant father. (98) Here there may be some controuersie, whe∣ther the exemplary manhood of the English, or their The modest and wi e behauior of the English. singular pietie, were more to be commended: but who will not infinitely preferre the latter, chiefly in Souldiers, among whom it is vsually most wanting? Great was the victorie, great was their prowesse, & great the glory; but they like true Christian knights and Souldiers, forbare all boast, referring the whole thankes and honour of their preseruation to God the true Author thereof. The night was so very darke, as if it had mourned for the day times bloud∣shed, therefore they made Gr ▪ store of fires, lighted torches, and candles, carefully tending their woun∣ded companions, and modestly reioycing in their owne faire aduenture. (99) But the next morning presented new work; for such a mist hauing ouerspread the earth, that they could scarse see hard at hand, yet were Ypod. Neust. Holinsh. The French are againe encoun∣tred and vtterly broken. Paul. Aemyl. saith that the English set vp French Banners, and by that stratagem drew them to destruction. new swarms of French abroad, who came from sundrie Cities and good townes, as Roan, Beauois, &c. to haue ioy∣ned with King Philip in the designed spoile of the English; these being mette with by King Edwards people, were in sundry places ouerthrowne and slaine, and multitudes of such as had lost their way in the last flight, were seuerely put to the sword, as the English chanced vpon them, Froissard. where they lay lurking in hedges, bushes, and by-wayes: The Earles of Northampton, Wil. North∣br gh apud Rob. de Auesbur . Suffolke and Norfolke, Ypod. Neustr. had the execution of the French which fled from this last o∣uerthrow, for the space of about nine miles English from the ground where they encountred. (100) There was leasure now to take an account of the slaine; which vpon the enemies side amoun∣ted, not onely in the number to very many, but in their quality to very great. For search hereof, king The field viewed by Heralds. Edward caused certaine principall commanders, & three Heraldes, (who by the Coat-Armours might iudge of the persons, it being then a thing perpetu∣all and solemne not to fight without those signes of Noblesse,) to take an exact view of the field, who about supper time returning, made report to the King, that they found the dead bodies of Grafton. eleuen great Princes, and of Barons, Knights, and men of Armes, aboue Wil. Northb. Serres. one thousand, and fiue hundreth. Among the owners of such bodies as were beaten to the Earth vpon the first day, these are worthily rec∣koned chiefe: The Serres. Polyd. Virg. l. 19: King of Bohemia, the Sir Tho. de la More, apud Iohn Stow. Harding. King of Maiorca, Serres. Charles Earle of Alanson, brother-German to King Philip, the Duke of Loraine, Iohn Stow. the Duke of Burbon, the . . Earle of Flanders, the Wil. Nort . Earle of Sauoy (both great Princes,) Serres also reckon Earle of ys at this bat∣ , who was a∣liue sundry . the Dolphin of Vi nois, sonne to Himbert, the Earle of S erre, and Hareconrt (whose brother Godfrey in pitty of his house, his two Nephewes being slaine with their father, forsooke the King of England after this bat∣tell, and returned into Grace with the French,) the VVil. Northb. Earles of Aumarl, Neuers, &c. sixe Earles of Almaine; beside others of great account of all sorts. Vpon the second day, the Grand Prior of France, who with his Archbishoppe of Roan, had on the behalfe of their Prince and Country put on Arms. Of the Commons, in 26 & 27. A g. A. D. 1346. both of these blacke dayes, there fell about thirty thousand, and some say, foure times more in this last, then in the other. (101) We finde not one man of honour, or note slaine vpon the English side, so that this victorie may safely bee accounted among the wonderfull. The Polyd. Verg. spoiles of the Enemies bodies and carriages, King Edward gaue wholy to his well deseruing soul∣diers. The rule of their safety (they being in a most populous enemy Countrie) would not permit them to vse much curtesie to others, as that which might haue proued cruelty to themselues, but vpon the second day they tooke many VVil. Northb. prisoners, though none of great name, for they were spent in the day before. It pleased the conquerour to proclaime a truce now for three dayes in the Country about, that the people might come in to burie their dead; but the bodies of the most noble, hee himselfe cau∣sed to be conueied to Monstreal, and there (in his March towards Calais) enterred. (102) Thus by Gods fauour, and the vnresi∣stable force of the English Archers, (who in a man∣ner did Polyd. Verg. onely fight) was King Edward put into a full and peaceable possession of a perfect victory; which after hee had one night onely enioyed in the Forrest of Crescie, hee dislodged with his conque∣ring hoast, & marched straight toward Calais, which Calais besieged. hee Serres saith 30 September. A. D. 1346. presently inuested, hauing decreed neuer to rise with his Armie from before it, till without as∣sault hee had carried the same. For which cause he entrenched and fortified his Camp on all sides, built vp Grafton. Sheds couered with Reed and broome, and o∣ther places and offices as to dwell in, and stopping all reliefe by Sea, (whereof hee was Master) with his Nauie. There commanded in Calais for the French, Sir Iohn de Vienne, Serres. Marshall of France, and the Lord Dandreghan, with a very strong Garrison, who concluded like good men of war, to trie all extremi∣ties, rather then to surrender the Piece, which was so strong, that to assault the same, otherwise then with famine had beene friuolous. These great Cap∣taines seeing King Edwards resolution, thrust forth of the Towne (for sparing of food) their poorer people, aboue fifteene hundreth; whom hee, like a true Christian Prince, turned not backe vpon the Towne, but releeued for Gods cause with fresh King Edwards Charity. victuals, and two pence sterling each; permitting them freely and securely to passe through his Camp, to his great glory, and (vndoubtedly) profite also, hauing their hearty prayers for his happy successe, and God for pay-master, and rewarder of such his Beneficence. (103) Many wayes were thought vpon by king Philip to raise this obstinate siege: two principall; The French de∣uise to succour Calais. an Army of French to fight with King Edward, and a diuersion by inuasion, wherein the Scots (their perpetuall allies) were forward. Both in their se∣uerall times, were put into execution. That of the Scotish inuasion was first, but with such suc∣cesse, as well declared it was Gods will (all people hauing their encreasings, zeniths, and declinations) that the English name should now be brought to the verticall point thereof, without any thing being able to resist it. (104) For Dauid the second King of Scots, to gra∣sand old Crownes. The Pope sending a Messen∣ger from Auignion, with an ouerture to intercede for a peace, had answere, that the message must bee sent to the King his father, for he co not meddle without commandement from him. Mean while hee disposed of things without impeachment, and returnes laden with honor and spoiles to Burdeaux, where the winter being spent, he sets forth to new aduentures. Hee had in his Armie about eight thousand braue, expert, and well disciplined Soul∣diers, and with them aduanceth through Perigort, & Limosin into the bosome of France, vp to the verie gates of Burgesse in Berie; the terror of his name flying before to his great aduantage. Thus satis∣fied for the present, hee wheeles about with pur∣pose to returne by Remorantine in Blasois (which hee tooke) and so through the Country of Iurain, Poi∣ctou, and Saintoin to his chiefe City Burdeaux. But Iohn King of France (hasting to goe beyond his fa∣ther in misfortune) hauing assembled a compleat hoast, followed, & about the City of Poictiers ouer-tooke the inuincible Prince. (115) When the Armies (with the ods of six to one against the English) were embattelled, two Car∣dinals The English victory at Potiers, 19. Sep. 1356. sent from Pope Serres, Polyd. Verg saith his name was Innocentius. Clement, laboured (as they had done before) to take vp the quarrell without stroke, whereunto the Prince was with reason yeel∣ding enough, but King Iohn fatally presuming on his aduantage, propounded such conditions, as if in a manner the Prince of Wales had already beene at his commaund; which with iust indignation were reiected. It came hereupon to a most bloudy tri∣all, where (if euer) the Prince and English gaue full experiment of their valour; for after long conflict and absolute discomfiture of al the 3. French battels, (the least of which exceeded al the Princes nūbers) the King himselfe valiantly fighting, and Philip his Serres. yongest sonne (who with such boldnesse and zeale defended his distressed father, as it purchased vnto him the Honourable surname of Hardie) were ta∣ken The French king taken prisoner. prisoners. (116) The English whose valiancy was most conspicuous, were the Earles of Warwicke, Suffolke, Salisburie, Oxford, and Stafford, the Lords Cobham, Spenser, Audley, Berkley, Basset, &c. of Gascoigne, subiects to the Crowne of England, the Capitall de Beuf, the Lord Pumier, Chaumont, with others of lower title, but not of vnequall valour. Froissard. Iames Lord Audley wanne immortall renowne at this bloudy battell, where hee receiued many wounds, and shared the Princes gift of 500. Markes land in Fee simple, to his foure Esquiers, who had continu∣ed with him in all the brunt and fury of danger. It is the misfortune or glory of the French Nobles, that in all great battels the losse fals heauily vpon them. In this most disasterous ouerthrow, there fell Serres. fifty and two Lords, & about seuenteene hundreth Knights, Esquiers, and Gentlemen bearing coates of Armes: The chiefe Lords were Peter of Bourbon Duke of Athens high Constable of France, Iohn Clermont Mar∣shall, George of Charney Lord great Chamberlaine, &c. and as many other as made vp the former account. Fabian out of the French Chronicles. S r . Reginold C ian, who that day bare the Oriflamb, was likewise slaine: of the common Souldiers there died about sixe thousand: Great God of victories, how abundantly diddest thou in these dayes blesse thine English? The list of Prisoners comprehended these great names, Iohn King of France; Philip his sonne, afterward Duke of Burgoin; The Archbishop of Sens; Iames of Burbon Earle of Pontheiu; Iohn of Artois Earle of Eu; Charles his brother Earle of Longu ne∣uile; Charles Earle of Vendo e; The Earles of Tan∣keruile, Salbruch, Nassaw, Dampmartine, La Roch, and many other great Lords, and about Ypod. Neust. two thousand Knights, Esquiers, and Gentlemen bearing Armo∣ries. The English at this iourney tooke an Serres. hun∣dreth Ensignes. (117) Now albeit nothing wanted to the title of a perfect victory, yet in two points the incompara∣ble Prince out-went that fame and merite; for ha∣uing vanquished the person of the French Monarch The Prince doth things more commendable then his victory. by force of battell, hee much more ouercame his heart with true and princely curtesie, deliuering his mind in a stile and kind of eloquence so ponderous, proper, graue, and naturall, and with that statelie humility, as onely the best soule with the best bree∣ding could be capable of; and yet Paul. Aemyl. hee spake not more officiously then he performed really. More then all this. The next day causing his Chapleins and the other Priests of the Armie, to celebrate di∣uine seruice, hee put off from himselfe the whole glory, and gaue it most deuoutly to Poly. Verg lib. 19. God; which being first done, he, in the sight and hearing of the Prisoners, highly commends, and most heartily thankes his Souldiers, with speeches full of sinceri∣ty and life, sealing his words to euery one, as his present meanes would permit, with liberall deeds & largesse. (118) Then hauing setled all other things, hee marcheth with ioy and iust triumph to Holinsh. & omnes. Burdeaux, the Archiepiscopall See, and chiefe Citie of his do∣minions in France. How the newes were entertained in all places of the English Empire, is not hard to coniecture, but specially by King Edward, who tooke speedy order by Simon Archbishoppe of Canterbu∣rie, that eight dayes together should be Bolyd. Verg. lib. 19. spent in giuing God the thankes and glory. But the Prince hauing sufficiently refreshed, and rested his peo∣ple, set saile for England with his Prisoners, where hee happily arriued in 5 M . A. D. 1357. Ypod. Neust. Plimmouth and was most ioi∣fully welcome euery where. At his comming to London (where at that time a magnificēt Citizen, Hen∣ry Picard, hee who afterward at one time so noblie feasted the 4. Kings of England, France, Scotland and Cyprus, was Lord Maior,) which receiued him with A Lord Maior feasted foure kings at once. exquisite honour; the multitudes of people com∣ming to see the victorious Prince, the French King, and his sonne the Lord Philip, and the rest, were such, that they could hardly get to Westminster, be∣tweene three of the clock in the morning and noon: but who will thinke the humour of the gazing vul∣gar worth the noting? (119) Great Edward, sauing that hee forgat not the Maiesty of a Conquerour, and of a King of Eng∣land, The two Priso∣ner kings lodged omitted no kind of noble curtesie towards the Prisoners. King Iohn and his sonne were lodged vn∣der a sure guard at the Sauoy, being then a goodly Pallace belonging to Henry Duke of Lancaster; the rest in other places: Dauid King of Scots was at this time straitly kept at the Castle of Adam . Odiam, but not long after, when hee had endured about eleuen yeeres imprisonment, at the incessant suit of Queen King Dauid set at liberty after 11 yeeres durance. Ioan his wife (sister to king Edward,) was deliuered: his Fourdon. ransome was one hundreth thousand Markes striueling, and a condition to rase certaine Ca∣stles. (120) About this time Isabel Queene Dowager of England, and mother of King Edward, (hauing first seene her sonne the most respected King of all A. D. 1357. Christendome,) 27. Nouemb. deceased, and was interred at Lon∣don, in the Church of the Friers-Minors there. To her birth France was slenderly beholding, as being about this time in most wofull and broken state, through occasion of that title which the English chal∣lenged by her, it suffering more by farre vnder their puissance, then Guil. Tilli . uer it did since the times of the Romans. Serres. Till . Charles the Dolphin, Duke of Normandie, who had escaped from the battell of Poitiers, gouer∣ned during his fathers imprisonment; but by the dangerous practises of Charles King of Nauarre, and bad disposition of the Parisians, toward the deliue∣ry of their Soueraigne, hee was lamentably encum∣bred, and beset with mischiefes, not being able to worke as yet his fathers liberty. Moreouer, the Eng∣lish vnder Sir Robert Knowles, Sir Iames Pype, and An. D. 1358 A. reg. 32. Thomalin Foulk, and others, did commit great wasts, and heaped huge wealth by incursions, ransomes, and other warlike licence, in Britaine, and Norman∣dy, vnder the title of seruing the Nauarrois. To bee briefe all France swarmed with dissolute souldiers of sundry Nations, which hauing no Generall, made hauocke at their pleasure. They were called peo∣ple without an head, and by innumerable insolen∣cies made the wretchednesse of Anarchy apparent. In England also swarmed another sort, no lesse bur∣thenous to the commonwealth and Church, which were the foure orders of Franciscan Friers, whom the VVals. in Ed∣ward 3. fol. 173. English Clergy found to be so pernicious to the regi∣ment of the Church, that they selected that renow∣ned Clerk, Richard Fitz-Ralph (who was Chancelour of the Vniuersity of Oxford, Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of Ireland) to appeare in person before the Pope, and there alleage the Armac . in Defensori curato∣r . Fox Mart log. in Edward 3. intollerable harmes by them accrewing to the Laity, the Clergy, and the Vniuersities, together with their disobedience to Gods word, their auarice, and pride. All which that noble Prelate learnedly performed, as appeareth by the handling of his 9. propositions against them, which are extant. In his second proposition, he sheweth, how ordinary a matter it was with them, to allure youth, without consent of their parents, to enter their Orders; which made men withdraw their sonnes from the Vniuersities, least the Fryars should so steale them away; whereby (saith he) it came to passe, that i . whereas in his owne time there were thirty thousand Students in Oxford, soone after there were left but sixe thousand. But how infinitely these Friarlie swarmes encreased in all lands, may appeare by that Sabelli. Ennead. 9 l. 6. strange offer made by the Generall of this one Order, to Pope Pius, who promised to bring him (being then a∣bout a Turkish Expedition) thirty thousand cunning warri∣ors, out of the number of Saint Francis Fryars, and yet e∣nough should remaine at home to performe the deuotions. But the Pope had such vse of those Fryars, that Ar∣machanus preuailed not in the matter, Tho. Wals. in Edward 3. though he pro∣ued the cause stoutly and manifestly against them, because (ah for pity, saith our Authour,) the Clergy stucke not close as they promised, and the Fryars had great store of money to procure fauour in the Court of Rome. But here in the English Court, two Cardinals, (one of them, hee of Pierregost, who had so diligently trauelled for a conclusion at the battell of Poictiers) could not with two yeeres labour, draw any thing to such▪ an head, as the French would, for their Kings deliue∣rance, performe; which put King Edward into a new resolution against France. (121) King Edward (houlding himselfe deluded King Edward 2. gaine in France. by the French) with a fleete of eleuen hundred Saile passeth ouer from Sandwich to a new inuasion. Hee arriued at Calais, from whence he set forward in three 24. October great battels, whereof the first, being least, was vnder Henry Duke of Lancaster, the second being greater, vnder the braue Prince of Wales, and the last which was greatest, was led by King Edward himselfe. They marched through Paul. Aemil. Artois to the Citie of Rheims in Champain, where the Kings of France vse to be crown∣ed and annointed. The City of Serres. Sens (an Archbi∣shops See) and Neuers doe yeeld without resistance. The Paradi in les Annals de Burgo. Duke of Burgundy, for two Froissard. Paulus Aemilius saith 100000. crownes. hundreth thou∣sand florens of gold, obtained that all Burgundy was spared from sackage or spoile. It was told the King, that the Normans had landed at Winchelsea in the time of diuine seruice, and among other their most impious outrages, a like execrable villanie, as that which Gibeonites, (sonnes of Beliall) are recorded to haue committed vpon the Iud. 19. 11. 25. and 26. Leuites wife, was more wickedly perpetrated by them in the Church it selfe, where the woman, being of singular beautie, was by their insatiable violations murthered; and they got backe to their Ships before the Countrey could rise vpon them to take due vengeance. Here∣upon Tho. Wals. King Edward presently raised his Standard, and set forth out of Champain, (where not farre from the City of Rheins hee had Polyd. Verg. lib. 19. kept his Christmas) to∣ward Paris. (122) He came before it with his armie diuided into Tho. VVals. An. D. 1360. nine Battalions, where hee honoured foure hundred Esquires and Gentlemen with the Order of Knighthood. Charles the Dolphin, Regent of The English be∣fore Paris. Foure hundred Knights made at one time. France, was within Paris with a great force, but could not by any meanes bee drawne to hazard battell. There were ample conditions in humble manner tendred to Edward, but he was as yet inflexible and deafe against any other, then such as himselfe (like a Conquerour) propounded. Paris (vp to whose Polyd. Verg. very wals King Edward ranne) not being fesible, he Serres and Polyd. Verg. retires into Britaine to refresh his Army, but vpon his returne finding it stronger then before, he turnes his wrath into the very bowels of France, exercising hostile Actions vp as farre as Paul Aemyl. Charters, and Tho. VValsing. Orle∣ans, and as yet continued inexorable. God was dis∣pleased thereat, and to let Edward know so much, he caused the Minister of his wrath, a terrible tem∣pest, to as aile his Hoast, and Serres Paul. Aemyl. to kill therein many both men and horses. King Edward is Tho. Wals. Ran. Cestr. said, vpon this occasion, to be so wounded with remorse, that repairing to our Lady-Church of Charters, he pro∣strated himself to God, and sorrowing for the blood∣shed and wast-full burning which hee had made, vowed to giue quiet to the Christian world vpon e∣quall conditions. This, and the Duke of Lancasters perswasions, softned him so, that finally (by mediati∣on of the Popes Fabian. Legat one Simon de Langres) a peace was concluded at Bretagnie neere to Charters vpon the Ti . eight of May; and in Nouember following K. Iohn himselfe was transported to Caleis, and there by King Edward (according to the Capitulations of the Treatie) set at liberty, after he had been a priso∣ner aboue foure yeeres. (123) Articles of this accord, so necessarie for the distressed Estate of France were these. 1 That (to Articles of peace. the intent these conditions which the French condescen∣ded vnto, should be more forceable, and not seeme to be ex∣torted by aduantage, ods; or inquitie of the times) the two Edwards, Father and Sonne, should for euer release to K. Iohn and to his heires, all the right and claime which they had to the Paul. Aemyl. Iohan. . Crowne of France, Serres Fabian. Holinsh. Paul. Aemyl. to the Dutchy and Estates of Normandy, Aniou, Turain, and Main, as also to the homages of Britain Armorick, and the Earldome of Flan∣ders. 2. That King Iohn and his sonne, for them and their heires, should by a day certaine restore, and release to King Edward and his heires, &c. the whole Countrey of Aquitain, enlarged with the bordering and spacious Coun∣treys of Santoin, Poictou, Pierregort, Limosin, Quercie, Angolesm, Rouergne, &c. with all the Cities, Castles, and appurtenances, to be holden free, without any dependencie but of God. 3. That the Tho. Walsing. County of Pontheiu (the pro∣per inheritance of Isabel late Queene Dowager of England mother of King Edward) the Townes, Coun∣tries, and Lordships of Calais, Guines, Mountril, Haim, Wale, Oye, Merck, S. Valary, &c. and all the Ilands which either the English then held, or which lay before any of the Premisses, with only certaine limitations concerning priuate mens interest, should remaine in like freedome as the rest of the premisses to the Crowne of England. 4 That King Iohn should pay for his ransome (part thereof to be in hand, and part vpon daies) the summe of Paul Aemyl. Polyd. Uerg. Froissard. thirty hun∣dreth The huge ran∣some of Iohn King of France. thousand scutes of Gold, euerie two of which should be Tho. VVals. Fabian. The City of Paris gaue toward this ransome one hundreth thousand roial . Edw. Gri his English Serres. sixe shillings and eight pence sterling. And that for assurance there should be assigned certaine number of Ho∣stages (by King Edward named) to remaine in England. 5. That the French should not aid, nor assist the Scots a∣gainst the English, nor they the Flemings against the French. 6. That it should bee lawfull for either King notwithstanding to aid the Titlers for the Dutchie of Bri∣taine at their pleasures. There were sundry other Ar∣ticles, as in cases of so transcendent qualitie must needs happen, but, as these were principall, so the most of them might haue beene well left out here, vnlesse they had more exactly beene obserued by the French. Yet were they ratified with hands, seales, and Oathes at 24. October. 1360. Calais, where the two Kings, in stead of kissing the Pax at masse (either hauing for honors sake refused to take it first) . par. 7. Caxton. saluted each the other with a most brotherlie embracement and louing kisse. buse the King of Englands credulitie, till hee had got∣ten before hand as farre as dissimulations could ad∣uance: hee Courts the good old Prince with louing letters and presents, while in the mean time his plots ripen abroad, and the County of Pontieu (the king of Englands vndeniable inheritance) was first surpri∣sed before King Edward heard thereof. And whereas the Prince of Wales had at a Parliament in Gascoigne propounded a demand for fowage, or of money to bee leuied by the chimney, the Earles of Armignac and Cominges, and other Lords the Princes subiects, bearing no sound affections toward the English Em∣pire (the lesse for that by the pollicy of Glequin, and the Chancellor of France Inuentorie of France in Charles the 5. Serr : Dourmauns, all or most of the Countries and Townes (which by vertue of the peace made at Bretigney) were annexed thereunto, were cūningly wrought to return to their old Lords) repaire to the French Court at Paris, there to pursue an appeale for redresse of this oppression against the Prince (who was not so happy as to follow the coun∣sell of Sir Robert Knols and other wisest Captaines who disswaded this imposition,) pretending that hee was to answere before King Charles as before his su∣periour Lord, of whom (they said) he held by homage and fealtie. This practise of the disloyall Lords (for what could they bee else? seeing King Edward and his heires were absolutely freede (by vertue of the said Treatie) from all manner of seruice for a∣ny of their Dominions in France) King Charles did openly at last entertaine, and (vpon hope to reco∣uer by surprise, and plot, what the English had won by dint of sword and perfect manhood) proceeded to summon the Prince of VVales to Paris, there to answere such accusations as his subiects made a∣gainst him. (137) To encrease the indignitie of these deui∣ses, you should hear the French kings Orators before the Pope and Emperour, to whom king Edward had seuerally sent Ambassadors, full of complaints a∣gainst King Charles, laying wholie vpon the French, the blame of the new warre, as vpon open breakers of faith, and violaters of the league, most confident∣ly on the contrary part charge the English. We had suffered the French hostages to visit their Paul. Aemyl. in Car. 5. friendes at home vpon the French Kinges word, that they should come backe by a day, contrary to which word, they, nor any of them, either were or are returned. That not so much as the Law of Nations was kept with vs, which ties Princes to demaund restitution by their Officers of Armes, or vpon deniall to defie them, but where (say we) are the Serres rashly affirmes he did: Heralds which King Charles did send? We say, that without notice hee surpriseth by stealth the Earledome of Ponthieu, King Edwards vnque∣stionable right, and hath disseised vs in Aquitaine, which doth no lesse belong vnto vs then Pontheiu. That Pol. Virg. in E. 3. Margaret the Inheritrice of Flanders, which had beene promised to the Lord Edmund, one of our Kings sonnes, was by their iniurious practise wonne away, and bestowed in marriage vpon Phi∣lip Duke of Burgundie. Finallie, wee say, that Lew∣is Duke of Aniou, one of the pledges, making an escape by that, contrary to honour, and the league, was by them receiued, and not returned, which points being all of transcendent qualitie, are (say wee) directly contrarie to the Treatie and sworne agreement at Bretigny. The French hereunto answere, and charge vpon vs, to shew the fault of first breach, not theirs, but ours. That we by vertue of the said Treaty were bound immediately to withdraw our Armie out of France, The points charged vpon the English. which yet (they said) we did not during all the raign of Iohn their King. That the peace was made thereby more noyous, and hurtfull then the warre, and that they were faine to purchase the departure of our Souldiers with a greater charge then would haue maintained a very gallant Armie: That this breach was ours, because the Souldiers were ours. That King Ed∣ward was bound in an open assembly of the States In Charles 5. Serres. of both Realmes, to renounce his right in the Crowne of France: when (say they) was this done? Thus they, and Serres ads that the Estates of those Countries which had beene assigned by the Treatie to the English asseuered, that it was against the fundamentall laws of France to alien anie part, & that they neither could, nor would cease to be mem∣bers of that Crowne. (138) So ye behold that the fortune of the great is neuer to want friends to speake for them, nor oc∣casions to slip out or in, whensoeuer profit and ad∣uantage doe inuite. Memorable (if true) is that part of the Frenchmens defense, in that polite and learned Italian, P. Aemylius, where it being obiected with what honour and clemencie King Iohn was vsed by vs, they breake out and affirme, that wee (being their Beneficiaries or Free-holders for such Coun∣tries as wee held in France) tooke more gold for the onely ransome of King Iohn, then they paied to re∣deeme S. Lewis their king, & his brother, the Peeres, and whole French Army captiuated in the Christi∣an warres by the barbarous Soldan. But (good Ae∣mylius) The dealings of the English de∣fended against P. Aemilius. say that were so, yet cannot you say, that the summe wee tooke was worth the least Countrie in France, and when all France was ours, was it not great bountie to take so small a pittance? If you re∣plie that we had many Countries besides, wee re∣ioine and trulie say, that wee quit more then we ac∣quired. But let vs proceed: for now all claimes & quarrels were as open, as if no obstacle had euer beene interposed: the ignominie of their late terri∣ble foiles wounded all true French hearts, and they desire (king Edward growne aged) not to seeme by sitting still vpon so many thornes of disgrace, and losse, to haue beene outwarred, though ouer-warred, and though in two or three battels inferior, yet not to haue beene clearely debellated. (139) What doth our King Edward now? Hee An. D. 1369 Iohn Duke of Lancaster sent to inuade France. Polyd. Verg. in Edw. 3. Froissard cals a Parliament, declares the breach, praies aid, obtaines it, and claimes the crowne of France afresh. Iohn Duke of Lancaster and Humfrey de Bohun Earle of Hereford are sent ouer to Calais with a great force to inuade France. No great matter as then ensued. Ypod. Neust. Thomas Beauchamp Earle of Warwicke comming o∣uer in hope to haue worke for his Curtelax, for the French affronted our armie vnder the conduct of Duke Philip le Hardy (though at this time scarce shewing himselfe worthy that surname) but rose v∣pon the Earles arriuall, and retired, accused the Lords for sloath, and sware he would abroad among them to find fighting, while English bread was as yet vndigested in his souldiers stomacks. Somewhat he did, but death by a pestilentiall dart preuented the rest. This Earle had with him a learned man (as Scipio had Polybius) to register the acts which hee saw done: A worthy example ill followed by po∣sterity. The Polyd. Verg. l. 19 Holinsh. in Edw. 3. Duke of Lancaster peirced vp with his armie so farre as Roan. The same Polydor wonde∣ring why they of Pontheiu hauing for an hundreth and twelue yeeres (that is, euer since King Edward the first had it giuen to him with his wife) been ours, should reuolt, only daring the greatnesse of the Eng∣lish, can find no other reason for their doings but this pleasant one, that as dispersed cattell gather to their owne heard, so Frenchmen flocke to the French, and English follow English. (140) Stirring Princes cannot containe them∣selues within their owne quietly possessed rights: An. D. 1370 Sir Robert Knolles sent Ge∣nerall into the parts about Britaine. Otherwise, who sees not how much better it is for the people, that their Princes should manage well that which they haue, rather then graspe at more? For King Edward (notwithstanding his continuall manifold victories) comes back to the Subiect (who yet had gained hugely by the warres, and therefore might the better doe it) for supportation: and they yeeld it, but his age was abused, for the money was not expended as the pretences were made. Priuate turnes were serued with publicke loanes. Neuerthe∣lesse, Tho. Walsing. in Edw. 3. after Midsomer day, that renowned Captaine Sir Robert Knols, whom martiall vertue had raised from the lowest rancke to the highest reputation (though some also affirme him Paul. Emyl in Car. 5. borne noble) was sent by King Edward into France with an Armie, where (while obedience lasted to his direction) all things prospered. But by the instigation of one Sir Iohn Paul. Emyl. Iac. Meir. Holinsh. Mensterworth the yong Lords Grandsonne, and Fitzwalter, and other vainelie scorning to be vn∣der Knols, for that they held themselues his betters, and thereupon diuiding themselues after they had done sundry exploits, marching vp euen to Paris, were beaten and foild by the French vnder Glequins conduct, but Knols wintred safe in Britaine. Menster∣worth comes into England, and knowing accusers haue the vantage, complaines to King Edward of Knols: but not altogether beleeued: he ads treason to vntruth, and turning French becomes a wicked enemy to his King and Countrey, Tho. Walsing. in fine Edw. 3. promising the French to procure the Castilian Nauie to inuade England, for which being in the last yeere of King Edwards raigne taken, hee by due course was con∣demned and cut in pieces, dying the death he had deserued. He was laid hould vpon in the City of Pampeline in Nauarre, and from thence conueighed to London, vpon whose bridge his wicked head stood Sentinell. (141) Tho. Wals. in Edward 3. Pope Vrban the fifth, comming from Rome to Auinion with purpose to vnite these two mighty Kings, their wils, and mights against the common enemy of Christendome, put off mortali∣ty at Marsils, and so that holy intention ceased for the present: but the same being Holinsh. continued by his next successor Gregory 11. yet tooke no effect, no more then that which the Emperour to like cause would haue vndergone: which the Serres. French impute to King Edward, who confident by reason of his former atchieuements, would trie it out by the sword. Wherein he seemed to forget the mutable condition of warre, the searnesse of his bodie, and the greennesse of his Grand-Child yong Richard, who was to succeed, if the Prince of Wales died, as shortly after he did. Neither did God seeme to ap∣proue his opinion herein, for that crosses came fast vpon him, both at home and abroad. There is no greater wisdome nor happinesse then to know when we are well, and then to preserue without hazard or empairment, that honour wealth or quiet which we already haue. (142) Among the States and Townes (assigned to the English by vertue of the treatie at Bretigny) which had reuolted to the French, was the Citie of Limoges in Limosin, whither the Prince marcheth, & sits down with his armie before it. Thither Holinshed. came vnto him out of England his brethren the D. of Lan∣caster & the Earle of Cambridge, with a fresh supplie of valiant Chiefs and Souldiers. The City stood it out to the vttermost, and was forceably entred, where mercy had nothing to saue nor spare, the sword and fire for terror to other killing and defa∣cing in a manner all. Hee Serres (an Au∣thor) distrusted. who writes that the Prince flew vp neere to Paris, and scarsely, by reason of Glequins valour, got backe to Burdeaux, seemes to haue mistaken therein, as in many other things con∣cerning vs of great importance. After this seruice, the Prince, (health failing him more & more) leaues his Brethren in Aquitaine, and sailes into Eng∣land. (143) The French in the meane time wonne towns and places in Aquitaine, gathering new hopes after so long and perpetuall infelicities. The losse of that expert Captaine Sir Iohn Chandoys (vnfor∣tunately slaine) was a great aduantage to their de∣sires, whose whole care for warre rested vpon Gle∣quin (not long before aduanced for his military ver∣tue from low estate to so great eminencie, as to bee Constable of France, the chiefest officer for warre which that Kingdome hath) and he a man of much proofe, in good and euill fortune, so tempered his courage with discretion, that he onely first bad his Country rise againe, and endeauor in despite of euill fortune to reflourish. (144) The Prince of Wales (wanting health) vp∣on comming to his fathers sight, rendred vp the Dutchie of Aquitaine, to bee disposed of, as to his roi∣all pleasure seemed good. While King Edward was at Clarendon, there repaired to him the factious king of Nauarre, whose errand was to make an ouerture of association against the French; but as his offers were acceptable, so his cautions not seeming suffici∣ent, hee returned (after great entertainement) with∣out concluding. (145) Iohn Duke of Lancaster, and his brother the Earle of Cambridge, doe now returne out of A∣quitaine, An. D. 1372 with the Ladies Constance and Isabel daugh∣ters of Don Pedro late King of Spaine, whom they married: The Duke thereupon instiling himselfe King, and his wife Queene of Castile and Leon. Nor was the English name onely encreased in titularie ho∣nors; for about this time, the Flemings (who had prouoked vs) were vanquisht by the Holinshed: Earle of Here∣ford at The Flemish Name distressed by the English. sea in a sharpe fight, Ypod. Neust. about twentie and fiue of their shippes being taken, and all the men slain. The sweete of this victory was sowred not long af∣ter with a grieuous losse: for the French hauing be∣sieged the strong Citie of Rochel in Santoin, with the aide by sea of Henry King of Castile; to relieue the Rochel besieged by the French. English, Iohn Earle of Pembroke was sent with a∣bout forty shippes, men, victuals, munition, and mony, to the value of twenty thousand marks, forthe vses of the warre; but being sodainely assailed with the Spanish Armado, which consisted of many great shippes, vnder the command of Ambrose Buccani∣gra and others, the English after a long and cruell The English Nauie distressed by the Castilian. conflict were vtterly distressed, the Earle taken pri∣soner, and almost all the rest either taken, or put to the sword. Polyd. Verg. l. 19 Rochel held out notwithstanding, to whose reliefe while King Edward himselfe in person, with an extraordinary force set saile, the wind (al∣wayes King Edward at sea to relieue Rochel is blown backe. till that time fauourable to his voyages for France) came Easterly, and draue him backe into England with great griefe, and the waste (they write) of Tho. Walsin. nine hundred thousand pounds sterling. Nei∣ther did hee so giue ouer the care of that strong Peece, which the English most manfully made good against the enemie. (146) Polyd. Verg. lib. 19. Rochel thus persisting in loyall resoluti∣on, Iohn Duke of Britaine (who had married the A. D. 1373 Rochel continu∣eth English. Lady Marie daughter of King Edward) a Gentleman of much gratitude toward the English, the authors of his fortunes, resolues to aduenture his state in their quarrell; ships away for England: hath aide ministred vnto him: hee returnes, and warres with various euent. But Iohn Duke of Lancaster with a very great Armie comes to Callis, and from thence marcheth ouer the whole face of France, and (though with losse of many thousand Tho. VVals. horse in the desert countries of A ergn throgh famin) came safe, but with an almost-hunger-starued Army to Bur∣deaux. Not long after hee drew into the field, and a day was appointed betweene him and the Duke of Anion the French Kings brother, to haue tried the quarrell of their Nations by set battell, before the City of Tholouz in Languedoc, but by an vntimely & a pernitious short truce (to which K. Edward yeel∣ded because his son the Prince lay dangerously sick) the hoped victory not onlie slipt out of the English mens hands, but almost all aduantage also of doing any thing else seasonably. The French boasted Tho Wals. lib. 19. themselues as of a Conquest, who notwithstan∣ding did helpe out their valiancy with policie. Gle∣quin makes his vse of all occasions, and workes much harme to the English party in Guien and Britaine: But in Britaine 1. Tillius Chron. Sir Robert Knols did so nobly acquit him selfe on the behalfe▪ of his Souereignes sonne in law the Duke, that he only seemed a fit parallel to Glequin, like as hee stopt the current of his fortune. was borne at Gaunt the chiefe Towne of Flaunders, Anno 1340. and 14. of his fathers raigne. In his Childhood he was created Earle of Richmond, which title was afterward recalled in, and bestowed vpon Iohn Duke of Britanny, who married his sister, to whose Dutchy it had formerly belonged. Hee had three wiues; the first, Blanch, daughter and Coheire, and in the end the sole heire, of Henry Duke of Lan∣caster (sonne of Edmund surnamed Crooch-back) in whose right he was at the first Earle, and after Duke of the same, and with that Dutchy also Earle of Lei∣cester, Derby, and Lincolne, and high Steward of Eng∣land. He had issue by her, Henry of Bullingbrooke Earle of Derbie, after Duke of Hereford, and lastly King of England, named Henry the fourth, who first placed the Crowne in the house of Lancaster; Phi∣lip, wife of Iohn the first, King of Portugall; and Eliza∣beth, married first to Iohn Holland Earle of Hunting∣don, (brother of Thomas Duke of Surrey) and after him, to Sir Iohn Cornwall Baron of Fanhope. His se∣cond wife was Consiance, the eldest daughter of Pe∣ter King of Castile and Leon, in whose right for the time he entituled himself King of both these realmes; by her he had issue one onely daughter, named Ka∣therine, married to Henry the third, sonne of King Iohn, in possession before, and in her right, after, King of both the said realmes. His third wife was Kathe∣rine the widow of Sir Hugh Swinford, a Knight of Lincolnshire, eldest daughter and Coheire of Payn Roet a Gascoigne called Guien King of Armes, for that Countrey, Miller. p. 992. his yonger daughter being married to Sir Geoffrey Cha cer, our Laureat Poet. By her hee had issue (borne before matrimony, and made legi∣timate afterward by Parliament holden in the twen∣tieth yeere of King Richard the second,) Iohn Earle of Sommerset, Thomas Duke of Excester, Henry Bishop of Winchester and Cardinall; and Ioane, who was first married to Robert Ferrers (Baron of Wemme and Oues∣ley, in the Counties of Salop and VVarwicke) and se∣condly to Raph Neuil the first, Earle of Westmerland. Shee and all her brethren were surnamed Beaufort, of a Castle which the Duke had in France Id ib. where they were all borne,) in regard thereof bearing the Porculleys of a Castle for the cognizance of their fami∣ly. This Duke in the thirteenth yeere of his Nephew King Richard, at a parliament holden at London, was created Duke of Aquitaine, but in the sixt yeere after, hee was called home, and this Title recalled in, and in the third yeere after, the sixtieth of his age, Anno 1399. he dyed at Ely house in Holborne, and lyeth honourably entombed in the Quire of Saint Paul. Edmond, their 5. sonne, surnamed of Langley, was created Earle of Cambridge Anno 1362. in the same Parliament, wherein Lionel was created Duke of Clarence. Hee was afterward made Duke of Yorke, Anno 1386. and married Isabel daughter and Co∣heire to Peter, King of Castile and Leon. His sonne Richard Plantagenet Duke of Yorke, took to wife Anne Morti er heire of the foresaid Lionel elder brother to Edmund Langley. William another of their sonnes, surnamed of Wyn∣sore, where he was borne dyed yong, and is buried at Westminster. Thomas the youngest sonne of King Edward and Queene Philip surnamed of Woodstocke (where hee was borne) was first Earle of Buckingham, created by his Nephew King Richard the second on his Corona∣tion day, An. 1377. by whom, after also he was made Duke of Glocester, 1385. The Earledomes also of Essex and Northampton and the Constableshippe of England, fell to him by right of his wife Eleanor, the only daughter and heire of Humfrey de Bohun Earle of Hereford and Essex. Hee was a man of valour, wisdome, and vigilancy for the behoofe of the King his Nephew and the State, but those noble vertues (distempered with too much wilfulnesse & froward obstinacy) bred him, first Enuy, and afterruine. For the King surmising him to bee a too seuere obseruer of his doings, consulted with Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolke how to make him away; whom Mowbray vnawares surprizing, conuaied secretly to Callis where he was strangled 1397. 20. of his Nephewes raigne. Himselfe in his life had prouided a goodlie tombe at Playsie in Essex (his owne Towne, and Lib. Eliens. the vsuall seat of the great Constables of England) Cambd. Erit. in Essex. where hee founded a Colledge; whither his body was brought, and laid with all funerall pompe, but afterward it was translated to Westminster, where also lyeth Eleanor his wife, who dyed 1399. Their issue was Humfrey Earle of Buckingham, Milles. p. 381. who dyed at Chester of the pestilence An. 1400. Anne (married first to Edmund Earle of Stafford, by whom shee had Humfrey Duke of Buckingham, secondly to William Bourchier Earle of Eue, by whom she had Henry Earle of Essex) Philippa, Ioane, Isabell, who died all issulesse. Isabel, the eldest daughter and second childe of K. Idem. p. 428. Edward and Queene Philip was married at Windsore with great pompe to Ingelram of Guisnes, Lord of Coucy, Earle of S ysons and after Arch-Duke of Au∣stria, whom K. Edward (his father in law) created also Earle of Bedford 1365. by whom shee was mother of Milles. p. 441. two daughters, Mary, (married to Henry of Barre, to whom shee bare Robert de Barre, and Ioane, the wife of Lewis of Luxemburg, Earle of S. Paul) and Phi∣lip, the wife of Robert de Veere Earle of Oxford, Duke of Ireland and Marquesse of Dublyn; this Robert in the heigth of his fortunes forsooke his noble Ladie, and married one Idem. p. 689. Lancerona a Ioyners daughter (by report) which came with King Richard the seconds wife out of Boheme; and being, for his pride and abu∣sing the Kings eare to the hurt of the State, driuen out of the land by the nobles, hee dyed at Louain, in great vexation of mind, and extreme penury, An. 1392. Isabel his wiues mother was buried in the Church of Fryars Minorites neer Algate in London. Ioane their second daughter and third child was borne 9. of her fathers raigne An. 1335. B ng 14. yeres of age, shee was desired in marriage by solemne Embassage, from Alphons the eleuenth King of Ca∣stile and Leon, sonne of King Ferdinando the 4: was e∣spoused by Proxie, intituled Queene of Spaine, and conueyed into that Countrey, where shee presentlie deceased of a great plague that then raigned; so as the King comming to meete her to solemnize the e∣spousals, with great griefe accompanyed her to Church only at her funerall 22. of her fathers raigne. An. 1348. Blanch the 3. daughter, died yong, and lieth buried at Westminster. Mary, their 4. daughter was married to Iohn Mont∣ford Duke of Britaine. Margaret their youngest daughter was the first wife of Iohn de Hastings Earle of Pembroke, but shee dyed without issue. RICHARD THE SECOND, KING OF Monarch 50 Richard II. ENGLAND, AND FRANCE, LORD OF IRELAND. THE FIFTIETH MONARCH OF ENGLAND, HIS RAIGNE, ACTS, AND TROVBLES. CHAPTER XIII. R Ichard of Burdeaux, sonne to that Great Star of Eng∣lish A. D. 1378. Cheualrie, Edward, by-named the Blacke Prince, and grand-child to the most renowned The Coronation of the King. Edward the third (both of them lately deceased) was crowned in the eleuenth yeare of his age, and vp∣on the sixteenth day of Iuly. Seldome hath been seen so magnificent a Coronation, as that of this young King, but the thing which gaue a better lustre of hope at his beginning; then the shine and maiesty of that publike Act, was the wise course which in this his childhood was taken; to wit, the reconci∣liation of the Lord Iohn Duke of Lancaster, and the Citizens of London, with the restitution of Sir Peter de la Mare Knight, Speaker in the late Parliament, (whom King Edward had committed to prison, at the instigation of Dame Alice Peeres now banisht, and confiscated) not onely to former liberty, but likewise to fauour and honor extraordinary. (2) At this Coronation, (which, as matters not vnworthie to bee kept aliue, wee following the im∣methodicall MS. ap d D Rob. Cotton. order of the Record, haue here for per∣petuall memory thought good to abridge out of authentike Monuments) Iohn the Kings eldest vn∣cle, vnder the stile of Iohn King of Castile and Le , and Duke of Lancaster, by humble petition to the King, claimed to bee now Steward of England, in right of his Earledome of Leicester; and as he was Duke of Lancaster, to beare the Kings chiefe sword called Curtana; and as Earle of Lincolne, to cutte and carue at the royall Table before the King. His petitions being found iust, were confirmed to him, Seruices by a on of Coro ion found and ∣ed in that . and to his Assignes, the two Earles of Derby and Stafford, the first to beare the Sword, while the Duke should be busied about other offices as Steward, and the other to cut and carue. The Duke then in great estate, held this the Kings high Court of Stewardship The Court of hig S ward∣ship. in the VVhite-hall of the Kings Pallace at Westminster, Knight the Constable thereof; which yet the Earle of Northumberland vpon the ninth day after recouered by force, putting those, who had surprized it, to the sword. (9) Neither was the spirit of the English (after it A. D. 1379. began to requicken) idle elsewhere; for as Sir Robert Rous had diuers wayes vexed the French, and taken Ol uer (the brother of that renowned Bertrand de Glequin) prisoner, so Sir Iohn de Harleston, Captaine of Cherbrough after him, slew and took diuers French in a skirmish. These the few foregoing drops of greater approaching showers. For Sir Hugh Caluer∣lee and Sir Thomas Percy, made admirals of the nar∣row Seas, tooke many rich prizes, and exploited sun∣dry other things very praise worthily, bringing home The Britons dislike of the French Gouern∣ment: matter of new troubles. the acceptable newes of the dislike which the Britons had conceiued against the French Kings Gouern∣ment; for he commanded them to render vp to him all their strengths, Castles, and walled Townes, and many of them, who refused to obey, hee put to death. (10) These emploiments, and fresh designes The commons spared in the subsidie. for other like, found need of pecuniary supplies; whereupon, in a Parliament holden at London, it was agreed, that for supply of the Kings wants, the Com∣mons should be spared, and the burthen be wholie vndergone by the able. The rates then of that taxe were these; Dukes, Archbishops, Earles and Bishops at ten marks each, mitred Abbots at as much, be∣sides fortie pence for euery Monke vnder their subiection. Briefly (saith Thomas Walsingham) there was no religious person, man or woman, Iustitiar, Sheriffe, Knight, Esquire, Parson, Vicar, or Si plex Capella∣ . Walsing. Chaun∣try Priest free from this tax rated according to the value of their yeerely receipt . (11) We formerlie mentioned, how Iohn Shakell A m morable example of a no∣ble young gentle∣mans faith▪ kee∣ping. (the other companion of Robert Haulee so execrablie murdered in Gods-house) was taken. He now vpon condition that the King (besides 500. markes in mo∣ney) should giue him lands to the yeerely value of one hundreth markes, and should also found and suf∣ficiently endow, at the Kings costs, a Chantrie with fiue Priests for their soules, whom the kings Officers had wickedly murthered, he rendred vp his Hostage, the eldest (but naturall) sonne of the said Earle of Dean. At the discouery and bringing-forth of whom, all men were stroken with wonderfull loue and admiration: for the yong Gentleman (hauing giuen his faith not to disclose himselfe,) appeared in the shape of a base groome, in which (vnknowne to all the world but his Master) hee had of his owne accord lurked. An example of such a point of per∣fect honestie as cannot be forgotten without iniurie. (12) The same yeere, the Lord Iohn Mountford, whom the French had driuen out, being inuited home by his Barons, returned into his Dutchy of Britaine, accompanied with the valiant Knights Cal∣uerley and Percy aforesaid, where he, his friends, and followers were receiued with singular honor. Soone Aids sent into Britain drown∣ed. after Sir Iohn of Arundell, brother to the Earle of A∣rundell, being sent into Britaine to aid the Duke, was with many other valiant Knights and Esquires drowned. It is imputed by our Author to a iust effect of Gods anger against the said Sir Iohn, and his houshold, for their manifold vices and outrages, practised by him and them, before they set out from England, for which they had the bitter curses of the people; and the Angell of destruction to execute those imprecations vpon the delinquents. (13) But the action of iding did more deepely Other aids pierce into Bri∣taine from by land. An. D. 1380. import, then that it should bee abandoned for the losse of that vnfortunate fellowship, and the excee∣ding riches which were with them: therefore the Lord Thomas of Woodstock Earle of Buckingham, with Caluerlee, Percy, Knols, Windleshores (or Windsor) verie valiant knights & other competent forces, was sent to assist the Duke of Britaine. But because the French Galleys houered vpon the narrow Seas, they landed at Calleys, and from thence march through France, spoiling Countries, burning townes, the French not Io. Til . in Chron. daring to empeach them, and killing people, till they and their whole equipage came safe into Bri∣taine. (14) There were about these times ciuill diuisi∣ons in France; for the Duke of Burgundie, younger brother of King Charles (lately dead) being made French troubles profitable to the English. Guardian of the person and dominions of his Ne∣phew Charles then in minority, had the Duke of Aniou (being an elder brother to the Duke of Bur∣gundie) a mortall enemie. Their bloudy quarrels fell out luckily for the English aides in the Dutchie of Britaine, out of which as Duke Iohn had beene driuen for adhering to his father in law the late king Edward, so the English did their best to vphold him in it, as there was cause. (15) The French in these extremes are releeued by their ancient diuersion: for the Scots entring a∣bout that time with fire and sword into Cumberland and Westmerland, and the forrest of Inglewood, draue away much Cattle, slew the Inhabitants, rifled the booths and houses of Perith in the Faire time, kil∣ling and taking many, and driuing away the rest. The Earle of Northumberland preparing a bloudy The Earle of Northumberland countermanded from pursuit of the Scots. reuenge, was (not without wonder) prohibited so to doe by letters from the King, that is, from such as were about the King. (16) But how coldly soeuer the publike affaires were followed, the want of money for supplies was The Parliament at Northampton. still pretended. And therefore in a Parliament hol∣den at Northampton, was granted to the King a gene∣rall supplie of money; the pretended occasion of monstrous mischiefe which followed, by reason of a clause in that grant of Subsidie, that euery one of ech sexe, being aboue a certain age, should pay by the head, or per Pol as they call it, twelue pence. (17) The English Cheualry began now againe to display it selfe farre off, to gratifie the priuate ends A. D. 1381. The Earle of Cambridge sent with an Armie into Portugall. of Iohn Duke of Lancaster, who claimed the Crown of Castile and Leon, in right of Constance his wife: For Iohn King of Portugal had a defensiue warre a∣gainst Iohn then King of Castile, who challenged the Crowne of Portugall R der. Santi part. . hist. Hisp. cap. 2 . in right of Beatrix his wife, (by whom hee had no issue) the onely daughter of Ferdinand king of Portugall, which this other Iohn (a bastard sonne of Ferdinands) had by faction vsur∣ped. There were sent to his aide the Lord Edmund de Langley Earle of Cambridge the Kings vncle, and sundry Knights and others of good experience with an Armie. These arriuing in Portugall valiantly de∣fended the same for about two yeeres, and were the chiefe cause of giuing the Spaniards an ouerthrow in battell, where they lost Polyd. Vergil. . l. 0. ten thousand men. At last the two Kings agreeing together bare the char∣ges of conueighing home the English in common, that their Countries might bee freed from them, being both alike iealous of their puissance. In this time Edward sonne to the Earle of Cambridge vn∣cle to Richard king of England, married the daugh∣ter of the king of Portugall, but afterward neither would the Earle leaue his sonne behind, as suspe∣cting the Portugeses faith, nor the other entrust his daughter to the Earle, so as they remained disioined in body, howsoeuer vnited by Ceremonie. (18) Not long after the time of that Earles im∣ployment into Spaine, there fell out accidents which The dangerous rebellion of Wat. Tyler, Iacke Stra & others. doe plainely conuince their error to bee great, who thinke that any madnesse is like that of an armed & vngouerned multitude, whereof these times (by a kind of Fate proper to childrens raigne) gaue a most dangerous document. The extreme hatred borne by the people to Iohn Duke of Lancaster, calling himselfe king of Castile and Leon, and the discontent∣ment taken at an extraordinary taxe, leuied per Pol, vpon all sorts of people, who were aboue sixteene yeers of age, which (as all other the euils of the time) they imputed to the Duke (the maner being to count them the authors of euils, who are supposed to haue the greatest power of doing them) moued the enra∣ged multitudes vpon slight and small beginnings to runne together in so fearefull a Torrent, that it seemed the King and kingdome were sodainely falne vnder their most wicked fury. There were in this most rebellious insurrection, the Commons and Bondmen (who aspiring by force to a free manumis∣sion) principally those of Kent and Essex, whose example was followed in the Neighbour Shires of Surrey, L. S. Alban. MS Suffolke, Norfolke, Cambridge, and other places by incredible heards and droues of like qua∣lified people: who (specially in Norfolke) forced sun∣dry principall Gentlemen to attend them in their madding. (19) They of Kent embattelled themselues vn∣der two Banners of Saint George, and about three∣score and tenne Penons vpon Blacke-heath by Greene∣wich, and from thence came to London, where, the generality of people inclining to them, they are ma∣sters. The Priory of S. Iohns without Smithfield they kept burning for about seuen dayes, and the goodlie Palace of the Sauoy, belonging to the Duke, with all the riches therein, they consumed by fire, in a kind of holy outrage, for they threw one of their fellowes into the flame, who had thrust a▪peece of stolne plate into his bosome. The Rebels of Essex came to Lambeth, burnt all the Archbishops goods, and defaced all the Writings, Rowls, Records and Monuments of the Chancerie, as hauing a speciall hatred to the Lawyers, little to their disgrace, for that they shared herein with good men also, whom they hated. But their desperate wickednesse exten∣ded it selfe beyond the spoile of houses and sub∣stance, laying bloudy hands vpon the most eminent and worthy men in the kingdome, for that they had disswaded the King to put himselfe into their hands at Greenwich, where hee talked with them out of his Barge, and thereby had their maine designe disap∣pointed. Simon Tibald Archbishoppe of Canterbu∣rie, and Chancellour of England, a right worthy Pre∣late, and Sir Robert Hales a Knight of high courage, Lord Prior of Saint Iohns, and Treasurer of England, with others, they without respect to the Maiestie of the King, or priuiledge of their most honourable dig∣nities, most barbarously murthered by beheading them vpon Tower-Hill, among infernall showtes & diuelish yels. For the Tower it selfe (from whence they had haled them, the young King being there in person) was open to their execrable insolencies. Neither doth the authority of Hist. Ang. l. 20. Polyd. Vergil, affir∣ming that they were not haled forth, but onely stay∣ed by the Rebels, to whom (hee saith) they were sent, induce vs rather to credite him, then Authors liuing about those very times. There was no little store of other innocent bloud shed by them in these tumults. Nor was the Kings own person without manifest perill, against whose life they had damna∣bly conspired. It were long to reckon vppe the kinds of such villanies as they wrought, but endlesse to recount the particulars. The common Ioh. Stow. Annals set forth this whole Tragicall businesse very dili∣gently. (20) They had many Captaines of mischiefe, VVat. Tyler the Idol of the Clownes. but two principall, Wat Tyler of Maidstone in Kent, (whom Walsingham pretily cals the Idoll of Clownes) and Iacke Straw, who together had followers to the number (as they were estimated) of about one hun∣dreth thousand, and at one Sermon made to them by Iohn Ball, Walsingham saith, there were about twise as many. Their Petitions were full of pride and malice, but easily granted by the King, the ne∣cessity of the times extorting them. They had a Chaplaine as gracelesse as themselues, one Iohn Ball an excommunicated Priest, who with his wicked do∣ctrine nourished in them their seditious furies to his own iust destructiō in the end: but when a great mul∣titude accepting the Kings mercy were gone, Wat Tyler and his Campe departed not, but vpon pre∣tence of disliking the Articles of peace, sought to winne time till he might put into full execution his incredible Treasons, which (as Iacke traw at the time of his execution confessed) were vpon that ve∣ry night of the day, wherein Wat Tyler was slain, to murder the King, and chiefe men, and to erect pet∣ty Tyrannies to themselues in euery shire: and al∣ready one Iohn Littistar a Dyer in Norwi h, had taken vpon him at Northwalsham in Norfolke, the name of the King of the Commons, and Robert Westbroome in Suffolke, to whom Iohn Wraw another lewd Priest had assigned it. (21) Neuer was the kingly race and common-weale so neere to an vtter extirpation, as at this pre∣sent, which was (wee may truly say) miraculously preuented. The yong king in these feares and dan∣gers repairing to Westminster, most deuoutly com∣mended his Crowne, Life, and whole estate to God, nor that in vaine. For Wat Tyler with his Campe of Rascals esteemed to bee ten or twenty thousand (according to the Kings Proclamation, attending in Smithfield, but cauilling of purpose vpon the con∣ditions of peace, as hee that meant a farther mis∣chiefe, though they of Essex were returned) was en∣treated to ride to the king, who also sate on horse-backe before Saint Bartholmewes, in whose compa∣ny was that renowned Lord Maior of London, Willi∣am Walworth, with many other men of birth and place. (22) Wat Tylar scarse at the last comming beha∣ued himselfe so insolentlie, offering to murther one of the Kings knights, Sir Iohn Newton, for omission of some punto of respect, which he arrogated to him∣selfe in more then a kingly manner, was (vpon leaue giuen him by the king) boldly arrested with a drawn weapon by the Lord Maior, a man (say Writers) of incomparable courage, which blow was seconded by the said Lord, and others so speedily, that there this prodigie of a Traitor was felde and slaine. A death too worthy, for that he died by the swords of honourable persons, for whom the axe of an Hang-man had beene far too good. (23) The Commons perceiuing the fall of their Captaine, prepared to vse extreme reuenge, when the most hopefull-young king with a present witte and courage (it being for his life and kingdome) spur∣red forth his horse, and bad them follow him, with∣out beeing grieued for the losse of a ribauld and traitour, for now hee himselfe would be their Cap∣taine, Hereupon they thronged after him into the field, there to haue whatsoeuer they desired. But the most worthy of all Londoners, Walworth, speeds with one man onely into the City, raiseth a thousand Ci∣tizens in armour, brings them (being led in good ar∣ray by Sir Robert Knolles and others) with Wat Ty∣lers head (which the Lord Maior had commanded to bee chopt off from his dead carcase) borne before him vpon a Speare to the king. That verie head, the cursed tongue whereof had dared to say, That all the Lawes of England should come out of his mouth. (24) This act restored the Crown (as it were) and Realme to King Richard, for the Rebels seeing them∣selues girt-in with armed men, partly fled, partly fel vpon their knees, and (throwing away all hope in weapon) they answerably to their basenesse, begged their liues, who but euen now reputed themselues masters of the field, and of the king. And albeit there was a generall desire in the hearts of loyall men to expiate so many villanies with the bloud of the Actors, yet things abroad in the Realme being as yet vnsetled, they had a generall Charter of par∣don sealed, and were so sent home into their Coun∣tries. (25) Certainly although the Citie of London (the most noble and able part of the English Em∣pire) hath otherwise deserued of the Kings of this land very well, yet the honour of this seruice wor∣thily stands highest in the many great praises therof. Which the King did thankefully and publikely te∣stifie by knighting Walworth, and by bestowing vpon him (when hee modestly excused his vnworthines (41) That which followed, may giue vs iust cause to suspect the truth of that Fryers accusation: for the Lord William la Zouch was also by the Fryer accused, of hauing been the Inuenter, broacher, and prouoker of him, to set downe all that which was comprehended in the accusation; who thereupon sent for to Salisburie (though then very sicke of the gowte) repaired thither in an horse-litter, where hee was compelled to answere to all such points as were obiected, like a felon, or a traytour standing bare∣headed: but the priuitie, or least thought of any such matter as the Fryer affirmed against the Duke, hee confidently forsware, and was thereupon acquit∣ted and dismissed. Howbeit (saith Walsingham) La Zouch was from that time forward a professed ene∣mie, not onely of Carmelites, but of al other orders of Fryers whatsoeuer. But these disgraces came vnseasonably vpon the Duke, whose head was vn∣doubtedly full of designes, and of cares, how to at∣chieue to himselfe the crowne of Spaine. (42) There were then sundry incursions made by the English and Scots, each into the others coun∣try, the Earle of Northumberland being leader to the English, with little aduantage to either. But to take away the very cause of this continuall bad neigh∣bourhood, or to lessen it by an established peace with France, the Duke of Lancaster sayled to Callis, about the beginning of August, there to treat with the Duke of Berrie, on behalfe of the young French King Charles 6. but after he had in that voyage ex∣pended (as was said) fifty thousād Marks, he brought into England nothing backe, except onely a truce, to continue till the first day of May next. His desire to haue procured a surer peace both with the French and Scots, seemes to haue beene great, that so hee might the more freely pursue the conquest of Spaine which he intended. (43) Whiles hee was absent in this Ambassage, Iohn Cumber∣towne once Lord Maior of London, confined and confiscated. there ensued the arraignement of a great fauourite of the Dukes, Iohn Northampton, alias Comberton, whom his aduersaries by-named Cumber-towne. This man is by them reported to haue exceedingly troubled the City of London, during his late Maioralty there, nor lesse afterward; for that being followed with many abettors, hee publikely disturbed Sir Nicho∣las Bramble his successor, (but a Tho . VValsing. Ypod. p. 539. bloudy minded man by report,) and wrought other maisteries, till Sir Robert Knowls caused one of the busiest compa∣nions to bee drawne out of his house, and (as some say) shortned by the head. This Comberton was by his houshold Clerke accused, as priuie to some pra∣ctises, in preiudice as well of the King, as the City, and when sentence was to bee pronounced in the Kings presence (being then with great store of his Nobles at Reading,) hee durst (as is said) affirme, That such iudgement ought not to proceede against him in the absence of his Lord the Duke. This a∣gaine vnraked the burning coales of enuie, and sus∣pition against the said Lord Duke; and perhaps ma∣lice to the Duke procured this hatred against his fa∣uourite. Whereupon hee was confined to the Ca∣stle of Tyntagel in Cornwall, and all his goods seised vpon by the Kings Seruants, whom Walsingham ex∣presseth, by calling them after the name of those Poeticall rauenous Birds, Harpyes. (44) That here which Polydor Vergil (assigning causes to actions, not alwayes such as are, but such Polyder. Vergil. not to be rashly beleeued. as seemed to him most probable, not seldome con∣founding and changing persons, times, names, and things) telles vs concerning a combate within lifts, betweene Sir Iohn Aunsley Knight, and one Carton hath little ground, (so farre as wee can find) in histo∣rie. He saith they were teterrima capita, both very wic∣ked men, & that there was a real plot to murther the king. We can neither find the crime nor the mē: there Sir Iohn A eys reputation re∣deemed from slander. had beene a solemne combat long before betweene such a knight and one Re hee is called, Ypod. Neust. A . 13 0. Katrington an Esquire, in which the knight was Challenger and victor, but the crime was not treason against the kings person, nor for any thing done in his time, but in his noble Grandfathers. Neither was Ansley, teterrimum caput, but a valiant and loyall man of Armes. The crime which he obiected to that Esquire (his kinsman) was, that for money he had traiterously giuen ouer the Castle of Saint Sauiour in the Land of Constantine in Normandie, when he had store of victuall and munition. The Esquire was vanquished in faire fight and died frantick the next day. Polydors errour therefore is ioyned with manifest wrong to the knights name, wherein wee ought to bee very circumspect, for that, honour is inestimable and descendeth to posterity. There was indeed, at the time he speakes of, another com∣bat, fought also within listes before the king, (for Duels then were performed, not on priuate choice or quarrell, but on publike appointment) betweene one Iohn Welsh an Esquire of England, and one Henry Knighto Can. of L c. A . apud. Holinsh. Mar∣tilet a Gentleman Nauarrois, who in reuenge against Welsh, for hauing at Cheirbrough (where the said E∣squire was vnder-captain) cōmitted (as Martilet said) adultery with his wife, accused him of high treason a∣gainst the King and Realme. But Welsh preuailed; and the Nauarrois, at his execution (for hee was Th UUals. in Richard 2. drawne and hanged after he had beene foild in bat∣tel,) confessed the cause of his euill will, and the inno∣cency of Welsh in the matter of treason. (45) The Scots had this while by practise and money gotten the Castle of Berwick, whereof the Custody belonged to the Lord Henry Percy Earle of Northumberland. The Duke of Lancaster was not sad at this, but so pursued the matter, that the Earle (as if by his negligence and priuity the same royall Hatred increa∣seth betweene the Duke and Count Northum∣berland. Castle had beene lost) was condemned in Parlia∣ment. But the king relieued him with extension of fauour. This was a great cause of confirming the rancour alreadie kindled in the hearts of these two principall Peeres. But the Earle to wipe away all blemishes of disgrace, encloseth the Castle with a siege both of forces and large proffers, so that after Berwick recoue∣red by the Earle. some time spent therein, he had it redeliuered vpon paiment of two thousand marks. (46) The Flemings had heretofore in the fifth yeere of this King, sent Ambassadors at the time of A. D. 1385. The Souereignty of Flanders offe ∣red to king Rich∣ard by the Flem∣mings. Parliament, to submit themselues and their Coun∣try to his dominion, renouncing alleageance to their naturall Lord the Earle, whom they had by force of Armes expelled, vpon pretence o oppression vsed by him, and for other causes; but because they see∣med not either persons sufficient, or sufficiently in∣structed with authority, to transact with the King in a matter of so high nature, they were commanded to returne, and fetch more ample power, and to bring certaine men of euery good Towne in Flanders. Now againe, the Citizens of Gaunt, though they had in battell against the French King, (who was there in person on behalfe of the Earle,) Iohn Tylli in Chron. lost twenty Paul. Aemyl. saith 40000. in in fight, and in ight, and that in those whole ciuill warres there perished 00000. thousand men not long before, desired of K. Rich∣ard, that they might haue an English Generall to com∣mand in their warres; to whom was sent a wise and valiant Gentleman, the Lord Edward le Bourser, who demeaned himselfe in that charge with much com∣mendation. And when afterwards he went more abundantly and strongly to haue supported them, they sodeinely turnd French, shewing Senescire (saith In Rich. 2. ad. A. D. 1386. Walsingham) vni amico, vel domino, fidem diuseruare. (47) The Duke of Lancaster (whose, or the like greatnesse may perhaps seeme more, then can stand The Duke of Lancaster stands vpon his ke ∣ping. with the narrow limits of England, which, without danger to the common wealth, can hardly afford such a proportion of estate to any Subiect) was a∣bout this time enformed, that the King had a pur∣pose to arrest his person, and to trie him vpon ca∣pitall points before Sir Robert Trisilian, his Chiefe Iustitiar, a man ready, (vnder the Kings protection) to deliuer iudgement without respect to Titles. The King was nourished in this *deliberation by yong men, who combined against the Dukes life. This Th . VValsing. in Rich. 2. ad. unc ann. being discouered, the Duke (a potent Prince) with∣drawes vpon his guard to his Castle of Pomfret in the North; neuerthelesse the hopes of wicked men, delighting in their Countreys miseries, and ciuill combustions, were made void by the great diligence of the Kings mother, the Princesse Ioan, who spared not her continuall paines and expenses, in trauailing betweene the King and the Duke, (albeit shee was exceeding tender of complexion, and scarce able to beare her owne bodies weight through corpulen∣cy) till they were fully reconciled. (48) It had indeed beene a most wretched time for a ciuill warre, not only because the French Ad∣mirall, Iohn de Vienna, had beene sent with forces embarckt in threescore saile of Ships, to be emploi∣ed out of Scotland against the English, but for that the French prepared a generall inuasion of England, The French pre∣pare an inuasion against England. hauing in hope already as it were deuoured it. There reigned at that time in France, Charles the sixth a yong and foolish Prince, (saith Tilius) who hauing in his treasury, left to him by his prudent father, Ex Record. ap d Tiliu . eigh∣teene millions of Crownes, (and not only eighteene hundred thousand, Paul. A myl. as some, fearing perhaps that the other summe might seeme incredible, haue writ∣ten,) and being moreouer set on fire with an incon∣siderate loue of glory, rather then vpon any sound aduise (though Polyd. Uerg. lib. bist. Angl. 20. & Paul. Aemyl. some impute the Counsell to the said Admiral) would needs vndertake the conquest of our Countrey. These newes stirred all the limbs and humors thereof, though the euent (God not fauouring the enterprize) was but like that of the Mountaine, which after long trauaile brought forth a ridiculous mouse, neuerthelesse it had beene a most desperate season for a ciuill warre to haue broken forth in England. (49) The preparations of the French doe hold Fr issard. I . Meir. notwithstanding, and the generall Rendeuou of their huge forces was at Sluse, in the Port whereof, and o∣ther places about, there were assigned to assemble for their transportation, Paul. Emyl. Three hundreth thousand English men in armes to∣gether▪ twelue hundreth saile of ships. At the same time (as if the two young kings had beene riuals in shew of men) Richard raiseth so great an army to ouerrun Scotland, as the like for beauty and number was neuer seene together, con∣sisting wholy of Englishmen. But may wee beleeue that England could spare three hundreth thousand men, and as many horses for the vse of a warre? Cer∣tainely a needlesse multitude, but only to terrifie the French with the fame, for there might haue beene fewer, for any great Act which Richard (full of iea∣lousie against his vncle of Lancaster, wherewith his head and heart were full,) effected. But we may the rather beleeue the account, for that Walsingham vou∣cheth Seruientes ad arma. Serieants at Armes (if he meane not Heralds by those words) whose office (he saith) it was to number the Host, and they affirmed the same. This is sure, that Paul Aemyl. in Carol. 6. among other the arguments vsed by the Duke of Bury (one of the French Kings vncles) to frustrate this enterprize, he alleaged, that the King of England had mustred ten thousand horsemen, and one hundreth thousand Archers for his defence; whereas the Admirall Iohn de Vienna affirmed, that hauing seene the forces of the English, they were but eight thousand horsemen and threescore thou∣sand foot; and he might well say hauing seene: for, though Aemylius bring him in speaking to the French King, and vaunting that he had encountred them, yet nothing is truer, then that the English re∣turned out of Scotland without the least offer of bat∣tell. The Admirall was willing indeed to haue fought, but when he saw our Armie from the hil-tops, his furie gaue place to reason. (50) While the Armie was vpon the way to∣ward Scotland, the Kings halfe-brother the Lord Iohn Holland wickedly slew the Lord Stafford, sonne The Kings mo∣ther dyeth being denied a pardon for her sonne the Lord Iohn Hol∣land. to the Earle of Stafford not farre from Yorke, being v∣pon his iourney to the Queene, whose fauoured Knight he was. For which heinous homicide the King seised vpon his whole estate, denying to his mothers most earnest praiers any pardon or grace for his brother. Which was to her so greeuous, that within fiue or sixe daies after shee gaue vp the Ghost at Wallingford. The young Lord tooke San∣ctuary at Beuerley, and the King by his iustice herein wanne the hearts of the said Earle of Stafford, the Earle of Warwick, the Lord Basset, and other great men of Staffords kindred and friends; neither did this empeach at all the present voyage. (51) The Scots and French in Scotland, seeing themselues vnable to withstand such forces, had so retired themselues and all their goods, that when the English should come, they, (as Walsingham plea∣santly saith) could see no quicke things left but onlie Owles. That which was greene in the fields, the horses deuoured or trampled down, yet such harme, as the materials of buildings were capable of, was done. Edenburgh also and the Ypod Neust. noble Abbey of Mailrosse were fired. The Duke of Lancaster per∣swaded the King to march beyond the Frith or Scot∣tish The Duke of Lancaster suspe∣cted for perswa∣ding the King to passe the Scot∣tish Sea. Sea (as his great Ancestors had done) to seeke out his enemies; but he, very suspicious that the Duke gaue him this counsell with a purpose to be∣tray him to destruction by famine, and want, which he was there to looke for, expressed much displea∣sure and returned. The Dukes wordes notwith∣standing and behauiour were tempered with much duty and modesty; but that would not serue, till the Lords peeced their affections together by interces∣sion in the best manner the time would suffer. But the English host was scarce returned and discharged, when the Scots and French sodeinely powred them∣selues forth vpon our Countrey, and did whatsoeuer hurt the shortnes of time in their incursion could permit. (52) To resist and endammage the French, there were appointed Admirals for the narrow Seas, the Master of Saint Iohns, and Sir Thomas Percie Knight, (the Earle of Northumberlands brother,) who did nothing worthy their fame or place. Only the Townesmen of Portsmouth and Dart, maund forth a few ships at their owne perill and charge, where∣with The vertue of priuat men in the publik cause. entering the riuer of Sein (vpon which the re∣nowned Citties Roan and Paris are situated) suncke some of their enemies ships, tooke others, and a∣mong them one of Sir Oliuer de Clisson's, the goodli∣est that France had. The successe answered their hopes, and they were enriched with the spoiles of their aduersaries, whom thus they compelled to beare the charge of their proper mischiefe. (53) Meanewhile that the French lay at Sluse, attending the approch of their kings vncle the Duke of Burie, (who fauoured not this enterprize of inua∣sion, but sought Iohn Tilli aswell by delaies, as by perswasion and authority to make it frustrate,) they of Ga t had gotten the Towne of Dam by the good liking of the Inhabitants, to whom the French gouern∣ment was odious. For recouery whereof, the French King drew his armie (prepared against England) to the siege of Dam, which (the same being first secretlie abandoned, after a moneths siege and many repul∣ses giuen to the French) was by him recouered. This, and other things, did so protract the great expedition intended, that (after wast of infinite treasure) Charles returned home, without hauing seene England, which was by these meanes most graciouslie freed by God, from so dangerous, and greatly-feared an impressi∣on. But that the English might the better endure the same, Iohn King of Portugall, hauing lately in a great and bloodie battell (where some of the Eng∣lish The Portugese d the English. deserued well of him,) ouerthrowne the Castili∣ans, and thereby setled his estate, sent into England sixe Gall ys throughly well appointed, for Sea-ser∣uice, though (as God would) there was no need of them. (54) Of those French, which (after the Cloude of warre at Sluce was dispersed into ayte,) passed o∣uerland into their Countreys, many were taken and slaine by the Gauntiners. Their nauie was not lesse vnfortunate; for at one I . xal S. Cr . 14. Septemb. time the English of Callis tooke of them eighteene, and the rage of weather brake and sunke diuers, so that this Brauado was not onely costly to the French, by reason of the charges, The bad euent of this French designe for an inuasion. but hurtfull in the losse of time, men, shippes, and hoped glorie. Such are the euents of humane en∣terprises, where God is not pleased to giue successe. The English thus deliuered from feare make a road into France out of Callis, and with a prey of foure thousand sheepe and three hundreth head of great cattell, besides an hundreth good prisoners, retur∣ned safe to their Garrison. (55) The multitude of memorable things which present themselues to vs in the liues of our English Monarches, is such, that if wee did not vse choise, and in their relation breuity, wee should not relieue our Readers of that molestation, with which the vaste volumes of former labours doe oppresse the memorie. The Laitie, at the Parliament now hol∣den at London, had yeelded to aide the King with a The attempt of the Laity to dis∣possesse the Cler∣gie of their tem∣porall estates. Fifteenth vpon condition, that the Clergie should succour him with a Tenth and an halfe; against which vniust proportion, William de Courtney Archbishop of Canterbury most stifly opposed; alleadging that the Church ought to bee free, nor in any wise t bee tax∣ed by the Laitie, and that himselfe would rather die then endure that the Church of England, (the liberties whereof had by so many free Parliaments in all times, and not onely in the raign of this King been confirmed) should be made a bond-maide. This answere so offended the C mons, that the Knights of the Shires, and some Peeres of the land, with extreme fury be∣sought, That Temporalities might bee taken away from Ecclesiasticall persons, saying, that it was an Almesdeed and an Act of Charity so to doe, thereby to humble them. Neither did they doubt, but that their peti∣tion which they had exhibited to the King would take effect. Hereupon they designed among them∣selues, out of which Abbey, which should receiue such a certaine summe, and out of which, another. I my selfe (saith T o. VVals. a Monke of Saint Albans) heard one of those Knights confidently sweare, that hee would haue a yeerely pension of a thousand Marks out of the Temporalities belonging to that Abbey. But the King hauing heard both parts, commanded the Petitioners to silence, and the Petition to bee ra∣zed out, saying, He would maintain the English Church King Richard the Clergies friend. in the quality of the same state or better, in which him∣selfe had knowne it to bee, when hee came to the Crowne. The Archbishop hereupon hauing consulted with the Clergy, came to the King, and declared, that hee and the Clergy had with one consent, willingly pro∣uided to supplie his Maiesties occasions with a Tenth. This grant the King tooke so contentedly, as he openly affirmed, hee was better pleased with this free contribution of one Tenth for the present, then if hee had gotten foure by compulsion. (56) Robert de Vere Earle of Oxford (a young Gentleman in speciall grace with the King) was at this Parliament created Marquesse of Dublin in The first Mar∣quesse made that euer was in Eng∣land. Ireland, which moued great despight against him, those rough times being impatient to beare the vn∣equall aduancement of fauourites. Neuerthelesse, though the gentle King was thought herein to please his owne fansie, rather then to reward me∣rite, yet did hee so sweetly temper it, as there was no iustice, nor reason to enuie to him that so∣lace which hee tooke in his friends encreased ho∣nour; for at the same time hee aduanced two of his vncles, Thomas of Woodstocke, Earle of Buckingham to the title of Duke of Glocester, and Edmund of Lang∣ley Earle of Cambridge, he created Duke of Yorke, al∣lotting seuerall proportions of pension to be paide out of his Exchequer. In Vere there was ancient Nobilitie to iustifie his new degree the better; but in making the Lord Chancellor Michael de la Poole Earle of Suffolke, with the yeerelie pension of 1000 Markes, was matter of more enuie; because he was not descended of such honourable Parents: a defect (if it bee a defect) which none more willingly vp∣braid to men of worth, then who themselues are not alwayes the most worthy. The first raiser of this familie of De la Pole was Edward the third, who made William de la Pole, of a braue Merchant, a Ex libr. Monast. de Melsa, & ex Record. apud Guil Cambd. in Torkesh. Knight Baneret, and gaue him great possessions, in requitall of an extraordinary and voluntary loane of treasure, aduanced by him to supply the King in a time of speciall necessity, when money could stand him in more steed then a thousand men of Armes: no little merite in a subiect, nor a slender reward of a most munificent Prince. (57) Henry Spenser the martiall Bishop of Nor∣wich found grace with the King at this Parliament, to bee restored to his temporalities, at the speciall suite of Thomas Arundell Bishoppe of Ely: whiles the Bishoppe of Ely thus besought his Maiesty of Grace, the said Michael de la Poole (Lord Chancellor and Earle of Suffolke) stood by, and brake out with much offence into these words. What is that (my Lord) which you aske of the King? Seemes it to you a small mat∣ter for him to part with that Bishops temporalities, when they yeeld to his Coffers aboue one thousand pounds by yeere? Little neede hath the King of such Counsellors, or of such friends, as aduise him to acts so greatly to his hinderance. Whereunto the Bishop of Ely not lesse truly, then freelie replide. What saith your Lordship, my Lord Michael? Know that I require not of the king that which is hi , but that which hee (drawne thereun∣to either by you, or by the Counsell of such as you are,) withholds from other men, vpon none of the iustest titles, and which (as I thinke) will euer doe him any good: as for you, if the Kings hinderance bee the thing you weigh, why did you so greedily accept of a thousand markes by yeere, at such time as he created you Earle of Suffolke? The Chancellour was hit so home with this round retort, that hee neuer offered any further to crosse the restitution of the Bishops temporalties. (58) After this the King being with his Queen at their manour of Eltham in Kent, there came thither A. D. 1386. A. reg. 6. Leo King of Armenia, a Christian Prince, whom the Tartars had expelled out of his Kingdome. The pretence of his negotiation was to accord the realms of England and France; that the Princes thereof might with ioint forces remoue the common enemy from Christendome. Therein hee could effect no∣thing, but his iourney was not otherwise vnfruitful to himselfe, for King Richard (a Prince to speake tru∣ly, full of honour and bountie) gaue him besides a thousand pounds, in a Ypod. Neust. ship of gold) letters Pattents also for a thousand pounds yeerely pension du∣ring life. (59) The time now was come, wherein K. Rich∣ard should see himselfe deliuered of all that feare and iealousie, which the greatnesse of his vncle the Duke of Lancaster stirred in him. His Forces were now ready, and his Nauie (encreased with olinsh. seuen Gallies, and eighteene shippes sent out of Portugall) attended at Bristoll, to transport him toward Spaine, (for Castile is high Spaine) the crowne whereof hee claimed in right of Constance his second wife, daugh∣ter of Dom Peter the cruell. Before hee set forth, the newes came that such English as were already in Portugall with their friendes had ouerthrowne the Spaniards, French, and Britons, at a battell in Spaine. This was a spurre to quicken the Dukes enterprise, which Pope Vrban the sixth (by granting plenarie remission of sinnes to all such as gaue the Duke aid) did specially fauour, as against them who did par∣take with his enemy the Antipape; Tho. VVal . p. 321. The noble ar∣my of th Duke of Lancaster for Spaine. but the frequent grant of such pardon and releasement, was now growne so vile and contemptible amongst the people, that few were found open handed towards this Cruceato. Admiral of this Fleete was Sir Thomas Percie, Sir Iohn Holland (who had married one of the Dukes daughters af∣terward created Earle of Huntington) was Constable of the host, and Sir Iohn Mereaux (who had to wife one of the Dukes illegitimate children) was one of his Marshals. There were in this noble and excel∣lently-well appointed Army, the Lords Talbot, Bas∣set, Will ghby, Fitz-walter, Poinings, Bradston, Fitz∣warren, Beaumont, Beauchampe, the Lord Pomiers a Gascoin, &c. with very many worthy knights & vali∣ant Esquiers, and a choise number of men of Arms, Archers and other Souldiers, to the number of Heur. Knighton. twenty thousand. The Duke tooke also with him his wife, the Lady Constance, and two daughters, which hee had by her, as * one relateth. Oklands Ang. prael. (60) It was now the moneth of May, when the great Duke of Lancaster comming to take leaue, had of the kings gift a Diademe of gold, and his Dut∣chesse of the Queene another: he also commanded the English to call, and hold his vncle for a King, and to doe him answerable honour. But after all this, hee lay for a wind so long, till his whole proui∣sions were almost spent; at length yet, hee set for∣ward. The first land they touched was neere to Brest in Britaine, where Sir Iohn Roch the Gouernour a∣gainst the French, complained of two Forts built about him to empeach his quiet egresse; whereup∣on the Duke of Lancaster caused thē to bee assaulted; so both of them being taken by surrender, were ra∣zed to the ground, though some English first lost their liues, among which, was Holinsh. ex Hen. Knigh. p. 449. Sir Robert Swinarton, a valiant Knight of Staffordshire, and Iohn de Bolton a couragious Esquier of Yorkeshire, whom the sodaine ruine of a Tower (ouerturned by mining) whel∣med and slew outright. Sharpened with the suc∣cesse of this victorie, they commit themselues to God, and the Sea, and prosperously arriue with the whole Fleet in the Port Corone, or the Groyne, Uigil. S. Lauren. in August. (61) The French (belike) thought England could not furnish an other Army for France, as she had for Spain: wherupon there was now no false nor vain rumor spread again, that the French would besiege Calis. The King to secure that pretious transma∣rine part of his Dominions, sent thither store of men and of all prouisions. The most eminent per∣son was Henry Lord Percie, sonne to Henry Earle of Northumberland. This was hee whom the Scots The Lord Henry Percie by-named Hotspur sent to Calis. by-named Hotspur, a young Gentleman, in whom (saith Walsingham) the patterne of all vertue and mar∣tiall prowesse shined: and indeed his nature did an∣swere his by-name; for hee made such ridings into the quarters about Calis, that they could neuer wish a worse neighbour. After which, when the fame went that the French king would not delay, or (as they call it) beleaguer Calis, but rather inuade Eng∣land, hee returned to bee present where the greatest danger was expected. At this time, the English Sea∣men of warre, brought two French prizes to Sand∣wich, in which was taken a part of an huge strong Timber-wall, which the French king, preparing now for Englands inuasion, had caused to bee built in length three miles, in height twenty foot, which had at euery twelue paces a Tower (ten foot higher) and each capable of ten men, the whole to be a de∣fence for the French encampments against our shot, and a shelter for theirs, there was also in the same Ships the Enginer and master workeman, who was an Englishman, and great quantities of powder, and store of Ordinance, together with the French Kings Master Magister Gun∣narius. A Parallelization of the English and French States in these times. Gunner. (62) There was in this time a great resemblance betweene England and France in the chiefe points of State. As England had Richard, so had France her Charles, both young Kings. Charles with an huge armie had prepared to inuade England, but did no∣thing: Richard with no lesse forces entred Scotland, and did no great thing. Richard had vncles which bare great sway in the Realme; so had Charles. Rich∣ard had his vncle Iohn more potent then the rest; Charles had his vncle Lewis. Iohn vpon his wiues title claimeth the kingdomes of Castile and Leon; Lewis by the gift of Ioan the Queene, claimes the Kingdomes of Naples and Sicil. Lewis went with an Army of Paul. Aemyl. thirty thousand horse into Italie to at∣chieue his claime; with what force Iohn set forth you haue heard. But Lewis died without obtay∣ning; Iohn preuailed so farre as to settle his child by marriage. The King and great Lords of France were glad (with any charge) to enioy the absence of Lew∣is, and Richard and his fauourites were not sad, that the Realme was for the present rid of Iohn. (63) The forces of the French prouided for this inuasion of England, were reported in open Parlia∣ment (which the King held about Michaelmas in London) to consist of Ypod. Neust. 15 Dukes, 26. Earles, two hundreth Lords, & an hundreth thousand souldiers, and a thousand Ships, assembled about Sluse, with full purpose to take reuenge of all the euils which the English nation had formerly wrought in France, and to destroy the English kingdome. But though these reports were not fained, (for the French atten∣ded nothing in a manner but a faire gale of winde to bring them,) yet could not the King, without Capitulations made by the Duke of Gloster, ob∣taine any aides of money; so that, whereas it see∣med to the King, that by the Duke of Lancasters de∣parture, he was become more free, yet had he left behind spirits much more stiffe and intractable. O deare Countrey, hadst thou not then beene appa∣rantlie in Gods protection, (for the French hauing stayd for a wind till Hallontide, and then hauing it halfe-way, were beaten backe, and the voyage made vtterly voyd) certainely thy ruine had then beene certaine. What shall wee thinke or say of those popular Lords, by this gentle King armd (to his owne bane) with power and greatnes, who vnder the spe∣cious pretext of reforming abuses, did satisfie their enuie and inbred insolency? (64) The King tels them, that England is, as they saw, in manifest danger, and prayes their succour in money: what is the answere? That the Duke of Ireland (for now the Marquesse of Dublin was made a Duke,) and Michaell at the Pole (so they scornfully called the Earle of Suffolke) and other must be re∣moued. Things are badly carried at home, say The first seeds of the ciuil wars. they; (and they perhaps said truly,) but where was now the care of our Countrey? God indeed turned from vs the mercilesse point of the French sword: but here began the seeds of innumerable worse mi∣series, neuer to be remembred without sighes and teares. (65) The seedes (we say) of those fearefull cala∣mities were then first here sowne, whose sum a flou∣rishing Sam. Dan. in his ciuill warres. Writer in our age (willing neerely to haue imitated Lucan, as hee is indeed called our Remaines. Lucan) doth not vnfortunately expresse, though hee might rather haue said he wept them, then sung them; but so to sing them, is to weepe them. I sing the ciuill warres, tumultuous broiles, And bloudy factions of a mighty land; Whose people hauty, proud with forraine spoiles, Vpon themselues turne backe their conquering hand; While kinne their kinne, brother the brother foiles, Like Ensignes, all against like Ensignes band; Bowes against Bowes, a Crowne against a Crowne, While all pretending right, all right throwne downe. But Robert de Vere, saith Thomas Duke of Glocester and his party, was vnworthily created Duke of Ireland, and De la Pole the Lord Chancellour seemed to the onely great Lords (for so they would seeme) to be in the Kings debt. Strange colours for Subiects to capitulate with their King; vpon giuing their ioynt aides against the common enemy, now ready with one destruction to ouerwhelme them all. The time they tooke to worke this pretended amend∣ment in state, was not well fitted. It sauoured of somewhat else besides the loue of common-weale. Priuate ambitions and passions could not bee wan∣ting in such oppositions. This is some mens iudge∣ment, let the sequels shew how iust. (66) There were called vp at this Parliament for defence of the Realme innumerable people out of al Shires, which forces lay about London within twen∣tie miles round, and had no pay but liued vpon spoile. These at last were licenced to depart to be ready at warning. There was also the Lord Chan∣cellour accused, of (we wot not what) petty crimes (for the abuses of following ages haue made them seeme so,) as for paying to the Kings Coffers but Tho. Walsing. in Rich. 2. twentie markes yeerely, for a fee-farme, whereof himselfe receiued threescore and ten, and some such other. To pacifie these great Lords, the Lord Chan∣cellour is disgraced, and the seale taken from him, against the Kings will, and giuen to Thomas Arundell Bishop of Elye, and then the houses of Parliament yeelded to giue halfe a Tenth, and halfe a Fifteenth, but vpon condition that it should be disposed of, as the Lords thought fit, for defence of the Realme. The money was thereupon deliuered to the Earle of Arundell to furnish himselfe for that purpose to the Sea. But to rid the Duke of Ireland out of the realme, the Lords were willing he should haue those thirtie thousand markes, for which the heires of Charles of Bloi , (who heretofore challenged Bri∣taine) were transacted to the French, vpon condition that the sayd Duke should passe into Ireland before the next Easter. (67) The Parliament was no sooner dissolued, but the King recals the Earle of Suffolk to the Court, keeps both him, the Duke of Ireland and Alexander Ne ile Archbishop of Yorke about his person, in grea∣ter fauour then before. Insomuch that at Christ∣mas he made De-la-Pole to sit at his owne Table not in the vsuall garment of a Peere, but Princely robed. Sure∣ly therein not well; for some of those great Lords, (though not by so sweet meanes as were fit) did de∣sire to waken him out of Courtly drowsinesse, and (as men that knew not what peace meant) to put him into actions worthy of his name and greatnes. These other persons were not so friended, or qualifi∣ed, that they could support a King against an vniuersal mislike. But the King vpon a stomacke doth it; so that (saith Ypod. Neust. Walsingham) here first grew the Kings hatred against the Peeres, that from thence forth he neuer, as it is said, regarded them but fainedly. So much more dangerous sometime is the remedy then a very gree∣uous maladie. (68) King Richard (whose age and place stood in need of wiser instructions) not thus contented to haue whetted the displeasures of the greater Peeres, as if he had said to himselfe, Rumpatur Mar al. quisquis rum∣pitur inuidiâ; is further drawne, as was said, to plot the death of his vncle, Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of Gloster, and other enemies of De-la-pole; who to∣gether being inuited to a feast (by the bloody de∣uise of Sir Nicholas Brambre late Lord Maior of Lon∣don) should together haue perished. But the present The Lord Maior of London refu∣seth to be of con∣spiracy against the Duke of Glo∣ster. Lord Maior Nicholas Exton (whom the conspirators would haue had their Partaker, if it may be belee∣ued) honestly refused to assent. The Lords hereupon hauing admonition, refrained to come. (69) The persons which were in the publike enuie for their ouer-swaying grace with the King, An. D. 1387. were (as you haue heard) Robert de Vere Duke of Ire∣land, Michael de la Pole Earle of Suffolke, the said Archbishop, Sir Simon Burley Knight, and Sir Richard Stury: These men hearing that Richard Earle of Arundel and Thomas Earle of Nottingham, Marshall of England, Aprilis. 24. had encountred with a great Fleete of Frenchmen, Flemmings, Normans, and Spaniards, and taken aboue one hundreth saile of ships, and in them nineteene thousand tunnes o ine, depraued the victorie, saying, that the vanquished were but Mer∣chants, whose loues had beene more profitable to our Countrey, then so to stirre them to inexorable hatred. But these (saith Ypod: Neust: A description of King Richards chiefe fauorites. one) who thus iudged, were rather the Knights of Venus then Bellona, fitter for a Canapie then a Campe, for language then a lance, as they who were awake to discourse of martiall actions, but drow e when they should come to doe them. Such there∣fore c ersing with the King (not * without suspition of Tho. VValsin. in Richard 2. ad A. D. 13 6. fowle familiaritie) neuer tooke care to put into his mind any matter which beseemed so potent a Prince, wee say not (quoth our Authour) as concerning the vse of Armes, but not euen concerning those very recreations, which most of all become great spirits, as hunting, hawking, and the like. But the Earles did more then meddle with Mer∣chants (who yet were able to make dangerous resi∣stances) for they landed at Brest in Britaine, and with great difficulty deliuered it againe from so bad neighbours as the two woodden Forts neerely built, The malignant construction made of the Earle of Ar ∣dels seruice. where the other had stood, one of which they fired, and the other they mand with the English Garrison of Brest. Then stuffing it with all sorts of prouisions for a yeere, and furnishing the wants of the Souldi∣ers with all necessaries, they returned, hauing wor∣thily wonne the loue and praises of the people. Which, as they were also due to them from the king, yet comming to his presence, they (by these mens euill offices) had so cold entertainement, as they eft∣soones withdrew themselues from Court to liue qui∣etly vpon their owne at home. After them the braue young Henry Hotspur, Lord Percy was sent (ill proui∣ded) to the Sea; neuerthelesse he ventred, and retur∣ned (when his commission was expired) with ho∣nour. (70) One thing done by the Duke of Ireland was surelie full of wickednesse and indignitie. For The Duke of Ireland puts a∣way his wife the Kings cosen. he hauing to wife, a young, faire, and noble Ladie, and the Kings neere kineswoman, (for shee was Grandchild to king Edward by his Tho. Walsin. in Rich. 2. daughter Isabel,) did put her away, and took one of Queene Annes wo∣men, a B hemian Sellarij Filia, a Sadlers daugh∣ter, some aay a Ioyners. Walsing. of base birrh, called in her mother tongue Lancecrone. This intollerable villanie offe∣red to the blood royall, King Richard did not en∣counter; neither had the power, some say, who dee∣med that by witchcrafts and sorceries (practised v∣pon him by one of the Dukes followers) his iudge∣ment was so seduced and captiuated, that he could not see what was honest or fit to doe. But where Princes are wilfull or slouthfull, and their fauorites flatterers or time-seruers, there needs no other en∣chantments to infatuate, yea and ruinate the greatest Monarch. (71) The Duke of Glocester tooke the matter more to heart, resoluing to be reuenged for the in∣famy A new ∣tion of the King how to bring the popular Lords to a triall. and confusion, which was brought thereby v∣pon his noble kinsewoman. Meanewhile the king, as if he meant to conduct his deare friend, the Duke toward Ireland, went with him into Wales. There the King deuiseth with him, the Earle of Suffolke, Sir Robert Tresilian and others; (who were equally af∣frayd of the Lords) how to destroy the Duke of Glocester, the Earles of Arundel, Warwicke, Derby, Nottingham, and such others, as from whom they thought fitte to bee cleare. Much time being trifled thus away in Wales, they come together (as if the Dukes appointed voyage, or rather ba∣nishment into Ireland; were quite forgotten) to the Castle of Nottingham, there more freely to deliberate. A fearefull estate of a Monarchie. Hee among a few, generally ill beloued, and ill aduised, and ill prouided; for their whole strength was the king, and these emulations made that force feeble both to him and them: the Lords, potent, martiall, rich, and popular; he at Notingham, they not neere him: but abroad farre-off, the Duke of Lancaster with the flower of the English forces, and mighty neighbours watching for the ruine of all. The course agreed vpon by the King and that ill∣chosen Senate, was first to haue the opinion of all the Chiefe Lawyers concerning certaine Articles of The Lawyers sent for to make treasons. Treason, within whose nets and sprindges they pre∣sumed the reforming Lords were; and if the Lawyers (who seldome faile Princes in such turnes,) did con∣clude, that those Articles contained treasonable matter, then vnder a shew of iustice they should bee proceeded against accordinglie. These Lawyers (who were the very men, which in the last seditious Parliament, gaue aduise to the Lords to doe as they did) now meeting, were demanded, whether by the law of the land, the King m ght not disanull the Decrees of the last Parliament: they iointly At Shrewsburie saith Hist. Lece∣strens. answered; he might, because hee was aboue the lawes: confessing, that them∣selues had in that Parliament decreed many things, and giuen their iudgement, that all was acording to law, which Hist. Lecestrens. now they acknowledged to be altogether vnlawfull. The King thus enformed, appointeth a great Councell to be holden at Nottingham, and sent for certaine Londoners, some of them such as were beholding to the King for mercie in cases of attaindour, to be there empanelled for Quests of Inquirie. The Sheriffes of Shires (being questioned) denied, that they could raise any competent forces against the Lords, their whole Counties were so addicted in their fauour: & being further willed to suffer no Knights to be cho∣sen for the Shires, but such as the King & his Coun∣cell should name, they answered, that the election belonged to the Commons who fauoured the Lords in all. (72) Vpon the 25. of August there met before the King at Nottingham these Lawyers, Robert Tri∣silian his chiefe Iustitiar, Robert Belknap chiefe Iusti∣tiar of the common Pleas, Iohn Holt, Roger Fulthorp vide Booke of Statut. A. 11. Rich. 2. cap. 4. Stile∣thorpe, & William Burgh Iustitiars in the same Court, and Iohn Lokton the Kings Serieant at Law: all which being vpon their allegiance charged to deliuer their opinions, whether such Those Articles are set downe in the Book of Sta∣tu. A. 21. R. . c. 12 Articles as were there in the Kings behalfe propounded (which Articles com∣prehended all the points of aduantage taken against the proceedings of the last Parliament, and the dis∣placing of the Lord Chancellor, Michael de Pole) contained matter of treason, they all of them an∣swered affirmatiuely, and subscribed; which after∣ward cost them deare. Iudge Belknap foresaw the danger, and therefore was very vnwilling to put his seale to the answeres; saying; there wanted but a In MS. it i ratis for Crat in likelihood. hurdle, a horse, and a halter, to carrie him where hee H st. . might suffer the death hee deserued; for if I had not done this (quoth he) I should haue died for it, and because I haue done it, I deserue death for betraying the Lordes. The King in the meane space puruaies himselfe of people to fight, if need required. (73) The Duke of Glocester (sadded with these newes, sent the Bishoppe of London to bring his pur∣gation vpon oath to the King, who inclining to cre∣dite the same, was in an euill howre diuerted by De la Pole. The Duke makes his and their common danger known to the Earles of Arundel, Warwicke, & Derby, eldest sonne to the Duke of Lancaster. They seuerally gather forces, that vnited they might pre∣sent their griefes to the King, who to keep them from ioyning, sends the Earle of Northumberland to arrest the Earle of Arundel at eygate in Surrey, where hee abode. But by reason of Arundels power, it was too dangerous a worke. Northumberland returnes, and Arundel (admonished by the Duke of Glocester of his farther perill) escapeth in post to Haringey, where the Duke and Earle of Warwicke had store of people. (74) As yet no bloud was drawne. Peaceable men procured that the Lords should repaire safe to West∣minster, and there be heard. Thither approaching they are aduertised by the Bishop of Elie and others (who had sworne on the kings behalfe for good dea∣ling to be vsed during the Interim) that, at the Mewes by Charing Crosse, a thousand armed men (which without the Kings priuity Sir Thomas Tri et and Sir Nicholas Brembre Knights were reported to haue laid for their destruction) attended in ambush. The King sweares his innocency, but the Lords come strong and trust no longer. The King royally a∣dorned keepes state in Westminster Hall with manie his Prelates and Peeres about him; the Lords pre∣sent themselues vpon their knees, and being requi∣red by the Eishop of Elye the Lord Chancellour (for The popular Lords bold an∣swere to the king the Lord De la Pole neuer had that place againe) why they were in warlike manner assembled at Haringey Parke, contrary to the lawes, their ioint answere was, That they were assembled for the good of the King and kingdome, and to weed from about him such Traitors as hee continually held with him. The traitors they na∣med to bee, Robert de Vere, Duke of Ireland, Alexan∣der Neuile Archbishoppe of Yorke, Michael at the Pole Earle of Suffolke, Sir Robert Tresilian that false ∣stitiar (quoth they) and Sir Nicholas Brambre that false Knight of London. To proue them such, they threw downe their gloues, as gages of challenge for a triall to bee had by the sword. The King hereun∣to replied, as knowing that they were all hidden out of the way: This shall not bee done so, but at the The kings reply. next Parliament (which shall be the morrow after Candle∣mas) all parties shall receiue according as they deserue. And now (saith hee) to yee my Lords; how or by what authority durst you presume to leuie force against mee in this-land? did you thinke to haue terrified mee by such your presumption? haue not I men of Armes, who (if it pleased me) could enuiron, and kill you like Cattle? Cer∣tainely in this respect I esteeme of you all no more, then as of the basest scullions in my Kitchens. Hauing vsed these, and many the like high words; hee tooke vp his vncle the Duke from the ground, where all this while hee kneeled, and bad all the other rise. The rest of the conference was calme, and the whole deferred till the next Parliament, then shortly to be holden at Westminster. In the meane time (that the world might see how little able the King was to equall his words with deedes) a Proclamation is set forth, in which the King cleareth the Lords (before any trial) of treason obiected, and names those perso for vniust accusers, whom the Lords had before na∣med. (75) The factious Lords neuerthelesse thought not good to seuer themselues, but to keepe toge∣ther for feare of the worst; which fell out to their aduantage; for the Duke of Ireland (with the Kings priuitie) had gathered a power in Wales and Cheshire, which they intercepting neere to Burford and Bab∣blake, slew Sir William Molineux leader of the Che∣shire men, and some others, and made the Duke to flie in great feare. Among the spoiles of the Dukes carriages there were found (as the Diuell would haue it) certaine letters of the King to the said Duke of Ireland, by which their counsels were plainely dis∣couered. The Lords hereupon march with speede vp to London, hauing an Armie of about forty thou∣sand men. The King shuts himselfe vp in the Tow∣er, but is glad before long to admit them to his The Lords harge the king with sundry matters, presence. There they (vnreuerently inough) obiect mutability to him and his vnderhand workings; they obiected also, that hee had secretly practised to flie with the Duke of Ireland into France, and to deliuer vp to the French Kings possession Callis, & such pie∣ces as the Crowne of England held in those parts: to proue which dishonourable act, they (as some write) produced the French packets intercepted. This wrung teares (perhaps of disdaine) from the King, and hee yeelded to come to VVestminster vpon the next day, there to heare and determine farther. The King in signe of amitie stayed his Cosen the Earle of Derbie (the same who afterward dethroned him) to supper. O where was the courage of a King? The Lords in their owne quarrell could draw vp fortie thousand men; but in the generall danger of the Realme, when the Commons were vp, and the French hung ouer their heads, with no lesse hatred then preparations, no such numbers appeared. Was it fortheir honour or praise, that their most rightful King should by their violence be driuen to consult vpon flight out of his proper Kingdome? The Citie An. D. 1388. An. Reg. 11. of London was also in no little perill at this present by their accesse, which drawne by iust feare was contented to open the gates and harbour the Lords and their partakers. These Lords, who so often are called here the Lord , are named in our Stat. A . 11. . 1 Statute bookes to be but these fiue; The Duke of Glocester, the Earles of Derbie, Arundel, Warwicke and Marshal. (76) The next day, hee would haue deferred his repaire to Westminster. This being signified to the Kings Lords (for so they might bee called, as being more Masters then the King) they labour not, by humble words, and dutious reasons to perswade the vse or necessity of his presence in that place, but contrarie to their allegiance, and all good order send him word, That if hee came not quickly according to appointment, they would choose them another King, who The rough and harsh behauiour of the Lords. both would, and should obey the counsell of the Peeres. They had him indeed amongst them, whom (belike) they euen then meant to haue surrogated, that is to say, the before said Earle of Derby, heire to the D. of Lancaster. The Lords certainely had so behaued themselues towards the King, that they well saw they must bee masters of his person and power, or themselues in the end perish. (77) The King (after a preposterous and inuer∣ted manner) attending his Subiects pleasures at Westminster, heauily and vnwillingly is drawne to disclaime Alexander Neuil Archbishoppe of Yorke, the Persons remo∣ued from about the King. Bishops of Duresme and Chichester, the Lords Souch and Beaumount with sundry others. Neither was the Male-sexe onely suspected to these curious pruners; the Lady Poinings, and other Ladies were also re∣moued, and put vnder baile to answere such things as should bee obiected. Sir Simon Burley, Sir Willi∣am Elinham , Sir Iohn Beauchampe of Holt, Sir Iohn Salisbury, Sir Thomas Triuet, Sir Iames Berneys, Sir Nicholas Dagworth, and Sir Nicholas Brambre knights with certaine Clerks were apprehended, and kept in straite prison, to answere such accusations (what if meere calumniations?) as in the next Parliament at Westminster should be obiected. (78) The Parliament began at Candlemas, where the King was vnwillingly present: The first day of the Session, all the Iudges Fulthrop, Belknap, Care, Historia Lecestren. Hott, Burgh, and Lockton were arrested as they sate in Iudgement on the Bench, and most of them sent to the Tower. The cause alleadged was, that ha∣uing first ouerruled them with their counsels and di∣rections, which they assured them to bee according to law, they afterward at Nottingham gaue contrarie iudgement to that which themselues had fore-decla∣red. Trysilian the chiefe Iustice preuented them by flight, but being apprehended, and brought to the Parliament in the forenoone, had sentence to be drawne to Tyborne in the afternoone, and there to haue his throat cut; which was done according∣ly. Sir Nicholas Brambres turne was next. This The Duke of new Troy or London. Brambre (saith Walsingham) was said to haue imagined to be made Duke of new Troy (the old supposed name of London) by murthering thousands of such Citizens, (whose names hee had billed for that purpose,) as were sus∣pected of likelihood to resist him. Then Sir Iohn Salis∣bury, and Sir Iames Bernes two young Knights, Sir Iohn Beauchamp of Holt, Steward of the Household to the King, and Iohn Blake Esquier, were likewise sa∣crificed to reuenge. Sir Simon Burley onely had the worshippe to haue but his head strucken off. Loe the noble respect which the gentle Lords had to iustice and amendment. This was no age (wee see) for a weake or slothfull Prince to sit in quiet; for now the people, and then the Peeres, foile and trample the regall authority vnder foote: the Duke of Ire∣land, the Archbishoppe of Yorke, the Earle of Suf∣folke and others, had their estates confiscated to the kings vse by Act of Parliament, as in the An. 10. & 11. Rich. 2. booke of Statutes may bee seene, together with a great part of the whole proceedings. (79) These troubles boiling and burning within, in the Bowels of the State, the Scots abroad had o∣portunity to inuade the North of England, vnder the conduct of Sir William Dowglasse, a noble young knight, a parallel and riuall in the honour of Armes to Henry Hotspur, Lord Percy, whom Hotspur figh∣ting hand to hand slew in battell: but the Earle of Dunbar comming with an excessiue number of Scots, tooke Hotspur and his brother prisoners, killing ma∣ny English, not without such losse to themselues, that they forthwith returned. (80) But these vnneighbourly hostilities soone A. D. 1389. A. reg. 12. after found some surcease, there being a meeting at Calis betweene the English and French, about esta∣blishing a peace: and albeit, because the French would haue the Scot and Spaniard included therein, the conclusion was deferred, yet shortly after it was resolued vpon for three yeeres, the Scots being com∣prehended therein. (81) King Richard (being now of age) declares The King de∣clares himselfe to be of age, and takes the gouern∣ment vpon him. himselfe free to gouerne of himselfe, without either controlement, or help of any other, then such as hee selected to that place, and in token that he was at li∣berty, he takes the Great Seale of England from Tho∣mas Arundel Archbishop of Yorke, (Alexander Neuill being attainted and fled) and departs out of the Councell Chamber. After a while hee returnes, and giues it backe to William Wickham (the He was founder of the two fa∣mous Colledges in Oxford and Winchester. renow∣ned Bishoppe of Winchester) who was vnwilling to haue accepted the same. Hee also puts out sundrie Officers, substituting such others as best liked him. From the Councell Table hee remoued his vncle Tho∣mas of Woodstocke Duke of Glocester, the Earle of War∣wicke, and others; which (as it might) encouraged the Dukes enemies about the King, to doe euill offi∣ces betweene them. Yet the king did not present∣ly credite what was whispered into his care, concer∣ning a purpose suggested to be in the Duke, to raise forces againe; but acquainting him withall, was sa∣tisfied. Neuerthelesse, he would not suffer the Duke to pursue an orderly or any reuenge vpon the Au∣thors, whom indeed it had beene wisdome to haue punished in an exemplary manner. (82) Michael de la Pole late Earle of Suffolke (whom the popular Lords had made most odious to the English) died at Paris in exile, bequeathing such goods as hee had there to Robert Duke of Ireland, who also breathed out his griefes in banishment, and died at last in Brabant. (83) The Duke of Lancaster the meane while, returnes into Gascoigne out of Spaine, and not long after into England. The successe of that voyage (be∣ing made to claime the Crowne of Castile and Leon) was briefly this▪ Iohn King of Castile Roder. Santius. Archiep. Toletan. Hist. Hisp. part. 4 cap. 22. alledged that Constance the Dukes wife was not right heire, but he. For, albeit the Lady Constance was eldest daugh∣ter and heire to Peter sonne of Alfonse, whose father Fernand the fourth was sonne of Sanchez the fourth, and he sonne of Alfonse the tenth; all Kings of Spaine successiuely; yet, that neither Constance, Peter, Alfonse, Ferdinand, nor Sanchez had the right. His reason was; for that Alfonse the tenth, (chosen Emperour of Almaine) had, before he begat the said Sanchez, an elder sonne called Ferdinand de la Cerda, who marri∣ed Blanch the daughter of Saint Lewis King of France, from whom descended Alfonse de la Cerda (who entituled himselfe King, but died without is∣sue) and Fernand, who had a daughter married to Iohn, sonne of the Infant of Portugall Emmanuel, mo∣ther to the Lady Ioane, wife of King Henry the se∣cond, father of Iohn King of Castile defendant. (84) This Apologie made by the Castilian, would not serue; for kingdomes are not vsed to be pleaded for by Bil and Answere; The English and Portugals ioine their forces. To the Duke (by rea∣son of his wiues presence,) manie did voluntarily submit themselues; all did not; for Don Polyd. Verg. l. 20 Hist. Ang. Aluarez de Perez on the behalfe of his Lord, the King of Spaine, offred to stop the Duke in his march to Bur∣gos, and was ouerthrowne. Other aduentures that warre afforded, but sicknesse hapning in the Eng∣lish Armie, consumed Froissard. many of the principall, and a∣mong them the Lord Fitzwalter, with other Lords, Knights, Esquires, and men of armes, almost three hundreth. Moreouer the penurie was such, that sundrie reuolted to the enemy to get reliefe, which being Tho. Wals. seene of the King of Portugal, he told the Duke he would set vpon them as Enemies, but hee said no, for that he knew they did it onely for lacke of foode. Thus hauing said, he held downe his head, as he sate on horsebacke, and wept most bitter∣ly, The Duke of Lancaster in his distresse calleth vpon God, and is heard. secretly powring forth his praiers to almighty God, and most humbly beseeching mercy. From which time forward his affaires in Spaine succeeded happily. (85) The warres had beene harpe and tedi∣ous, but the end acceptable. For Don Iuan king of * Roder. San. qua supra. Castile, a Prince of no euill conscience, seeing the right which the Duke of Lancaster vrged, and fore∣seeing Conditions of perpetuall amity betweene the K. of Spaine and the Duke of Lanca∣ster. what calamities might happen hereafter, if (as was feared the French should match with him, sought and obtained a firme peace. The Principall conditions were: That the Lord Henry, his sonne and heire, should marry the Lady Katherine, daugh∣ter and heire to the Duke and Constance his wife; That the Lord Henry (during his fathers life) should be called Prince of Asturia, and Katherine his wife Princesse: That Tho. VValsin. in Ric. 2. for default of issue betweene the young Princely couple, the Crowne should come to the Lord Edward Duke of Yorke, who had married the other daughter of King Peter. That the king of Spaine should lade Fabian. Caxton. eight Cars with wed∣ges of gold for the Duke, or (as Holinsh. pag. 450. some write) pay two hundreth thousand nobles, toward the defrayment of the Dukes huge charges; That finallie, he should giue sufficient Caution for an Annuitie of Ypod. Neust. ten thou∣sand pounds, during the liues of the said Duke and Dutchesse, to be duly paid to their vses at the City of Holinshed. The Duke of Lancaster doth good offices. Bayon in Gascoigne. (86) The King, at such time as the Duke of Lancaster returned, was at Reading, whither he had commanded the Peeres to repaire. To that meet∣ing the Duke makes hast, aswell to present his dutie to his Soueraigue, as to be an authour of loue and peace betweene the king and Lords, against some of whom the King was not thought to be verie fauou∣rably disposed. Which he gratiously effected, as seeming to addict his mind to offices of piety and publike benefit. Certainely the wisdome and mo∣deration The Duke of Yorkes carriage worthily praised. of the Duke of Yorke his brother, were such, in all the late, and other tumults, that he is not so much as once named among the factious; which Christian spirit if it had raigned in all the rest, Eng∣land had neuer beene polluted with such infinite bloodshed of her noblest Children; neither had the goodlie fabricke of state, laden with innumerable trophees, falne vnder that most hideous Chaos, which succeeding ages saw and sighed for. (87) The King vpon the Duke of Lancasters A. D. 1390. An. reg. 13. The Duke of Lancaster made Duke of Aqui∣taine. returne, whether hee felt the keeping of Aquitaine an vnprofitable burthen, or the absence of his vncle the Duke, a thing worthie to be purchased at anie rate, certaine it is, that in a Parliament held at Lon∣don, he vested in him that famous Dutchy, by deliue∣ring the Cap of State, and Ducal Rod; whither hee shortly went to take possession. His sonne, Henrie of Bullingbroke Earle of Derbie, loath to spend his houres in sloath, but desirous to pursue renowne by martiall Acts in forreine parts, sailed ouer to the warres in Prussia, where in sundry enterprizes against the Lithuanians, he wan great honor, which, by com∣parison Henry of Bulling∣broke seekes ad∣uentures into Germany. of King Richards Calmnes, prepared a way for him in the Englishes affections, to points more eminent. (88) The Pope now vnderstood, that the Eng∣lish State began againe to be sensible of Romish en∣croachments; and as in a A. R. 13. vid. lib. Stat. former Parliament they had enacted against all Collations of Bishoprickes and dignities by the Pope, with banishment to all which did accept such Collations, and death to al that brought in any excommunications from the Pope, to hin∣der the execution of that Act; so in this last Parliament, Ypod. Neust. 544. another seuere Act was made, against such as went to the Pope to procure any such prouisions. A Proclama∣tion also was made at London, * that all beneficed men ibid. p. 545. then being in the Court of Rome, should returne by a day prefixed, or loose all their liuings. The Pope himselfe (saith Walsingham) troubled with frigore turbat . so great a thunder∣clap, sent with all speed into England, to perswade the A. D. 1391. King, that such Statutes as had beene thus made in their preiudice, who followed the Court of Rome, and such other clauses as tended to the dammage of that See, should be made void; whereto the Kings answere was, that the Popes Nuntio must expect till the next Parliament. At which Parliament the King, as also the Duke of Lancaster, seemed to haue some re∣spect to the Pope, (whose messenger was their Pre∣sent) but the Ypod. Neust. Knights of the house would not in any wise giue their consents, that such R mipetis. Rome-gadders should without due punishment pursue their wonted course, longer then till the next Parliament. To furnish the Duke of Lancaster into France, to treat of a peace, and vpon condition that the King should that yere inuade Scot∣land, large contributions were there made, both by Clergy and Laity. Hereupon the Lord Ioh. Stow. cals him Earle of Northumberland. Henry Percy, Hotspur (who had redeemed himself) was called from his charge at Callis, and made Warden of the Mar∣ches against Scotland; Thomas Moubray Earle of Not∣tingham succeeding in the Captaineship of Calys. The Dukes chargefull emploiment in France bare no o∣ther flower, then a yeeres short truce. (89) The Kings wants still encreasing with his imploiments, the Londoners (carried away with e∣uill A. D. 1392. London in dis∣grace with the King. counsell) did a thing most vnworthy of their Ci∣tie and themselues, and it might to them haue pro∣ued as hurtfull, as it was vnworthy, at such time as the King Tho. VVals. desired the loane but of one thousand pounds: which was not onely churlishly denied, but a certaine Lumbard, honestly offering to lend the same, was badly vsed, beaten, and almost slain Their liberties for that and other Fabian & Cax∣ton; but. Stow mistikes their ad∣ditions of other disorders. disorders are seised, and their proper Magistracy dissolued, (Guardians be∣ing giuen them, first Sir Edward Dallinging, then Sir Baldwin Radington) and their Maior, and some chiefe Citizens layed in prisons farre off from London. The punishment brought the fowlenesse of their errors to their sight; but by the Duke of Ypod. Neust. Glocesters inter∣cessions (who did not vnwillingly lay hold vpon such occasions of popularity) the king and Queene are wonne to enter the City, which gaue them tri∣umphall entertainement. The sea is not sodainely calmed after a tempest, neither a Princes anger. By degrees yet, and not without deare repentance, they were at last restored to their former condition in all A. D. 1393. points. (90) The king declaring his purpose to crosse in∣to Ireland, had an aide of money conditionally A. D. 1394. granted: foure yeeres truce by the trauaile of the two Dukes of Lancaster and Glocester being conclu∣ded in France. This yeere was farther notable for many great Funerals. Constance Dutchesse of A∣quitaine and Lancaster, a Lady of great Ypod. Neust. The death of Queene Anne and many great Ladies. Innocency and deuotion: the Countesse of Derby her daugh∣ter in law, Isabel the Dutchesse of Yorke, and a Lady noted for too great a finenesse and delicacy, yet at her death shewing much repentance and sorrow for her loue to those pestilent vanities, left this present life. But all the griefe for their deaths did in no sort equall that of the kings, for the losse of his owne Queene Anne, which about the same time hapned at Sheene in Surrey, whom he loued euen to a kind of madnesse: but Ladies onely died not; for Sir Iohn Hawkwood, whose cheualrie had made him renow∣ned ouer the Christian world, did in this yeere de∣part The famous Sir Iohn Hawkwood dieth. an aged man out of this world in Florence, where his ashes remaine honoured at this present with a stately Tombe, and the statue of a Man at Armes, e∣rected by the gratitude of that State and City, which chiefly by his conduct, courage and valour (to this day admired amongst them) was preserued. The Ita∣lian Writers, both Paul. in log . . Historians and Iulius Feroldus Poets, highlie celebrating his matchlesse prowesse enstyle him, -Anglorum decus, & decus addite genti Italicae, Italico prasidium{que} Solo. Englands prime honour, Italies renowne, Who vpheld all Italie from sinking down. But the Duke of Lancaster hauing all things ready, sets saile to Burdeaux, there, with the consent of the State to take possession of his lately granted Dut∣chie. (91) The King doth the like for Ireland; where that sort of the Irish which are called the wild, had greatly inuested the English Pale, and other good Subiects there, to the great dammage of the Crown of England. In the times of Edward the third, Ireland yeelded to the kings coffers Tho. Walsin. thirty thousand pounds yeerly, but now things were so grown out of order, that it cost the King thirty thousand Marks by yeere To reduce the rebellious, himselfe conducts thither an Armie, attended vpon by the Duke of Glocester, the Earles of March, Nottingham and Rutland, all the Irish being commanded to auoid out of England. The terror of the preparatiōs, & shining presence of a king (which aboue al worldly things is pleasāt to the Irish) had such effects that sundry great men were compel∣led to submit themselues. To supply the Kings wants, growne in the Irish expedition, Edmund D. of Yorke, the Kings vncle, and Custos or Warden of Eng∣land, called a Parliament at London (whither the Duke of Glocester repaired to declare the Kings wants) and hath contributions granted. Neuerthelesse, so strong a party against the Clergy, & Fryarly abuses of those times discouered it selfe therein, that the Archbishop of Yorke, the Bishop of London, and others, prest o∣uer Sea to the King at Dublin, beseeching him to re∣turne, the sooner to represse the Lollards (so called they the embracers of Wicliffes doctrine) and their Ypod. Neust. fauourers, who sought not onely (as they vntruly pre∣tended) to wring away all the possessions of the Church, but that which was worse, to abrogate and destroy al Ec∣clesiasticall constitutions, whereas they aimed onely at the redresse of exorbitancy in the Papal Clergy. The King hereupon returnes: by whose arriuall and authority, those consultations of the Laity were laid downe. Sir Richard Storie a seruant of his had been forward against the Prelates; of him therefore hee takes an oath vpon the holy Gospell, that he should not hold such opinions any longer. The Knight takes that oath, and we (saith the King) doe sweare, that if thou doest breake it, thou shalt die a most shamefull death. The rest hearing the Lion roare so terribly, drew in their hornes, and would be seen no more. (92) The King caused the body of the late Duke of Ireland to bee brought into England. His excee∣ding loue to him was such, that he commanded the Cypresse chest wherein his body lay embalmed, to bee opened, that hee might see, view, handle, and openly expresse his affection. The dead remaines of that noble young Gentleman, (by his birthright Earle of Oxford, and by race a Vere) were buried at the Priorie of Coln in Essex, there being present the King himselfe, the Countesse Dowager of Ox∣ford, the Dukes mother, the Archbishoppe of Can∣terburie with many Bishops, Abbots, and religious persons, but few of the Lords, for they had not as yet digested the hate they bare him. (93) The Duke of Lancaster was this while in A∣quitaine, where he had sought to winne the people An. D. 1396. with incredible largesse, to accept of his Soueraign∣ty, according to the tenor of King Richards grant. Little did he then thinke, that within lesse then sixescore and three yeeres after, an Doct. Tayler ex Autograph ipsius. A. D. 15 . Ambassador of King Henry the 8. should write thus of Burdeaux it selfe, the Capitall City of Gascoign and Guien: Ang∣lorum nulla ferè vestigia remanent, &c. There are (saith that learned Gentleman) scarse any foot-prints of An excellent note concerning the vanity of worldly ambiti∣on in Princes. the Englishmen remaining. In the Churches, and o∣ther places newly refreshed and reedified, such Ar∣mories of the English as stood, were vtterly blotted and defaced: yet in the Church of the Fryers Preachers, the Armories of the Duke of Lancaster stand entire in a Glasse-window, and in the oldest wall of the City those also of England, though consumed in a manner with age: The Lawes, Statutes and Ordinations which were made by the English, are notwithstanding obserued at this day. But the Dukes eye could not looke so farre into the times to come. Neuerthelesse wee that see these things must confesse, that the best kingdome vnder heauen is not so worth the getting, as that with the wilfull contempt of God and conscience any man should seeke to purchase it. (94) But while the Duke was thus busied in Courting the Gascoignes good will, Froissard. who had sent into England, to shew causes why they should not atturne to the Duke, (and yet were wrought at last to the point of yeelding,) he receiues a commande∣ment from King Richard to returne, that he might goe with him into France; which he obayed. The King keeping his at Langley in Hartfordshire, the Duke The Duke of Lancaster mar∣ries the Lady Katherine Swin∣ford. was there entertained with more honour (as it was thought) then loue. Being licenced to depart for a time, he repaired to Lincolne, where he a widdower, married his old loue the Lady Katherine Swinford, now a widdow. Men did wonder at it, but hee therein obeyed the remorse of a Christian consci∣ence, without respect to his owne vnequall greatnes; for hauing had sundry Children by her in his for∣mer wiues time, he made her and them now the only sufficient amends, which the law of God or man enioineth. And further in a Parliament held the yeere following, the Duke procured an Act to passe, by which, such children as he formerly had by his new Dutchesse, were legitimated; and surnamed them Beufot, being Stow, Holinsh. erreth in saying but three. foure of them, Iohn, Thomas, Hen∣rie, Ioane; the second of which was by the Kings bounty created Earle of Sommerset. (95) The King, being specially accompanied A peace and marriage with France. with those his vncles of Lancaster and Glocester, at a most sumptuous and chargefull enteruiew between him and Charles King of France, in the parts of Calis and Gynes, espoused the Lady Isabell, daughter of the said Charles. At the deliuery of her, King Rich∣ard, in the presence of all the greatest Princes, Peeres, and Ladies of either nation, gaue the King his father in law great thanks for a gift so noble and accepta∣ble, adding, he tooke her vpon the conditions made betweene the two nations, to the intent that liuing in peace and rest, they might attaine to the establish∣ment of a perpetuall amitie, for auoyding the effu∣sion of Christian blood, which would in likelyhood haue followed, had not at that time affinitie beene contracted betweene them. The young Lady was not aboue seuen or eight yeeres old, but the truce was taken for thirty yeeres. Her person therefore was committed to the Dutchesses of Lancaster and Glocester, and other great Ladies, who conducted her to Callis. From whence, after a short stay, the King, his young Queene (with whom he had great riches) and all the glorious companie came ouer into England. Their persons arriued safe, but the Kings gorgeous Pauilions, and a great part of his stuffe was cast away by tempest in the transportation. This iourney (besides his losses at Sea) cost the King aboue forty thousand markes. (96) The outward felicitie of England seemed A. D. 1397. A. reg. 20. at this time verie great, and the rather seemed so, be∣cause it was likelie to continue. In the Duke of Glocesters persō that bright prosperity was first ouer∣shadowed. He, Vir ferocissimus & pracipitis ingenij (as Hist. Ang. lib. 20. Polydor censures him,) a most fierce man, and of an headlong wit, thinking those times, wherein he had mastred the King, were nothing changed, though the King was aboue thirty yeres old, forbare not, rough∣ly, not so much to admonish, as to checke and schoole his Souereigne. The peace with France displeased him, that therefore he calumniates. The King had restored Brest in Britaine to the Duke, vpon reem∣bursements of the money lent; he tels the King that hee should first conquer a Towne, before he parted with any; yet the King answeres, that he could not in conscience detaine the same, now that the Duke had repaid his loane. There were other things which could not so well be answered. For a vaine rumor Ypod. Neust. Grafton Chron. that he should be chosen Emperour, put him belike into such a vaine of spending, as carried a proportion with that maiesty; his coffers in a short time sounding like empty Caske, there was no great monied man in whose debt he was not, nor any in a manner so meane to whome hee was not burthenous. (97) The King had heretofore complained of this vncle to the Earle of Saint Paul a French-man, (then in England,) whose iudgement was, that such insolency was to be reuenged; but complai∣ning to his other vncles of Lancaster and Yorke, they wisely aduised the King, not to regard his words but his heart, which he and they knew sincere vnto him. Neuerthelesse, partly to weaken the intollerable humor of their brother, who like a constant Admi∣rer of his owne waies, thought nothing well done, but what himselfe either did or directed, and partlie to auoid the scandall of the Kings bad courses, they withdraw their presences from the Court. The King notwithstanding is the same man still, as the Duke of Glocester thinks; wherefore, he breakes his minde to such as he durst trust. Arundell in Sussex is appointed the Consultation-place, where he, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Earles of Arundell, Warwicke, Marshall and others, take an Oath of Se∣crecy, and conclude to raise a power to remoue Fabian. Con∣cor. Hist. the Dukes of Lancaster and Yorke, and such other as they thought best, from about the King, so to enact a reformation. (98) They are charged by A French pamphlet apud Ioh. Stowe in Hollinsh. pag. 488. Lanquets. Epito . some to haue plot∣ted the imprisonment of the King and Dukes, and the death of all other Councellours: which, how∣soeuer it was perhaps no part of their intention, might yet haue beene a necessarie consequent. The blustring Duke had breathed out dangerous words; as, Hist. Angl. li. 20. that he would put the King (of whose courage he spake contemptiblie) into some prison there to spend his daies in ease and peace, as himselfe thought best. His brethren hearing hereof, bro∣therlie admonish him to beware; but, as it seemes, they found him deafe on that side. This though some of the late Authors write, yet there are both Tho. VValsin. old and Grafton Io. Stow. Annal. new, who mention no such matter, but the contrary, not obscurely teaching vs, that the Dukes ruine was but an effect of old malignities. (99) Thomas Mowbray Earle of Nottingham and Marshall, a party in the reported plot, though sonne in law to the Earle of Arundel, reueileth the same to the King. *The Duke of Glocester is here∣uppon surprized by Mowbray Milles. p. 427. (lying in wait in the woods where hee was to passe) sent to Cal∣lis (where Nottingham was Captaine) and there im∣prisoned; the Earles of Arundel and Warwicke, the Lord Iohn Cobham, and Sir Iohn Cheiney, are arrested. Proclamation is then made that they were not com∣mitted for anie old matters, but for hainous things newly contriued, as in the next Parliament should be made manifest; though the euent (as Ypod Neust. Walfingham truly saith) declared the contrarie. But the Duke of Glocester, and the two said Earles are endited at Not∣tingham. The King to maintaine the accusation of treason obiected, had (as some say) suborned Edward Earle of Arundel, Thomas Earle Marshall, Thomas Holland Earle of Kent, Iohn Holland Earle of Hunting∣ton; Thomas Beaufort Earle of Somerset, Iohn Monta∣cute Earle of Salisbury, Thomas Lord Spencer and Sir William Scroope Lord Chamberlaine. (100) In September begins the Parliament at London, where the king had a great guard of Ches∣shire A. reg. 21. men to secure his person, and the Lords atten∣ded also not without sufficient numbers. The Kings chiefe Agents were Sir Iohn Bushy, Sir William Bagod, and Sir Henry Greene knights. In the first act (after the liberties of the Church and people confir∣med,) we find these Libr. Statut. An. 21. Rich. 2. cap. 2. words. The commons of the Par∣liament haue shewed to our Souereigne Lord the King, how in the Parliament holden at Westminster, the first day of October, in the tenth yeere of his reigne; Thomas Duke of Glocester, and Richard Earle of Arundell, trai∣tours to the King and his Realme and his people, by false imagination and compassing caused a br ad. An. 10. . Commission to bee made, &c. and that the said Duke of Glocester, and Earle of Arundel, did send a great man and Peere of the Realme in message to our Lord the King; who of their part said, that if he would not grant and assent to the said Com∣mission, HEE SHOVLD DE IN GREAT PE∣RIL OF HIS LIFE: and so, as well the said Com∣mission, as the said Statute touching the said Commission, were made by constraint, &c. Wherefore the Com∣mons pray their Soueraigne Lord the King, that the said Commission &c: be vtterly anulled, as a thing done TRAITEROVSLY, &c. (101) The sanctuary of former lawes, and all particular Charters of pardon being now taken away from the Duke, Earle, and others, they lay open to manifest ruine. The Holinsh. Duke of Lancaster sate in iudge∣ment as High Steward vpon Richard Earle of Arun∣del, where, for no other but for the old attempts, (though the other accusations seeme to haue been auerred by the eight Appellants) by which, as ye haue heard, so many were displaced and put to death, hee adiudged him to die that soule death of a common Traitor: but the King satisfied himselfe with onely his head, which was at one stroake taken of at Tow∣er-hill. That he was a traitour either in word or deede, The Earle of A∣randel beheaded. he vtterly did deny, and died in that deniall. The con∣stancy of this Earles carriage aswell at his arraigne∣ment, passage, and execution, (as in which he did not discolour the honour of his blood with anie de∣generous word, looke, or action) encreased the enuie of his death vpon the prosecutors. The Earle of Warwicke confessed with teares, (and as some say, drawne by faire hope of life) that in adhering to the Duke of Glocester in those ridings and assemblies hee was guilty of treason. The same sentence was there∣fore pronounced vpon him. The King neuerthe∣lesse did only banish him into the Ile of Man. But the Duke of Glocester (whom, as the peoples darling, it seemed not safe to bring to a publike triall) was se∣cretlie smothered at Calis with pillowes and feather∣beds. The Duke of Glocester murthe∣red. (102) The great Parliament (for so it seemes to haue beene called, by reason of the extraordinarie A. D. 1398. numbers of Peeres, and their retinues, which came thereunto) was holpen by adiournment at Shews∣bury. In it, those Iustitiars, who were partly put to Libr. Statu. An. 21. Rich. 2. cap. 12. death and partly banished, but all attainted (at such time as the Duke of Glocester and the rest were in armes,) doe all of them stand thereby cleared from dishonor, and such Tho. Walsin. Articles as they subscribed, (be∣ing, together with their answeres, set downe in the Act) are publikely ratified, and the offendors against them pronounced Traitours. Amongst these Ar∣ticles, one, conteining these great Lawyers iudge∣ments concerning the orderly proceedings in al Par∣liament, is very obseruable: Book of statut . A. Ric. 2. 21. ca. 12. artic. 6. That after the cause of such assembly is by the Kings commandement there decla∣red, such Articles as by the King are limitted for the Lords and Commons to proceed in, are first to bee handled; but if any should proceed vpon other Arti∣cles, and refuse to proceed vpon those limitted by the King, till the King had first answered their pro∣posals, contrary to the Kings command; such doing herein contrary to the rule of the King, are to be punished as Traitors. But the King, to content all parts, and to kindle new lights in the place of such as he had extinguished, hauing first created himselfe Tho. Walsing. The King (Prince of Chester) creates Dukes and other States. Prince of Chester, made his cosen Henry Earle of Derby, Duke of Hereford; the Earle of Rutland Duke of Aumarl; the Earle of Nottingham Duke of Norfolke; the Earle of Kent Duke of Surrey; the Earle of Huntington, Duke of Excester; the Earle of Somerset Marquesse Dorset; the Lord Spencer Earle of Glocester; the Lord Neuile Earle of Westmorland; William Scrope Earle of Wiltshire; Thomas Percy Earle of Worcester. The King also (saith Walsingham) added to his Scucheon Royall, the armories of Saint Edward King and con∣fessor. (103) The formost in this goodly ranke, being Henry Duke of Hereford, not long after accused Thomas Duke of Norfolke, of certaine words soun∣ding to the kings dishonour, which hee should pri∣uately vtter to the said Henry. Hist. Ang. lib. 20. Polydor (though ve∣ry negligently hee makes Mowbray the Accuser, and Hereford Defendant) may yet be heard in reporting the effect of the words, as That King Richard held the Peeres of the land in no account, but as much as lay in him sought to destroy them, by banishing some, and putting others to death. That hee neuer troubled his mind with considering how his Dominions were dimini∣shed through his Idlenesse. Finally, that all things went to wracke, as well in peace as war. But the Duke of Norfolke, (who vnlesse it had beene to feele how the Duke of Herefords heart was affected to the king, had little reason so to complaine) most constantly deny∣ing that euer he spake such wordes; it should haue come to a combat within lists; but the king to ∣uoid (as hee pretended) such deadly fewds as might rise in the families of two such potent Peeres, but (indeed to bee rid of an enemie with the losse of a friend) banished Norfolke for euer, and Hereford first for ten yeeres, then for sixe. Walsingham Ypod Neust. saith that this censure was giuen against Norfolke, vpon that very day in which the yeere before, he (by the kings commandement) had taken order for putting to death the Duke of Glocester at Callis, whereof the said Duke of Norfolke had the Captaineship. (104) Fearefull were the tragedies which ensu∣ed these times; and heare now what is written of An. D. 1399. An. Reg. 22. some Portents or wonders, presaging the same. The Ypod, Neust. Bay or Laurell trees withered ouer all England, and afterward reflourished, contrary to many mens o∣pinion; and vpon the first of Ianuary, neere Bed∣ford towne, the riuer between the villages of Swel∣ston and Harleswood where it was deepest, did vpon the sodaine stand still, and so diuided it selfe, that the bottome remained drie for about three miles space, which seemed (saith Walsingham) to portend that reuolt from the King, and the diuision which ensued. (105) Roger Mortimer Earle of March, Lieutenant of Ireland, hauing in the yeere before, while he too much Tho. Wals. in R. 2. trusted to his owne Forces, been slaine with very many others, by Annal. Hibern. apud Cambd. O-Brin, and the Irish of Lein∣ster, at a place called Kenlis; King Richard deter∣mines in person to reuenge the bloud of his Noble kinsman, being the man to whom hee meant the Crowne of England, if issue failed to himselfe. Hee remembred not how broken an estate hee had in England, where the peoples hearts were strongly a∣lienated, not onely for the death of the late great Lords, and banishment of the Duke of Hereford, (whose calamitie encreased his popularity) or for the like passed exasperations, but for that (to fur∣nish his Irish voyage) he had extorted money on al hands, taking vp carriages, victuals, and other neces∣saries, without any recompence; whereby the hatred of his gouernment grew vniuersall. (106) But the euill fortune which hung ouer his head, laid forth an alluring baite to haste his destru∣ction, by occasion of the Duke of Lancasters decease, which hapned about Candlemas, and the absence of his banished sonne and heire Lord Henry. The king (most vniustly) seizeth vpon the goods of that mighty Prince his vncle, & as if all things now were lawfull, which but liked him, he determines to ba∣nish the new rightfull Duke of Lancaster Henrie, not for a few yeeres, but for euer; for which cause hee reuoked his Letters Patents granted to the said Henry, by which his Atturnyes were authorised to sue his Liuerie (and to compound for the respite of his ho∣mage at a reasonable rate; whereby he made it seem plaine to the world, that hee had not banished him to auoid dissentions, but (as many said) to fill vp the breaches which his riote had made in the roi∣all treasures, with plentifull (though an vndue) Es∣cheate, as that of his deceased vncles fortune. (107) The one stedfast base and buttresse of all lawfull Empire, is Iustice; that supports the king∣lie throne. This he ouerthrew, and how then could himselfe hope to stand long? He lands at Waterford in Ireland with a Nauie of Annal. Hibern. apud Cambd. two hundreth ships, ha∣uing with him the sonne of the late Duke of Glocester, and of the now Duke of Lancaster, to secure him∣selfe the rather. Tho. VVals. His forces consisted much of Cheshire men. But that king is deceiued, who repo∣seth his safetie in violence. It was no great matter hee did there, that which fell out to bee done else∣where, was great indeed. His warre in Ireland was more dammagefull, then fishing with an hooke of gold, for here the baite and hooke was not onely lost, but the line, rod, and himselfe, were drawne altogether into the depthes of irrecouerable ruine. Duke Henry sees the aduantage which King Richards absence gaue him, and vseth it. In his Companie were Thomas Arundel the banished Archbishoppe of Canterbury, and his Nephew the sonne and heire of the late Earle of Arundel, and not aboue fifteen Lan∣ciers. His strength was (where the Kings should haue beene) in the peoples hearts. Neuerthelesse, the Duke did not sodainely take land, but houered vpon the Seas, shewing himselfe to the Country people in one place now and then in another, pretending nothing but the recouery of his rightfull Heritage. (108) Edmund Duke of Yorke, whom King Rich∣ard had left behind him to gouerne England, hearing this, cals vnto him Edmund Stafford Bishoppe of Chi∣chester, Lord Chancellor, the Earle of Wiltshire, Lord Treasurer, and the Knights of the Kings Councell, Bushie, Bagot, Greene, and Russell. Their conclusion was to leuie a force to impeach Duke Henries en∣trance. The assembly was appointed to bee at S. Albans, which came to worse then nothing, for the protestation that they would not hurt the Duke, whom they knew to bee wronged was generall. This made the Treasurer Sir Iohn Bushie, and Sir Henrie Greene flie to the Castle of Bristoll, Sir William Ba∣got to Chester, from whence he got shipping into Ire∣land. Meane while Duke Henry lands at a village heretofore called Rauenshire, to whom repaired Hen∣ry Earle of Northumberland, his sonne Henry Lord Percie, lands at Neuill Earle of Westmerland, and ma∣ny others, who (saith Walsingham) greatly feared King Richards tyrannie. With an Armie of about threescore thousand (multitudes offering their ser∣uice) they come to Bristoll, besiege the Castell, take it, and in the same the foresaid Treasurer Bushie and Greene, whose heades (at the cries of the Commons) were the next day after their surrender seuered from their bodies. (109) King Richard was in the City of Dublin, when these most heauie newes arriued. His courage which at no time seemed great, was shortly none at all. Somewhat must bee done: hee leaues the sons of Duke Henry, & of his late vncle of Glocester (which hee retained as pledges for his owne indemnity) in the Castell of Trim, and returnes himselfe into Eng∣land, entending to encounter the Duke before his force should bee too much established. The great names which accompanied him, were his late noble Creatures, the young Dukes of Aumarle, Excester, and Surrey, the Bishops of London, Lincolne and Car∣leol, and many others. There had beene some more hope for vpholding his right, if hee had not made the worlde know, that tenne yeers space was not able to burie in him the appetite of reuenge, which made many forget their owne loyalty to him, and the Crowne. Princes see in him the vse of obliui∣on: but some conscience of euill deserts seeming to haue taken from him all confidence, he dismisseth his Armie, bidding his Steward Sir Thomas Percy & others to reserue themselues for better dayes. (110) His last refuge is in Parlea. For that cause there repaired to him, at the Castell of Conway in Northwales, (for thither he was now come) the late Archbishoppe of Canterbury, and the Earle of Northumberland at the Kings appointment: The sum of his demaundes were, that if hee and eight, whome he would name, might haue honourable allowance, with the assurance of a quiet priuate life, he would resigne his Crowne. This Northumberland did sweare should be: whereupon he forthwith departs to the Castle of Flint in their company. After a short conference there had with the Duke, they all ride that night to the Castell of Chester, being attended by the Lanca∣strian Armie. If, to spare his peoples bloud, he was contented so tamely to quit his royall right, his fact doth not onely not seeme excusable, but glorious; but men rather thinke that it was sloth, and a vaine trust in dissimulation, which his enemies had long since discouered in him, and for that cause, both held his amendment desperate, and ran themselues into these desperate Treasons. (111) The King did put himselfe into the Dukes hands vpon the twentieth day of August, beeing but the forty and seuenth from the Dukes first lan∣ding. From thence they trauell to London, where the King lodged in the Tower. Meane while writs of Summons are sent out in King Richards name, for a Parliament to bee holden at Westminster, Crastino Michaelis. The tragicall forme of Resignation, you haue Ed. 2. §. 33. & 34. had already in Edward the second, of whom this King is a Parallel. There are named to haue been present at this wofull-ioyfull Act, Arundel Archbi∣shoppe of Canterburie, Richard Scrope Archbishoppe of Yorke, Iohn Bishoppe of Hereford, Henry Duke of Lancaster, (who in this serious play must seeme as if hee were but a looker on) the Earles of Northumber∣land, and Westmerland, the Lords Burnell, Barckley, Ros, Willoughby, and Abergeuenie, the Abbot of Westmin∣ster, &c. (112) In their presence Richard as yet a King, and in his Tower of London, but not otherwise then as King Richard resignes vpon Michaelmas day. A. D. 1340. a prisoner, reades the Instrument of his surrender, with a seeming chearefull countenance, as if he were glad the hower was come, in which hee might taste what it was to be a priuate man, and (hauing other∣wise first done and said what then he could to put all right out of himselfe) subscribes it with his hand; but prayes, that his Cosen the Duke of Lancaster might succeed him in the regall gouernement, and in token that it was his desire (for he must seeme to desire what hee could not hinder) hee Holinsh. pa. 504 plucked off his Signetring, and put it vpon the Dukes finger. Then did he constitute the Archbishoppe of Yorke, and Bishop of Hereford his Procurators, to declare to the whole Body of Parliament what he had done, & how willingly, where euery one ( D. Hayward. i Hen. 4. except the loyal & magnanimous Bishop of Carleol) being particularly asked, did particularly accept of the resignation. Ne∣uerthelesse, it was not thought inough to haue his Crowne, vnlesse they also published his shame. Thir∣ty Fabia. Concord. hist. saith thirty and eight. and two Articles are therefore openly (but in his absence) read; of all which, it was said (for then men might say what they listed) that he had confes∣sed himselfe guilty. In the front was placed his a∣buse of the publike treasure, and vnworthy waste of the Crown-land, whereby he grew intollerably grie∣uous to the Subiects. The particular causes of the Dukes of Glocester and Lancaster, the Archbishop of Canterburie and Earle of Arundel filled sundry Arti∣cles. They charged him in the rest with dissimula∣tion, falshood, losse of honour abroad in the world, extortions, rapine, deniall of Iustice, rasures, and embezelling of Records, dishonourable shifts, wic∣ked Axiomes of state, cruelty, couetousnesse, sub∣ordinations, lasciuiousnesse, treason to the rights of the Crown, periuries,; and briefly with all sorts of vnkingly vices, and with absolute tyranny. (113) We may be assured, that nothing could then be obiected so vntrue or incredible, but would haue gone for current and vndenyable with affections so throughly prepared. Hereupon it was Tho. Wals. concluded, that in all those thirty and two Articles, hee had broken the Oath of Empire taken at the Coronation, & al the States of the Kingdom (strange that so many should so concurre in disloyalty vnder pretence of equity) being asked what they thought; did hold that those causes seemed notorious, and sufficient to depose King Richard. Commissioners were there∣fore nominated by consent of the whole house, to pronounce the sentence of Deposition; which were, the Bishop of Asaph, the Abbot of Glassenbury, the Earle of Glocester, the Lord Barkly, William Thyrning, Chiefe Iustice of the common Pleas, and some o∣thers. The forme of pronuntiation was, IN THE NAME OF GOD, AMEN. We Iohn Bishop of Saint Asaph, Iohn Abbat, &c. Commissioners speci∣ally chosen by the Lords spirituall and temporall of the Realme of England, and Commons of the said Realme, representing all the States of the said Realme, sitting in place of iudgement, &c. (114) The definitiue sentence of Deposition giuen thus in open Parliament, there were further named certaine persons, amongst whom Ypod. Neust. William Thirning Chiefe Iustice of the Cōmon Pleas was thoght the fittest man, by whose lawlesse mouth that vniust doome should be deliuered to the King, and who on the behalfe of the Realme, should renounce to the said Richard the fealties and homages heretofore made vnto him, and to make relation of the whole manner and causes of their proceedings. The Regall seate was now reputed void; whereupon Duke Henrie riseth from his place, and stands vpright, that hee might be seene of the people, then Ypodigma. Neust. signing him∣selfe with the signe of the Crosse vpon the forehead and breast, and inuocating the name of Christ, he challenged the Crown and Realm of England, with all the members and appurtenances. His words are said to be these. In the name of God, Amen. I, Henry of Lancaster, claime the Realme of England, and the Crowne, with all Ypod. Neust. the appurtenances, as comming by the blood royall from King Henry, and by that iustice which God of his grace hath sent to me, by the helpe of my kinfolke and friends, for recouery of the said Realme, which was in point of per∣dition, through default of Gouernment and breach of lawes. (115) Which challenge and claime being thus made, all the States of the Kingdome doe with one consent grant, that the said Lord Duke should reigne ouer them. The Archbishop of Canterbury (brother to the late Earle of Arundel) takes him then by the right hand, and the Archbishop of Yorke (the late Earle of Wiltshires kinseman) being his assistant, pla∣ceth him in the royall throne, with the generall ac∣clamation and applauses of the people. Lastly, in full complement of the present solemnity, the Arch∣bishoppe of Canterburie (that we may see how the Diuinity as well as the Law of those times were dege∣nerated into temporizing Policie) made a Sermon vpon these words in Samuel, A Man shall raigne ouer the People. By occasion whereof Fab. 1. Concord. Hist. Holinsh. ex Fab. hee describeth out of the holy Scriptures, the happinesse of that King∣dom which is gouerned by a man, and the infelicity of those Realmes where a Child (whether in age or discretion) weeldes the Scepter. The euill whereof as they had dan∣gerously felt vnder the late King, so they hoped abundant∣ly to enioy the other in King Henry. To all which the whole Auditorie ioyously answered Amen. Then rose the affable new Monarch, & among a few other words, hee gaue the world to vnderstand, that none should thinke hee would as by way of Conquest, disin∣herite A necessary pro∣testation. any man, certaine bad members onelie ex∣cepted. (116) From henceforth hee was taken for King, and all Writs issued, and went forth in his name: which disorderly matters being orderly related to the deposed Prince in the Tower, by Thirning the Chiefe Iustice, hee onely vsed these words; That hee looked not after such things, but (quoth he) my hope is, that (after all this) my cosen will bee my good Lord and friend. The Archbishop (otherwise inexcusable in those proceedings) yet in his said Sermon seemeth grauely and truly to haue described the cause of this effect; for (quoth hee) the child or insipient (which are with him aequiparable) drinketh the sweet and de∣licious words vnaduisedly, and perceiueth not intoxicati∣on, which they beene mingled with, till hee bee enuironed and wrapped in all dauger, as lately the experience there∣of hath beene apparant to all our sights and knowled∣ges, and not without the great danger of all this Realme. Being thus brought downe to the show, and little∣nesse of a priuate man, wee leaue him to draw his comfort out of holy meditations, as one whose violent death ensued before long, and turne ouer to his politike and martiall Successor. (117) Yet in our way, wee may not quite ouer∣passe a cursory consideration of the affaires of the Church vnder this King, which, for auoiding often interruptions of other argument, we haue put off to this last place. For albeit the Kingdome indured great crosses in the affaires of State, yet Mornay. Myst. iniquit. p. 482. some haue thought, that it found as great blessings in matters of religion, which in those daies tooke so deepe root in this our land, by the preaching of Iohn Wicliffe, that the branches thereof did spread themselues euen into Bohemia, o∣pera Io. Huss. To. 2. o∣uer the Seas: Nor were the common people only al∣lured with his doctrine, (though the Walfi. p. 205. & p. 208. Londoners fa∣uouring of him is thought by Walsingham to haue de∣terred the Prelates from proceeding against him, and a scholler of his in Leicestershire, is said to haue drawn by his preaching, Ibid. p. 285. all the Laymen in that Countrey) but (as the same Authour reporteth) sundrie of the Fry∣ars themselues fell to him and imbraced his opini∣ons, amongst whom one p. 327. being also the Popes Chap∣laine, so discouered by preaching the murders, luxuries and treasons of Fryars of his owne Habit, that the common people were astonied with the horror thereof, and cried out to haue them all vtterly destroied; which his accusations he particularlie iustified by publike writing, professing he came forth of that Order, as out of the Diuels nest. But that which Walsingham much more p. 285. admires, is, that Wicliffes opinions were not onlie entertained in ordinary Cities, but euen in the V∣niuersity of Oxford it selfe, where was C lmen Sapien∣tia & scientia. p. 201. the very top of wisdome and learning: and where not only two Chan∣cellors successiuely. p. 286. Doctor Nicholas Hereford, and p. 201. Robert Rugge were most earnest maintainers of Wicliffes doctrine, but also, when the pope (to sup∣presse the same doctrine) sent his Bulla Gregorij. ib. Bull to the Vniuersi∣ty threatning the priuation of all their priuileges, the Pro∣ctors and Regents thereof were very doubtfull, whether they should receiue the Popes Bull with honour, or rather reiect it with open disgrace. Yea, the whole body of that glorious Vniuersitie (as the Pope there cals it in his Bull) gaue a glorious Vide op. Ioh. Huss. 10. 2. Testimony (vnder their publike seale) of Wicliffes religious life, profound learning, orthodoxe opinions, exquisite writings, all farthest from any staine of heresie. (118) And therefore no marueile, if not onely the Duke of Lancaster, with Nimio fau re P ocerum & mi∣litum. VValsin. p. 351. & p. 328. sundry Peeres and great ones, but King Edward 3. himselfe, were (as Capgraue testifieth) a fauourer of him, and Ypod. Neust. p, 552. ibid. King Richard 2. and the whole Parliament did (according to his instructi∣ons) much labour to abrogate the Popes Transcen∣dent power, which was a principall cause of the Popes hatred against him. Notwithstanding to dis∣countenance the truth which he taught, in defence of Regall Supremacy against Papall Vsurpation, (as also against the Masse, Transubstantiation, Merit; against Adoration of the Hoast, of Saints, Images; and Reliques; against Fryarly Orders, Pilgrimages, Indulgences,) ma∣ny lewd opinions by misconstruction (as his bookes Varia Wicliffi M. S. in biblioth. Oxon. yet extant, euince) are fathered on him, yea some so monstrous and diabolicall (as, Tho. VVals. p. 285. that Men ought, yea, ib. pag. 283. that God himselfe ought, to obay the Diuell) that that any man which heareth them, will presently be∣lieue (without further perswasion) that they are but malicious figments. This famous Doctor An. 1385. dying of a palsie, hath this charitable Euloge or Epitaph be∣stowed on him by a Walsi. p. 312. Ypod. Neust. p. 537. Monke; The Diuels Instrument, Churches Enemy, Peoples Confusion, Heretikes Idole, Hy∣pocrites mirrour, Schismes broacher, hatreds sower, lyes forger, Flatteries sincke; who, at his death dispaired like Cain, and stricken by the horrible iudgement of God; brea∣thed forth his wicked soule to the darke mansion Atri Ditis, is in M. S: not in the printed copies. of the blacke diuell: Whereby, Gods best children may learne, not to regard, whiles they liue, the malice of the wicked, nor to respect after their death ought else but their slanderous rancor. And thus we con∣clude the raigne, though not the life of King Richard: His first wife. (119) The first wife of King Richard the second, was Anne, daughter vnto the Emperour Charles the fourth, and sister to Wenceslaus Emperour, and King of Bohemia, who was crowned Quene the 22. of Ia∣nuary 1384. Hauing beene tenne yeeres his wife shee dyed, without any issue, at Sheen in the Coun∣ty of Surrey, 1394. whence her body was conuayed and buried at Westminster, the seuenth of the Ides of Iune. His second Wife. (120) Isabell, daughter vnto Charles the sixth, King of France, was a virgin about seuen yeers of age, when shee was affianced vnto King Richard, 1396. Neither had her husband (it seemeth) anie nuptiall fruition of her, by reason of her tender age, before such time as his traiterous Lords, (to com∣passe their owne disloyall purposes, and gratifie an vsurpers ambition) had dethroned him. What be∣came of this young Ladie, we shall further see in the ensuing storie. HENRIE THE FOVRTH, KING OF Monarch 51 Henry IIII. ENGLAND, AND FRANCE, LORD OF IRELAND, THE FIFTIE ONE MONARCH OF ENGLAND, HIS RAIGNE, ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XIIII. H ENRIE of that name the fourth, hauing thus obtained the title of king, in full accomplishment of all rites peculiar to Maie∣sty, had the Crowne of England set vpon his head, with all worldly magnifi∣cence and honour at West∣minster, by Thomas Arun∣del Archbishoppe of Canterbury, vpon the Tho. VValsin. selfe day twelue moneth, in which hee had formerly beene banished vnder Richard the second. Power and fa∣uour can set vp and maintaine a King, though they can∣not create aright. But such transcendent courses de∣uiating from all due regulation of Iustice, haue been too frequent in this Kingdome. What right had William surnamed the Conquerour? what right, (we speake of a right of Equity,) had his sonnes William the second, and Henry the first, while their elder brother liued? what right had that valiant and princely Stephen? what was the interest of Henry the second, during the life of his mother Mathildis? or that of King Iohn, till his Nephew Arthur Duke of Britaine died? yea, or that of Henry the third, till Arthurs sister died in her prison at Bristow? How be∣it, in this present case, not only Richard the late king, but the house of Mortimer, claiming from the one∣ly daughter* and heire of Lionel Duke of Clarente (an elder brother of Iohn D. of Lancaster) doubly might haue withstood the legall challenge of this Prince? That obstacle which grew by Richard, was in appa∣rance greatest, but the other was onely dangerous. Richard had no issue but the line of Mortimer (en∣graffed by marriage into the house of Yorke) feeling it selfe vnable to preuaile, and during Richards life time, hauing no right▪ secretly fostered in it selfe those fires, which afterward brake forth, and taking hold of the roofe-tops of both the royall houses, ne∣uer left burning, till no one principall timber was vnconsumed in either, all the Male-Issues which could claime by a direct line, vtterlie lopt downe thousand friends at Pomfret; they proceed to Wal∣lingford, then to Abingdon, and so to Circester. The rumors vsed by them to encrease their numbers were; that Henry of Lancaster (meaning the King) was fled with his sonnes and friends to the Tower of London, and that King Richard was escaped. Maudlen also, one of Richards Chapleins, tooke vpon him the Ex Anonym. apud Io. Stow. Annal. Holinsh p. 515. Polyd. Verg. lib. 21. per∣son of his said Lord, the more strongly to seduce the multitude, by so bold and perilous a fiction. Thus seemed they to fit their words and sute their Arts to the place. At Sunning, Richard (they said) was at Pomfret, for there the guile had beene transparent; but at Circester, Richard was not at Pomfret, but pre∣sent. (17) How beit the successe was not answerable to the deuise; for, besides that King Henry was in the heart of his strengths at London, where sixe Hall. Chron. thou∣sand men were put into a readines, and would come vpon them like a storme, the Townesmen of Circester assailed the Lords, tooke them, and (because their Town was fired of purpose by some of their follow∣ers, the better to recouer them while the quenching found the people employment,) haled them forth, and without longer tarriance seuered their heads from their bodies: The Earle of Huntington, with a trustie Knight of his, Sir Iohn Shellie, as others haue it. Sheuele, hauing (after the faile at Windsore) in vaine attempted to escape by Sea, was taken by the Commons at Fab, Conc. Hist. Pitwel (perhaps Prittlewel) in Essex, brought first to Chelmsford, and lastlie to Pleshie, the house of the late Duke of Gloce∣ster (whose Ghost a tragicall Poet would suppose did haunt his persecutors for reuenge,) where, partlie also by this Earles instigation, the said Glocester was first arrested. The Commons (out of whose hearts the image of that Duke was not vanished) at Harst. cap. 119. the Countesse of Herefords instigation who was the Dukes widdow, tooke satisfaction vpon the Earle, with the escheate of his head, which there was sun∣dred from his shoulders. The Lord Spencer called Earle of Glocester (one of the Conspirators) had like execution done vpon him by the Commons at Bri∣stol. Some other of them were put to death at Ox∣ford, and some at London; where Iohn Maudlen (the Counterfeit Richard, who as it seemes was a beauti∣full and goodlie person) and one William Ferby were drawne, hanged and headed. The Bishop of Carleol neuerthelesse was by the Kings clemencie preserued aliue after the condemnatory sentence. There were Hall. Chron. Holinsh. p. 516. nineteene in all (whereof two had beene Dukes) put to death for this conspiracy, most of which were men of speciall note. (18) The designes and misfortunes of King Rich∣ards friends being made known vnto him, could not but worke strongly in a soule opprest with griefe; but whether so strongly as to make him resolue by voluntary abstinence to starue himselfe (as Tho. Walsing. the fame went) may bee doubted, though it be past doubt that King Henry was not sorrie hee was dead howsoe∣uer. That he was starued seemes verie plaine; though, as it is not certaine, (neither yet vnlikely) that King The late King Richard starued to death. Henry was priuy to so foule a parricide, so neither is it knowne, but that Richard might as well be starued of purpose, Ypod. Neust. as starue himselfe. Annal. in H. 4. Master Stow (a man for honest industry very praiseworthie) saith that king Richard was fifteene daies and nights toge∣ther kept in hunger, thirst, and cold, till hee died. How true that was in the circumstance, who knows? but in the point of staruing hee is clearelie with Wal∣singham: and a Sir Iohn F r∣tescue. Knight liuing about those times cal∣leth it a death neuer before that time knowne in England. Harding Chron. c. 200. also, liuing vnder King Edward the fourth, agrees of the rumour of staruing. In Yorkshire pag. 567. Master Cambden saith of Pomfret Castle, that it is a place prin∣cipum cade & sanguine infamis, but seemes to insinu∣ate, that some other torments were most wickedly practised vpon this King, as made out of the way with hunger, cold, and vnheard-of torments. Hist. Angl. 20. in in. Rich. 2. Polydore therefore may in this bee beleeued, who writes of this poore deposed Monarke, that, (which may well be called vnheard-of torments) his diet being serued in, and set before him in the wonted Princely manner, The fiction of Tant lus verified in King Richard. he was not suffered either to taste, or touch thereof. Idle therefore seemes Lanquets Chron. in Hen. 4. his dreame, who writes hee was murthered in the Tower, and not more credible Fab. Conc. Chron. theirs, who tell vs of Sir Peirs of Extons assault, and the murther basely by him acted vpon this most miserable Princes person: but much more are Holinsh. p. 517. they to blame who negligently for credit of the fable quote Walsingham, in whom no syllable of such a thing is found. Onely Lib. 16. Hector Boetius wils vs to belieue that Richard fled disguised into Scotland, was disco∣uered to King Robert, and honourably entertained, but Richard who would no more of the world, gaue himselfe wholy to contemplation, and both liued, A counterfet King Richard bu∣ried in Scotland. died, and was buried at Striueling. Which fond fa∣ble hath neuerthelesse somewhat in it, for that some personated Richard might so doe is neither impossi∣ble, Tho. VVals. in Hen. 4. ad An. D. 1044. nor improbable, and indeed it was so. (19) The late King Richard thus cruelly and hei∣nously murthered (for in regard of pining death the Richards dead body shewed openly at London. seeming fable of his fight with Sir Peirs of Exton was a sport, it being both noble and full of comfort, for a man of honour and courage to die with weapon in hand) King Henry causeth his dead body to bee brought vp to London. O Henry, if thou wert Au∣thor, or but priuie, (though for thine owne preten∣ded safetie, and for that errors cause which is lewdly mis-called reason of state) of such a murther; we doe not see, how the shewing of the people his vncoue∣red face in Pauls, did either conceale or extenuate the execrable crime. But to let the world know that there was no hope nor place for a Richard, that course was vsed, which may the rather confirme the truth of his enfamishment: for a violent death by braining could not but deforme him too much: and it is most pro∣bable that such a death would bee sought, as might least appeare. Surely he is not a man, who at the re∣port of so exquisite a barbarisme, as Richards enfa∣mishment, feeles not chilling horror and detestation; what if but for a iustly condemned galley-slaue so dying? but how for an annointed King, whose Cha∣racter (like that of holy Orders) is indeleble? The tra∣gicall spectacle of his dead body (perhaps because it moued too much both pittie and enuie) was after a From thence is carried to Lang∣ley, and after∣ward to West∣minster. while transported without honor to Langley in Hart∣fordshire, where the last rites were performed by the Bishop of Chester, the Abbats of S. Alban and Wal∣tham, but neither King Henry present, (as at the exe∣quies in London) and the great Lords and such other as were had Thom. Walsing. in Henr. 4. not so much as a funerall feast bestowed on them for their labour. But Henry the fifth, in the first Fab. Conc. Hist. yeere of his raigne with great honour did after∣ward cause those royall remaines to be interred in the Sepulture of his Ancestors at Westminster. Among the riming Latine verses of his Epitaph, ye may mar∣uell to reade these, considering vpon what points he was triced out of Maiestie and State; Ecclesiam fauit, elatos suppeditauit, Quemuis prostrauit, regalia qui violauit. Fabians English of them. The Church he fauoured, casting the proud to ground, And all that would his roiall State confound. The said Author therefore Robert Fabian, obser∣uing the scope of those lines (to dampe their force) doth vnderwrite and annex this Stanza, with much greater discretion then elegancie: But yet alas, though that this meeter or rime, Thus doth embellish this noble Princes fame, And that some Clerke which fauoured him sometime, List by his cunning thus to enhance his name, Yet by his Story appeareth in him some blame: Wherefore to Princes is surest memory, Their liues to exercise in vertuous constancie. More tart and seuere is the censure of Gower vpon this Prince, one of whose verses Annal. Stow giues vs thus, So God doth hate such rulers as, here viciously do liue. That beautifull picture of a King sighing, crowned in a chaire of estate, at the vpper end of the Quier in Saint Peters at Westminster, is said to be of him, which witnesseth how goodly a creature he was in outward lineaments. (20) King Henry to diuert the humors and eyes of the people from the remembrance of this Trage∣die, prepareth now a puissance, therewith to inuade Scotland; some subiects whereof, together with their Admirall Sir Robert Logon a Scotish Knight, were taken at Sea by certaine English ships. But K. Henry may seeme to haue done any thing rather, then to haue made a warre; for albeit hee did some hurt by Ypod. Neust. wasting the Country, yet did not the Scots offer battel, and the rest will wel appear in these words of Hist. 51. li. 16. & by Belindens diuision. cap. 13 Boetius. He did small iniuries to the people thereof: for he desired nought but his banner to bee erected on their wals. He was euer a pleasant enemy, and did great hu∣manity to the people in all places of Scotland where he was lodged. Finally, hee shewed to the Lords of Scotland, that hee came into their Realme rather by counsell of his No∣bles, then for any hatred he bare to Scots. Soone after hee returned into England. Whether the remembrance of the curtesies shewed to his Father Duke Iohn, or the feare of his owne great state so neere to an ouer∣throw by the late furious conspiracy, wrought these gentle effects, it was not long before the euent shew∣ed, that his prouidence in not creating new acerbi∣ties was therein needfull. (21) For albeit the face of England seemed smooth, yet God thrust a thorne into King Henries side, when and where he little expected; for the Welsh, whom Owen Glendowr drawes the VVelsh into rebellion. former Kings of England had so yoaked, and subie∣cted, did contrary to all mens expectation, breake forth into open acts of hostility, vnder the conduct of a Gentleman of that Nation surnamed Glendowr, of the Lordship of Glendowr in Merionithshire, whose owner he was; the wrath and iustice of heauen is alwayes so well furnished with meanes to exercise the mightiest, those chiefly at whose amendment God aimes by chastisement. The originall of so great an euill was in the seed but little, as but this: Owen Glendowr, Hist. of Wales D. Powel, p. 385. 386. 387. whom the Welsh call the sonne of Gruffith Vachan, descended of a yonger son of Gruf∣fith ap Madoc, Lord of Bromfield, was at first a Stu∣dent of the common laws, and an Vtter Barister, (but not therefore an apprentise of law, as Doctor Powell mistakes, for an apprentise of the law, is hee that hath been a Sir Edw. Cooke Epist. part. 3. report. double Reader) did afterward serue the late King Richard in place of an Esquier, & was well beloued of him, but in King Henries time (re∣tiring himselfe as it seemes to his Mannour of Glen∣dourdwy, the L. Gray of Ruthen entred vpon a peece of common, which lay betweene Ruthen and Glen∣dowr, which Owen (despite the Lord Gray while Rich∣ard continued King) had formerly holden, though not without contention. Owen (a man of high courage, and impatient of force) armes hereupon, and encounters the Lord Gray in the field, where he scattered the said Lords people, and tooke him pri∣soner, as hereafter will else-where bee touched. (22) It seemes herein that hee had forgotten the lawes which he had formerly studied, and wher∣in hee had been a licentiate; for shortly after, as hee had troden law vnder foot, so did he also cast off loyaltie, burning & destroying the Lord Grays inhe∣ritances, and killing sundry his seruants. The King aduertised hereof, passeth with an Army into Wales, King Henrie enters North-VVales with an Armie. burnes, kils, and takes such reuenge as that time would permit. Meanewhile, Owen (whom pride & folly armed to the farther ruine of his Country) with his trustiest friends (which were not few) withdrawes into the inexpugnable fastnesses of Snowdon, where during this tempest, he kept his head safe. Shortly after the King with such riches and spoiles as those Parts had afforded, returnes. His next most noted VVarre by P e. action was peaceable. For one of the house of Pa ∣logus, and Emperour of Constantinople, came into Eng∣land to pray some succour against the Turke, and vpon the day of S. Thomas the Apostle, was met at Blackeheath by King Henry, highly feasted, richly presented, and his charges borne till departure. But as Tilius . saith of his successe in France, verbis & promissis tantum adiutus est, so here his speed was not much better, the point of armed aides, being only therein assisted with words and promises. (23) In a Parliament held the next yeere, S . 4. an 2. c. 5. by reason of the numbers of Lolards, (so called) encreasing, An. D. 1401. An. Reg. 2 the punishment for them enacted, was burning. And in the same yeere also, the Articles of peace beeing first agreed vpon betweene the two Nati∣ons, English and French (notwithstanding that they had denied to match with the young Prince of Wales, Polyd. Verg. Hist an . 21. because the former marriage with Richard thriued so badly) the Lady Isabel who had beene crowned Queene of England, as Spouse of the late King, was now sent backe into France after a most princely ma∣ner, shee being not as yet Tho. VVals. twelue yeeres old, had Holinsh. Chron. Frossard. no dowrie allowed her in England, for that the mar∣riage was neuer consummated. Before shee was re∣stored to her friends, the Lord Henry Percie, before the Ambassadors of both the Nations, where they were met betweene Caleis and Boloigne, protested, That the King of England his Master had sent her to be deliuered to her Father cleare of all bonds of marriage, The forme of redeliuering Queen I abel to the French. or otherwise, and that hee would take it vpon his soule, that shee was sound and entire, euen as shee was the same day shee was deliuered to King Richard, and if any would say to the contrary hee was ready to proue it against him by combat. But the Earle of Saint Paul saying, hee beleeued it to be true, the Lord Percie tooke her by the hand, and deliuered her vnto the Earle, and then the Commissioners of France deliuered certaine let∣ters of receipt and acquitall. She was afterward mar∣ried to Charles Duke of Orleance. (24) Owen Glendowr persisting in his pride and disobedience made incursions vpon the English, do∣ing them great harme, and returning himselfe with∣out any; but K. Henries danger was greater at home; for treason had crept into his most secret Chamber. In his bed there lay hidden a Galtrop or Engine with The King in danger to be slaine or woun∣ded. three small yron pikes, long, slender and passing sharpe all of them with their points set vpward, but (God so disposing it) the King before hee laid him∣selfe downe, perceiued them, and thereby auoided that hidden mischiefe, but who was actor therein it doth not appeare. (25) This appeares that the splendors of his new regality had drawne vp many thicke and poisonous An. 1402. cloudes of enuie and practise, to darken if it were possible the farther brightnesse thereof. Neither was it long before it grew to some extremity. For Owen Glendowr vpon the causes beforesaid, wasting the Lord Reynald Grayes lands, was encountred by him, as presuming that Owen and his friendes might easily be ouercome, but the contrary hapned, for there in fight hee lost very many of his companie, and was himselfe taken Prisoner. This fortune made the swelling mind of Owen ouerflow in vaine hopes, who compelling the said Lord to marry his daugh∣ter, yet obtained hee not his liberty the sooner, but died (say Fab. Chron. ad A. D. 1400. some) in the power of Owen, if perhaps our Author mistake not the Lord Gray for Edmund Lord Mortimer Earle of March, who indeed did marrie so after hee was also ouerthrowne by the said Owen with the slaughter of aboue a thousand principall persons of Herefordshire, assembled vnder his conduct, to resist the Welsh inuasions, and there al∣so himselfe was by trecherie taken prisoner. (26) Walsingham doth In Hen. 4. write, that about this time sundrie conspiracies were discouered in the yolke (as it were) or embrion; the whole hopes whereof rested vpon calumniations, and forgery, for by the first they Polyd. Verg . 21. traduced (in libels) Henries actions, so to make him hatefull, and by the second they di∣uulged that Holinsh. p. 520. Richard was still aliue, thereby to raise an head of separation. Henry thus galled in his ho∣nour, and endangered in the main, resolued to spare The late king Richard though dead, suffers not K. Henry to rest. none, vpon whom the crime or concealement was found. The first of them that fell vnder his iustice, was a Priest of Ware, with whom was taken a list, or roll of names which hee had gathered, supposing them such as in regard of benefites receiued, would liue and die for King Richard, which vanitie of his created trouble to many, till it appeared that he had therein wronged them, as persons who were vtterlie ignorant both of the man and matter. Whereupon hee was drawne and hanged. The like fate had Wal∣ter Baldocke Prior of Lawnd, who confest that he had concealed others counsels against the King, though himselfe had acted nothing. A Frier Minor also being taken with some other of his Order for like intendments, was asked, What hee would doe if King Richard were aliue and present? hee confidently an∣swered, that hee would fight for him till death against a∣ny whosoeuer; which cost him his life, being drawn and hanged in his Fryars weeds. Neither did this hard fortune fall onely vpon the Clergy, for Sir Roger Cla∣ringdon Knight, (reputed the base sonne of Edward, late Prince of Wales) together with an Esquier and seruant of his, finished the affection which they bare to the deceased Richard by hanging. Not long after eight Franciscan Fryars, or Minorites were taken, conuicted, hanged, and headed for the like causes, which made the King an heauy Lord to that whole Order. It is said that somewhat before this knot was discouered the diuell appeared in the habit of a Mi∣norite at Danbury Church in Essex, to the incredible Tho. Wals. Ypod! The Diuell ap∣peares in Essex astonishment of the parishioners; for, at the same time there was such a Tempest & thunder with great fire∣bals of lightning, that the vault of the church brake, and halfe the Chancell was carried away. (27) But howsoeuer these out-branches were pared away, the rootes of all the practise lay deeper out of sight, for the Cambd in Nor∣thumb. p. 675. Percies, Henry Earle of Nor∣thumberland, Thomas Earle of Worcester, and Henrie Hotspur Lord Percy, because perhaps they thought they had done wickedly, in helping to set vp Henry, Pol. Verg. lib. 21. beganne to imagine that bloudy mischiefe, which afterward was prosecuted. This malice, the late suc∣cesse of Owen Glendowr against the Lord Mortimer Earle of March, (taken prisoner, as is said, with no little slaughter of his Herefordshire men) did perhaps nourish; for that hee saw an enemie appeare, who was not vnlikely to proue an able member of a grea∣ter rebellion. Certainely the King hauing in Sep∣tember led an Armie into Wales to take reuenge vpon his Rebels was in great danger to haue perished with sodaine stormes and raines, the like whereof none of his people had euer felt or seene, so that after he had done some wasts vpon the Country hee returned. The common fame went that Owen was a Coniurer, and had raised those hideous tempests by hellish arts; they seemed so excessiue, which (whether true or false) did yet impart no little strength to the Welsh faction. (28) The Kings fortune was happier in the North, where his Lieutenants had two faire victories, the one at Hect. Boet. l. 16. Nisbet, and the other at Halidowne-hill, neere to a village called Woller. And although the first was not a small one, yet the other deserued the name of a iust battell and garland. To the Scots, hauing with aboue ten thousand men (vnder conduct of Archi∣bald Earle of Dowglas, whom the Scots nick-named Tyne-man, because he neuer wanne field, though no sort of true manhood was wanting in his person) made great spoiles in England as farre as to Newca∣stle, and were now vpon returne; Henrie Percie Earle of Northumberland, the noble Henry Hotspur Lord Percie his sonne, and George Earle of Dunbar (who fled as you haue heard out of Scotland) with the for∣ces of the Countries there about, not meaning to let them to passe in so slight a sort, opposed themselues. The chiefe feare was wrought by the English Ar∣chers, Henry Hotspurs fortunes against the Scots. who first with their stiffe, close, and cruell stormes of arrowes made their enemies footmen breake, and when the noble Dowglasse descended to the charge with his choisest bands, himselfe being in a most rich, and excellently tempered armour, and the rest singularly well appointed, the Lord Percies Archers making a retreat, did withall deliuer their deadly arrowes, tam viuidè, tam animosè, tam graui∣tèr (saith our Monke) so liuely, so couragiously, so grie∣uously, The incredible force of the olde English Archery. that they ranne through the men of Armes, bo∣red the helmets, pierced their very swords, beate their lan∣ces to the earth, and easily shot those who were more slightly armed through and through. There were taken The summe of the great victory at Halidown hil. prisoners the Earle of Dowglas himselfe, (who not∣withstanding his armour of the best proofe, had fiue wounds, and lost an eye,) Murdake Stewart Earle of Fife (eldest sonne to Robert Duke of Albanie,) George Earle of Angus, the Earles of Tho. Wals. Murrey and Ork∣ney, the Lords Montgomerie, Erskin, and Grane, with about fourscore Knights, besides Esquiers and Gen∣tlemen. Polyd. Verg. hath not a word in particular of this so great an action There were slaine the Lords Gourdon, and Swyntonn (Belindens Boetius cals them Knights) with sundrie other men of honour and marke, beside store of common souldiers. The riuer Tweed, to shew it selfe meere English, did likewise fight for them by swallowing about fiue hundreth in his vnknowne depthes, as they, who fled from the battell, sought to passe. This victory hapned vpon Holyrood in haruest. The troubles which afterward hapned, did not onely hinder the Lord Percie from farther prose∣cution of such a victorie, but eclypsed the honour hee had gotten now, and gaue his dayes a bloudy & foule Catastrophe. (29) The Lord Edmund Mortimer Earle of March next generall heire in bloud to the Crowne of Eng∣land after the death of Richard the second, hauing through feare of Owen (whose prisoner hee was) or hope of recouering his right, or for reuenge (because the King did not ransom him, married Owens daugh∣ter, The Lord Mor∣timer dies a pri∣soner amongst the VVesh. by which hee must necessarily declare himselfe an enemie to King Henrie, entertained intelligence with his neere kinsmen the Percies, and sundry other his friends in Cheshire, and elsewhere, to what pur∣pose will shortly appeare. The night in which this Lord Mortimer (though some referre it to Owens birth) was born, all the horses in his fathers stable, are said to haue bin found standing Belly-deep in bloud. A fearefull prodigie, as euen then it seemed, but ve∣rified afterward in the farre more fearefull euents, when (vpon the quarrell of Mortimers title, by which the house of Yorke claimed,) the horses of warre did not onely stand belly-deepe in bloud, but also swam therein. The mischiefe was already be∣gun: for Henry Earle of Northumberland (when now his owne and his houses strengths were mighti∣ly encreased by this late victory against the Scots, which he vnder-hand seemes to haue conuerted to his secret priuate ends,) closely Cambd. p. 675. in Northumberland. animated his bro∣ther the Earle of Worcester, and his fiery spirited son, against the King, to both their confusions. (30) The King tooke to wife the Lady Iane of Nauarre, widdow of Iohn de Montfort Duke of Bri∣taine A. D. 1403. named the Conquerour ( Ioh. Tilius Chr. who died the yeere before) by whom she had issue both sons and daugh∣ters, but by the King none. He met, and married her at Winchester, and crowned her Queene at West∣minster. The King was not trusted with the custody of any her three sonnes, Iohn, Richard & Arthur, who remained in France. (31) Euents are the best interpreters of pro∣phesies and prodigies. Strange was that which Ypod. Neust. & in Histor. Walsingham hath written of a fatall Spectrum or Ap∣paritions in the summer time betweene Bedford and Bickleswade, where sundry monsters of diuers co∣lours, in the shapes of armed men were often seene to issue out of the woods at morning and at noone; A strange pre∣saging apparition of war. which to such as stood farre off seemed to encounter one the other in most terrible manner, but when they drew neer, nothing was to be found. Of ano∣ther nature were the fiery attempts of the Percies. The first of them who discouered in armes his mor∣tall hatred, was the noble Hotspur, who (vnder He . Bo . lib. 16. co∣lour of the Scottish warre) made head about Chester and the marches of Wales. To him (by the priuitie of Hotspurs father,) repaires the naughtie old man the Earle of Worcester, leauing the young Prince of Wales and the Princes houshold, ouer both which (for their better Gouernment) the King had placed him. Now was the torch of warre lighted vp, and began to blaze, for though the chiefe plot-master the Earle of Northumberland was not ioined to them, as hee did intend, yet were their numbers growne mightily, with which they meant to enter the Towne of Shrewsbury, to make thereof a Seat of warre. (32) Colourable causes of their armes were the ordinarie paintings of the like attempts. Care of Causes of the Lord rcies dan∣gerous rebellion. common-wealths reformation, and their owne safe∣ties; for hauing first protested their intentions not to be the breach of loyaltie, they pretend and by letters sent about, doe signifie. 1. That Thom. Walsing. the publike monie was not employed vpon the pretended defence of the king∣dome, but vnduly wasted. 2. That by reason of bad tongues about the King they durst not approach him, to declare their innocency, vnlesse the Prelates and Peeres of the Realme did first intercede for them. 3. That they tooke armes onely to guard their owne heads, and to see the Kingdome better gouerned. These Articles had the place of the Huske, but the kernell of the enter∣prize had principallie these. 1. To thrust King Hen∣ry out of his seat, and consequently to depriue him of life. 2. To aduance the title of the Lord Mortimer Earle of M ch their Cambd. in Nor∣thumberland. neerest Allie: for the Earle of Northumberland had married Elizabeth the daughter of the Lord Edmund Mortimer the elder, Earle of March, by Philip daughter to Lionel Duke of Cla∣rence. 3. To take reuenge of King Henry, for seeking to drawe the chiefe benefit to himselfe of the victory at Halidow hill, whose principall prisoners he required, and for such other priuate grudges. 4. To share the Kingdome betweene Mortimer, Percy and Owen Glen∣dower. The Kingdome of England to bee shared among the conspirators. Concerning which partition it is in some found written, that Indentures tripartite were sea∣led, showing that South-England should remaine to Mor∣timer, North-England to Percy, and Wales beyond Seuern to Glendower. But Archembald Earle of Dowglas (who did his Countrey good seruice by making one in our Combustions,) by common consent was al∣lowed for his share to be free from ransome, and to haue Berwicke. (33 This (in our English Adages) is called to reckon without our host, or to count our chickens before they are hatched. But though at this time God would haue it so, yet who doth not easily see what a wild horse a kingdome (so gotten) is, and how hard to sit, and not to manage onlie? Yet it see∣meth, that if Mortimer, hauing so iust a title to the Crowne, had openlie professed the cause of his at∣tempt against King Henry, it might iustlie haue beene exempted from all staine of disabilitie. But this partition is Holinsh. p. 521. said to haue beene wisely built vpon a sound Welsh prophesie of Merlins: as if King Henry were the Mowldwarp cursed of Gods owne mouth, and Mortimer, Percy and Glendower, the Dragon, Lyon, and Wolfe, which should diuide this Realme betweene them. The late dead King Richard a∣gaine afflicteth Henry. Surely the Welsh hauing any hand in such a partiti∣on, it is not likelie they could thinke it had the right feete, if it stood not vpon the supposed Merlins his ridiculous cosenages and riddles. The English (not to be behind in leasings,) doe in the meanetime eue∣ry where spread that Ypodig. Neust. Richard was safe aliue and in the Castle of Chester. Who can wonder that this name should be so gratious, as if alone it were enough to haue shaken Henry out of his State? when Nero himselfe had so many fauorites, that twenty yeeres after his death an obscure fellow faining himselfe Nero, was so backt and countenanced by the Parthi∣ans, and others, . lib. . that not without much difficul∣ty the Romans could get him into their hands. (34) On the other side King Henry assailed with so vnexpected ieopardies, defends his cause by let∣ters, and strongly puts the blame vpon the accusers, saying, That he maruelled exceedingly, seeing the Earle of Northumberland, and Henry his Sonne had the greatest part of the publike moneys deliuered to them, for defence of the borders against Scotland, why they should make that a quarrell, which was a meere calumnie. And to take a∣way all pretence of feare from the Conspirators, hee sends to the Earles of Northumberland and Worcester, and to the hot Lord Percie, a safe conduct vnder his roiall Seale, by which he secures their accesse, but vn∣bridled rashnesse (saith Walsingham) despising the roiall clemencie, did put on the rigour of rebellion. Meane while the King armes with all speed against the enemie, the rather at the counsell of George Earle of Dunbar, who (like a valiant man at Armes, and a wise friend) ad∣uised him so to doe, before their aduersaries numbers were too mightily augmented. The King with his sonne the young Prince of Wales, and a very noble fellowship, was now aduanced within sight of Shrews∣bury, as the gallant Percie stood ready to assault the Towne. But so soone as the roiall Standard was dis∣couered, that enterprise was left off, and he drew out his people (being about fourteene thousand choice and hardie bodies of men) to try the fortune of war against a well tride warrior. (35) Peace notwithstanding (by the exceeding tendernesse of the King) had ensued, but that the mis∣cheeuous Thomas Percie Earle of Worce ster cause of the battell at Shrews∣bury. Earle of Worcester, by misreporting and fal∣sifying his Soueraignes words, did precipitate his Nephew into sudden battell. If there were any praise or good example to bee drawne out of so detested bloodshed, as that of ciuill warre, we would willingly describe vnto you the order and actions, but we can∣not too soone passe ouer such mournfull obiects, which are rather to bee celebrated with teares then triumphes. There is no doubt but Percie, Dowglas, and the rest fought terrible. Why should we ad∣mire that in them? So doe Lyons, Tygers, & Beares, and yet wee admire them not. Where was dutie, where conscience, where the other respects, of which onely we are called men? Let none of vs honour, or imitate them, in whose eyes the price of English blood is so vile, as that (for priuate fansies) they can bee content to confound all regards, and make sport for common foes, with mutuall massacres. There∣fore wee will content our selues with the knowledge of Gods part in this daies worke, who gaue the gar∣land to the King, though the first arrowes flew from the Percies Archers. (36) The Kings courage was not small in the The terrible battel at Shrews∣bury. fight as neither was the danger, the yong Prince of Wales also (being then first to enter himselfe into the schoole of blood and battell,) gaue no small hopes of that perfection which afterward shone in him, being wounded with an arrow in the face. The Lord Per∣cy and Earle Dowglas (then Thomas Walsing. whom the wide world had not two brauer Champions) in steed of spending themselues vpon the multitude, set the point of their Ho spurre and Dowglas onely seeke to encoun∣ter the Kinges person. hopes vpon killing the King, as in whose person they were sure ten thousand fell. For this cause they most furiously rushed forward with speares and swords; but the noble Earle of Dunbarre, discoue∣ring their purpose, drew the King from the place which he had chosen to make good, and thereby in likelyhood for that present saued his life, for the Standard royall was ouerthrowne, and (among other valiant men) the Tho. Walsing. Earle of Stafford, Sir Walter Blunt, the Kinges Knight and the Standard-bearer himselfe was slaine, such was the fury of these sodaine thun∣derbolts. That day the Dowglas slew with his owne hands three in the Kings Coat-armour, (per∣haps some in Heralds Coats) though ibr. 16. Boetius yet saw a fourth. Sure it is, that manie of the subiects thought the King was slaine, and not a few Many thousands together aith VValsingham. ranne out of the field. Who notwithstanding, like a valiant Prince, did reenforce the fight, performing maruels in armes with his owne hands. The slaughter could not be small on both sides, the Archers shooting so continually, and the men of armes doing their vtmost for about the space of three whole houres. (37) That which gaue an end to this wofull worke was the death of Hotspur, who ryding in the head of the battell in defiance of danger and death, was (by an vnknowne hand) suddenly killed, with whose fall (as if his whole army had had but one heart) the courages of all others fell into feete, which now altogether they trusted to. But the King ab∣horring to make farther execution of the misguided The King vseth his victory mer∣cifully. multitude, suffered them to shift for themselues. The Earles of Worcester and Dowglas, Sir Richard Vernon, the Baron of Kindlaton, and diuers others were taken. Of the Kings side was slaine (besides the Earle of Stafford) ten new Knights, whose names (as dying in an honest cause) deserue immortality, and were Sir Holinsh. p. 523. Iohn Stow names also Sir Nicholas L gford, and cals the two Gau∣sels not Gausels, but Gentels and brothers. Hugh Shorly, Sir Iohn Clifton, Sir Iohn Cokain, Sir Nicholas Gausel, Sir Walter Blunt, Sir Iohn Caluerly, Sir Iohn Massie, Sir Hugh Mortimer, Sir Ro∣bert Gausell, and Sir Thomas Wendesley, who dyed of his hurts not long after, as most of the other did a∣bout the Standard; all which fighting for their spurs, (as being knighted but that morning) bought them with the honourable losse of their whole bodies; there were also slaine many Esquires, & Gentlemen, and about one thousand and fiue hundreth common souldiers, besides three thousand sorely wounded. On the other part, (omitting that second Mars, the Lord Percy (who drew a ruine after him sutable to his Spirit and greatnesse) there fell most of all the Esquires and Gentlemen of Cheshire, to the number of two hundred, and about fiue thousand common souldiers. This battell was stricken neere to Shrews∣bury The great de∣struction of Che∣shire Gentlemen. vpon a Saturday, the one and twentieth of Iuly, and the Eue of Saint Marie Magdalen. (38) The Earle of Worcester (the seducer and de∣stroier of his noble Nephew Hotspur, and therefore if but for that, very worthy to haue dyed) Sir Richard Vernon Knight, and the Baron of Kinderton had their heads cut off vpon the Monday following. Hotspurres body had beene buried by permission, but vpon o∣ther aduise, the King caused it to be drawne out of the graue, beheaded, quartered, and the parts sent into diuers Citties of the Kingdome. The Earle of Northumberland (pretending to come with forces to the Kings aide) was empeached by the Earle of Westmorland, and Robert Waterton who had raised a great host. Northumberland taking neither of them for friend, wheeles about, and returnes to his Castle of Warkworth. But what can be secure to a subiect against the victorious armie of a martiall King? The Earle knew as much, manifestly feeling the irrecoue∣rable maimes of his house in the losse of his sonne and brother, and therefore shaped his course accor∣dingly. The King therefore being altogether as prudent as fortunate, hauing setled the state ofthings in the Marches about Shrewsbury, sets forward to the City of Yorke, from thence to take order for such perils, as he foresaw might happen. He setled him∣selfe the more seriouslie and entirelie to this needfull worke; for that his Ambassadors had effected an abstinence from warre with France, till the first of March, which pausing space though it might seeme little, was not a little welcome to the King, the Realme of England being then so full of dangerous perturbations. While hee was at Yorke, he com∣mands the Earle of Northumberland to come thither in person, which he accordingly did vpon the mor∣row after the day of Saint August. 10. The Earle of Northumberland pardoned of his life. Laurence, and that also with a small traine in the nature of an humble sutor. He could not in reason hope for the wonted familiar fauour of the King, neither had he yet, for it was ac∣counted matter of grace, that his life was pardoned, though his meanes and liberty was abridged, the King allowing only necessary maintenances. The life of Princes is like a perpetuall motion. The Northerne Countreys are now setled, but hath the King therefore any the more rest? Nothing lesse; for Wales & the troubles thereof call him thither. What should he doe? Money the Cement and soldure of all such actions, (for Armies cannot otherwise bee held together) vtterly failes. The Archbishop of Can∣terbury sees the needs and vses of his Soueraigne, and like a Father supplies him with a Tenth, which the Clergy at their Metropolitans motion, consent to giue: vpon the strength whereof, the King knowes how farre hee may proceed against the Welsh in his good time. (39) Toward the reliefe of these his necessities, the valiant exploits of William de Wilford an Esquire, VVilford a Sea∣captaine takes a thousand tunnes of good commo∣dities. who was in the meane time abroad for the King vp∣pon the narrow Seas, brought some assistance, cer∣tainely store of contentation; for he tooke forty law∣full prizes laden with yron, oyle, sope and Rochell wine, to the number in all of a thousand tunne vpon the Coastes of Britaine, and in his returne set fortie saile on fire; and to make the Britains know that hee was not only a man of his hands at Sea, he comes on shore at Penarch, burnes Townes and houses a∣bout sixe leagues into the Countrey, and afterward did as much for them at the Towne of Saint Ma∣thewes, which he consumed with flames and wasted the land for three miles about. The French not to seeme slow to like mischiefes, land at the Wight, but were compelled with losse to betake themselues a∣gaine vnto their Fleet, with farre worse successe then the Britons vnder the conduct of the Lord of Castell had not long before, who landing at Plimmouth inua∣ded, tooke and burnt it. (40) The King hauing humbled the Earle of A. D. 1404. The Earle of Northumberland restored. Northumberland in such sort as you heard, lookes a∣gaine vpon him with an eye of compassion and fa∣uour, not without a secret respect to his owne safe∣ty; and he had little appetite to augment enmities, but to allay them rather, whereas by this gratious v∣sage of that Earle, (for he restored him fully to all) he now thinkes those North parts sufficiently secu∣red. This restitution was made to the Earle in the Parliament holden at London about the midst of Ianuary, where the King obteined an vnusuall Taxe or Subsidy, of which (that it might not be drawne into example) no record, nor writing was suffered to remaine. Some part of the gold which the king thus drew into the Eschecquor, he had occasion to bestow at this time. For, there presented themselues The Country∣men about Dart∣mouth kill the French General, and present the King with ho∣nourable priso∣ners. vnto him, a boisterous troupe of plaine Western-men, who brought to the kings view three Lords, and twenty knights of note; These were prisoners, whom the Countrey people about Dartmouth in Deuonshire had gotten in plaine fight. The king was therefore giuen to vnderstand, that the Lord of Ca∣stel the Briton, who had formerly burnt Plimmouth, thinking to doe the like at Dartmouth, came on shore with his forces, where these and the like people fiercely encountred him; at which time their Women (like Amazons) by hurling of flints and pebles, and by such other artillery, did greatly aduance their husbands and kinsefolkes victory. The Lord of Castel himselfe and many besides were slaine, these other were saued as more of them might haue beene, but that the ignorance of language alike confoun∣ded the cries of indignation and pitty. They there∣fore in reward of this hazard and seruice, doe pray they might reape some commodity by their Cap∣tiues. It was but reason; wherefore the King, who tooke pleasure to talke with the lusty Western-men, himselfe, causeth their purses to be stuft with golden Coyne, reseruing the prisoners to repay himselfe with aduantage out of their ransomes. The like good fortune against Owen Glendowr and the Welsh would haue gladded him indeed; but they burne Owen Glendwr and the Welshmen waste the Mar∣ches. and destroy the Marches, they kill and captiuate the people, and partly by force, partly by fraud, get ma∣ny Castles, some of which they rase, and fortifie others. Neither came these euils single, for the Fle∣mings and Britons tooke certaine Merchant ships of England, and either slew or hung the Sailers. (41) It is more strange that King Richard was not A new false king Richard. suffered to be dead, after he had so long a time been buried. Serlo, who had beene a Gentleman of his Chamber, hauing heard that King Richard (his roy∣all and gracious Master) was secretly abiding in Scot∣land, left the fauour of the French Court to see him, but it was not worth his so much loue and labour; for hee that bare the name, was but an Impostor. Loath yet to let the opinion die, because it might do King Henry harme; Serlo affirmes that Richard was aliue. What cunning madnesse is so great which hath not some great fooles or other to support it? The old Countesse of Oxford (mother to the late Duke of Ireland) will needs perswade her selfe and others in Essex, that Richard was aliue: certaine it is, that shee desired it might be true. To make o∣thers more firmly beleeue the same, she secretly gaue siluer and gilt Harts (the badges which King Richard vsed to bestow vpon his followers) as tokens. Hi∣therto the deuise held out, for it had no great dan∣ger in it; but Serlo seeing the necessity of greater friends, which appeared not, grew weary, and know∣ing Serlo a spreader of that impos ure deliuered to the King. that Sir William Clifford knight, Captaine of Ber∣wicke had receiued sundry fauours from King Rich∣ard, hopes by him to bee furnished with money, to beare his charges out of Scotland into France. Clifford farre otherwise minded, seizeth vpon Serlo, as a fit meanes to reconcile himself with the King, in whose high displeasure he stood, (for that hee had continu∣ed his charge in Berwicke contrary to expresse com∣mandement) and carrieth him to the King, who was then come to the Castle of Pomfret, beeing weake∣ned with these rumors, and suspecting that the chiefe nest of danger lay in the North; whither the Earle of Northumberland brought his grandchildren (as pledges) to assure the King of his loyalty: thither also Sir William Clifford brings poore Serlo, who both confesseth the practise, as also that hee had a guiltie hand in the murther of the Duke of Glocester, which made him farre more odious then the other forgery. The crimes being manifest, Serlo is drawn frō Ponte∣fract beginning his pain, where he had his doom, & at London knits vp the Tragedie in an halter. The Coūtesse of Oxford for this falshood lost al her goods being moreouer committed to close prison. To make this imposture the more probable & passable, Serlo had caused K. Richards signet to bee counterfei∣ted, wherwith he sealed sundry consolatorie and ex∣hortatory letters to his friends, indited in K. Rich∣ards name; wherupon many in Essex gaue credit to the Countesse, & among the rest som Abbots of that Countie. Into this smokedid al the deuise euaporate. (42) And no lesse smokie was both the deuise & successe of certain in the Parliament (held this year at Couentry, & called the Parliam . Tho. Wels. lack learning Parliament, either for the vnlearnednesse of the persons, or for their ma∣lice to learned men) where, to supply the Kings wants, a bill was exhibited against the Temporalties of the Clergie; but by the courage of the Archbishop of Can∣terburie, (who told them, it was the enriching of them∣selues, not of the King, which they respected in their sa∣crilegious petitions) and by the gracious care of the King, (who vowed to leaue the Church in better state then he found it, rather then in worse,) their motion vanished to nothing, but the infamous memory of the attempters. It is obserued that Sir Iohn . Ypodig. Neust. pag. 563. a Knight the chiefe speaker in this bill against the Clergy, had beene himselfe a Deacon, and so himselfe first aduan∣ced by the Clergy. With great reason therefore did our forefathers distinguish the people into the lear∣ned and lewd, inferring truely that such commonlie were lewd, who were not learned, and that lewd and wicked were but two words of one signification, as in this Parliament well appeared, whose Commons might enter Common with their cattel for any vertue which they had more then brute Creatures. (43) Twife after this, betweene Christmas and An. 1405. Palmesunday, the King assembled the States againe, once at London, and then at Saint Alban, for the cause Mowbray Earle Ma all and Scrope Archbi∣shop of Y ke to red , and lose their heads. of money, but with much distast, the Peeres of the land rising from the last Session thereof meanely contented, as it well appeared not long after, though to the enterprisers ruine. Thomas Mowbray Earle Marshall, one of the chiefe men which disliked the carriage of publike matters, drawes Richardle Scrope Archbishoppe of Yorke into a conspiracy, in ful hope that Henrie Percie Earle of Northumberland, the Lord Bardolf, the Citizens of Yorke, and the common peo∣ple would assist their cause, which was glosed with the specious pretence of redressing publike abuses, hapning through the Kings default. The Earle of Westmerland hearing of this attempt, wherein the Earle Marshall and the Archbishoppe were leaders of the people, gathers a force to encounter them, but perceiuing himselfe too feeble, he betakes him∣selfe to fraud, and by faining to like the quarrell, got them both into his power, and presented them as an acceptable oblation to the King, who about Whit∣sontide comes to Yorke where (albeit the Earle of West∣merland had promised them their liues) aswell the Archbishoppe, as the Earle Marshall were beheaded. But the next yeere the Pope excommunicated all such as had a hand in putting the Archbishoppe to death. It was said of Tiberius Sueton. lib. 3. cap. 59. Casar in a Satyricall libel, -regnabit sanguine multo, Adregnum quisquis venit ab exilio. Who, first Exi de, is after crown'd, His raigne with bloud will much abound. (44) This the King verified in his person, who comming out of banishment, could not support his The King pur∣sues the Earle of Northumberland. Title and estate, but by shedding much bloud of subiects. For not contented with those two liues, he pursueth the Earle of Northumberland and Lord Bardolf with an inuincible Armie of seuen and thirty thousand men: but they vnable to make head a∣gainst so mighty a force, take Berwicke for refuge. Thither the King marcheth, at the sound whereof, they both distrustfull of their safety, flie into Scot∣land, where the Lord Flemming entertaines them. Ber∣wicke vpon hope of succours out of Scotland, (which gladly nourished the English miseries, and the Eng∣lish theirs) refused to render, whereupon the King plants a battering piece against a Tower in the wall; which as it threw downe the halfe thereof with one shot, so did it quite ouerthrow all the de∣fendants The first time that a gunne is vsed in England. courages, who presently yeelded the place vpon hard and desperate terms, for they were partly hanged, and partly emprisoned. After Tho. VValsing. In Hen. 4. Berwicke was thus recouered, the king takes Alnwicke, & all other Castles belonging to the Earle, and thinking the like happines would shine vpon him in Wales, he crosseth ouer thither, where it fell out far otherwise, not by the manhood of the Welsh, but by the sodaine rage of waters which destroied his carriages and about fiftie wains (as was said) laden with much treasure: therfore he returns to Worcester. Owen Glendowr the chief cap∣tain of the Welsh natiō, expecting & fearing a reuenge had before this time confederated himselfe with the French, who in 140. ships arriued at Milford hauen to the aid of Owen, hauing well neere first lost all their The French with seuenscore ships arriue in to aid Owen Glendowr. horses in the passage for want of fresh water. The Lord Berkley and Henrie de Pay (by what meanes appeares not) burnt fifteen of that number in the harbour. They made the entrance of their warre by laying siege to the Towne of Carmarden in South-Wales, which, the Garrison being permitted to de∣part with bagge and baggage, was yeelded. (45) The King being againe in need of money, after long vnwillingnesse and delay, the Parliament furnished him, rather ouercome with wearinesse in A. D. 1406. An. Reg. 7 contradiction, then for any great good will. Some of his treasure was employed, as it seemes, vpon se∣cret practises with the Scots, that the Earle of Nor∣thumberland, and the Lord Bardolfe might bee deli∣uered into his hands, in exchange for some Scots; whereupon they fled into Wales, and the Scots missing their purpose, slew Dauid Lord Flemming for disco∣uering their intention to his distressed guests, (as by the lawes of honour and hospitality he was obliged) which filled Scotland with ciuill discords. To auoide the dangers whereof, and to better his education, the King of Scots sent his sonne and heire by sea into France, whom, together with the Bishoppe of Orknay certaine Mariners of Cley in Norfolke surprized at sea, and presented to the King, who committed him prisoner to the Tower of London. Meanewhile the French prosecuting their affaires in Wales, sent thi∣ther eight and thirty shippes full of souldiers, of which number the English tooke eight (the rest es∣caping in great feare to Wales,) and not long after o∣ther fifteene saile laden with waxe and wine. This A. D. 1407. fortune though good, was nothing in regard of the seruice which Henry Pay, with certaine shippes of the Cinque Ports, and about fifteene other, ex∣ployted vpon a great Fleet, containing sixscore saile, whose ladings were yron, salt, oyle, and Ro∣chel wine. The same times was a felon put to King' Richard spred to be aliue death for hauing in many places of London, dared secretly to set vp bils, containing newes that King Richard was aliue. The fearefull plague of pesti∣lence slew multitudes of people through the Realm, chiefly in London, where, within a short space it de∣stroyed thirty thousand. That most renowned Cap∣taine Sir Robert Knolles, who had led so many li∣uing Sir Robert Knolls dieth. men to their honourable deaths in battel, was now captiued himselfe by death vpon the fifteenth day of August. His fame grew principally by mar∣tiall deedes in the great warres of France, vnder Ed∣ward the third, but spred and setled it selfe by good workes, among which the goodly stone-bridge at Rochester in Kent was one. (46) In the meane space, the wars of Wales were managed by Prince Henry, who tooke the Castle of Aberistwith; but Owen Glendowr soone after got it againe by faire fraud, and thrust into it a Garrison of his owne. Thus Owen prospered for a time; but the Earle of Northumberland and Lord Bardolf forsa∣king Wales, and seeking to raise a force in the North, were encountred by the Sherife of Yorkeshire, who af∣ter a sharpe conflict slew the Earle in the field, and so wounded the Lord Bardolf, that hee died there∣of. The Earles head was cut off, which being first ignominiously carryed through London, was fixed vpon the Bridge. The King hauing thus vanqui∣shed his chiefe enemies, went to Yorke, where inqui∣ries were made for the Earles adherents, of which he condemned, ransomed, and emprisoned many. The Abbot of Hales, because hee was taken fighting on the Earles behalfe, had sentence to die, which was executed vpon him by hanging. In fortaine and transmarine parts, the Kings affaires had mixt suc∣cesse; for Edmund Earle of Kent, at the siege of Bri∣ant in Britaine, was strucken with a quarrell into the head, whereof hee died; but yet after he had first ta∣ken the said Castell, and leueld it with the earth. (47) The peace of Christendome hauing beene long tempestuously troubled by a Schisme, raised An. D. 1409. by ambition of opposite Popes, wherof the one was Platina. chosen at Rome, the other at Auinion, by contrarie factions of the Cardinals; A generall Councel was summoned to bee held at Pisa in Italie, whither the King of England sent his Ambassadors, and the Cler∣gy elected Robert Alum Ypod. Neust. p. 566. Chancellour of Oxford, & Bishoppe of Sarum, to signifie, Antiq. Britan. ecclesia. that vnlesse both the Popes would giue ouer their Papacie, neither of them should thenceforward be acknowledged for Pope. The King in his letter then sent to Pope Gregory, char∣geth him (as Platina likewise doth) with Pertury, and that this Papall emulation had beene the cause of the murther of Walsing. Ypodig. p. 569. more then two hundreth and thirty thousand Christians slaine in warres. There assembled a great number of Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, and mitred Prelates, who elected a new Pope, A∣lexander 5. (a man S. Theo. Oxonia. saith Tho. Gas∣coigne. MS. trained vp at Oxford, where hee An. D. 1410 tooke degree in Theologie) reiecting the two o∣thers, who long and bitterly had contended for the place. The King also cals his Parliament to find out meanes for more money, to the custody and charge whereof hee ordained Sir Henry Scrope, creating him Treasurer, as Thomas Beaufourt the Kings halfe brother, Lord Chancellour. In which Parliament was reuiued the sacrilegious Petition of spoiling the Church of England of her goodly patri∣monies, which the pietie and wisdome of so many former ages had congested. But the King (who was bound by oath and reason to preserue the flourishing estate of the Church) detested their wicked propo∣sition, and for that cause denied all other their re∣quests. The Duke of Burgundies prouisions which he had made to reduce Caleys to the French domi∣nions, & stored at Saint Omars, were consumed with casuall fire to ashes. (48) About these times the great and bloudy factions betweene the Dukes of Burgundy and Or∣leance An. D. 1411. brake forth. The cause was for a murther committed vpon Lewis (brother to the French king, and father of the said Duke of Orleance) as he came late one night from the Queenes lodging, who at that time lay in of a child. The murtherers Paul. A yl. in Carol. 6. to pre∣uent pursuit, strewed galthrops behind them. The Duke of Burgundie iustified the fact, for that Lewis had (as hee said) laboured with the Pope to put the King from his seat, vpon pretence that hee was as vnfit to gouerne as euer Childericke was, whom Pope Zacharie pronounced against. This prepared the way for that scourge wherwith God meant to chastice the pride and sinnes of France. Each partie sought to fortifie it selfe with friends, aswel at home as abroad. The Duke of Burgundie sends for aid to the King. The Duke of Burgundie had the King and the Dol∣phin on his side; the other had the Kings of Nauar and Arragon, the Dukes of Berrie and Britaine with many of the mightiest Earles and Lords. The Duke of Burgundie, (who together with the King and the face of gouernment, kept in Paris) perceiuing his aduersaries strengthes to bee more then his owne, offers to the King of England, a daughter of France in marriage with the Prince, and many great promi∣ses, so as hee would ioyne in defence of the King, & send ouer competent forces; whereunto hee is said to haue answered: Our aduise is, that you should not in this case aduenture battell with your enemie, who seems The Kings wise and Christian answere to the Dukes request. to prosecute a tust reuenge for the death of his Father; but labour to asswage the displeasure and anger of the exas∣perated yong man, by all the good meanes which are possi∣ble. If that cannot bee, then stand vpon your guard, and draw into place of most safety, with such force of men as may best serue for your defence. After all this, if hee will not bee appeased, you may with the better consci∣ence encounter him, and in such case wee will not faile (more fully) to assist, according as you request. For the present he sent ouer the Earls of Arundel and Kyme, Aides sent by the King to the Duke of Burgundie. and many men of Armes, with plenty of English Bow-men, who came safe to Paris, where they in nothing diminished the ancient glory of their nati∣on, but behaued themselues valiantly. (49) The Duke of Orleance, and the Peeres of his faction, seeing their successe, consult how to draw the An. D. 1412 The Duke of Orleance sends to the King for succour. King of England from their enemie, and thereupon send ouer one Falconet and others, with solemne let∣ters of credence, whom they made their irreuocable Procurators, to entreat, agree, and conclude, (on their behalfes) with the most excellent Prince, Henry * The words of the Dukes letter. by the grace of God King of England, and his most no∣ble sonnes, &c. for the restitution and reall redeliuerie of the Dutchie of Aquitain, with all the rights and appurtenances, which (as is affirmed) are the inheri∣tance of the said most excellent Lord the King of Eng∣land, by them to bee made and done, &c. The Am∣bassadors hauing shewed forth this Proxie, exhibited The great offers of the Orleance faction to the King. the points of their negotiation in these Articles, by which wee may see how farre the desire of reuenge will transport great minds. 1 They offer their bo∣dies to be imployed against all men for the seruice of the King of England, sauing their faith to their owne Soue∣raigne, as knowing the King of England would not o∣therwise desire them. 2 Their sonnes, daughters, ne∣phewes, Neeces, and all their Cosens to bestow in marri∣age at the King of Englands pleasure. 3. Their Castles, Townes, treasure, and all their goods to be at the seruice of the sayd King. 4. Their friends, the Gentlemen of France, the Clergy and wealthy Burgers; who are all of their side; as by proofe (they said) shall well appeare. 5. They finally offer to him the Dutchy of, Aquitaine en∣tire, and in as full a manner as euer his Predecessors en∣ioyned the same, without excepting any thing; so as they themselues will hold, and acknowledge to hold their lands in those parts, directly of the said King, and deliuer as much of them as they can into his possession, and will doe their vtmost to conquer the rest for him. Vpon condi∣tion Their demands. on the other side. 1. That the King of England and his Successors should assist the said Lords, against the Duke of Burgundy for the murther committed vpon the person of the late Duke of Orleance. 2. That he should assist against the said Duke of Burgundy and his fauou∣rers, till they had repaired all the losses which they, their friends and tenants had susteined through that ccasion. 3. That he should help to settle the quiet of the realme, &c. (50) These Offers being put into the balance with the Articles, vpon which the Duke of Burgun∣dy The King for∣sakes the Duke of Burgundy and aides the Duke of Orleance. had obteined succours, ouerweighed them so farre, that about the midst of August, before all those which had beene sent with the Earle of Arundel to the contrarie part, were returned into England, aydes were decreed to the Duke of Orleance, to the wonder of all men, who vnderstood not the secret, so that Thomas Duke of Clarence, Edward Duke of Yorke, the Earle of Dorcet, and very many other principall men with a competent puissance were sent ouer to ayde the Duke of Orleance, the Earle of Angolesme remai∣ning hostage in England, for the sure payment of one hundred and nine thousand Crownes for perfor∣mance of Pol. Verg. lib. 21. the other Articles: They came on shore in Normandy; but, whither the confederates moued with the perill into which their Country & Nation Iob. Tilius Chr. should by these meanes be precipitated, or for some other causes, (though none indeed so iust, as the sor∣row and shame for their so disloyall a combination with the Capitall enemies of France,) the Duke of Orleance (contrary to agreement) came not at the appointed time and place, whereupon the English burnt, spoiled and tooke much riches in the Castles, Countrey and good Townes, therewith to satisfie themselues, till the Duke of Orleance should see them payd. At last yet the Dukes of Clarence and Orle∣ance came to a treaty, after which the English campe The English burne and spoile in Normandy till the Duke of Or∣leance came. rose peaceably and marcht into Aquitaine there to winter it selfe, the Duke of Orleance returning to his owne. While these matters were in hand, the Lord of Heyle Marshall of France with many other Lords, and about foure thousand homines de . men of armes layd siege to a certaine strong place in Gascoigne; which Sir Iohn Blunt Knight, with three hundred souldiers not onely defended, but draue them also from the siege, taking prisoners twelue of the principall and about sixe score other Gentlemen. * The King liued not A. D. 1413. A. reg 14. to see the carriage, and fortune of these warres, for falling sicke at Eltham in the Christmas time (at which our ancient authors begin to draw the circles of their yeeres) but recouering himselfe a little, he repaired to London about Candlemas, there to hold a Parliament; the end whereof he liued not to see, but vpon the twentieth day of March finished his The King dieth hauing reigned thirteene yeeres and sixe moneths wanting fiue daies, ith VValsing. short, but politicke and victorious reigne, in peace and honour, had not the iniustice of his first entrance left a dishonorable stayne vpon his worthiest acti∣ons. (51) The vulgar Chronicles tell vs a strange Story, the truth whereof must rest vpon the repor∣ters. The King, say they, lying dangerously sicke, caused his Crowne to bee set on a Pillow at his beds ll. olinsh head, when suddainely the pangs of his Apoplexie seizing on him so vehemently that all supposed him dead, the Prince comming in, took away the Crown; which, his father reuiuing, soone missed; and calling for his sonne, demanded, what the meant, to bereaue him of that, whereto hee had yet no right? The Prince boldlie replied; Long may you liue Soue∣raigne Father to weare it your selfe; but all men deeming you were departed to inherite another Crowne, this being my right, I tooke as mine owne, but now doe acknowledge for none of mine; and thereupon he set the Crowne againe where he found it. Oh sonne, (quoth hee) with what right I got it, God onely knoweth, who forgiue me the sinne; how∣soeuer it was got, sayd the Prince, I meane to keepe and defend it, (when it shall bee myne) with my sword, as you by sword haue obtained it. Which the King hearing, hee entered discourse of aduise, shewing him that hee feared some discord would a∣rise betwixt him and his brother Thomas Duke of Cla∣rence, who with better respect had borne forth his youth then Prince Henry had done, and whose di∣stemper was like to breed great troubles, if it were not in time stayed. If my brethren (quoth Henry) will be true subiects, I will honour them as my bre∣thren, but if otherwise, I shall assoone execute iustice vpon them, as on the meanest of birth in my King∣dome. The King reioycing at this vnexpected an∣swere; both prudently and Christianly charged him before God, to minister the law indifferently, to ease the oppressed, to beware of flatterers, not to deferre iustice, nor yet to be sparing of mercy. Pu∣nish (quoth hee) the oppressors of thy people, so shalt thou obtaine fauour of God, and loue and feare of thy Subiects, who whiles they haue wealth, so long shalt thou haue their obedience, but made poore by oppressions, will be ready to make insurrections. Reioyce not so much in the glory of thy Crowne, as meditate on the burthe∣nous care which accompanieth it; mingle loue with feare, so thou as the heart shalt be defended in the midst of the body: but know, that neither the heart without the members, nor a King with∣out his Subiects helpe is of any force. Lastly my sonne loue and feare God, ascribe all thy victo∣ries, strength, friends, obedience, riches, honour and all, vnto him: and with the Psalmist say with all thankes, Not vnto vs Lord, not vnto vs but to thy holy name be giuen the laud and praise. (52) Vpon what soile these most Christian, true and excellent Councels fell, the following life will shew, being nothing else, but a full representation in act, of such things, as are here in precept only, shew∣ing to the world how diuine a beautie Christian goodnes hath. His Wiues. (53) The first wife of King Henry the fourth, was Mary one of the daughters and heires of Hum∣frey de Bohum, Earle of Hereford, Essex and Northamp∣ton, Constable of England, &c. Shee dyed An. D. 1394. before he came to the Crowne. (54) His second wife was Ioane, Queene, daugh∣ter to Charles the first, King of Nauarre, shee being the widow of Iohn de Montford, Sirnamed Streani, Duke of Britaine; and died without any Children by King Henry, at Hauering in the Bower in the Coun∣ty of Essex 1437. the tenth day of Iulie in the fif∣teenth yeere of Henry the sixt, and was buried by her husband at Canterbury. His Children. (55) Henry, the Prince of Wales, Duke of Corne∣wall, Earle of Chester, and afterward King of England, whose glorious life and acts next insue. (56) Thomas, Duke of Clarence, President of the Councell to King Henry the first (his brother,) and Steward of England. He was slaine at Beaufort in Anion without any issue. He married Margaret daughter to Thomas Holland, Earle of Kent, the wi∣dow of Iohn Beauford, Earle of Somerset. (57) Iohn Duke of Bedford, Regent of France in the time of King Henry the sixt, Duke also of Anion and Alanson; Earle of Cenomannia, Harecourt, of Ken∣dall and Dreux, Viscount Beaumont. He married first with Anne, daughter to Iohn Duke of Burgundy. Se∣condly with Iacoba, daughter to Peter de Luxemburgh Earle of Saint Paul. And died without any issue. (58) Humfrey, was by his brother King Henry the fifth created Duke of Glocester, was Protectour of the Kingdome of England for 25. yeeres, in the time of King Henry the sixt, in whose first yeere hee styled himselfe in his Charters thus: Humfrey by the grace of God, sonne, brother, and vncle to Kings, Duke of Gloce∣ster, Earle of , Holland, Zeland, and Pembroke; Lord of Friestand, Great Chamberlaine of the Kingdome Cambd. Brit. in Glocest. of England, Protector and Defendor of the same King∣dome, and Church of England. Hee was a man, who nobly deserued of the common wealth and of lear∣ning, as being himselfe very learned, and a magnifi∣cent Patron and benefactor of the Vniuersity of Ox∣ford, where hee had beene educated; and was gene∣rally called, the Good Duke. Hee married first Iacoba, heire to William Duke of Bauaria Earle of Holland, who (as after was knowne) had first beene lawfully troth-plighted to Iohn Duke of Brabant, and there∣fore was afterward diuorced from the said Humfrey. His second wife was Elianor daughter to Reginald, Baron Cobham de Scarborough. Queene Margaret, wife to King Henry the sixt, repining at his great power in swaying the King & state, socretly wrought his ruine, hee being murthered in his bed at Burie, dying without any issue, 1446. His body was buri∣ed at Saint Albans, yet the vulgar error is that he lyes buried in Saint Pauls. (59) Blaunch married to William Duke of Bauaria, and Emperour. (60) Philip married to Iohn King of Denmarke and Norway. HENRIE THE FIFTH, KING OF Monarch 52 Henry V. ENGLAND, AND FRANCE, LORD OF IRELAND, THE TWO AND FIFTIETH MO∣NARCH OF ENGLAND, HIS RAIGNE, ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XV. A Mongst the many Mo∣narchs of this most fa∣mous Empire, none is found more complete with all heroicall vertues then is this King, of whose life by order and successe of story wee are now to write; which is Henry of that name the fifth, the renowne of England, and glory of Wales. Of whom, what was spoken of Titus in the flourishing times of the Romans, may for the time of his raigne be truly verified in him: both of them being the-louely dar∣lings, Sutton in vit. Tit. 1. 6. and delightfull ioy of Mankind. But as Titus is taxed by his story-Writers, in youth to haue been riotous, profuse, wastfull and wanton, for which (as he saith) with the dislikes of men he stept into the throne; so if wee will beleeue what others haue writ, Henry Ti. . F . was wilde whiles hee was a Prince, whose youth∣full prankes as they passed with his yeers, let vs haue leaue here to rehearse, and leaue them motiues to our owne vse, as hee made them for his. (2) His birth was at Monmouth in the Marches of Wales, the yeer of Christs assuming our flesh, 1388 Edw. Hal. and the eleuenth of King Richards raigne, his father then a Subiect, and Earle of Derbie, Leicester, & Lin∣colne, Henry borne at Monmouth in Wales. afterwards created Duke of Hereford, in ri ht of his wife, then of Lancaster, by the death of his fa∣ther; and lastly by election made the Soueraigne of England, (that vnfortunate Richard) being deposed the Crowne. His mother was Mary, second daugh∣ter and coheire of Humfrey Bohun Earle of Hereford, and Northampton, high Constable of England, R cor. of Towe . 4 Hen. 5. as we haue said. (3) His young yeeres were spent in literature in the Academie of Oxford, where in Queenes Col∣ledge Ioh. Rosse . in lib. regi . he was a Student vnder the tuition of his vncle Henry Beauford, Chancellour of that Vniuersity, after∣wards Bishoppe of Lincolne and Winchester, and last∣ly made Cardinall by the title of Eusebius. But Prince Henries Educatin. his Father obtayning the Crowne, and himselfe come to the age of twelue yeeres, had the successi∣on thereof entailed on him by Parliament, and ac∣cordingly was created Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle of Chester, and presently had Holinsh. the Title of the Dukedome of Aquitaine conferred vpon him, the better to effect the thing then inten∣ded, which was to haue obtained in marriage young Queene Isabel, late wife to the murthered King Richard, daughter of Charles the sixt, King of Richard Grafton. France. (4) From Oxford, Prince Henry was called to Court, and the Lord Thomas Perey then Earle of Edward Hal. Worcester made his Gouernour; but being himselfe false to the Father, could giue no good example vn∣to the sonne, whose hostile attempts in the field of Shrewsburie cost that disloyall Earle his head, and al∣most had done Prince Henry his life, who in battell Thom. Walsing. against him was wounded in the face with an arrow. This marke of his manhood, with the ouerthrow of Hotspur in that bloody conflict, were hopefull signes of his following successe, which presently were seconded with as fortunate proceedings a∣gainst Owen Glendowr that scourge of his Country, Rich. Grafton. and Arch-rebell vnto Englands peace, whom this Prince so pursued through the vast mountaines of Wales, that from the Dennes of those deserts hee durst not shew his face, but therein perished by fa∣mine, & natures other wants, though the Prince had then scarcely attained vnto sixeteene. (5) But growne from his tutors command, or controll, and come to the yeers for dispose of him∣selfe, as his youth stood affected, so were his con∣sorts, and those (many times) whose conditions were none of the best; whether led by an inclinati∣on of youth (which commonly lets the raine loose vnto Will) or, to know that by proofe, which other Princes doe by report, I will not determine: yet vnto the latter doe I rather incline, knowing that Salomon the wisest of Kings did so himselfe; and ra∣ther Eccles. 2. by Rosse I am lead, who writeth that Prince Hen∣ry in Oxford had in great veneration, such as excelled Ioh. Rosse. in vertue or learning, and among many, two hee na∣meth, Thomas Rodban of Merton Colledge a great A∣stronomer, by him preferred to the Bishopricke of S. Dauids in Wales, and Iohn Carpenter of Oriel Col∣ledge, a learned Doctor of Theologie, whom hee ad∣uanced to the See of Worcester. But let vs heare how his wilde oates were spent, and with what increase the haruest was got. The translater of Liuie, who wrote the storie of this worthy Prince, and dedica∣ted his paines to King Henry his sonne, affirmeth for truth, that many actions he did, farre vnfitting his greatnesse of birth; and among other, doth taxe him with no better then theft, who in the raigne of his Father, accompanied with such as spent their wits vpon other mens spoiles, laide waite in the way for his Rents receiuers, and robd them of that which indeed was his owne, when sometimes in shufling he nothing was spared, but bare away many knocks. the lenders whereof hee would frankly reward, when they complained vnto him of their losses re∣ceiued, which euer were abated in the foot of their accounts. (6) Our learned Knight Eliot setting his pen to Sir Tho. Eliot Gouernour. portrait a perfect Gouernour, recordeth a story, re∣taining this Princes great fame, the credit whereof let it lie vpon himselfe. It chanced (saith he) a ser∣uant of his to bee arraigned for felony at the Kings Bench-Barre, where standing ready to receiue sen∣tence of death, the Prince had intelligence, and po∣sted thither, where finding his seruant made sure for starting, commanded his fetters to be strucke off, & the fellow arraigned to be freed the Court. All men amased at this his approach and speech: the Chiefe Iustice stood vp, and shewed the Prince that his seate was the Kings, that lawes were the sinewes of the Common-wealth, that himselfe was sworn to doe Iustice, and must yeeld an account for all that he did, that he honored him as the eldest sonne of his Soue∣raigne, and Prince, but to set free the prisoner, hee could not, hauing so apparantly endangered his life to the law; and therefore desired the Prince, if hee held him in such esteeme, to saue him by pardon from the King, and not to infringe the law, which he told him plainely he should not doe. (7) The Prince enraged to haue the deniall, assai∣ed himselfe to set free the Prisoner, which the Chiefe Iustice forbadde, commanding him vpon his al∣legiance to cease from such riot, and to keepe the Kings peace: whereat Prince Henry in a furie stept vp to the Bench, and gaue the Iudge a blow on the face, who nothing daunted, sate still, and with a bold countenance, spake thus to the Prince, Sir I pray you remember your selfe, this seat of iudgement which here I possesse, is not mine, but your Fathers, to whom and to his lawes you owe double obedience. If his Hignesse be thus contemned, and his lawes violated by you, that should shew your selfe obedient to both, who will obey you when you are a Soueraigne, or minister execution to the lawes that you shall make? Wherefore, for this attempt, in your Fathers name, I commit you prisoner vnto the Kings Bench, there to remaine vntill his Ma∣testies pleasure be further known. With which words the Prince greatly abashed, stood mute by the Iudge, and fixing his eyes vpon his reuerend face, presently laid from him his weapons, and with humble o∣beisance done, departed to prison. The King vn∣derstanding the whole circumstance, greatly reioy∣ced that he had a Sonne of such obedience to his laws, and a Iudge so vpright to administer them without either fauour or feare of the person; notwithstan∣ding for this, and other like actions of his youth, he remoued him from being President of his Priuie Councell, and placed in his stead Thomas Duke of Rich. Grafton. Clarence his second brother; to Prince Henries no little griefe and discontent. (8) Howbeit his followers were nothing dimi∣nished, but his Court frequented more then his fa∣thers, which bred some suspition in the crazie kings head, lest among his other wild parts, hee would at∣tempt to play with his Crowne; which was encrea∣sed by his domesticall flatterers, who dayly buzzed new iealousies into his eares. This made Prince Tho. Otterborne. Henry (as Otterborne noteth) to strengthen himselfe with his chiefest friends, and well-willers, and with such a troupe repaired to his fathers Court, as a grea∣ter in those dayes had not beene seene. The tran∣slator of Liuie reports the maner of his approch, e∣uen from him that was an eye witnesse, and the same no lesse then the Earle of Ormond in Ireland, whose relation is this. (9) The King somewhat crasie, and keeping his Chamber, hearing newes dayly of his sonnes loose exercises, too meane for a Prince, and their constru∣ctions euer made to aime at his Crowne, he both be∣ganne to withdraw his fatherly affection, and to feare some violence against his owne person: which when Prince Henry heard of, by some that fauoured him of the Kings Councell, in a strange disguise hee repaired to his Court, accompanied with many Lords and noble mens sonnes. His garment was a gowne of blew Satten, wrought full of Eylet-holes, and at euery Eylet the Needle left hanging by the silke it was wrought with: about his arme he ware a dogs-collar set full of S. S. of gold, the Tirets ther∣of being most fine gold. Thus comming to West∣minster, and the Court of his Father, hauing com∣manded his followers to aduance no further then the fire in the hall, himselfe accompanied with some of the Kings houshold, passed on to his presence, and after his duty and obeysance done, offered to make knowne the cause of his comming. The king weake then with sickenesse, and supposing the worst, commanded himselfe to bee borne into a withdraw∣ing Chamber, some of his Lords attending vpon him, before whose feet Prince Henry fell, and with all reuerent obseruances, spake to him as followeth. (10) Most gracious Soueraigne and renowned father, the suspition of disloyalty, and diuulged reports of my dangerous intendmentes towardes your royall Person and Crowne, hath enforced at this time, and in this manner, to present my selfe and life at your Maiesties dispose. Some faults and mispent time (with blushes I may speake it) my youth hath committed, yet those made much more by such fleering pickthanks, that blow them stron∣ger into your vnwilling and distastiue eare. The name of Soueraigne ties alleagiance to all, but of a Father, to a further feeling of natures obedience; so that my sinnes were double, if such suggestions possessed my heart: for the Law of God orday∣neth, that he which doth presumptuously against the Ruler of his people shall not liue, and the child that smiteth his father shall die the death: so farre therefore am I from any disloyall attempt, against Deut. 17. 12. Exod. 21. 15. the person of you my Father, and the Lords an∣nointed; that if I knew any of whom you stoode in the least danger or feare, my hand according to duty shoud be the first to free your suspition; yea I wil most gladly suffer death to ease your perplex∣ed heart; and to that end I haue this day prepa∣red my self, both by confession of my offences past, and receiuing the blessed Sacrament. Wherefore I humbly beseech your Grace to free your suspition from all feares conceiued against mee, with this dagger, the stabbe whereof I will willingly receiue here at your Maiesties hand, and so doing, in the presence of these Lords, and before God at the day of iudgement, I clearely forgiue my death. But the King melting into teares, cast downe the naked dagger (which the Prince deliuered him) and raising his prostrate sonne, embraced and kissed him, con∣fessing his eares to haue beene ouer-credulous that way, and promising neuer to open them againe a∣gainst him. But the Prince vnsatisfied, instantly desired, that at least his accusers might be produced, and if conuicted, to receiue punishment, though not to the full of their demerites; to which request the King replied, that as the offence was capitall, so should it bee examined by the Peeres, and therefore Tho. Otterborn. willed him to rest contented vntill the next Parlia∣ment. Thus by his great wisdome he satisfied his father from further suspition, and recouered his loue that neerely was lost. Hetherto of Henry as he was Prince (some other of whose youthly actions we al∣so touched in his fathers raigne) and now to his Acts after he was King. (11) Henry ordained successor, and ouerseer of his dying Fathers Testament, had in his entrance so Ex Record. fortunate proceedings, as hee seemeth to exceed all his Predecessors; his Nobles proffering the oath of their Alleagiance, before himsel e had made his, for the iust gouernment of the Common-weale, which so farre was from acceptation, that hee desired God ne∣uer to admit him to the Crowne, vnlesse he should Ioh. Stow. to his glory raigne, and rule the Scepter to the good of the Subiect. The day of his entrance and of his Fathers death, being the twentieth of March, and Rich. Grafton. yeere of Christs Incarnation, according to our ac∣count, 1412. on the ninth of Aprill following hee was solemnly crowned at Westminster, Thomas Arun∣del An. D. 1413. Archbishoppe of Canterbury performing the roi∣all Ceremonies: which no sooner was ended, but to beginne a good gouernment, hee beganne with himselfe, banishing from his presence and Court the vnbridleled youthes which had beene his consorts, commanding them either to change their manners, or neuer to approch within ten miles where hee lay. Then chose hee worthy and prudent men for his Councell of Estate, and aduanced his Clergie with dig∣nity Ti . L . Tho. Walsing. and power: being himselfe as zealous in deuo∣tion, as liberall in building, and indowing of places for deuotion of others. His Iustice was found of all that sought it; for euery day after dinner for the space of an houre, his custome was to leane on a cushion set by his cupbord, and there himselfe receiued petitions of the oppressed, which with great equity he did redresse. And for a further testimony of his tender and com∣passionate heart, the slaughtered body of K. Richard ouer-meanely enterred at Langley, in great state he remoued into Saint Peters Church at Westminster, and there laid him enshrined by Queene Anne his first wife (as himselfe had desired and prepared) foun∣ding a weekely memoriall to bee celebrated, and six shillings eight pence thereon distributed vnto the poore, and yeerelie twentie pounds giuen vpon his anniuersarie day, besides foure tapers to burne be∣fore R b. Fabian. his monument day and night for euer. And so neerely did his death touch this innocent King, that hee sent to Rome to bee assoyled from that guilt of his fathers Act, by the Popes holinesse, then ac∣counted another God; whose penance enioined, he willinglie performed, and afterwards purposed to Polyc ron. haue made warre in Palestina against the enemies of Christ; for which end, hee sent Sir Hugh de Lauoy of Henault to Ierusalem, to discouer the state of things there; but before his returne he was departed to the heauenly Ierusalem himselfe. (12) The obsequies of his Father being solemni∣zed Vpon Trinity Sunday. at Canterbury, and the King in person attending the Corps, fitte occasion was giuen vnto Archbi∣shoppe Arundell to complain of the Wicklifians, (then Nich Vig r. in bist. Eglise. termed Lollards) great rubs in the wayes of the Cler∣gies pride and proceedings; whereof Sir Iohn Old∣castle was thought a chiefe, who by his marriage con∣tracted with a kniswoman of the Lord Cobhams of Cooling in Kent, obtained the title thereof, a man strong and valourous, and in especiall fauour with his Prince. This Knight in their Synode assembled at London, immediately after the Kings Coronati∣on, was accused by them to haue rent Christs seame∣lesse coat, in maintaining VVickliffes doctrine to bee taught, especially in the Diocesse of London, Roche∣ster, and Hereford: against whom also some choise Fox in Acts and Monuments. Inquisitors at Oxford, appointed for Heresies (though Oper a Ioh. H ssi To. . that whole Vniuersity had formerly vpheld both Wickliffe and his doctrine,) informed and presented his name with two hundred forty sixe conclusions, which they had collected to be hereticall. (13) The King incensed (by the Archbishoppes suggestions) against these discontented discipliners, Thom. Walsing. was further made beleeue that they themselues had set vp billes in diuers places, threatning that an hun∣dred thousand persons were ready for armes, against all that withstood their reformation, and among these that Oldcastle his Knight was reputed the chiefe. The King graciously inclined, heard the Archbi∣shops complaint, and being at Kennington promi∣sed to conferre with the Lord Cohham himself, which accordingly hee did, instantly willing him to submit himselfe to the censure of the Church and obedience of the Archbishoppe: but Cobham, no turne-coate from his profession, humbly told the King he owed his subiection only vnto his Maiesty whom God had placed in these his Dominions, as his onely Vice-ge∣rent to gouerne his people and Subiects, and that himselfe forced nothing Romes leaden sword, vnshea∣thed by the Pope (that Antichrist) against the Lords seruants, nor would suffer the key of Canterbury to open the closet of his conscience, where the spirite of God was residing, bearing witnesse with his, that hee stood in the truth, for whose defence as his Cham∣pion, he was ready to liue or die. (14) This answere receiued, was so deliuered vnto the Archbishoppe, with power to cite, exa∣mine and punish, as their owne Canons in such ca∣ses had decreed. The Lyon thus laid for, whose paw they still feared, was serued by processe to ap∣peare in the Archbishops Court, and the same deli∣uered by one Butler a seruant of the Kings Priuy and Monu∣ments. Chamber, for that the bold Sumner durst not doe it himselfe, and the Archbishoppe (diligent lest he should forget the day) caused his letters citatorie to be set vpon the gates of the Cathedrall Church of Rochester, which were presently torne down, and others againe set vp, were againe pulled off, to the great offence of the Clergies eye, and the rather, for that the Actor could not be knowne. The Knight not appearing (as knowing their malice and his own danger) was condemned of contumacie, and after∣wards Ouldcastle pro∣nounced an he∣retike. in a Synode at Rochester, was by the Archbishop pronounced an Heretike, where himselfe then ena∣cted that hereticall decree, that the holy scriptures Tho. Wals. Antiq. Britan. should not bee translated into the English tongue. But marke the iudgement that fell vpon his own tongue, whose rootes and blade shortly after (as is recorded) Ex libro Wigorn. grew so big in his mouth and throate, that he could neither speake nor swallow downe meat, but in hor∣ror Archbishop A∣rundels death. lay languishing, till lastly he so dyed starued by famine. (15) In the meane time the Lord Cobham wrote his See it in Foxes Martyrologie Beliefe, which was very Christianlike, and pre∣sented it himselfe to the King, who (being much pre∣possessed) in no wise would receiue it, but suffered him to bee summoned in his presence, and priuie Chamber, when the Knight for his purgation offered an hundred knights and Esquires, which would not The offers of the Lord Cobham. be accepted; then, according to his degree of Order, and law of Armes, he required the single Combat to fight for life or death, with either Christian or Hea∣then in the quarrell of his faith, the King and Coun∣cell onely excepted. This notwithstanding could not be suffered, but needes must he appeare before the Archbishop his Iudge: where, after diuers exami∣nations (in all which hee most religiously iustified himself & his profession) he was condemned of Here∣sie, Rob. Fabian. and committed Prisoner vnto the Tower of Lon∣don, whence shortly he escaped, and got into Wales. Vpon which escape great feares were conceiued, e∣specially of the Clergy, the causers of his troubles, and mortall Enemies to him & his welwillers, for the king was confidently (but as it seemeth malitiously) infor∣med; Touching Ould∣castles innocency from Treason, see Foxes defence against Cope in Martyrologie. that Oldcastle with his adherents laid for his life, & that in S. Giles Fields neere vnto Holborne twenty thousand were to assemble in hostile manner, with an intent to destroy the Monasteries of Westminster, Saint Albans, all the religious houses in London, and the Ca∣thedrall Church of Saint Paules. The King there∣fore in person himselfe after midnight with a great Army came into these fields, where (if wee will be∣leeue their professed enemies) fourescore of that fa∣ction were apprehended, who sayd they came to Iohn Stow seeke the Lord Cobham. But as the answerer of Copus from more ancient times hath obserued, that in daies of persecution, such assemblies often had beene made to heare the Gospell preached, which other∣wise Iohn Fox in Acts and Monuments. they could not enioy: so in this place then called Thicket fields. then o∣uergrowne with bushes and vnfit for battell, those few were in likelyhood assembled vnto Iohn Beuerly agodly man their Preacher, without any intent of treason, hauing for their Chieftaines no greater persons then Sir Roger Acton a Knight of no great account, a Minister, and a malt man. But their A∣pologies we leaue to See Fox at large. others; onely the Lord Cobham could not be found, though the King by Proclama∣tion had promised a thousand markes to his taker, besides many liberties to the City or Towne, that would disclose him; whereby (saith Walsing:) it may be ghessed, that the whole Kingdome, well neere, embra∣ced Ypodig. Neust. his opinions which that Fryar cals his madnesse: Thir∣ty seauen of that assembly were condemned, where∣of seauen were consumed with fire and strangled, Acton, Beuerley and Murly were likewise executed. (16) As the zeale of this King is much commen∣ded for his fauours towards his Clergy, so is his Tho Wals. Bishops of Saint Dauids. Princely pittie in the commiseration of young Per∣cies distresse, whose father Hotspur slaine at Shrews∣bury (as we haue said) and hee by his Grandfather sent into Scotland for security, was there notwithstan∣ding deteined a Prisoner, for that Iames their King was forcibly kept in England by Henrie, and as they tooke it against all Iustice. But fit occasion being offered for young Percies release, and exhcange made betweene him and Alrede sonne of Robert Duke of Al∣bany (who had beene taken prisoner at the Battell of Halidon) the king restored him not only in blood, and to grace in his Court, but also inuested his per∣son with the Title and State of his Grandfather, to his owne no little honour, and faithfull seruice attai∣ned of that honourable family. (17) Vpon Archbishop Arundels death, star∣ued by famine as wee haue said * Henry Chicheley a Henry Chicheley made Archbi∣shop of Canter∣bury. stout Champion also against Wicliffes doctrine, was with the Kings consent, by the Monkes of Canterbury elected their Archbishop, which the politicke Elect neither accepted nor refused, but left it to the will and pleasure of the Pope: who first tooke snuffe that Thomas Walsing. it so farre proceeded without his direction, yet was soone pacified by Chicheleys submission, and (as saith mine Author) with other Gratulations besides. The man though not so rich by birth as Arundle was, yet as strong for the Clergy, and more grati∣ous with his Prince as the sequele proued. (18) The first assaies of both was made knowne in a Parliament holden at Leicester, where in a Bill A complaint a∣gainst the Cler∣gies excesse. exhibited, complaint was made, that the temporall Lands giuen to religious houses and spirituall per∣sons for deuotion were either superfluous, or disor∣derly spent; whose reuenues (if better imploied) would suffice for the defence of the Land, and honor of the king; fifteene Earles, fifteene hundred knights sixe thousand two hundred Esquires, and one hun∣dred Almes-houses, for the reliefe of impotent and diseased persons, and vnto the kings Coffers twentie thousand pound by yeere. Which Bill (saith Hall) made the fat Abbots to sweat, the proud Priors to Edw. Hall. frowne, the poore Friers to curse, the silly Nunnes to weepe, and indeed all her Merchants to feare, that Babell would downe. (19) To stop the breach of which searching spring, no better meanes could be found, then to di∣uert the Parliament with other businesses, and to driue other proiects into the kings minde; whose head (as this new Archbishoppe there tolde him) had the best right to the Crowne of France: for The Archbishop C ichleys oration. not onlie the Dutchies of Normandy, Aquitaine, and Aniou, the Counties of Gascoigne, Maine, and the rest, were his lawfull) though vnlawfullie detained) inheritance; but therewithall the whole Realme of France, as true heire vnto his great Grandfather king Edward the third, and vnto Philip the faire, in right of his mother Queene Isa∣bell, Io. Serres. the only daughter and Child liuing of the said French king. As for the law Salique alleaged The Law Salique. against the English claime, he affirmed, that Text touched only those parts in Germany, which lay betwixt the riuers Elbe, and Sala conquered by king Charles the great, who placing his French there to inhabite, for the dishonest liues of those touched the Germans. Germaine women made this law. In terram Sali∣cam Mulieres ne succedant, which the Glosse did falsly expound for the whole kingdome of France. Whose practise notwithstanding he shewed to be the contrary, by many experiences both in king but not the French. Pepin which deposed Childericke by the claime of heire Generall (as descended of Blithild daughter Their claiming by the same title. to Clothair the first,) and by Hugh Capet, who, vsur∣ping the Crowne vpon Charles Duke of Lorraine (the sole heire male of that line from Charles the great) to make his claime good (which indeed was starke naught) deriued himselfe as heire to the La∣dy Lingard, daughter to Charlemaine, sonne to Lewis the Emperour, that was sonne to Charles the great. King Lewis also called the Saint; (who was the heire to the vsurper Hugh Capet) could not bee satisfied in conscience, how he might iustly keepe and possesse the Crowne of France, till he was ful∣ly instructed that Isabell his Grandmother was lineally descended of the Lady Ermengard daugh∣ter and heire to the aboue named Charles Duke of Lorraine, by the which marriage the blood and line of Charles the great was againe vnited, and re∣stored to the Crowne of France. Whereby (said the Archbishop) it most manifestly appeared, that the title of Pepine, the Claime of Capet, the posses∣sion of Lewis, yea of the French Kings themselues to this day, deriue their onely rights from the heires female, and that this pretended Law Sali∣que was but a shifting deuise to debarre the Eng∣lish Kings from the claime of the French Crown. Which exclusion howsoeuer they pretend to bee right, yet the law of God (said he) hath made it meere wrong, which with better regard of the Sex alloweth the woman to inherite her fathers pos∣session, as we see in the practise of that state, where∣of Christ himselfe is called king, where the fiue daughters of Zelophehad for want of heires males, were admitted to succeed in their fathers inheri∣tance, allotted them in the Tribe of Manasses; and Numb. 27. a law made by the Lord himselfe, that if a man di∣ed and had no sonnes, then his inheritance should be transferred vpon his daughters. Neither is it to be doubted but that the daughter of Shesham was An addition. the sole heire vnto her fathers patrimony, he dying without issue male; though shee married an Egyp∣tian, whose posterity had their possessions among the Tribe of Iudah, euen to the Captiuity of Babi∣lon: 1. Chro. 2. 34. so that if such a law were, as in truth there was no such, better were the breach by the warrant of diuine direction, then the continuance by colour of such prescription, seeing God hath ordained aswell for the daughter as for the sonne. (20) The Archbishops vnexpected but not vnpremeditated Oration thus ended, so stirred the blood of the young Couragious King, that his heart was all on a flame; and so tickled the eares of his Auditory, as they presently conceiued that France was their owne; the Title whereof descending from Isa∣bell, the mother of the famous third Edward, and shee the daughter and suruiuing heire vnto Philip the faire; his right was lineally deriued thence as followeth, first Philip by Ioane his first wife intitu∣led Queene of Nauarre, had three sonnes and one daughter, namely Lewis, Philip and Charles, all three successiuely Kings, and this Lady Isabell, by whom the English claime: his second wife was Constance the daughter of the King of Sicil, who bare him a sonne after his owne decease which liued not many daies after his father. Lewis his eldest sonne and Lewis . tenth of that name succeeded Philip in the King∣dome of France, and by Margaret his wife the daugh∣ter of Burgundy had his daughter Iane intituled Queene of Nauarre, who made claime also vnto the French Crowne, but neuer attained it; so that her Title fell with her death. Lewis by his second wife Clemence of Sicil, had a sonne named Iohn borne vnto him, but presently both father and sonne de∣parting this life, left the Scepter to his second brother; who by the name of Philip the fift, a while wore the Emperiall Crowne of France: his wife was Iane the daughter of Burgoine, who bare vnto him only foure daughters. (21) Vnto King Philip succeeded his brother Charles the faire, the fourth of that name, whose first wife was Blanch, detected of incontinency and brought him no fruite, his second wife was Marie daughter to Henry Luxenbourg the Emperour, who bare him a sonne that dyed soone after birth, and the mother likewise shortly came to her graue. Mar∣garet the daughter to the Earle of Eureux, was his third and last wife, who at his death hee left with Child, and thus the three sonnes of Philip were bran∣ched, raigned, and died, whom Queene Isabell their sister suruiued, and in that right her sonne King Ed∣ward the third, by his royall consanguinity whilst the Crowne stood thus at suspence, till a Prince should be borne, claimed to be Regent in the Inter∣regnum, and in the nonage of the looked for issue, against which, Philip de Valois sonne of Charles the hardy, who was brother to Philip the faire, being a second branch from Hugh Capet, and first Prince of the blood of France, maintained that the Regency of the male (if so he were borne) as also of the Realme (if a daughter or the sonne dyed) belonged onely vnto him as the next in blood. The state thus standing, and a daughter borne, Philip was saluted and proclaimed King, no other right alleaged then this foisted and falsely termed fundamentall law Salique, for no otherwise doth Ottoman the French famous Lawyer esteeme of that vngodly and vniust Ordi∣nance, if any such had beene ordained. (22) The Kings right thus apparant, and suffici∣ent possessions to be had in France: the Bill of com∣plaint against the Clergies excesse was quite dasht, and all mindes addicted for the affaires that way; thinking it vnreasonable to pull the Prouisions from their natiues and brethren, when as the Circuit of their inheritanee extended more large in com∣passe: and therefore with the Danites they determi∣ned Iudg. 18. no longer to sit so pent with increase, seeing God had giuen them another Kingdome, but would free their own straitnesse by dint of sword, and spread their Tents wider in the Continent of France: Nei∣ther was there any motiue more forceable in confe∣rence, then was the successe of those intruding Prin∣ces, who assaied the Crowne by that vniust claime of law Salique. (23) For did not the sword of God (rather then Io. Serres. man) in the hand of King Edward the claimer cut downe the flower of France in the Battell of Crecie, with the slaughter of Lewis King of Bohemia, of Charles the French Kings brother, of Iames Dolphin of Viennois, the Dukes of Lorrayne, and Burbon, the Earles of Aumarle, Sauoy, Montbilliard, Flanders, Ni∣uers and Harecourt, the Grand Priour of France, the Archbishop, and Zanxinus and Noyone, of Lords, Ba∣rons, and Gentlemen to the number of 1500 with 30. thousand of the French Souldiers, and Philip not able of himselfe to defend himselfe, inciting Dauid of Scotland to inuade and weaken England, therein did but only vexe his owne spirit, for in that attempt the Scottish King was taken prisoner and brought so to London, leauing Philip to struggle with his hard fortunes in France, which with bad successe hee did to the day of his death. (24) Iohn his sonne by the same title and claime felt the same stroake of iustice from the hand of that thunderbolt in warre Edward surnamed the blacke Prince, the sonne of Englands Mars, who farre infe∣riour to the French in number, farre exceeded them in marshall power, when at the battell of Poitiers the French royall Standard was stroke downe, an hundred Ensignes wonne by the English, the Consta∣ble, Marshall and great Chamberlaine of France with fifty two Lords and seuenteen hundred Gentlemen Io. Serres slaine in the field. King Iohn himselfe, his sonne Philip, two Bishops, thirteene Earles, and one and thirty Lords taken prisoners by the Prince, to his great praise and confirmation of his iust cause. (25) Nor was the punishment of the father a∣ny whit lessened in King Charles the sonne then raigning, who besides the intestine warres in his own dominions was by Gods iust iudgement strucke in∣to a Lunacy, being vnable to gouerne himselfe much lesse his Kingdome, vpon which aduantage (as the French would haue it) King Henry now plaied; though it be most certaine he sought his right farre otherwise, for so it standeth vpon record dated the ninth of February and first of Henry the fift his Ex Record. apud Westm. raigne, that he sent his Ambassadors vnto the French King, who could not bee admitted to his presence, and him whom they imployed to procure accesse was by the French committed to Prison: whereat King Henry most iustly conceiued a grudge. Paulus P. . Aemilius their owne Story-writer saith, that Henry King of England, sent honorable Ambassadors to demand in marriage the Lady Katherine daughter vnto the French King: which (as he saith) was neglected with this answere, that the King had no leasure to thinke on that businesse: whom Franciscus Rosienius doth further inlarge, saying, the King scornefully smiling answered Fr. Ros en. that France was neither destitute of Dukes, nor hee at leasure to thinke of the Proposition; and being iealous l st Burgoigne would match his daughter with Hen∣ry, sent him a command to the contrary, and again at their Conclusion of peace, expresly enioyned the Enguerrant de Monstrel. said Duke, and all other Princes of the bloud, not to make any alliance of mariage with England, wher∣by K. Henry was further exasperated against France. And lastly, by his counsell and conference vpon the Nich. Ueg . Will Parradin. in Annal. de Bur∣goin. Ca ton Chron. . Archbishops Oration sent a Summons and demand of the Dutchies of Normandy, Aquitaine, Guyen, & Aniou; in derision whereof, as Caxton recordeth, the Dolphin of France, sent him a Tunne of Tennis Bals, as Bullets most fit for his tender hands, who had spent his youth (as he thought) more among Rac∣kets, then regard of his person or matters of State: so forward is man to be an Actor in common mise∣ries, when the Fates haue made the Subiect of the Scene Tragicall, that hee drawes the hand of Desti∣nie, sooner to strike, and heauier to fal vpon that pro∣iect decreed to bee east downe: for by these disdains and vnprincely dealings the Crowne of France was graspt by the English hard hand, and that faire soile stained with her Natiues owne bloud: for the Pre∣sent receiued as it was sent, had promise to bee re∣payed with balles of more force, whose stroke should bee such as the strongest gates of Paris should not be rackets sufficient to bandy the rebound. (26) Grudges thus growne, and warres in prepa∣ring, Ex Record. VVest. the French thought it fittest to make Scotland their friend, whom they incited to molest the Eng∣lish Marches, which accordingly was done, and that with such violence, as it was a question decideable, whether of the Kingdoms was first to be dealt with Westmerland thought it safest to checke the Scots as An. D. 1414. the neerer and continuall backe-friends. But Exce∣ster held it better policy to beginne with France the stronger, especially now disquieted through the fac∣tions of Burgundy and Orleance, and vnto this the Ypod. Neust. most voices gaue way, whose forwardnes was such, that the Clergy granted a Tenth, and the temporall Lords their aides to the King, as followeth. The Earles Northumberland, 40 men at Armes & 120 Archers a peece Westmerland. The Earles Warwicke, 20. men at Armes, and 40. Archers a peece. Stafford. The Earle of Suffolke, a shippe, 20. men at Arms, and 40. Archers. The Earle of Abergaueny 20. men at Armes, and 20. Archers. The Lords Louell. A shippe, 20. men at Armes, and 40. Archers a peece. Barkley. Powis. Camois. S. Iohn, Ex Record. Burrell. The Lords Fitzwater. Halfe a shippe, 20 men at Armes, and 40. Ar∣chers a peece. Darcie. Seymour. Rosse. Willoughbie. The Lord Morley, 6. men at Armes, and 12. Archers. The Lords Scales, Proffered to attend the King in their persons without en∣tertainement. Randolph, The whole number thus granted and appointed, amounted to of Men at Armes. 346 Archers. 552 Ships. 9½ To put back the Scots, Sir Robert Vmfreuile was sent who in a skirmish vpon Mary Magdalens day tooke 360 of them prisoners, and with great spoile retur∣ned to Rocksborough Castell whereof hee had charge; the news whereof K. Charles vnderstanding, and the Iohn Harding. Roger VVals. great preparation made against France, being better aduised vpon the dangerous euent, sent his Ambassa∣dors into England, whereof the Archbishoppe of Bourges was principall, who at Winchester made of∣fer of money, and some other Territories (but none of the best) with the Princesse Lady Katherine to be giuen in marriage vnto King Henry, so that he would dissolue his Armie and conclude a peace. To this Oration the Archbishoppe of Canterburie made an∣swere, that his King demanded the Dutchies of A∣quitaine and Aniou, with the other Seigniories an∣ciently appertaining to his Progenitors the Kings of England, which as they were his most rightfull and lawfull inheritance, so would hee with all possible di∣ligence endeauour (if not otherwise) by fire & sword to recouer, which his assertion the King himselfe in presence confirmed. (27) But Burges the Archbishoppe presuming Enguerrant de Monstr l. more vpon his Prelacy, then respectiue vnto whom hee spake, with an vnreuerend boldnesse (liberty ob∣tained) seconded his Ambassage with the termes of an Herauld, and with bended browes thus spake to the King: Thinkest thou ô King wrongfully to put downe and destroy the most Christian, the most renow∣ned, and the most excellent King of all Europe, both in bloud and preheminence. or thinkest thou that our migh∣ty Soueraigne Charles hath offered thee lands, summes of money and possessions with his most beautifull daugh∣ter, either in feare of thee, of thy English Nation, or of all thy well-willers whomsoeuer? I tell thee no, but moued in pitty as a louer of peace, and to saue the shed∣ding of christian bloud, hath made thee these offers: & his cause being supported by equity and truth, God and his good Subiects he trusteth will set a period soone to thy quarrell. Wee therefore his Ambassadors demand thy safe conduct to passe out of thy Realme, and that thou wilt write thine answere, and send it vnder thy seale. (28) Henry no whit daunted with his big looks and words, answered the Archbishoppe with milder Holins and better set termes; My Lord (said he) I little esteeme of your gallant brauadoes, and lesse weigh your imagined power or French bragges. I know my owne right to your Region, and so doe your selues, vnlesse you will deny a most apparant truth: the strength of your Master you dayly see, but mine as yet you haue not tasted, he (you say) hath many louing subiects and friends, and (God be thanked) I haue both as well affected to mee, with which, ere long I hope to make the highest crowne in your Country to stoope, and the proudest Mi∣ter to kneele downe: And say to the Vsurper your Master, that within this three monethes, I will enter France, not as into his land, but as into mine owne lawfull patrimonie, entending to conquer it not with bragging words, nor flatte ing orati∣ons, but by power and dint of sword, through Gods assistance in whom I trust: and I assure you I will not speake the word, the which I will not write and subscribe, nor will I subscribe to that to which I willingly will not set my seale. There∣fore your safe conduct shall bee dispatched, and mine answere in writing deliuered, which once receiued you may depart into your Country, when I trust sooner to visite you, then that you shal haue cause to bid me welcome. (29) The Statute enacted, the first of his raigne hee now put in execution, and commaunded the French out of his land, according to that made the 13. of Richard 2. which disabled the Alien Religi∣ous to enioy any Benefices within England, and now Ex P l. 1. H. 5. fearing to nourish a snake in his bosome, King Hen∣ry forbad the French from all preferments Ecclesia∣sticall, and those Priors Aliens conuentual, who had institution and induction, to put in security, not to disclose, or cause to be disclosed, the counsell nor se∣crets of the Realme: and that the French might hold his dealings honourable, and open, hee sent An∣tilop his purseuant at Armes, vnto King Charles with letters of defiances: next making Queene Ioan his mother in Law the Regent of the land, he drew his forces vnto Southampton, commaunding his follow∣ers there to attend him in readinesse by the feast of Saint Iohn Baptist ensuing. (30) Charles the French King expecting present Alain . in A ls of Brit. inuasion, sent his Ambassadors vnto Iohn the sixt Duke of Britain, who had married his daughter with an hundred thousand Crowns, to leuie forces for his aide, and a Iewell worth fiue thousand Crownes more to himselfe, which the Duke promised to come in person to performe. And as it is reported, King Charles sent to Scrope, Grey and Cambridge (all three in especiall fauour with the King) a million of An ancient Manuscript. gold to betray Henry into his hands, or to murther him before hee should arriue in Normandy. These to make their faction stronger, though Scroope was Lord Treasurer, Grey a Priuie Councellour, & Cam∣bridge Ti . . the sonne of Edmund Duke of Yorke, meant to draw in, Edmund Earle of March the sonne of Roger Mortimer, and lineally the heire vnto Lionell Duke of Clarence, the next in succession for the house of Yorke, and reuealing their intended purpose, forced him to sweare to their secresie, which if hee refused, St . they threatned his death; whereupon he required but an howres respite, which hardly granted, he went to the King and reuealed the conspiracie, euen the night before the day that hee meant to put to sea. (31) The parties apprehended and brought Holinsh. before him in presence of many nobles, King Henry thus spake; With what horrour O Lord may anie true English heart consider that you for pleasing of a forreine enemy, should imbrue your hands in our blood, as also in the blood of our brethren, to the ruine of your owne natiue soile! reuenge herein touching my person though I seeke not; yet for the safegard of you my deare friends, and for due preseruation of the Realme, I am by place and office to minister remedy against these Offen∣ders; Get you hence therefore you miserable wretches, to receiue the iust reward of your de∣serts, wherein God giue you repentance for your so foule sinnes. (32) Notwithstanding this their offence, their inditement as it standeth in the Record, includes matter of other quality: that, Richard Earle of Cam∣bridge o. St . Annal. of Conesburgh in the County of Yorke, and Thomas Grey of Heton in the Countie of Northumberland Knight, for that they in the twentieth of Iuly and third of King Henry the fifts raigne, at Southampton had conspired to∣gether with a power of men, to haue lead away the Lord Edmund Earle of March into Wales, and to haue procured him to take the Gouernment of the Realme, in case that King Richard the second were dead; with a purpose to haue put forth a Proclamation in the name of the said Earle as heire to the Crowne, against King Henry by the name of Lancaster vsurper, and further to haue conuayed a Banner of the Armes of England, and a certaine Crowne of Spaine set vpon a Pallet (layd in gage to the sayd Earle of Cambridge) into Wales; As also that the said conspi∣rators had appointed certaine into Scotland, to bring thence one Trumpington, and another resembling in shape, fauour, and countenance, King Richard. And Henrie Scroope of Masham in the Countie of Yorke was like∣wise indited as consenting to the Premisses. Thus well appeared their purpose, though Richard Earle of Cambridge, considering the possibility of his owne issue had secretly carried that businesse: whose sor∣rowfull letter of his owne hand writing, as it came to ours, we thinke not amisse here to insert. Most dreadfull and Soueraigne Liege Lord, I Richard Li . Original. Yorke your humble subiect, and very Leigeman, beseech you of grace, of all manner of offences which I haue or assented vnto, in any kind by stirring of other folke, eg∣ging me vnto, wherein I wot well I haue highly offended to your Highnesse, beseeching you at the reuerence of God, that you like to take mee into the hands of your mercifull and piteous grace, thinking yee will of your goodnes my Leige Lord: my full trust is, that you will hau con∣sideration (though that my person be of none valew,) your high goodnesse (where God hath set you in s high estate) to euery Leigeman, that you longeth, plent to ue; that you like to accept this my simple request for the loue of our Lady, and the blessed holy Ghost, to whom I pray that they moue your heart euer to all pittie and grace for their high goodnes. Notwithstanding this his humble peti∣tion vpon the sixt of August following, hee, with Scroope, and Grey, were beheaded, and his body with head enterred in the Chappell of Gods-house in South∣hampton; whose apprehensions, arraignements, and deaths, were so followed each after others, as the French knew not, but that the treason had successe, and their returned Ambassadours told it for cer∣taine, that King Henry had either dismissed his Ar∣my, or (which was thought more true) himselfe was slaine by the Conspirators; so easie an entrance hath babling report into the wide eares of credu∣lous desire. (33 But King Henrie now ready to embarke Harding 1500. Ioh. Stow. 1600. Holinsh. 1000. Grafton. 140. Ould. Manuscr. 1500. Caxton. 1500. his men, vpon Wednesday the seauenth of August with fifteene hundred Saile tooke to Seas, attended with sixe thousand speares, and twenty foure thou∣sand footmen besides Gunners, Enginers, Artificers and Labourers a great number, and the fifteenth of Nichol. Giles. the same month cast Anchor in the mouth of Seyne, at a place called Kideaux, about three miles from Harflew, where he landed his men; and falling de∣uoutly vpon his knees, desired Gods assistance to re∣couer his right, making Proclamation vpon paine of death, that Churches should be spared from all vio∣lence of spoile, that Churchmen, women and Children, should not be hurt, abused or wronged: then giuing the order of Knighthood to many of his followers Titus Li l. hee assigned his Standards to men of most strength and courage, which done he tooke the hill neere ad∣ioyning, and thence sent his spiall to the Towne of Harflew, making that the first assay of his fortunes in France. But before we enter any further discourse in the affaires of that Kingdome, it shall not be amisse to speake of things commenced in England before that King Henry tooke to the Seas. (34) The Churches throughout Christen∣dome, de ylles∣c Hist. P tif. hauing beene disquieted the space of twentie nine yeers, and now growne intollerable, through the schismaticall ambitions, maintained by three Pa∣pall Monarchs, mounted into Saint Peters seate, each of them grasping the Chaire with so fast a fist, that the ioints thereof were forced asunder; and the tri∣ple Crowne so battered with their thunderbolts of their curses that it was flatted and made vnfit for any of their heads. The persons arreared were Iohn 23. by the Italians elected; the second was Gre∣gory Platina. 12. whom the French had set vp; and the 3. was Benedict 13. preferred to the place by the Spamard. These striuing for the helme, the ship was so steered, that her wracke was apparant vpon these raging and vnquiet Seas. To preuent which the Christian Princes put their helping hands, and by a generall consent, ordained a generall Councell to bee held at Constance in Germany, which began in February 1414 and continued aboue the space of three yeeres; Nicol. in Theatr ∣sal de Pr . whereunto were assembled besides the Emperour, the Pope and the Palsgra e of Rheine, foure Patriarks, twentie seauen Cardinals, forty seauen Archbi∣shops, Sebastian Munster. one hundred and sixty Bishops, Princes, Barons and Gentlemen with their attendants aboue thirtie thousand. (35) Vnto this Councell King Henry sent Rich∣ard Francis Goodwin vpon the liues of the Bishop. Clifford Bishop of London, Robert Halam Bishoppe of Salisbury, made Cardinall, and died at the same Councell. Iohn Keterich, Bishop of Couentree and Lichfield, Nicholas Bubwith Bishop of Bath and Wels. Iohn Wakering, Bishop of Norwich, Robert Mascall, Bishop of Hereford, Stephen Patrington, Bishop of S. Dauids; the Abbot of Westminster, and Prior of Wor∣cester, in company of whome, and for whose greater indifferent, the French gallant, fresh, and through vaine hope of honour, already mounted aboue men The French glo∣rious in shew but the English conquerors. of meane rancke, the English weake, weary and sore starued, made no such shew, and yet their courage no lesse then the other. The one spending the night be∣fore Battell, in Feasts, Triumphes, and other like Caxton. Chron. sports, distributing their Captiues, diuiding their spoiles, and decreeing none to bee saued but the King, and his nobles; all others must die or be incura∣bly maimed: the other trimming their arrowes, sharpening their speares, buckling their armours, and refreshing their bodies for the next day; and besides other obseruances, by the light of the great The English dis∣cerned what was done in the French army. P. Aemil. fiers made in the French Campe, the English decerned what was therein done, and tooke the aduantage of their order and ground. (51) The morning approached, the French tooke the field, thronging forward, who should be first to this most easie and certaine victory (as they tooke it) their greatest strength consisting in horse. Against whose violence King Henry commanded two hun∣dred strong bow-men to lodge in a low meadow, Alain B chant. n les Annales de Bretag e. where a deepe ditch full of water might secure them from the horse, and the bushes couer them from sight. These hauing stakes prepared and shod with Iron at both ends, were appointed to sticke them The stratagem with stakes. slope-wise in the ground, yet so that they might bee remoued as occasion was ministred, to guarde them from the danger of the horse: which policy accom∣plished, King Henry (whose hope was in God, and the goodnesse of his cause) about ten of the clocke raun∣ged Guil. Parradyn. his English, against the French then in field: he di∣sposed his host into three battels, placing his bow-men on both sides of the maine. (52) The vantgard, consisting of Archers, was Tho. Walsing. The chiefe Lea∣ders of each part of the English army. led by Lord Edward, (his cosen) the Duke of Yorke, & with him the Lords Beaumont, Willoughby, and Fan∣hope. In the maine Battell all in compleate and bright shining armour, the King rode himselfe, his shield quartered with the royall atcheiuements of England and France, vpon his helmet he ware a Co∣ronet, the circle whereof glittered with pearle and stones of an vnestimable price: his horse of a fierce The noble abllia∣ments of King Henry in the maine Battell. courage carreird as he went, the bridle and furniture of Gold-smithes worke, and the Caparisons most richly embroidered with the victorious Ensignes of the English Monarchy: Before him in gold and glori∣ous colours the Royall Standard was borne, and many other banners in warlike order waued with the winde. (53) The French had framed their Battels into two sharpe fronts, as intending with their points to Ti Liui . haue runne through the English squadrons; altoge∣ther relying vpon their horsemen, and shining in bra∣uery with an incredible excesse. And surelie the beauty and honourable horror of both the Armies, no heart can iudge of, vnlesse the eye had seene it, the Banners, Ensignes and Penons streaming in the ayre, The admirable and glorious sight that both armies made. the glistering of armours, the varietie of colours, the motion of Plumes, the Forrests of Lances, and the thickets of shorter weapons, made so great and goodlie a shew; but the silent expectation of the bloody blast was as the bullet ramd into the Canon, whose roaring voice is not so soone heard, as the stroake of death felt by the aimed-at marke. (54) The Battels thus raunged a while stood 10. Serres still, and faced each other euen in the face: The French (whether vpon errour like to that of Pompeis at the Battel of Pharsalia, where Caesar was victorious, or to draw the English farther-from their aduantage of ground, is altogether vnknowne) but certaine it is, that King Henry was resolued to open his way for Callis ouer the Enemies bosome, or else to die: and King Henry see∣keth to passe Callis. thereupon with a cheerefull countenance and words full of courage, he comforted his followers and said. My most faithfull Companions and worthy soul∣diers, we now goe into the field of honour, and to the worke of manhood, which your great valours Tho. Walsing. so long haue expected and praied for; loe the day is now come, and your worke the noblest in the world; poure forth therefore your vtmost forces, that ages may know what the lance, the Axe, the sword and the bow ca oe in the hand of the va∣liant: Whosoeuer therefore desires riches, ho∣nour, and rewards here he shall find them. Nimi∣rum haec medio posuit Deus omnia Campo. When hee had thus said, his army fell prostrate on the ground, and committed themselues vnto God euery man taking into his mouth a peece of earth, in remem∣brance of his owne mortality, (being thereof made) or of the holy Communion whereof hee was incorporated to be a partaker; and so resolued, ari∣sing, Stowes Annal. the King with cheerefull countenance comman∣ded his Standard to aduance forward, saying, because our iniurious enemies doe attempt to shut vp our way, let vs vpon them in the name of the most glorious Trinity, Tho. Wal. and in the best houre of the wholeyeere. (55) The ranging of the Battell King Henry committed to an old experienced Knight called Sir Denis Sa age in Cron. Flan. Thomas Erpingham: who with a warder in his hand lead the way, which when he saw time hee threw vp into the aire, whereat the whole army gaue a great shout; which done, he alighted frō his horse, & came Enguerrant de Mon reles. to the King, who was in his place on foot. The French beholding this Offer, kept still their owne The English proffer Battell. standing, which the English perceiuing, made forward and came on, giuing another shoute, when immedi∣ately the Archers, layd in the meadow, darkened the aire with a shower of sharpe arrowes, most fearefull to the sight, but more deadly to be felt, and withall, Their Archers put the enemy to the greatest harme. the English charged their Battell with an admirable Courage; the most of them for nimblenes being but halfe clothed, without hat, and bare-legged. And such was their courage notwithstanding their wants, as he that ere while could scarcely bend his Bow, is Ypodig. Neust. able now to draw his yard-long arrow to the verie head, whose roauing marke was the flancke of the French, so rightly aimed at, and so strongely stucke on, that their sides were altogether larded with ar∣rowes, whereby the vantgard was instantly distrest, and disordered into such a confused presse, as they were not able to vse their weapons at any aduantage. Their wings likewise assayd to charge the English; but Mounsieur de Lignie in the one not well seconded Enguerrant. by his troopes was forced back: and Guilliaum de Sur∣reres The wings of the French battell discomfited. charging home, in the other, was slaine. The Bat∣talions now brokē, for safety fled to the Main, where they breed both feare and confusion by the vnruli∣nesse of their wounded horses, so galled with arrowes as they could not be gouerned. (56) The first troope of the French horse, were Tho. Walsing. exquisitely appointed, whereon their riders much presumed, and meant to haue burst through the Ar∣chers with a violent course, but they giuing backe left their sharpe pointed stakes sticking, which till then were vnseene; the French supposing the Archers had fled, came on with their horse vpon the spur, and that in such heat, as the earth seemed to tremble The English Ar∣chers giuing back the French horsemen spill themselues vpon the sharpe poin∣ted stakes. vnder their thundering feet, and being forced for∣ward, without foresight of danger carried their proud Riders into the iawes of destruction: for fal∣ling by troopes vpon those goaring stakes, they were miserably ouerthrowne, and paunched to death. The tempests of arrowes still whisling in the aire sparkled fire in their fals from the helmets of the French, and with their steeled heads, rang manie thousands their knels that dolefull day, who like to corne cut downe with the sith, fell by whole plumps in that fatall field; the English still following the ad∣uantage: against whome Anthoine Duke of Brabant, hoping by his example to encourage others (follow∣ed Enguerrant de Monstrel. with a few) turned head, and brake into the Eng∣lish Battell, wherein manfully fighting hee was slaine. (57) With the like manhood Duke Alenzon Guil. Paradyn. in les Annals. de Burg. a lusty French Lord, pressed into the Battalion where King Henry fought, and incountering Hum∣frey Duke of Glocester the Kings brother, both woun∣ded and ouerthrew him, to whose rescue if Henry had not come, he had died more honourablie then King Henry res∣cueth his bro∣ther the Duke of Glocester. afterward hee did, for King Henry bestriding him, deliuered his said brother from danger, and wanne himselfe much honour by the deed. Alenzon then coped with King Henry in fight, and with his Axe cut a part of his Crowne, which blow was so surelie laid on, that therewith his helmet was battered vnto Alenzon encoun∣tring King Henrie putteth him in some danger. his brow, but the Lyon enraged, with redoubled strength, stroke the French Gallant vnto the ground, and slew two of his men that seconded their Master. The Duke thus down, cried to the King, I am Alen∣zon, whom Henry sought to haue saued, and so had done, had not the deafe eares of reuenge stopt all Rich. Grafton. sound of life, against him, that so had endangered their Souereigne Lord. (58) The French Reregard surprised with feare, at the disaster of the vantgard, and the maine battell The French maine battell put to flight. fled, not striking one stroake (except some principall leaders and they not many) the English horsemen fetched a compasse and wheeled about vpon their backes, which no sooner was perceiued, but that the taxe of fighting was ended, and the worke of killing Pyd. Verg. began; as by the words of Walsingham doth mani∣festly appeare: The way (saith he) is at length made by fine force; the French did not so much giue place, as fall dead to the earth: for when they saw those beaten indeed vnderfoote, whom they reputed inuincible, their minds forthwith grew amazed, and such an iciefeare slyd through their marrow, that they stood still like senselesse Images, Walsinghams de∣scription of the Frenches ouer∣throw. while our men wrested weapons out of their hands, and slew them therewith as beasts. Slaughter then had lost the stay of it selfe, and fight did follow no longer, but all the warre was made at throates, which (as it were) offered themselues to be cut, neither can the English kill so manie of the enemies, as may bee killed. Thus therefore the whole glory of the French name is almost perished, by the hands of those few, wh immediately before they held in most extreme contempt. But the sword now made After some sharp execution the English shew mercy to the French. weary and drunke with blood, all danger past, and humanity retired, prisoners were taken, and liues spared, which hitherto was neglected, least mercy might haue proued the destruction of them∣selues. (59) Whilst the King was thus busied, & the suc∣cesse Enguerrant de Monstrelet. of the battell in dispute, his carriages (but sclen∣derly garded) by the French were assailed, & all made spoile of, that was to be had. The Captaines of this cowardly enterprize, were Robinet de Bourneuille, Rif∣flant de Clumasse, and Isambert de Agincourt, with sixe Ypod. Neust. hundred Peasants, who had turned their faces at the first brunt of Battell, as men of better practise to pil∣fer, Certaine French rob the Kings carriages. then to purchase by manhood the spoiles of the field. Where among other things they found a rich Crowne and sword, which they bare away in tri∣umph-wise, fayning that King Henry was taken, and as a prisoner followed their troopes, the sight of cer∣taine They steale a Crowne and a sword and faine that King Henry is taken priso∣ner. History of Nor∣mandy. English prisoners by them taken and led away cōfirming the report more strongly in the beholders conceit. But King Henry breathlesse, and in heat of blood, seeing certaine new troopes of the King of Sicils appeare in the field, and the same strong inough to encounter with his weary men, fearing (as hee had cause) that the Bourbon Battalion vpon sight of fresh Pol. Verg. succours would gather into a body, and againe make head, considering withall how his men were ouer-charged with multitudes of Prisoners, who in number surmounted their Conquerours: that A new power of French appea∣ring, King Henrie causeth all his prisoners to bee slaine. the charge would be double at once, to guard and to fight, and that the prisoners would be ready vpon euery aduantage to take armes and free themselues from their takers: these and other necessities con∣strayning, King Henry contrary to his wonted ge∣nerous nature, gaue present commandement that Enguerrant. euery man should kil his Prisoner, which was imme∣diately perfourmed, certaine principall men excep∣ted. Which done, and falling againe in Order, hee sent his Heraulds vnto these troopes assembled, com∣manding them forthwith to come vnto Battell, or Ti Li else to depart the field, either of which if they delaied, he threatned to reuenge with their deathes, without any redemption or mercy; at which seuere sentence their hearts were so daunted, that with shame and di∣shonour they departed the field. The base surpri∣sall de ▪ of the Kings carriages, (the only cause as some alleage of the French prisoners death) was so ill dis∣gested by the French themselues, that the Duke of Burgundie imprisoned the Actors thereof, and was minded to haue put them to death, had not his sonne The Duke of Burgundy impri∣ oneth the rob∣bers of King Hen∣ries carriages but pardons their liues at Count Charolois request. Ypodig. Nest. the Count of Charolois mediated for them, vnto whom they presented King Henries rich sword, the guards whereof was gold set with stones of great price. (60) The day almost spent in spending French blood, and euening approaching neere the set of the Sunne, the field cleared, and no enemy seene, the re∣treate was sounded, and all were assembled to giue thankes vnto God; which done, while his souldiers pillaged the dead, King Henry sent for Montioy he∣rault King Henry ac∣knowledgeth God the g uer of victory. at armes in France, and for other heraulds both English and French: vnto whom he said, we haue not of our selues made this great slaughter, which the sword in our weake hands hath laid at our feete, but the Arme of God for the offences (no doubt) of the French hath doneit, God deliuereth a nation into the hands of the de∣stroier for their sinnes. whose blood let now rest vpon their owne heads, and wee guiltlesse in following our right: and then deman∣ding the name of the place, was answered, it was Azincourt, then said he, to all posterities following, this Battell shall be called the Battell of Azincourt. Thus dismissing the heraulds, he returned to Maisconcelles, where he lodged the night before. The spoile was Enguer. de Mon∣streles. great, and the pray rich in armours, iewels, and appa∣rell, for which by the Countrey Peasants many (left as dead) were stripped starke naked, who afterward crept from the place, but most of them mortallie wounded without reliefe, lay in great dolor and died in the ditches: so certaine is the calamity of warre, and vncertaine the sword till it bee quietlie shea∣thed. (61) King Henry lost his cosen Edward Duke of Yorke, and the Earle of Suffolke that day, besides some Nich. Gille. Latiers volume de Cron. Franc. others, the Frēch writers say three or foure hundred, yet Caxton will haue them but twenty and sixe: and Paulus Aemilius addeth to the two slaine Lords, two The small num∣ber of English slaine. Tho. Walsing. Knights and only ten priuate souldiers, without anie more; vnto whom an ancient manuscript addeth Ex Manuscript. Dauid Gam an Esquire, and twenty eight priuate souldiers, affirming confidently, that no more of the English died that day. (62) A farre larger role is writ of the French, slaine at this Battell, yet diuers and different among their owne Authors, the true Catalogue as wee can∣not certainely set downe, yet as wee haue many Col∣lections we will deliuer the same in part, and referre the rest to be seene vpon the record: Only naming the Officers and Leaders in the same field either The names of great persons either slaine or taken prisoners. slaine, or taken Prisoners, by this famous King Henry in this his triumphant and fortunate day. Charles D'Albert, high Constable of France. Geoffrey Bouciqualt Mar∣shall of France. Iaques Chastillon Admi∣rall. Guiscard Daulphin of Ar∣ragon great Master of the Kings Horse. Edward Duke of Barre. Anthoine D. of Brabant. Duke Alencon. Count Neuers. Count de Marle. Count de Vaudemont. Count de Blaumont. Count de Grandpre. Count de Roussie. Count de Farquembourg. Lewis de Bourbon. Enguerrant de Monstrelet. Sig. de Preaux. Robert de Barre. Iehan de Barre. Great Lords. Sig. de Croy. Sig. de Helly. Sig. de Auxi. Sig. de Brime . Engu . Sig. de Poix. Sig. de Louroy. Sig. de Raineualt. Sig. de Longue all. Sig. de I che. Sig. de Neuf ille. Sig. de Dampierre. Sig. de More ill. Vidame de Amiens. Mes. Alain. Mes. de Saueses. Mes. de Mocont. Mes. de Poix. Mes. de Bethune. To bee short, Iehan Tillet saith, that there were ten Iehan Tillet. Bertrand de Argentre. La. Mer: Nichol. Giles. Legend. Fland. Chron. Fran. 3. vol. thousand slaine, and almost as many more taken: and most of their owne writers account the successe of this Battell to be with the slaughter of foure thou∣sand Princes, Nobles, Knights, and Esquires: but the history of Normandy accounted eight thousand to be slaine of that ranke, whereof an hundred and twenty bare Banners: among whom died foure Dukes, nine Earles, one Of S . The number of Dukes, Earles, &c. slaine. Archbishop, and ten thousand common souldiers, as the Heraulds relation in that behalfe hath reported. (27) Prisoners of account taken in this field, were Charles the Duke of Orleance, and Iohn Duke of Denis S g. Bourbon, Arthur Earle of Richmond, extremely wounded and left for dead, as he lay gasping among the slaine, was by the English recouered and reteined their Prisoner. Louis de Bourbon Cont de Vendosme was Bertrand de Arg re in hist: Bret. there taken Captiue, was Charles Earle of Eu, being carried into England, where hee remained prisoner twenty three yeres. Others of great account were like∣wise Iehan Tillet. taken and put to ransome, as Edward de Rouen, Oliuer de la Feild, and Iehan Giffart, with these and ma∣ny Alain Bouchart Annal. de Bret. more the next day King Henry marched to Callais, leauing the French to search for their wounded, that in ditches and bushes had made their heauy beds. Will. Parredin. Annal. de Bur∣goin. In commiseration whereof, the Counte Charrolois ex∣tre me pensiue for the losse of his vncles, and other his friends, in charity came to the field; and caused the dead to be buried, the charge whereof he com∣mitted to the Abbot of Roussiannille and the Bailiffe History of Nor∣mandy. of Ayre, who inclosed a peece of ground with a deep ditch of two hundred and fifty yards square, fensing it with an hedge of thornes against the rauenings of dogs and wolues. Wherein were interred fiue hundred and eight thousand Christian carcases, in 5800. slaine French buried in one plat of ground. regard whereof it was sanctified by the Bishop of Es∣guines, and made a Churchyard. (28) The Duke of Britaine with his forces was come to Amiens within two daies march of Azin∣court Alain Bouchart Annal. de Bret. to ayde King Charles, but the French vpon a conceiued assurance of victory, would not stay his comming: who now hearing of the glorious day obtained by the English, dismissed his troupes, and retired to his owne Countrey, not meaning any more to intermeddle in the warre betweene England and History of Nor∣mandy. France. Now King Henry vpon Saturday the 26. of October, being the next day after Battell, tooke his march towards Callis, but in passing the field wherein they had fought, he caused search for all the English, which he caused to be enterred according to their e∣states. Stowes Annal. But the Bodies of his slaine cosen the Duke of Yorke, and of Michael de la Poole Earle of Suffolke, hee tooke away thence, carrying them both into Eng∣land, and so passing to Guisnes with his Prisoners hee entred Callis, whither, those left at Harflew resorted, Grafton. to pay their ransomes to them assigned. (29) His host now refreshed and courage aug∣mented, it was disputable in Counsell, whether the King should returne againe into France, to pursue his enterprize already begun, or else to imbark for Eng∣land. But the time of yeere spent, the winter wet, and the field Camps very much subiect to fluxes, wherewith many of his souldiers were as yet infe∣cted, and more vnhealed of their wounds; it was thought fittest to make for England, and the sooner, for that victuals became somewhat scarce in Callis. These things premised, King Henry vpon the six∣teenth day of Nouember spread sayles for England, King Henry re∣turneth into England. and in the passage was met with such stormes, that his French Prisoners were in as great feare, as they He and his com∣pany in danger at S . Tho. Wal. had beene in danger at the Battell of Azincourt: but arriued at Douer and all dangers past, vpon the three and twenty of Nouember in triumph wise hee made his entrance into London, foure hundred Citizens The King is re∣ceiued o London with great state. riding before him in red and white hoodes, the gates and streetes weere garnished with Pageants, and the Caxton Chron. Conduits plenteously powring forth sweet wines. The religious men met him with procession, and foureteene mitred Bishops attended his approach vnto Saint Paules, where, out of the Censers the All sorts both Clergy and Laity shew their affe∣ction to the King, and he to God. sweet Odours filled the Church, and the Quier chan∣ted Anthems cunninglie set by note: in all which the honour was ascribed only vnto God, the King so commanding it. And so farre was he from the vaine ostentation of men, that he would not admit his bro∣ken Crowne, nor bruised armour to be borne before him in shew, which are the vsuall Ensignes of war∣like triumphes. The Citie presented him a thousand pound in gold, two golden basons worth fiue hun∣dred Stowes Annal. pound more, which were receiued with all Princely thankes. (30) And now to doe the last office of a souldi∣er for those two noblemen slaine at Azincourt, hee willed the body of the Duke of Yorke to be interred The Duke of Yorke interred at Fotheringhay. The Earle of Suf∣folke at Ewhelme. in his Colledge at Fotheringhay in Northamptonshire, and the Earle of Suffolke at Ewhelme in Oxfordshire, commanding most of his Bishops and Abbots to celebrate the Exequies in London, whereunto like∣wise resorted his vncle Dorset the Gouernor of Har∣flew, whom for his good seruice done, he created Duke of Exceter, and gaue him a thousand pound by yeere out of his owne Exchecquer: but in his ab∣sence some attempts were made by the French a∣gainst the said Towne, whereby he was enforced the sooner to returne. (31) The calamities of these times by the stir∣red Gonzales de ylles∣ in la Hist. Pontif. schismes of the Church, and these bloody warres among Christian Princes, Sigismund the Emperour a man of great wisdome and integrity, much lamen∣ted at the Councell of Constance, & as another Con∣stantine sollicited the three stiffe stirring Popes vnto vnity, but failing of that purpose, from those farre parts he trauelled into France, and thence into Eng∣land: seeking to make peace betwixt these two We∣sterne May 7. The Emperour Sigismund com∣meth into Eng∣land. Monarchs, the better to withstand the com∣mon knowne enemie of Christendome the Turke. King Charles he sollicited first, finding him in words very forward, with many faire shewes to imbrace the motion, whereupon taking with him the Archbishop of Rheims as Ambassadour from the French King, came vnto Callis, where he was most honourably entertained by the Earle of Warwicke, Deputy of the Towne, and diuers other Lords sent thither by King Henry to attend him, as also thirtie of his tallest shippes to waft him to Douer gallantlie rigged and manned with a noble traine. The Duke of Glocester accompanied with many of the nobility, was appointed to receiue him at Douer, where they attended his comming. (32) The Emperour arriued, and ready to take land, Glocester and the other Lords with their drawne swords entred the water, and thus spake to the Em∣perour, that if his Imperiall Maiesty intended to en∣ter as their Kings friend and a mediator for peace, The sterne man∣ner of entertai∣ning the Empe∣rour at his lan∣ding. they would receiue him with all willingnes accor∣dinglie, but if as an Emperour to claime any autho∣rity in England, which was a free Kingdome, they were there ready to resist and impeach his entrance. Which rough demand being most mildely answered by Sigismund, he had present accesse, and by them was attended towards London. VVell liked of by the Emperor. (33) This worthy Emperour, King Henry greatly respected, as well for his owne worths, and the ami∣ty held euer with the house of Beame; as also for that he had married Rich. Grafton Barbara the daughter of the Earle of Zilie the Kings Cosen Germane remoued. His entertainement was Princely, and Paul Aemil. charges alto∣gether borne by King Henrie, who the more to ho∣nor him at Windsore, solemnly enstalled him Knight of the Order of Saint George or Gartar, with a most sumptuous fest purposely prepared, at which the Em∣perour sate in his Collar and Robes; but not fore∣slowing the cause for which he came, hee instantlie vrged the peace for France, wherein he was gentlie heard by the English King, but vpon new displea∣sures The King willing∣lie heareth the Emperour for a peace. for some losse of men in the Territories of Roane, the motion at that time was dasht, and would not proceed, least (as King Henrie alleaged) the French should suppose that a small losse had weakened his spirits: yet the Emperour continuing his intercessi∣on Enguerrant de M let. Vpon an vnexpe∣cted assault by the French the King st eth fur∣ther talke of peace. A. D. 1415. March 14. for peace, had brought it to that passe by his pi∣thy perswasions, as had not the French at that verie instant besieged Harflew both by Sea and land, it had beene effected. (34) For not long before Thomas Earle of Dor∣set, hauing made a roade into the County of Caux, was set vpon by the Earle of Armigrace Constable of France with other strong men at Armes neere vn∣to Vademont, who so distressed the English, that Dorset tooke into a Garden for defence, and hauing had priuate conference there with the Constable, early before day, departed with the losse of Nichol. Gilles Alain Chartier Secretarie an Roy Charles 7. foure hun∣dred men. Armigrace puffed vp by his got victory, with his French powers followed the English in a hasty march toward Harflew, and vpon the sands in∣tercepted * Hist. of Norman∣die saith 800. their passage, where betwixt them a cruell conflict was perfourmed, with the ouerthrow of the French, and flight of the Constable, who retired to Monstreuillier for safety. (35) This his vnlucky attempt he tooke greatly Rich. Grafton. to heart, and therefore purposing to repurchase again his honor, he determined for Harflew, where hee set Harflew besieged by the French both by land and sea. downe his land siege, before the English Garrison within, were well aware, when also the Vicount Nar∣bon Vice-Admiral of France, with a Fleete of tall ships entred the hauen, so that the Towne was begirt on euery side as we haue said. King Henry hearing of these newes, called home his Ambassadours, which Enguerrant de Monstrel. were the Bishop of Norwich and Sir Thomas Erping∣ham in commission then at Beauuois, and in confe∣rence for a Peace; and the Emperour well perceiuing that the French plaid vpon aduantage, and that King Henry was not of temper to turne edge at their The Emperour out of hope to make attone∣ment for France entreth league with England. strokes, saw it vaine to prosecute the peace for France further, and therefore sought to enter league with the English himselfe, vnto the which King Henry was so willing as he confirmed the same vpon these Arti∣cles following. (36) That the said Emperour & King, their heires & successours Titus Liui. should be friends each to other as Al∣lies and Confederates against all manner of persons of what estate or degree soeuer, the Church of Rome, and the Pope for the time being only excepted (for he was the Master Bee that then lead the swarme.) The Pope might not be opposed. (37) That neither themselues, their heires nor successours should be present in Counsell or other place, where either of them, their heires or succes∣sours might sustaine dammage in lands, goods, ho∣nours, states or persons: and that if any of them should vnderstand of losse or hinderance to be like to fall or happen to the others, they should impeach the same, or if that lay not in their powers, they should aduertise the others thereof with all conueni∣ent speed. That either of them, their heires and successours should aduance the others honour and commodity without any fraud or deceit. That nei∣ther of them, nor their heires or successours should permit their subiects to leauy warres against the o∣thers. That it should be lawfull and free for each of their subiects to passe into the others Countrey, and there to remaine and make merchandize either by Sea or land, paying the Customes, gables, and du∣ties due and accustomed according to the Laws, and Ordinances of the places, and Countreys where they should traffique. That neither of the saide Princes, nor their heires, nor successors should re∣ceiue any rebell, banished man, or traitour of the others willingly, but should cause euerie such person to auoid out of their Countreys, Realmes, domini∣ons, and Iurisdictions. That neither of the said Princes, their heires nor Successors should begin any other warres against any other person, other then such as they had warres with at that present without the consent of the other his Confederate, except in defence of themselues, their Countreys and subiects in case of inuasion made vpon them. That it should be lawfull for the King of England to prosecute his warres against France for the recouery of his right, as should seeme to him expedient, and for the Empe∣rour, for the recouery of any part of his right retei∣ned by the French. Lastly, that either of them should assist other in recouery and Conquest of their rights, lands and dominions, withheld and kept from them, by him that calleth himselfe King of France, and o∣thers, the Princes and Barons of France. These conclusions and agreements bare date the 19 of October, in Anno 1416. In the meane while the French that had felt the hard hand of the English, and seeing that Henry had with-drawne his commissio∣ners for peace, King Charles made a league with the states of Genoua, requiring their aide against this dan∣gerous enemie, who supplyde him with sixe hun∣dred Ag ino Giusti∣ ano V scouo. di. . Crosse-bowes, and eight tall ships of warre, and as many gallies with munition and victuals. These wafting the Seas with many brauadoes, King Henrie in person meant to haue mette with himselfe, but the Emperour disswading his purpose, the charge of that Enterprize was committed to Iohn Duke of Bed∣ford, accompanyde with the Earles of March, Mar∣shall, Paul. Aemil Alain Char ey. Secretarie. Oxford, Warwicke, Huntington, Arundell, Deuon∣shire, and Salisbury; these falling vpon the County of Narbon, a fierce encounter was begun, and long fought, till at length the victory fell to the English, so that the French Nauy was most of them battered, French Nauy ou rthrowne. suncke and taken; amongst others three great Car∣ricks of the Genoaes were sent to England, with whom the bastard of Burbon was brought away Prisoner; & the Viscount de Narbon, Le Sire de Montaine, and Le Sire de Berrar chased into Britaine. This victorie History of Nor∣mandy. La Mer des Histo∣ries. obtained, the Duke past forward to the Towne of Harflew, and refreshed it with victuals without anie impeachment; for Armagnac the Constable hearing how his Consorts had kept tune on the Seas, thought it not best to set to their note, least his meane would not be heard, the base of this musicke soun∣ding too deepe, and therefore he put vp his pipes, and got him to Paris. This seruice perfourmed was so commended by the Emperour, as he openly The Emperour applaudeth the city of Eng∣land. said, that Realme was happy that had such a King, but the King more happie that had such Subiects, and euer after held Bedford in a most speciall ac∣count. (38) His affaires now finished, and Princely en∣tertainements He prepareth for Germany. thankefully receiued, he prepares for his returne toward Germany, and King Henry to doe him the more honour would needs accompany him to his Towne of Callis, whither after their arriuals the Duke of Burgogne repayred to doe his homage vnto the Emperour, which Burgogne some moneths Denis Sauage Chro. de Fland. before, had concluded a peace with the Earle of Warwick in the behalfe of King Henry, for the Coun∣ties of Flaunders and Arthois. Henry therefore in hope of a further friendship with him, sent his bro∣ther the Duke of Glocester, and the Earle of March vnto Saint Omers to lye hostages with the County Charrolois, for Burgognes passage and safe returne, with whom hee sent Warwicke to conduct him to Callis. (39) His entertainement was honourable both by the Emperour and King, which as acceptably he The Duke of Burgundy doth homage to the Emperour and taketh a truce with K. Henrie. receiued, and vnto Sigismund performed his homage, and with Henry renewed the truce for the time of two yeres, both which were so distastiue to the French stomackes, that the Emperour is taxed, he came not with an intent to worke the good of France, but ra∣ther Ioh. Serres in Charles 6. to augment her miseries by animating Burgundy to bandy against Orleance: and that King Henry was puft with an humor of pride, his affaires so pros∣perous against a weake King. But this busines en∣ded, Burgundy returned to Graueling, Henry into Eng∣land, and the Emperour toward Germany, being was ted into the low Countreys with the Kings Fleet 13. That none of the Captaines nor Souldiers, nor That no person should forsake the Towne, for being true to K. Henry they should be safe. any Burgesse should forsake the Towne, vntill the se∣cond of Ianuary next: and his maiesty of his grace and mercy, was pleased that all such as would remain in Fallais, should remain there in safety both in body and goods, so as they would bee true subiects vnto him. 14. That none of the defendants of the Ca∣stell Neither person nor goods of the Castels to be re ceiued into the Towne. During the truce no assault to bee made on the Towne. 12. Knights and Esquires to bee hostage to King Henry. should be receiued into the Towne, nor their goods secretly kept by the Inhabitants vnder any pretence or Colour whatsoeuer. 15. That during the treaty no assault or offence should be offered by the kings army, to the Towne or to the Inhabitants, so as they do not ayde, assist or relieue the defendants in the Castells. 1. That for the true perfourmance of the Articles twelue knights & Squires should be deli∣uered hostage to the Kinge, and to be set at liberty when the Couenants aboue mentioned were fulfilled These things concluded and subscribed with their A. D. 1417. names and seales, the 20. of December; vpon the se∣cond of Ianuary no succours appearing, the towne of Fallais yeelded to the King. Fallais was acordingly deliuered, but the Castle stand∣ing obstinate, the king was as diligent, till the defen∣dants failing in their spirits, the first day of February demanded a Parley. Wherunto Henry consented making Clarence his brother his sole Commissioner. The Articles a∣greed vpon. The Articles acorded for the most part were as the former, whereto were added these which ensue. That if they were not succoured by the French pow∣er, to surrender. (51) That vpon the 16. of the said moneth of February, if the King in person, the Dolphin his sonne, or the Earle of Armagnac Constable of France, That they should trust to the kings royall promise, Geffrey Chasteaux excepted. did not with force raise the siege, then Sir Oliuer de Mauny Knight, gouernour of the said Castell, should render the same vnto King Henry. 2 That the said Gouernour and all other within the Castell should at the day assigned submit themselues to the King, and remaine his prisoners, trusting to his Maiesties royall promise not to receiue offence either in life or goods: (Geoffrey Chasteaux only excepted) who was That the gouer∣nour should re∣paire the wals. left simply to the Kings mercy. 3. That after the rendering of the said Castell Sir Oliuer de Mauny the Gouernour, should at his owne charges repaire all the breaches and ruines made in the wals during the siege, and leaue it in the same sort as it was before 8. Gentlemen to be hostages. The Castell re∣paired, the Go∣uernour should▪ be et at liberty. the same was besieged. 4. That for the perfour∣mance of these Articles, eight Gentlemen should re∣maine Hostages with the King. 5. That when the Castell was prepared, Sir Oliuer Mauny, and al his Company should be set at liberty, and vntill then to remaine the Kings Prisoners, Geoffrey de Chasteaux aboue mentioned only excepted. These agree∣ments concluded, the Indenture subscribed, and king Henries seale of Armes thereunto fixed, at the Febru. 16. pre∣fixed day according to these Articles the Castell of Fallais was rendered vnto him: which done, he diui∣ded his Army into manie parts, vnde the seuerall conducts of the Dukes of Clarence, and Gloucester, and The City of Roane besieged. the Earle of Warwicke: who wan diuers Castels, himselfe the while marching to besiege Rouen, where he set downe his siege, and began the assault in a fu∣rious manner: the defendants as obstinately bent to hold him out: so that to winne the Towne by force, Henry found it very difficult, aswell for the Polyd. Verg. strength of Bulwarkes and Ramparts as for the num∣ber of hands within it, to make resistance, and therefore to reduce them by famine was his only de∣signe. Enguerrant de Monstre . (52) For Burgogne from King Charles had sent many worthy Captaines with a thousand selected 15000. Citizens well trained within Roane. Souldiers to defend the City, and within it besides were fifteene thousand Citizens well trained and furnished: and the Towne stored with victuals for ten months continuance; notwithstanding K. Henry quartered about the Towne, and for his safety The Riuer Seine blockt vp with I∣ron-Chaines. cast vp a Trench betwixt the wals and his men: the Riuer Seine hee blockt vp with three Iron-Chaines, one of them layd two foote aboue water, another with the leuell, and the third two foote vnder the water, to forbidde all reliefe vnto the Citty by Boats. (53) With the English, sixteene hundred Irish Kernes were enrolled, from the Prior of Kilmain∣ham, Caxton. Chron. able men, but almost naked, their armes, were targets, darts, and swordes, their horses little, and bare no saddle, yet very nimble, on which vpon euery ad∣uantage they plaied with the French, in spoiling the Country, rifeling the houses, and carrying away chil∣dren, with their baggage, vpon their Cowes backes. Denis Sauage. Roane besieged sixe monthes. Thus from Iune vnto December the siege had con∣tinued, and now victuals failing, and the Towne in distresse, the Rouennois sent foure gentlemen, and as manie Burgesses, vnto King Charles, and the Burgogne 50000. quite fa∣mished and 12000. almost starued put out of the Towne. (then at Beauuois) to signifie their miseries; fifty thou∣sand already famished with hunger, and twelue thou∣sand staruelings put out of the Towne, but not suffe∣red to passe by the English, died by multitudes in the ditches, whose vnburied Carcases did infect the Towne with contagious diseases, so that without pre∣sent reliefe they must be inforced to render. (54) Ayde was promised, and earnestly expe∣cted, The Lady Kathe∣rines picture sent to King Henry to moue him to pit∣ty Roane. but in steed of supplies, the Bishop of Beauuois accompanied with others, and the Cardinall or Vr∣sins sent from Pope Martin, were dispatched to King Henry, to entreat a peace; for the better accomplish∣ing thereof, they brought with them the picture of the Lady Catherine, according to life, which King Iohn Serres Henry well liked, yea and (as Serres saith) fell in loue with: but demanding a hundred thousand Crownes with the Dutchies of Normandy, Aquitain, Aniou, and other Seignories for her dowry, nothing was conclu∣ded Denis Sauage. or done. (55) And now the Rouennois helpeles of succour, Enguerrant. and despairing of peace, resolued to make a braue sally vpon the kings quarter: to performe which reso∣lution, 10000. chosen mē with their leaders issued out of the Towne, the vantgard (which was 2000.) be∣ing Ten thousand of Roane sally forth vpon King Henry, and are ouer∣throwne. past and in fight, by misfortune the draw-bridge with ouer-weight of men brake, manie were drow∣ned, slaine and hurt: neither was there any more pas∣sage that way, to releeue their followers engaged in fight with the English; whereupon they made hast to the other Gates: but before they could come to giue ayde, the vantgard was broken, and most of them slaine, and taken Prisoners. Vpon this disa∣stre the souldiers within mutined against Guy de Boutellier their General, murmuring that he had con∣triued the breaking of the bridge. (56) In these distastures King Charles returning towards Paris, sent the besieged word to make what King Charles sen∣deth no succour. shift they could, which vnexpected message stroake a sad feare into the miserable defendants hearts, who weake in men and victuals, knew no way to subsist, and thereupon in Counsell concluded to send vnto Henry, which presently they did. For whose enter∣tainement, he caused two tents to be set vp at Port S. Hillarie. Their Commissioners were two gentle∣men, The Rouennois desire a parley. two Clergie-men, and two Burgesses of the Towne. Commissioners for the King were the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Earle of Warwick: the demands of the Rouennois were many, but their answers were short; that no conditions would be ac∣cepted, but simply yeelding to the kings mercy; whereupon the conference brake vp, and these retur∣ned They returne vnsatisfied. into the Towne, bred sundry distractions, some crying to yeeld, and other some crying to die like men, but Henrie desirous to be Master of the Towne, and fearing it would be fired by themselues, if he wan it by force, made the Archbishop of Canterbury his Instrument, whose vocation was fit for it, to call again The Articles of the composition of Roane. Denis Sauage. Chron. de Flaun∣ders. King Henry re∣quireth 356000. Crownes. Enguerrant de Monstrel. Two principall persons to bee left to his mercy. All to sweare fealty to King Henry. the Commissioners, and againe fell into treaty of Composition, which lastly was agreed, vpon these Articles as follow. 1. That the Burgesses should giue vnto Henry towards his expense in the siege, three hundred fifty sixe thousand Crownes of gold. 2. That Robert Li et vicar generall to the Archbi∣shop of Rouen, Iehan Iourdan who commanded the Canoniers, and Alen Blanchart Captaine of the Common people, should be left to his mercy with∣out condition. 3. That all the people should sweare faith and loyalty to Henry and his Successors. 4 That Henrie should protect and defend them against all That their pri∣uiledges should be confirmed to them. That who so would, might de∣part, but their goods should bee forfeit. The souldiers to resigne vp their armes and de part, promising a twelue months truce. men, and confirme vnto them their priuiledges, fran∣chises, and liberties, which they had enioyed euer since the time of Saint Lewis king of France. 5. That all such as had desire to leaue the Towne, might free∣ly depart, with his garments vpon his backe only, and his goods to be confiscated vnto King Henry. 6. That the souldiers should bring all their Armes to a place assigned, and should depart out of the Towne vnar∣med with a Cudgell in their hands, first taking their Oath not to beare Armes against Henry; for a twelue month next ensuing. (57) This agreement was concluded the 16 of Iune Anno 1418. when as the hungry Citizens in multitudes came to the English Campe to buy victu The hungry Ci∣tizens plentifully relieued from Henries campe. als, which so abounded with Prouisions, as a fat mut∣ton was sould for sixe souses of Paris money. Vp∣on the next day following, Henrie triumphantlie A fat mutton sould for 6. sou∣ses. King Henry roi∣ally entreth the City. made his entry into Rouen; the Ecclesiasticks of the Towne, in their miters and vestures, with their re∣liques, singing of Hymnes, conducted him to the Cathedrall Church, where before the high Altar, vpon his knees, he gaue thankes to God for the Conquest of this Towne, which had remained two hundred and fifteene yeeres in the possession of the Rouen 15. yeeres before the now winning of it, was wonne by K. Philip from King Iohn of England. French, euen from the time when Philip King of France wan it from king Iohn of England. The day following, Alain Blanchart the Captaine of the com∣mon people was beheaded, Robert Linet, and Iehan Iourdan, put to their high ransomes, the French Gar∣risons pillaged, vnarmed, and put out of the Towne, but safely were conducted ouer Saint Georges- bridge to goe whither they would. Guy de Boutellier, who was Captaine generall of Rouen, became King Hen∣ries leigeman, vnto whom he gaue all his lands, and a charge vnder the Duke of Gloucester. Immediately after the rendering of Rouen, sundry other places of Many Townes yeeld after the sorrender of Rouen. note yeelded themselues, as Caudebec, Monstreuillier, Diepe, Feschamp, Arques, Neufchastell, Deincourt, Eu, Moncheaux, Vernon, Mante, Gorney, Harflewr, Ponteur∣de-Mer, Mollineaux, le Treict, Tancaruille, Abre∣chier, Mauleurier, Valemont, Neufuille, Bellaucombre, Fontaines, Le Boure, Preaux, Nougonder-uille, Logem∣pree, Saint Germain, Sur Cuylly, Baudemont, Bray, Ville∣terre, Charles-Maisnill, Les Boules Guillen court, Fani∣fontaines, Le Bec{que} Crepin, Backeuille, and diuers other places wherein Henry placed his Garrisons. France generally troubled, and trembling at the losse especi∣ally of Rouen, Henrie ready to pierce forward, and Charles declining through his infirmities encreasing; the Duke of Burgogne (who bare all the sway vnder Burgogne ende∣uoreth to make a peace betweene Charles and Henrie. that infirme King, and therefore much hated by the Daulphin, whose reuenge he feared,) much doubting Henries rising fortunes, held it best to vphold his own greatnes, by mediating a peace betwixt the two Kings. For which end he sent his Ambassadours to Polyd. Verg. Henry, praying personall Conference; to which he assented and assigned the place, which was at Melun, where in a field well trenched, and ramparted with The place of treaty was at Melun. strong Gates, two pauillions were arreard, the one for the Kings to repose themselues in, and the other for their counsell to consult in. (58) Charles, Isabell, Burgogne, and Katherine, the Count Saint Paul, with a thousand horse garding them The French states came first. thether, came first. King Henry with his brothers of Clarence and Gloucester, attended vpon with a thou∣sand horse, held the appointment; and now met, the two Kings embraced each others; Henry kissed I∣sabell Henry meeteth with a thousand horse. and Katherine, who indeed became a precious pearle in his eye: Burgogne a little bending his knee, did his reuerence to Henry, who tooke him in his Armes: and the two nations though mortall ene∣mies, demeaned themselues so ciuilly, as no cause of quarrell was offered on either side, much conference passed, but nothing concluded; Henries demands Their followers on both parts though enemies demeane them∣selues ciuilly. seeming to the French to bee so vnreasonable. The treaty thus dissolued, and all ready to depart, King Henry not well pleased, spake thus vnto Burgogne, Cosen, I may not wel digest this refusall, but be you assu∣red, that either I will haue your Kings daughter, and all King Henry dis plea d at their retu all. The Dukes reply. my demands, or else I will banish both you, and the cut of France. You speake your pleasure said the Duke, but before you shall thrust the King, them, and me, out of the Realme, you will be weary of the enterprize. (59) The treaty thus broke, and danger nothing lesse, the Burgundian altogether French; and in heart Burgogne sideth with the ul∣phin who after ward slew him. no friend to the English, reconciled himselfe vnto the Daulphin, which deed was soone after the cause of his owne death; and Henry displeased with this combi∣nation, quickened his thoughts (full of reuenge) to prosecute the warre more sharpely then heretofore: the first enterprize he made, was vpon Ponthois, vnto Ponthois besie∣ged. which Towne the last day of Iulie hee sent three thousand foote, which before the breake of day, and not discouered by the Centinels, set their Ladders to the Wals, mounted vp, crying Saint George, and so opening a Port let in their Companions. The Sig∣neur Enguerrant de Monstrelet. de L' Isle-Adam Marshall of France and Gouer∣nour of the Towne, affrighted at the surprize, fled out at another Port towards Paris, after whose exam ple aboue ten thousand Inhabitants did the like, so as the English without resistance were Masters of the Towne, where in great riches fell to the souldiers The souldiers got great riches in the Towne. shares. When King Charles at Paris heard of the losse of Ponthois, in great feare with his wife, daugh∣ter, Burgundy, and many noblemen, to be further from the fire so neere at hand, went vnto Troyes in-Champagne, leauing Paris vnder the Gouernment of King Charles vpon the lo e o Po th flieth from Paris. the Count Saint Paul, and Eustach de Lactre Chancel∣lor of France, whilst Henry went forward with his in∣tended enterprizes. (60) For his brother of Clarence by three weekes siedge wan the Castell Gizors by composition, the Enguerrant de Monstrelet. Earle of Huntington sacked Preaux, burnt Bretuiell, Clermont, and the Castell of endueil, and Henry him∣selfe besieged the Castell of Guillart, and Rochguien, two of the strongest holds in Normandy; which vp∣pon Guillart and Rochguien two of the best Forts in Normandy. compositions were surrendred, and further pre∣uailed more then the French wished. For the Daul∣phin, the only man that stood for the publike defence of France, was miserably poore, and for want of pay could make no great shew of followers in the field, whose chiefe Counsellor was the Constable Armag∣nac an old craftie foxe, that had euer sided with Orle∣ance A cunning plot of the Constable Armagnac. against the Burgundian. And now fearing least his owne esteeme should be lessened, or that Burgun∣dy should be the Archite to crosse him the wise Achi∣tophel, 2. Sam. 17. or rather indeed thrust forward by destinie to be the scourge and fall of France, he counselled the young Daulphin to seize vpon his mothers money, iewels and plate, for his further supply to the pub∣like Queene Isabell robd of her Iew∣els and plate. vse, (which immediately he did) to aduance the estate: but Queen Isabell impatient of these wrongs receiued, in a womanish splene studies the reuenge, wholy neglecting the common cause, which gaue the English surer footing in France: but the Daulphin to make good what he had done, leades the King in The Daulphin drawes the King to suspect Queen Isabell. iealousy that the Queenes designes were dangerous, and altogether set for the alienation of the Crowne, which he weake man, no sooner heard then belee∣ued, being euer ready to take her at the worst and ne∣uer ouergone in her loue at the best. (61) These sparkes of sedition thus blowne in the Court, suspitions increasing, and maligners A ls of Bur∣gundy. still working, Queene Isabell with her sister in law, the Dutchesse of Bauier were sent prisoners to Blois, and from thence to Eours where they were kept with Queene Isabel and her sister imprisoned. strait guard, three Gentlemen in Commission to take care of their safeties: till then her fauours had gone with Orleance, and with him had contested euer a∣gainst Burgogne, but now to quit her imprisonment, shee reconciled her selfe vnto him, and sollicited his Shee solliciteth Burgogne for her deliuerance. assistance for her deliuerance. Burgogne well percei∣uing how much it would aduance his part, to draw the Queene to be of his faction, brake vp his siege then laid before Corbeill, and with certaine choise troopes repaired toward Trours, from whence im∣mediately Burgogne sendeth to the Queene. he sent the Queene word of his comming. Shee faining deuotion to the Abbey of Marmonstier seated somewhat without the Towne, made it known to her keepers, and they not daring to contradict so great a Princesse, mistrusting no danger, attended her thitherward with a competent guard as they suppo∣sed, where Fosseux and Vergie two especiall men in the Dukes trust, were laid in the Ambush neere vnto The manner of her escape from her keepers. the Abbey, and hauing notice the Queene was come to Church, came to salute her, and to signifie that the Burgogne was in person to attend her seruice. Her keepers conceiuing their seconds were not farre off, as men dismayed, told the Queen of some fear, & that an enemie was neere at hand; whereunto shee answe∣red, I am not ignorant who they are, and thereupon commanded to apprehend those her keepers; her li∣bertie thus got shee became wholy for Burgogne, and Shee is made Regent of France. by his meanes was made the Regent of France, and her picture stamped vpon the Seale of that State. (42) By birth shee was a Germane, and daugh∣ter to Stephen Duke of Bauier, of an imperious spirit, and vnreconcileable enuie, not ouermuch beloued of her husband, and (as the nature of most women are) not ouermuch fauouring his fauorites, whose fe∣mall authority and hatred against her owne sonne Daulphin Charles, sore bruised the Crowne, which her weake husband ware: his foregone infirmities and 10. Serres The causes why the French were the easier con∣quered by king Henry. her new sprung Regency, were now as two flud∣gates set open to let in the deluge of France, hers is to be spoken of in the intercourse of the English; his, manie times hath beene, but not made knowne how it came: therefore a while in that subiect, before we passe forward in this place, let vs reade what others haue writ. (43) This Charles the sixt, and sicke-braind King of France was the sonne of King Charles surnamed the Eccles. 2. 19. wise, who with Salomon his wiser might haue deman∣ded this question; who can tell whether his sonne shalbe a wiseman or a foole? for the flower of his youth and commendable dispositions of his middle age pro∣mised great hopes of a valiant, moderate and most happie Prince, only inclined to choller and reuenge, as by the occasion of his lunacy is easilie seene, which chanced on this manner. (44) Peter Craon a Courtier, his minion, and an in∣ward The occasion of King Charles di∣stemper. fauorite of the Duke of Orleance the Kings brother, blabbed out some secrecy of the said Dukes amorous passions vpon a wanton Lady, vnto his Dut∣chesse Valentine; who but lately married, and so soon deceiued of bed, took the wrong no lesse then it was, nor letted shee (as who can let a woman to speake) to Orleance newly married is in loue with another. tell him his faults on both sides of his head, the Duke could not hide what shee too well knew, and therefore sought to satisfie her with complements of kind words, but the Curtaine-sermons nightly en∣larged vpon the same text, made him many times to lie awake with little deuotion (God wot) to heare, and often to rise when hee would faine haue slept, which caused him lastly to complaine to the King that Craon had, and would betray their ouermuch trust. The cause no more, but yet too much against a Prince, Craon with all disgrace was discharged the C dismist the Court for telling the Dutchesse of the incontinen∣cy of her hus∣band. Court, who not able to brooke such an open indig∣nity, assaulted Cliston the Constable in a murthering manner, as the only man (as he thought) that wrought his disgrace, and escaping Paris, fled into Britaigne whose Duke was his kinseman, and an enemy to the Constable. (45) King Charles transported with choller of this double offence, mindes to draw Craon by force King Charles pur∣sueth Craon into Britaine. out of Britaine to iustifie himselfe, whom the Coun∣cell had declared guilty of high Treason, and enemie to the Crowne of France, and resolues in person to enterinto Britaine: forthwith the expedition for men and manner of proceeding made Charles to loose both meate and sleepe, so as the vexation of minde and distemperature of body, carried apparant shewes in his face: in so much that the Dukes of Berry and Burgogne mistrusting the worst, counselled that his iourney might be staid; his Physitians disswade him in regard of his health, the summer extreme hot, and Notwithstan∣ding his sicknes he continueth his iourney. his blood as then ouer subiect to dangerous feuers. New deuises were wrought to stay him at home, gi∣uing it forth that Craon was fled Britaigne, and in Ar∣ragon was imprisoned by the Queene. All this not∣withstanding, needes would he forward, so forward is man when his fate will so haue it. (46) He departed Meaux in Iulie: the yere ve∣ry hot, his head couered with a great Cap of scarlet, his body wrapped in a thicke veluet Ierkin warme e∣nough for winter, his mind distempered with choller, griefe, and despite, and his body wearied with wat∣ching, distasture, and want of rest. Thus entring the forrest of Meaux about noone-tide, a man bare-hea∣ded, Charles in the forrest, at Noon∣day seeth an ap∣parition. and bare legged attired in a Coat of white rugge, stepped sodainely forth from betwixt two trees, and caught hold of his bridle, staid his horse, saying; King ride no further but returne backe, for thou art betraied. Charles whose spirits were otherwise dulled, and his blood greatly distempered, was amazed at the voice: which seene, his seruants ranne to this man, and with blowes forced him to leaue the reines of the horse: and so without any further search the man vanished away. (47) The troopes of his nobles diuided because of the dust, King Charles was followed by the Pages of his Chamber, who ouercharged with heat and di∣stemperature, tooke no great paines to guide their horse, so that thronging together, he which bore the Kings Lance, let it fal vpon him, who had on his head His followers thronging con∣fusedly to helpe doe distemper him the more. the Kings helmet, and in the falling made a clatte∣ring noise. The King much musing vpon the words spoken, and now withall hearing this vnexpected noise, was from a pensiue melancholy suddainely strucke into a raging Lunacy, supposing himselfe to be betraied indeed: and transported with this frensie he drawes his sword, and made towards his Pages with a maine crie: his brother Orleance not knowing the cause, hasted among them, whom Charles like∣wise pursued, and with the like rage ranne at his vn∣cle of Burgogne, thus spending himselfe and his horse out of breath, all incompassed the still raging man, He runneth di∣stractiuely at euery one with his sword. tooke from him his sword, disrobed him for heate, and cheered him with flatterings and faire spoken words, his brother and vncles saluted him, but hee knowes them not, sits mute, sighing and panting, and with troubled amazement moues both body and head, so that all signes of Phrensie appeared in this poore Prince, and the eminent misery that was to fall vpon France very apparant to the inseeing Sta∣tists: but now to proceed. (48) Iohn Duke of Burgogne ill disgesting the threats that King Henry had giuen, and ioined in league with the Daulphin, as we haue said: was not∣withstanding Iohn Duke of Burgogne suspe∣cted of the State. suspected to be a great enemy to the State, and as the Giants are faine to heape mountaine vpon mountaine, for steps of assent to pull Iupiter out of his throne, so by sinister Counsellors Bur∣gogne was accused of some intended stratageme, as meaning to mount the Chaire where the Daulphin should sit: Charles therefore from Monstrean-Sur∣fault yonne a Towne in Brie, sent for the Duke vnto Charles the Daul∣phin seeketh his remouall. Troyes in Champagne to conferre further vpon the ef∣fecting of their affected accord, as also to imploy their vnited forces vpon the common enemie the English, a third cause likewise was alleaged, and that was to haue him his meanes for a reconciliation to his mother the Regent, whose wrath, besides him, no man could pacifie. (49) The Duke mistrusting no snake in the Iohn Serres. grasse, thought all things as sure as they were faire in shew. and accompanied with many noble-men, fiue hundred horse, and two hundred Archers, he repai∣red to Monstreau, at whose Gate the Daulphin had built 2. Barricadoes, & himselfe in armes stood there to receiue the Duke, Burgogne approached, kneeled downe vpon one knee, and with an honourable re∣uerence Burgogne repai∣ring to the Daul∣phin, is charged with breach of promise. saluted him most humbly, the Daulphin neg∣lecting all courtesies to him-ward, charge him with breach of promise, for that the ciuill warres and his garrisons were not surceast and withdrawne, the Dukes sword hanging too farre backe, and some∣what troubling his kneeling, he put his hand vpon the hilt, to put it more forward, whereat Robert de Loire standing by, sayd, doe you draw your sword a∣gainst the Lord Daulphin? at which words Tanneguy He is slaine by Tanneguy de Cha∣stel and others. de Chastell with a battle-axe stroke him on the face and cut off his Chin, and others with other wounds made an end of his life, before he could arise from his knee or get out his sword. (50) Queene Isabell another cruell Medea and Queene Isabel incites his sonne, to reuenge it, and moues Charles to disin∣herite the Daul∣phin and adopt King Henry. vnnaturall mother, hauing a double offence done her, redoubled her wrath and continued her tragick passions against her sonne the young Daulphin, who not only incites Philip now the new Duke of Bur∣gogne to reuenge his murdered fathers death, but tor∣ments her poore husbands spirits, in perswading him to disherite Charles their sonne, and to giue in marri∣age Lady Katherine vnto King Henry, who now had set his foote farre into France. Duke Philip for his Guil. Parradyn. part ready for reuenge, sent the Bishop of Arras with other his Ambassadors vnto Rouen to King Henry to entreat a peace, and againe not many daies after their returne sent backe the said Bishop, whose message was so pleasing, that Henry sent the Bishop of Roche∣ster, the Earle of Warwicke and Guien vnto Arras, who were as welcome vnto Duke Philip; so that betwixt Rouen and Arras messengers continually passed till a peace was concluded; which was proclaimed to A peace conclu∣ded betweene K. Henry, K. Charles, and the new Duke of Bu gogne: continue from that day (then about the feast of the Epiphany) vnto mid-March ensuing, betwixt King Henrie, King Charles, and Philip Duke of Burgogne. (51) King Henry thus farre gone in his affaires for that Crowne, sent his Ambassadors vnto the new made Pope Martin the first, such was the fate of Romes Apostolicall fathers in those faire Sun-shine and Golden daies, that the greatest Monarch was but a vassal to attend vpon their stirrop & their Crownes subiect to be spurned off, with their feete. Henrie therefore minding to stop the violence of these nar∣row Seas, and to make the streame milde betwixt his two Realmes, had now none to let, but only him that was all in all, and bare an Oare in euery mans boat: and therefore from King Charles, Burgogne, King Henrie solli∣cites the Pope to confirme him King of France. and himselfe, his Ambassadors sollicited his fatherlie consent, to admit him his most Christian sonne of France, and to giue his holy blessing for the confir∣mation of the marriage, and peace concluded be∣twixt those two famous Princes. King Henries right to the French Crowne they plainely laid forth, what calamities France had felt in their resistance, The Calamities of France for withstanding the right of the Eng∣lish. Agincourt, Normandy and Aquitaine (as they shew∣ed him) were most lamentable witnesses, and the holde that the Lyon had got (at that day) of the Flower de Luce, was not to be wrested out of his fast grasped pawes. But his dull eare was deafe here∣vnto, answering that this peace was preiudiciall to La legende des Flamens. the right of Charles the Daulphin, and therefore hee denied to confirme it. The Pope stood for the Daulphin. (52) But with what quill these wines were ven∣ted from the setled Lees for the Daulphin, vnlesse it was the golden vice, (a powerfull key indeed to vn∣locke the Popes silent lips,) I know not; most true it Alain Chartier. Enguerrant de Monstrel. is, the conditions went forward, and the place for the confirmation of couenants was Troyes in Champagne, where King Charles, and his Queene then lay, and whither Burgogne, Guien, the Lord Rosse, and others attended with fiue hundred horse, were sent Ambas∣sadors Ambassadors from King Henry from Henry. In their way they besieged (and after fifteene daies wan) the Towne of Crespie that held for the Daulphin, demolished the Castell, razed the wals, and departed vpon composition. These comming to Troyes were honorably recei∣ued, History of Nor∣mandy. and louingly concluded on a finall peace, where Lady Katherine was attended as the Englsh Queene, Ladie Katherine attended as Queene of Eng∣land. Henry goeth in person to Troyes. and some left to guard her by King Henries com∣mand. His Ambassadors returned, and affection enflamed, himselfe attended with the Dukes of Cla∣rence, and Gloucester his brethren, the Duke of Excester, the Earles of Warwicke, Huntingdon, Salisbury, Guienne and many other nobles, (his guard consisting of six∣teene hundred Launces and Archers) departed from Rouen to Ponthois, to S. Denis, and from thence into Prouins, where he was met neere vnto Troyes by the Duke of Burgundy and many other French Lords, and with all Princesse attendance was conducted into the Towne. The ioy was great with which he was receiued, especially of the King, the Queene and Lady Katherine, whom he found in S. eters Church expe∣pecting History of Nor∣mandy. his comming, where forthwith he and the Lady was affianced; and falling effsoones into confe∣rence of the conditions of amity, these were consen∣ted vnto by the French and King Henry. 1. That K. Henry should take Lady Katherine to wife. 2. That Charles & Isabel should retaine the name of King and Queene, and should hold all their dignities, The Articles a∣greed vpon be∣twixt the two kings. rents, and possessions belonging to the Crowne of France, during their naturall liues. 3. That the Lady Katherine should haue her Dowry in England as Queens heretofore were wont to haue, Queene Kathe∣rines Dowry. that is to say, the summe of forty thousand sceutes, that is, two to a noble. 4. That the same summe of forty thousand sceu∣tes yeerely, shall bee confirmed vnto Queene Kathe∣rine by our lawes, according to our vsuall rights, at the time of our death. 5. That the said Lady Katherine so ouerli∣uing vs, from the time of our death, shall haue for her Dowry in the Kingdome of France, the summe of twenty thousand francks yeerly, out of the lands, places, and Lordships that Blanch some∣time wife to Philip Beauisall held and enioied. 6. That after the death of Charles our said father, The Crowne of France intailed to England. the Crown and Realme of France shall with all rights and appurtenances remaine vnto vs, & to our heires for euermore. 7. And for as much as our said father is infirme by reason of sicknesse, and may not entend in his owne person to dispose of the affaires of the Realme, therefore during the life of our said father the faculties and exercise of the gouernment, and dis∣position The gouern∣ment of France assigned to King Henrie. of the publike vtilitie of the Realme of France shall be, and abide to vs, so that thence forth wee may gouerne the Realme, and admit to our Councell and assistance to the Councell of France such of the English Nobility as we shal thinke meete. 8. That also we of our owne power shall cause the Court of France to be kept and obserued in as full authority, and in all manner of places, that now or in time comming, is, or shall be subiect to our said fa∣ther. 9. Also that we to our powers shall defend and helpe all, and euery of the Peeres, Nobles, Cities, Townes, Cominalties and singular persons, now or in time to come, subiects to our father, in their rights, Customes, priuiledges, freedomes, franchises, belon∣ging, or due vnto them in all manner of places, now or in time comming subiect to our father. 10. Also that we shall to our power trauell truly, & diligently, to see that Iustice be administred in the same Realme of France according to their lawes, Customes, and rights of the same Realme without personall acception; and that we shal keepe and hold the Subiects of the said Realme in tranquility and peace to our power, and shall defend them against all manner of violence and oppression. 11. Also that we to our power shall prouide that able and profitable persons shall execute the offices aswell of Iustices and other offices belonging to the gouernance of the demaines of the Realme of France for the good and peaceable Iustice of the same, and for the administration that shall be committed vnto them. 12. Also that we of our power, so soone as it may commodiously be done, shall trauaile to put in∣to obedience of our said father, all manner of Cities, Townes, Castels, places, Countreys and persons within the Realme of France, disobedient and rebels to our sayd father, syding with them that bee called the Daulphin or Armagnac. 13. And that we may the more commodiously and freely exercise and fulfill these things aforesaid, it is accorded, that all worthy Nobles and estates of the same Realme of France aswell spirituals as tem∣porals The subiects of France sworne to King Henry. and also the Nobles, Citizens, Burgesses and Cominalties of France in obedience at this day to our said father shall make these Oathes vnto vs. 14. First to vs hauing the faculty, exercise, dispo∣sition, and gouernance of the foresaid common pro∣fit at our hests and commandements, these shall meekly and obediently obey in all manner of things concerning the exercise of Gouernment in the same Realme. 15. Also that the worthy great and noble estates of the said Realme aswell spirituals as temporals, Citizens, Burgesses, and Comminalties of the same Realme in all manner of things well and truly shall keepe and to their power shall doe to be kept in as∣much as to them belongeth, or to any of them, all The tenor of the oath. those things that be appointed and accorded be∣tweene our foresaid father, our mother, and vs. 16. And that continually from the death, and after the death of our said father Charles, they sha be our true liegemen, and our heires, and they shall re∣ceiue and admit vs for their liege, and Soueraigne, and very King of France, and for such to obey vs without opposition, Contradiction or difficulty, as they be to our father during his life. And neuer af∣ter, this Realme of France shall obey to man as King and Regent of France, but to vs, & to our heires. Also they shall not be in Counsell, helpe, or assent, that we loose life or limme, or be taken with euill taking, or that we suffer harme or diminution in person, estate, worship, or goods, but if they know any such thing to be contriued or imagined against vs, they shall let it to their powers, and shall doe vs to witten thereof, as hastily as they may by themselues, by message, or by letters. 17. That all manner of Conquests that shall be made by vs in France vpon the disobedient in the Dutchies of Normandy, shall be done to the profit of our said father, and that to our power, all manner of Lands and Lordships, that be in places to be conque∣red, belonging to persons, obeying to our forefather, which shall sweare to this present accord, shall be re∣stored to the same persons, to whom they belonged. 18. That all manner of persons of the holy Church beneficed in the Dutchie of Normandy, or any other places in the Realme of France, subiect to our father, and fauouring of the parts of the Dukes of Burgundy, which shall sweare to keepe this present accord, shall peaceably inioy their benefices of holy Church in the Dutchie of Normandy, or in other places next a∣foresaid. 19. Likewise that all manner of persons of holie Church obedient to vs, and beneficed in the Realme of France, and places subiect to our father, that shall sweare to keepe this present accord, shal enioy peace∣ably their benefices of holy Church, as is afore∣saide. 20. Also that all manner of Churches, Vniuersi∣ties and studies generall, all Colledges of Students, and other Colledges of holy Church, being in places Churches, Vni∣uersities and Colledges to enioy their liber∣ties. now, or in time comming, subiect to our father, or in the dutchy of Normandy, or other places in the realme of France subiect to vs, shall enioy their rights, pos∣sessions, rents, prerogatiues, liberties and franchises, belonging, or due to them in any manner of wise, in the said Realme of France, sauing the right of the Crowne of France, and of euery other person. 21. Also by Gods helpe, when it happeneth vs to come to the Crowne of France, the Dutchy of Normandie, and all other places conquered by vs in the said Realme, shall bow vnder the Commande∣ment, obeisance, and Monarchy of the Crowne of Normandy to be vnder the Crown of France. France. 22. Also that we to our power shall see recom∣pence to be made by our said father, without dimi∣nution of the Crowne of France to persons obeying him and fauouring the party of Burgundy, to whom Lands, Lordships, Rents and possessions belongeth in the said Dutchie of Normandy, or other places in the Realme of France conquered by vs hitherto, gi∣uen by vs in places, Lands, gotten, or to be gotten in the name of our said father vpon rebels and inobe∣dients to him, and if so be that such manner of re∣compence be not made to the said persons in the life time of our said father, we shall make that recom∣pence in such manner and places of goods, when it happeneth by Gods grace to the Crowne of France, and if so be that the Lands, Lordships, Rents or possessions belonging to such manner of persons in the said Dutchie and other places, bee not giuen by vs, the same persons shall be referred to them without any delay. 23. And during the life of our father in all places, now, and in time to come, subiect to him, letters of common iustice, grants of offices, giftes, pardons, remissions and priuiledges shall be written, and pro∣ceed Letter, Grant, gifts, &c. signed by King Charles. vnder the name and seale of our said father. And forasmuch as some singular case may fall that may not be foreseene by mans wit, in the which it may be necessary and behouefull, that we write our letters; in such case if any hap for the good and sure∣ty of our father, and for the gouernment that belon∣geth And by King Henry. to vs, as is aforesaid, and to auoid perils which otherwise might fall to the preiudice of our said fa∣ther, to write our letters, by the which we shall com∣mand, charge and defend after the nature and quali∣ty of the need in our fathers behalfe, and ours, as Re∣gent of France. 24. Also that during our fathers life, we shall not call, nor write vs King of France, but shall verily ab∣steine from that name, so long as our said father liueth. 25. Also that our said father during his life, shall name, call and write vs in French in this manner. Nostre treschier filz Henry Roy d'Engleterre heretere de France: and in Latine in this manner; Praclarissimus King Henries stile du ing King Charles his life. filius noster, Henrieus Rex Anglia, & Hares Francia. 26. That we shall put no impositions or exacti∣ons to charge the Subiects of our said father, with∣out cause reasonable and necessary. No otherwise then for common good of the Realme of France, and according to the Lawes and Customes prouided for the same Realme. 27. Also that we shall trauell to our power, to effect that by the assent of the three states of the Realmes of England and France, all manner of ob∣stacles may be done away, and this chiefly, that it be ordeined, and prouided, that from the time, that we, or any of our heires come to the Crowne of France, both the Crownes, that is to say, of France and England, perpetually be together in one, and in the The vnion of the Crownes. same person, that is to say, from our fathers life to vs, and from the terme of our life thence forward, in the persons of our heires, that shall be one after another, and that both Realmes shall be gouerned from the time, that we, or our heires come to the same, not se∣uerally vnder diuers Kings in one time, but vnder the same person, which for the time shall be King of both Realmes, and our Soueraigne Lord, as is afore∣said, keeping neuerthelesse in all manner of things, to either of the said Realmes, their rights, liberties, customes, vsages and lawes, not making subiect in any manner of wise, one of the same Realmes to the rights, lawes or vsages of that other. 28. That thenceforth perpetually shall be still rest, and that in all manner of wise, dissentions, hates, rancours, enuies, and warres, betweene the same The vnion of the Subiects. Realmes of France and England, and the people of the same Realmes drawing to accord of the same peace may cease and be broken. 29. That from henceforth for euermore, peace and tranquility, good accord and affection, and stable friendship shall be betwixt the said Realmes and the Subiects of the same, and shall keepe themselues with their Counsels, helpes, and common assistance against all men that enforce them to doe, or to ima∣gine wrongs, harmes, displeasures, or greeuances to them or either of them, and that they shall be con∣uersant in merchandizing freely and surely together, paying the Customes due and accustomed, and that all the confederates and allyes of our said father and the Realme of France, as also our confederates of the Realme of England shall in eight months space from the time of this accord of peace, as it is notified to them, declare by their letters, that they will draw to this accord, and will be comprehended vnder the treaties and accord of this peace, sauing neuerthe∣lesse their obedience to either of the same Crownes, and to all manner of actions, rights, and reuenues, that belong to our said father and his Subiects, and to vs, and our Subiects against all manner of such Allies and Confederates. 30. That our father, neither our brother the Duke of Burgundy, shall begin nor make with Charles calling himselfe the Daulphin of Viennes, any treatie, No peace with the Daulphin. peace, or accord but by Counsell and assent of each of vs three, or of other the three estates of either the said Realmes aboue-named. 31. Also that we with the assent of our brother of Burgundy, and other of the Nobles of the Realme of France, which ought thereunto to be called, shall ordeine for the Gouernance of our said father, sure∣ly, louingly and honestly, after the degree of his roy∣all estate and dignity in such wise, as shall be to the worship of God, of our said father, and of the Realm of France. 32. Also that all manner of persons; that shall be, our father, to doe him personall seruice, not onlie in office, but in all other attendances, aswell the No∣bles and Gentlemen, as others, shall be such as haue beene borne in the Realme of France, or in places belonging to France, good, wise, true, and able to doe him seruice, and our said father shall dwell in places vnder his obedience, and no where else, wherefore we charge and command our said liege subiects, and other being vnder our obedience, that they keepe, and doe to be kept, in all that belongeth to them, this accord and peace, after the forme and manner as it is accorded, and that they attempt in no manner The punishment of the peace∣breakers. wise, any thing that may be preiudiciall, or contrary to the same accord, and peace, vpon paine of life and limme, and all that they may forfeit vnto vs. 33. Also that we for the things aforesaid, and e∣uery one of them shall giue our assent by our letters Patents, sealed with our seale vnto our said father, without all approbation, and confirmation of vs, and all other of our blood roiall, and of the Cities and Townes to vs obedient, sealed with our great seale, shall make or cause to be made letters approba∣tory, and confirmed of the Peeres of his Realme, and of the Lords, Citizens, Burgesses of the same vnder his obedience, all which Articles we haue sworne to keepe, vpon the holie Euangelists. Yeuen at Troies the 30. of May, Anno 1420. And the same were proclaimed in London the 20. of Iune following; for the Copies of this treaty, the French King sent to e∣uery Town in France, as King Henry did likewise into England, there to be published by Proclamation. These Articles were concluded betwixt the two Kings, in the presence of Queene Isabell, the Duke Holinsh. The testies of these Articles. Wil. Parradin. Annals of Burg. of Burgundy, and the Kings Councell, the Prince of Orange, Seigneur Chastelleux, Marshall of France, with many others the prime Nobility, both of England and France, both the Kings with the Queene, taking their solemne oath there, vpon the holy Euangelists, as did likewise the Duke of Burgundy, and the rest, Burgundy Titus sets downe his Oath verbatim. being the first man that laid his hand on the booke, and Enguerrant. Nicholas Vigneur. sware homage to King Henry; who thereupon was stiled and proclaimed Regent of France. (53) In whose presence also vpon the third of Hollinsh. Iune, (being the morrow after Trinity Sunday) the marriage of King Henry and Lady Katherine, with all King Henry mar∣ried to Ladie Ka∣theri . pompous solemnity was celebrated, in Saint Peters Church at Troyes, the Bishop of that See, doing the Ceremonies. And after royall feasts and Princely History of Nor∣mandy. entertainements, before the dissolution of that roiall assembly, King Henry, inuiting the French King and Hollinshed: but Polyd. a th, this speech was deliuered before at their swearing of fealty. others his great Peeres to a sumptuous banquet, made a pithy and pleasing Oration vnto them, thus testifying his Princely desire to aduance their weale, and demerit their loue. (54) As the chiefe marke whereunto my cares and endeuors haue hitherto leuelled, hath Polyd. Verg. beene, to vnite and concorporate these two King∣domes King Henries O∣ration vnto the States of France. of France and England into one, which now by Gods goodnes is most happily effected; so is it still, and euer shall be, both my desire and care, that vnto posterity we may leaue it setled in the same sort, and free from all empeachments, of factious discords: that beingas (it is) the greatest, it may be also the happiest Monarchie of Europe. For the cleere accomplishment of which worke, there rests now nothing, but the depressing of the Daulphin, who is by your doome already, not only depriued of that dignity, but of succession to the Crowne, and prosecuted as a Traitor to the State; and of whom this we must be assured, that while he liues, France cannot but be in a perpetuall combustion. For preuenting whereof, I both need and intreate, both your Counsels and aide, nothing doubting of your readines in either; for how can we expect any safety, or you any goodnes at his hand, who, in his young yeeres, did so perfidiously murder the Duke of Burgundy his vncle? I am now, you see, your Regent in present, and Successour to the Crowne in hope; Let it not therefore sticke in your hearts, that I am an Englishman borne, for you know I haue much French blood in my veines, which warmes my affections as well to French as English; but looke on me as the lawfull heire to the Diademe, both by iust Title, and your owne con∣sents, who therefore am, and ought to be, wholly yours; and your kindnes and iust dealing bind me so to be. Yours also am I now by fresh alliance, as sonne in Law to your King, vnto whom I will performe all offices of loue and honor, as to mine owne father; and you his subiects shall I loue and cherish, as mine owne children, and will defend France and the French, so long, as you defend my right with your louing aide, and will deserue my loue with your loiall affection. (55) These affaires thus accomplished at Troyes, Polyd. Verg. the Kings, the Queenes, and the rest of the Peeres in great estate rode vnto Paris, where all faire counte∣nances were shewed, and great entertainement giuen to the English. But the Daulphin and his followers The Daulphins counterplots to vphold himselfe. neither feared nor fainted, though the present cour∣ses pleased not their palat. Their first Counsell therefore was how to preserue themselues in so e∣minent danger; to sit still and doe nothing, they knew it was but to increase and aduance the successes of the English; and to rise without strength, was to fall into further misfortunes, hauing no meanes to hold warre with so potent an Enemy. In this distraction their voice was best heard, that spake most for the safety of the Daulphin (whose only life gaue breath vnto the after-hopes of France) and for the strengthe∣ning of those places which might be of most aduan∣tage to themselues, and offence to the Enemie. This then past by decree in that Counsell of warre, that the Daulphin should at no time hazard his person in field, and that a leuy of Souldiers should be had, to lie in Garrison in places conuenient; for Time, which neuer stands still, they well hoped might yet turne the rice for them, fortune being (said they) as subiect to fawne, as to frowne; in which resolution each man tooke to his charge, and all to withstand the doings of Henry. (56) As these consulted for the state of the French so in Paris a Parliament of the three estates was assembled, wherein such as were guilty of the Denis Sauage in Chro. de Fland. death of Burgundy, were iusticed, the disherizing of the Daulphin confirmed, and warres prepared against these Townes which held for him. Against Sens the two Kings with their Queens, Clarence, and Bur∣gundy, marched; which after 12. daies was rendered Enguerrant de Monstrel. vpon composition of life, those excepted as were guilty of the Duke of Burgundies death. Monstreau Monstreau besee∣ged and gotten. was the next, which by force was entred, where the body of the Duke of Burgundy, vndecently buried by the Daulphinois, was taken vp, and by his sonne Philip sent in great pompe to Diion in his Dutchy, and there honorably interred. The Towne being taken, the Castle held out: vnto whose Captaine twenty Cap∣tiue Io. Millet Gentlemen were sent, whose liues from King Henries mouth (say the French) were sentenced to death, vnlesse they could perswade the Castellan to Holinsh. surrender; but those men (say our English, to mollifie that seuere doome) were all especiall friends of that Captaine and such, as had giuen opprobrious words to the Kings Herauld, being sent vnto them in the siege of Monstreau. Howsoeuer, in this extremity they sollicited Guiluy vpon their knees, vrging their owne deaths, and his great danger if he held out; but Guiluy, a true Frenchman, and friend to the Daulphin, withstood the assault, and thereupon these Gentle∣men Petitioners were presently hanged in the sight of the defendants: so bloody is Mars to maintaine his owne Lawes, and so eager was Henry of his full Conquest of France, whose thirsting sword had here∣to fore beene some what ouerlauish in blood, but ne∣uer more (perhaps) then in this bloody act; which I wish might be obliterated from the number of his other glorious actions. Yet at length was that Ca∣stle enforced to surrender vpon composition of life, excepting the guilties of Burgundies death. (57) Then was the siege remoued to Melun, a Towne of great strength, and made more strong by Tis. Linius Melun beseeged and gotten. the valours of her commanders, who were Seigneur Barbafon an absolute souldier, Pierre de Bourbon a Prince of the blood, Preaux, and Bourgeois, whose Garrison was seuen hundred Daulphinois: and indeed no default in defence, could anie wise be imputed, but the Canon opening a breach, the English and Bur∣gundians made an entry into the Bulwarke, and ouer the Riuer Seine built a bridge with Boates; so that from either quarter they had passage one to the other without impediments, and encamped them∣selues for their best aduantage; vpon whom the ene∣mie neuerthelesse made diuers sallies, with the losse of either parties. King Henry inforced his siege to the vtmost, and made a myne vnderneath the wals, which being perceiued, the defendants countermi∣ned against him; where the King (too forward) as the Enguerrant. King Henry figh∣teth in single Combat. very first man entring his myne, and Barbason like∣wise his within the Towne, met each other at point of sword, where they performed nobly the parts of priuate souldiers, (nobly indeed, if priuate souldiers they had been, but Princes should remember they are not such) till lastly they agreed to discouer them∣selues, and first Barbason made known his name, then Translator of Liuie. King Henry did his, whereupon the French Lord sud∣dainely getting backe, caused the Barriers to be clo∣sed, and Henry returned to his Campe. (58) This enterprize failing, King Charles him∣selfe Enguerrant came into the Campe, to induce the defen∣dants to render, at the presence of their naturall Lord; which neuerthelesse was little respected; for answere was made, that if their King were at liberty, and free from King Henries power, they would doe The French re∣fuse to submit to their owne King. him the duty of naturall subiects, and yeeld him their charge as their Liege Lord: but being as he was, they desired to be excused, for to the mortall enemy of France they would not yeeld. (59) Whilest King Henry lay at the siege of Melun, the Duke of Bauier (who was Palsegraue of Rhyne Elector) came to King Henry hauing married his sister, and thence sent a defiance vnto the Daul∣phin Nichol. Giles. his kinseman by Queene Isabell his mother; the Prince of Orange likewise came thither vnto Henry, but because he required an Oath of him, as a subiect of France, he went away displeased, saying, he was a free Prince, and ought neither obedience to England nor France. At which time the Parisians with more respect of their owne safety committed their City Paris yeelded vp to King Henry. vnto K. Henries deuotion who deputed his brother Clarence (though Count Saint Paul with his French dis∣pleased) Gouernour thereof, and put Garrisons in∣to the Bastile of S. Anthonie, the Lowre, and the Hostill de Nesle. During this siege, mandatory Dat. 23. Iuly. An 1420. Denis Sauage. Picardy sweares fealty to King Henry. letters were sent by King Charles into Picardy, to put all pla∣ces that held for him in those quarters into Henries possession, and to take the Oath of their obedience vnto him as to the only heire, Successor, Regent, and Go∣uernour of France; the execution whereof was com∣mitted to the Count of Saint Paul, the Bishops of The∣rouenne and Arras, the Vidame of Amiens, the Lord of Vendueill, the Gouernour of Lisle, Pierre Marigny Ad∣uocate of the Parliament, and George Ostend the Kings Secretary, beginning thus; Charles par le Grace de Dieu, &c. (60) The distresse of Melun, was wonderfull Enguerrant. great aswell vpon the seegers, as defendants; the one afflicted, and their troupes sore weakened with mor∣tality, the other oppressed with famine, and other defects incident to a long indured siege. In this State eighteene weekes were spent, and more had beene, but that the English were supplied with soul∣diers out of Picardie, whose colours displaied a farre off, put the Towne in hope of reliefe, as sent from the Daulphin, but vpon their neerer approach, Melun was rendred by these capitulations. 1. That the Enguerrant de Monstrelet. Towne and Castle should be deliuered to the King. 2. That aswell the men of warre, as the Burgesses, should submit themselues to King Henry, to be dealt with as pleased the King. 3. That all such as should be found guilty of the Duke of Burgundies murder should suffer death. 4. That all the rest of the soul∣diers should be receiued to mercy, but to be priso∣ners vntill they put in good caution for their true obedience in after times. 5. That the Natiues of France should be sent home to their owne Coun∣treys. 6. That all the moueables and Armes in the Towne should bee carried into the Castle. 7. That all the Prisoners they hadtaken either be∣fore or during the siege, should be enlarged ransome∣free, and acquitted of their promises. 8. That for the performance of these Articles, 12. of the princi∣pall Captaines, and 6. of the wealthiest Burgesses should deliuer themselues in hostage. 9. That all the English, and Scots, should be deliuered to Henry and left at his disposition. These things accorded, an English Garrison was put into Melun, commanded by Pierre Varrolt. Pi∣erre de Burbon, Seigneur de Preaux, and valiant Bar∣bason, with sixe hundred Prisoners of quality, were sent with a strong guard vnto Paris. The guilties of Burgundies murder were all of them put to death, a∣mongst whom were two Monkes, and Bertrand de Chartmont a Gascoigne, (a man in great fauour with King Henry) for that he at King Henries entry into Melun, had conuaied thence one Amenion de Lau, who was proued guilty of Burgundies death. The Duke of Burgundy himselfe, as also Clarence earnestly Enguerrant. labored with King Henry for Bertrands pardon, but the King, though much grieued, and protesting that he had rather haue lost 50000. Nobles, yet was resol∣ued he should die for example to all such, as should dare to offend, vpon presumption of their nearenes A noble exam∣ple of Iustice. and grace with their Princes. (61) Melun being rendred, and these things thus disposed, the two Kings with their Queenes Iohn Millet. most honorablie attended, returned to Paris, before whose entrance the Citizens and Students met them in most solemne manner, hauing beautified the City Iohn Millet with flagges, streamers and rich hangings throughout the streetes where they should passe. The two Kings The two Kings entred Paris. rode together vnder a rich Canopie, Henry vpon the left hand, next vnto whom followed the Dukes of Clarence and Bedford, and vpon their left hand the Duke of Burgundy clad all in blacke, the Princes and Nobles of either Nation mingled together in their degrees, the Clergy with processions, and their vene∣rable reiiques, going before them to Nostre dame Church; and the next day the two Queenes entred The two Queens enter Paris. the City with as great a shew. King Henries Pal∣lace was prepared in the Loure, which was most rich Denis Sauage. and magnificent, and Charles his Court in the Hostel of Saint Paul, being but homely and meane; for (saith Millet) young Henry commanded all, and his bre∣thren Millet. exercised supreme authority, whiles olde Charles stood as a Cypher, and the French Nobilitie had nothing to doe. (62) During the two Kings abode here, a great Enguerrant de Monstr. Assembly was called as well of the Spiritualty, as of the secular Nobilitie, in whose presence, in the great Hall of the Hostell, a State for Iustice was prepared, where the two Kings sitting, as supreme Iudges, vn∣der one Cloath of estate, the Court was furnished The two Kings sit personally in iudgement. with Princes and Officers in most solemne wise. Before whom, Nicolas Rollin aduocate from the Duke of Burgundy, and the Dutchesse his mother, craued au∣dience (and had it granted) vnto an inuectiue and long Oration against Charles Visconte Narbone, Tan∣neguy, Barbason and others, for the cruell murther of Processe against the murtherers of the Duke of Burgundy. Iohn Duke of Burgundy; and not only that the mur∣therers might be accordingly executed, but withall, that a Church might be founded and furnished with sacred Ornaments for twelue Channons, sixe Chaplaines, and sixe Clerkes to pray for his soule for euer, euery Chanon to haue yeerely two hundred pound Paris money, euery Chaplen one hundred, and euery Clerke fifty, to be leuied vpon the Lands of the Daulphin, and his associates in the murder: that the same foundation should be engrauen vpon the Porch thereof, and the like inscription set vp pub∣likely in the Cities of Paris, Rouen, Graunt, Diion, Saint Iames of Compostella, and Ierusalem. This motion was seconded by a Doctor of Diuinity appointed by the Rector of the Vniuersity, who concluded with an hum∣ble request to the King and those Princes, that iustice might be done. Whereunto the Chancellor of France, in the behalfe of King Charles, promised that no en∣deuour on his part should bee lacking; and thereu∣pon caused his sonne to be solemnely called to the Marble-Table, to answere his accusation, by the name of Charles Duke of Touraine, and Daulphin de Iohn Serres. Vienne, which done three seuerall times, and he not The Daulphin ci∣ted to appeere, and disinherited. appearing, by arrest of the same Court of Parlia∣ment, he was banished the Realme, and iudged vn∣worthy to succeed in any of the Seignories as well present, as to come. But the Daulphin appealed from this sentence to God and his sword, and still was the same, though his fortunes were changeable. Moun∣sieur de Barbason was vehemently accused to haue his hand in the murder, and therefore King Henrie King Henry him∣selfe giues sen∣tence iudicially. accordingly gaue sentence on him to suffer to death; but he in open Court defended himselfe, not to bee guilty of the crime, although he confessed to be a true seruant to the Daulphin. Notwithstanding, had he not appealed to the Officers of Armes, King Hen∣ries iudgement of death had gone against him: for the Law Military, as he there alleaged, forbiddeth, Holinsh A quirke of He∣raldy to ouer∣throw a Iudiciall sentence. that any man, hauing his brother in Armes within his danger, should afterwards put him to death for any cause or quarrell, and proued himselfe to be the Kings bro∣ther in Armes, for that he had in the Countermine coa∣ped in combat with the King. Thus by a quirke of Heraldry acquitted from death, he was neuerthelesse retained in prison the space of nine yeeres, and lastly at the winning of Castle Galliard from the English, was deliuered out of most strait imprisonment, to the great ioy of the French. (63) This execution of Iustice on those Mur∣therers, was a great, but not the only act of K. Henry A Parliament at Paris. Holinsh. at this great Parliament of three Estates of France in Paris. For therein also was the finall accord betwixt the two Kings, openly acknowledged by the French King, as made by his free assent, and with aduise of all the Councell of France; whereupon it was there also ratified by the generall states of France, and sworne vnto particularly vpon the holy Euange∣lists, by all their Nobles and Magistrates, spirituall and secular, who also set their seales to the Instru∣ments thereof, which were sent into England to be kept in the Kings Where they yet remaine, saith Hollinsh. p 578. Exchecquer at Westminster. King Henries glory thus ascended to the highest verticall in France, his Court was not only honoured daily both with Courtly and military shewes and pastimes, but also was still frequented both with forraine Ambassadors, and domesticke Commissioners, whose directions depended only vpon his voluntary assigne, himselfe redressing all things at his pleasure, placing and displacing Officers and Gouernors, cau∣sing also a new Coyne to be made, called a Salute, wherein were the Armes of France, and the Armes of England and France, quarterly stamped. King Charles the while in his Palace, was but for fashions sake visited, and but by some of his olde seruants, his Sunne was drawne so neere vnto the setting. The great affaires of France thus setled, (as well as that vnsetled time would permit,) King Henry minding to Crowne his Queene in England, ordained his bro∣ther of Clarence, (a wise, valiant, and a great Captaine) King Henry re∣turneth into England. his Lieutenant generall of France, leauing also the Duke of Exeter with 500. men of warres to keep Paris, and so attended with great state, he came to Amiens and Callais, where taking to Sea, he arriued at Douer vpon the third of February, and was receiued of his Enguerrant de Monstrelet. Subiects as an Angell from heauen, or another vi∣ctorious Caesar on Earth. (64) All things in a readines for his faire Queens Coronation, vpon the foure and twentith of the same month, with all roialty the same was solemni∣zed at Westminster, and the English rich diadme set on her head. The feast was great, with all Princely Ex Antiq. M. S. D. Roberti Cotton. seruices, and the state such as deserueth the report; for the Queene sitting at Table, at the right side of her Chaire, kneeled the Earle of March holding a Scepter in his hand; the Earle Marshall kneeling on the left side, held another; and the Countesse of Kent sate vnder the Table at her right foote; vpon her right hand at Table sate the Bishops of Canterbury and Winchester, and vpon the left the King of Scots, the Dutchesse of Yorke, and the Countesse of Hunting∣ton; the Nobles giuing their attendance, each man ac∣cording to his office and place. (65) Presently, after Easter, in the month of May, a Parliament was held at Westminster, whose chiefest intent was to haue meanes to continue the Kings Conquest in France; but such was the state of those lauish times, that, to stop the current of this melting mint, some, minding more the heapes of their money, then the spreading abroad of Englands faire Monarchy, exhibited their Bils vnto the three estates in Parliament, and petitioned vnto the King, to commiserate the pouerty of the commons, which Ex. Record. Parl. 9. Hen. 5. (as they said) were beggered by these warres. For which cause, as it seemeth, no subsidy or ayde was de∣manded, but the King againe pawning his Crowne to his vncle Beaufort, the rich Cardinall, for twenty thousand pound, before the said month was expired, The King paw∣neth his Crowne for money. Pontus Herterm. with foure thousand horse and foure and twenty thousand foote returned into France to follow those warres. (66) Neither was his hast more then needed: for Iohn Earle of Bucquhanan, and Archbald Dowglas, two valiant leaders of seuen hundred resolute Scots, repaired into France to ayde the Daulphin, and ioi∣ning with the French in Aniou, meant to haue surpri∣zed the Duke of Clarence before he had beene aware: Alain Chartier. in which enterprize, foure stragling Scots, taken and brought to his presence, Vpon Easter Eue. as he sate at dinner, reuea∣led the intent and strength of the Enemy, whose ap∣proach was verie neere at hand. This newes no soo nesty and mercy, which shall crowne my memo∣ry with glory, and free mee from blame and slan∣der, which in long raignes can hardly be auoided: but you haue iust cause to mourne at my vntime∣ly death, and it cannot bee but a generall griefe to my people, that in such an Ocean of businesse yet depending, I shall leaue you and them destitute of a Prince able to gouern: but your sorrow ought to be so much the lesse, when you call to mind the frailty of worldly thinges, and that euermore there will bee somewhat wanting which wee desire. My first request vnto you shall bee this, that with an vnanimous affection to aduise, foresee and pro∣uide, that the counsel which I name may be follow∣ed. I further ernestly entreat you to loue my Infant Henry, to instruct him with your wisdomes, that by your counsell, care and loue, hee may be made able & worthy to weild so great an Empire. Com∣fort my deare wife, the most afflicted Creature li∣uing, extend your loues vnto her in the same pro∣portion as I haue euer loued you. Touching the publike I admonish and exhort you to brotherlie concord, and neuer to breake league with Philip Duke of Burgundie; and if you shall thinke it good, let my brother Humfrey Duke of Glocester gouerne England, and not depart vpon any occasion what∣soeuer, vntill my sonne Henry be of yeeres to sway Enguerrant de Monstrelet. the estate; and my brother Iohn Duke of Bedford with the assistance of Philip Duke of Burgundy, to manage the Realme of France. Concerning Charles (commonly called the Daulphin) either he must by your swords be made to submit himselfe, or else you shall neuer be in quiet; and it were as good to render him the possession of what you haue: wherefore sleepe not, and while you haue meanes and opportunity be industrious. Lastly, I beseech, charge, and command you, (howsoeuer time or occasion may perswade, or inuite you to the con∣trary) that Normandy receiued by my industry, and your swordes, being the ancient inheritance of the Crowne of England, be not alienated for any cause whatsoeuer. Among other things then en∣ioined, he willed that the Duke of Orleance, the Earle of Eu, Guacourt, and Guichard de Sisay should not be ransomed, vntill yong Henry were of yeeres to go∣uerne (82) Thus said, and drawing neere to the period of his short but glorious life; he demanded of his Phy∣sitians Enguerrant de Monstr. how long (in their iudgement) he might liue? wherunto when one of thē answered, Sir, thinke on your soule, for your time is not aboue 2. houres: he made his cōfession, & his Chaplains afterward knee∣ling in prayer, when one of them out of the Psalms made mention of Ierusalem, the king no sooner heard the name, but with a loud voice he said; Lord thou His death. knowest, that my purpose was to conquere Ierusalem from the Infidels, if it had pleased thee to haue giuen me life: & Tho. Wals. then in a right faith, assured hope, perfect charity and sound memory, hee Augusti 30. Fabian. rendred his soule to his Creator, af∣ter hee had raigned nine yeeres, fiue monethes, and Some reckon but 11. dayes, Stow addeth fiue monethes more. four∣teene dayes, leauing none like vnto him amongst all the Kings and Princes of Christendome, for which cause his death was not onely bewailed of the English, whom hee gloriously had ruled, but also of the French, whom hee had victoriously conquered. This was the manner of this triumphant Monarchs end, which moues men iust∣ly to wonder at Hector Boetius, who saith, he was Boet. l. 16. c. 19. stricken by God for sacriledge, and died miserablie: Hectors friends haue occasion to wish, that his Rea∣ders should not make that miserable iudgement, the rule and measure of crediting or discrediting his o∣ther writings, yet lamentable his end was indeed, if he perished by poison, wherof there was a vehement suspition, as Polydor Vergill hath auerred, and the car∣riage of the French affaires afterward makes it more Polydor. then probable. (83) His workes of pious affection were shewed in erecting the Monasteries of Bethlem & Briget, neere Ioh. Stow. A ls. His works of deuotion. vnto his Manour of Richmond, as also his princely gifts vnto the workes and furniture of Westminster Church, besides the brotherhood of S. Giles without Creple gate London. And (which had surpassed all the rest) hee intended (such was his loue to learning, and to the place where himselfe was a learner) to haue founded in the great Castell at Oxford, a mag∣nificent Colledge for Diuines, and Students of the seuen liberall Sciences, Ioh. Rossus. the plot and ordinations of which foundation he had already drawne, and Th. Gascoign in Dict. Theolog. re∣solued to endow it with all the lands in England, be∣longing to Priors Aliens; but his vntimely death preuented both that, and many other noble workes. To leaue a domesticke testimony of his affection to Armes, hee first instituted Gartar principall King at Armes: besides other augmentations to the Or∣der of Saint George. In a word, neuer liued English King with more true glory, nor euer died any in a more vnseasonable time, nor more lamented: for he was godly in heart, sober in speech, sparing of words, Tho. Wals. resolute in deedes, prouident in Counsell, prudent in iudgement, modest in countenance, magnanimous in action, constant in vndertaking, a great Almesgiuer, deuout to Godward, a renowmed Souldier, fortunate in field, from whence hee neuer returned without victo∣rie. These, with many other (I might almost say, all other) vertues are attributed to this most renow∣ned amongst English Kings; the more to be admired in him in so short a raigne, and in those yeeres, hee Stow. Annal. being but of 36. yeers, when he breathed forth his glorious soule. (84) His bowels were interred in the Church of Saint Mauro de Fosses, and his embalmed Corps was closed in Lead, and attended vpon by the Lords of England, France, Normandy, and Picardy, was brought vnto Paris (wherein the Church of our Lady so∣lemne exequies were performed) and thence to Ro∣uen, where it rested till all things were ready to set for∣ward for England; though the Cities of Paris and Rouen stroue, and offered great summes of gold to haue Henries royall remains enterred amongst them. His picture artificially was moulded of boiled hides, and countenance painted according to life, vpon whose head an imperiall Diademe of gold and pre∣tious The manner of his bringing into England. stones was set, the body clothed with a pur∣ple robe, furred with Ermine, in his right hand it held a scepter royall, and in the left a ball of gold; in which manner it was carried in a Chariot of State, couered with red veluet, embroidered with gold, and ouer it a rich Canopie, born by men of great place. Thus accompanied by Iames King of Scotland, many Princes, Lords and Knights of England and France, he was conuaied from Rouen to Abbeuile, to Hesdin, to Menstruill, Bologn, & Calais, the Chariot al the way compassed about with men all in white garments, bearing burning Torches in their hands; next vn∣to whom followed his houshold seruants, all in blacke, and after them the Princes, Lords, and E∣states in vestures of mourning adorned; then two miles distant from the corps followed the stil lamen∣ting Queene, attended with princely mourners, her tender and plerced heart more inly mourning, then her outward sadde weedes should in any sort ex∣presse. (85) And thus by Sea and Land the dead King was brought vnto London, where through the streets the Chariot was drawne with foure horses, whose Caparisons were richly embroidered, and embos∣sed with the royall Armes; the first with Englands Armes alone, the second with the Armes of France and England in a field quartered, the third bare the Armes of France alone, and the fourth three crowns Or in a field Azure, the ancient Armes of King Ar∣thur, now well beseeming him who had victoriously vnited France, England, Ireland. three Kingdomes in one. The body with all pompous celebrity was enterred in the Church at Westminster (for so Henrie had by his last will com∣manded) next beneath King Edward the Confessor, vpon whose Tombe Queene Katherine caused a roi∣all picture to bee laid, couered all ouer with siluer plate guilt, but the head thereof altogether of massy∣siluer. All which at that Abbeys suppression, (when the battering hammers of destruction did sound al∣most in euery Church) were sacrilegiously broken off, and by purloining transferred to farre prophaner vses, where, at this day, the headlesse monument, (worthy to be restored by some more Princely and sacred hand) is to be seene, and with these verses written vpon his Tombe. Dux Normanorum, verus Conquestor eorum, Legend des Flamens. Hares Francorum, decessit & Hector eorum. Here Normans Duke, so stiled by Conquest iust, True Heire of France, Great Hector, lies in dust. His Wife. (86) Katherine, daughter to King Charles the sixt of France, vpon an agreement of peace foremen∣tioned, was married vnto King Henrie at Troyes in Champaine, Iunij 3. A. D. 1420. and after Febr. 14. was Crowned at Westminster with all solemnities. Shee was his Queene two yeeres, and about three months, and suruiuing him, was remarried vnto Ow∣en Theodore of Wales, vnto whom shee bare three sonnes, Edmund, Iasper, and Owen, and a daughter who liued not long. Owen tooke the habite of religion at Westminster, the other two by King Henry the sixt (their halfe brother,) were honorably preferred; Ed∣mund was created Earle of Richmond, and marrying Margaret, the sole heire of Iohn Beaufort Duke of Som∣merset, was father by her vnto Henry (the only heire of Lancaster,) afterwards King of England. Iasper, the second brother, was created the same yeere, Earle of Pembroke, who required his brothers kindnes with continuall assistance against the house of ; and when that faction preuailed, he was forced to flie into Flanders, but it againe waning, he was both restored, and to his greater honour created Duke of Bedford, dying without any issue legittimate. This Queene, either for deuotion, or her owne safety, tooke into the Monastery of Bermondsey in South∣warke, where dying Ian. 2. A D. 1436. shee was buri∣ed in our Ladies Chappell within S. Peters Church at Westminster; whose Corps taken vp in the raigne of King Henry the seuenth her Grand-child, (when he laid the foundation of that admirable structure,) and her Coffin placed by King Henry her husbands Tombe, hath euer since so remained, and neuer rebu∣ried: where it standeth (the Couer being loose) to be seene and handled of any that will; and that by her owne appointment, saith Report, (which doth in this, as in most things, speake vntruth) in regard of her disobedience to King Henry, for being deliuered of her sonne at the place hee forbad. His Sonne. (87) Henry the only child of a roiall couple, borne at Windsore, and not nine months old at his fathers death, succeeded in his dominions, though not holding his Empire with the like glory. Crowned he was with the Crownes of two Kingdomes, but vnable by much to weild the scepter of one, that of France was lost by the factions of his Nobles, before it was well wonne; and Englands Crowne twice pluckt from his head before his death. Of whose aduen∣tures and variable raigne (the times when England lay goared in the blood of her ciuill warres) we shall speake in the insuing relation of his innocent, but vn∣fortunate life. HENRIE THE SIXTH, KING OF Monarch 53 Henry VI. ENGLAND, AND FRANCE, LORD OF IRELAND, THE THREE AND FIFTIETH MO∣NARCH OF ENGLAND, HIS RAIGNE, ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XVI. H Ad God almighty (the Dan. cap. 2. v. 21 giuer and transferrer of Kingdomes) thought good that the English should haue setled in the Continent of Europe, and not haue beene shutte vp within their Ilands, hee would not so soone haue depriued them of their late incomparable Captaine and Soueraigne Henry the fifth. But it seemes that God hauing humbled the French Nation vnder Henries victorious hand, ment now again to restore them to his wonted fauor by taking away their terrour & triumpher, substitu∣ting Henry the sixth began his raigne the last day of August, being the day of his Fathers death. Anno 1422. his son (an Infant) in his place, Henrie of that name the 6. born at Windsor, who was crowned about the eight month of his age. The prety hands which could not feed himselfe, were yet made capable to weeld a scepter, and hee that was beholding to nur∣ses for milke, did neuerthelesse distribute the suste∣nance of law and iustice to so great and warlike Na∣tions. Counsell supplies the defect of age. At his fathers death hee had vncles, men of approued va∣lour and discretion, to whom the principall care of all publike affaires by the fathers last prouisions was committed. Humfrey Duke of Glocester (the yonger brother of two) had the Tit. . gouernement of England entrusted to his fidelity: the regency of France was assigned for Prouince to Iohn Duke of Bedford, the eldest liuing vncle of the King, as to a Prince of much magnanimity, prowesse and felicitie in conduct, with whom was Ioh. Til. Chr. ioyned Philip Duke of Burgundie. The guard and custody of the royall Infant was assigned to Thomas Stowes Annal. Duke of Excester: the nurture and edu∣cation to his Polyd. Verg. hist. lib. 23. mother, the Queene Dowager: vpon the two vncles (as betweene the two Poles of the English Empire) the whole globe of gouernment moued: whatsoeuer is done by the kingly power is said to be done by the King. We shall behold not∣withstanding in the tragicall glasse of this Henries raigne, how farre the imbecillity of the kingly per∣son may affect the body politicke with good or euill. If histories were ordayned to stirre affections, not to teach and instruct, neuer any Princes raigne since the Conquest did better deserue to bee described with a tragical style and words of horror & sorrow, although the beginning (like the faire morning of a most tempestuous day) promised nothing morethen a continuance of passed felicities. (2) For the State of the English affaires was great and flourishing, England without tumult, the natu∣rall fierce humors of her people consuming or exer∣cising themselues in France, and France her selfe (for the nobler parts together with the grand City of Paris head of that Monarchie) was at their deuoti∣on. There wanted nothing which might aduance the worke begunne. Most noble and expert Lea∣ders as those which had bin fashioned in the schoole of warre, vnder the best martiall master of that age, the late Henry, arms full of veterant souldiers, most of which were of skill sufficient to be commanders themselues: their friends firme, no defect nor breach (by which dissipation might enter to the ouerthrow of the English greatnesse) as yet disclosing them∣selues. Wisdome, pietie, riches, forwardnesse at home, courage and like forwardnesse abroad. It is a fruitfull speculation to consider how God carrieth his part in the workes of men, alwaies iustly, some∣times terribly, but neuer otherwise, then to bring all worldly greatnesse and glory into due contempt, and loathing, that the soule may bee erected to her Creator, and aspire to a Crown celestiall. The first disaduantage which hapned to the English cause (af∣ter the late Kings decease) was the death of Charles the French King, who suruiued the other but Paul. Aemyl. in Car. l. fiftie and three dayes. This wee may worthily call the first (as it was a great, aswell as the first) disaduan∣tage, for the imbecilities of that Prince were a strēgth to the English; On the other side (God obseruing a talio and parilitie) the infancy of young Henry was an aduantage to Charles the Daulphin of France, now by them of his faction called King of France, as the English vsed in derision to enstyle him King of Ber∣rie, because little else was left vnto him. (3) In England (whose condition the order of na∣rure wils vs first to describe, because there was the A Parliament at Westminster. seat of counsell, by which all the actions of the ge∣nerall state were directed) a Parliament was assem∣bled to establish the Crowne vpon the Infant, and to prouide for the publike vses and necessities of State. Money The leuie ther∣of was 5. Nobles on euery sacke of wool. (alwayes one of them) was liberal∣ly granted. It was a strange sight (and the first time that euer it was seene in England) which in the next yeere hapned, an infant sitting in the mothers lap, before it could tell what English meant, to exercise the place of Soueraigne direction in open Parlia∣ment. Yet so it was, for the Queene to illumine that publike conuention of States with her Infants presence, remoued from Windsor to London; through which Citie (her selfe roially seated with her young sonne vpon her lappe) passed in maiesticke manner to Westminster, and there tooke seate among all his Lords, whom (by the ordinary mouth of that high Court) hee saluted and spake to them at large con∣cerning the premises; where, as hee vttered the mind of his place by anothers tongue, so hee else∣where prosecuted all affaires by other mens hands and Organs. (4) The Duke of Bedford (as the nature of his place exacted) to settle and preserue the State of France for his young Nephew the King, together with Phi∣lip Duke of Burgoigne, who as yet continued a stedfast friend to the English Soueraignety (knowing the Daulphin busie to recouer France) strengthned the confines of their gouernment with Garrisons, as∣sembled their powers, and laboured to retaine the hearts of their owne party. The Duke of Bedford Regent of France, had Polyd. Verg. bist. lib. 23. The Regents Oration to the French. words to them to this ef∣fect in open assemble. That they should not violate their plighted and sworne alleagiance, neither by them∣selues endeauour nor endure, that by others their Soue∣raigne Lord young Henry should be defrauded of his inhe∣ritance, or that the hatreds and enmities which now be∣ganne to die betweene the French and English names, should through the practises of most faithlesse men be re∣nued, and reinflamed: That they would remember how (by Gods speciall fauour and goodnesse) the two King∣doms of France and England were vnited vnder one most faire and goodly Monarchie in an eternall league, and lately so established that no humane force could r st. That albeit they had sustained dammage by the warre, yet the same would bee recouered with aduantage, if they honored loued and obeyed their lawfull Soueraigne Lord King Henry, and prosecuted his enemies with extremity, ac∣cording to bounden duty. This Oration found plau∣sible admission in shew: Henry is proclaimed King of England and of France, and such chiefes as were present did their homages, taking oath to be true: The like Obligation and Sacrament of alleagiance was put vpon all the French through the English Dominions in France. (5) Charles (who as sonne and heire to the late King entitled himselfe King of France, by the name of Charles the seuenth) being then about the seauen and twentieth yeere of his age, full of courage and new hopes, gathered what force he could: his chiefe Leuies were made in Daulphynois and Italy, from whence (for money) he drew sundry troupes. But the best sinews of his Army moued in certain thou∣sands of the Scotish Nation, which serued vnder him. The first steppe which the Charolines, or forces of Charles made into hostile action was vnfortunate, for comming to raise the siege which the English held a∣bout Paul. Aemyl. in Car. 7. Crepan they were put to flight, with the losse of about two thousand of their numbers. This was noble in Charles, and his Charolines, that their minds sunke not at the horrour of such an euill Omen. It * Crauant. saith Polyd. who pla∣ceth this action in the following yeere. The bounds of the English Re∣gency in France. was saith Aemylius of them, resolued to encounter ad∣uerse fortune with encrease of courage. The Regent on the other side was vigilant vpon all occasions: the power of his Regency extended it selfe without con∣tradiction Stows Annal. through Vimew, Pontieu and Picardie, from Paris to Reines, Chalons and Troyes, vp to the water of Loyr and the Sea: A goodly scope of territory, and absolutely the best of France. That late losse & foile of the Charolines was repaired shortly after by an o∣uerthrow in skirmish which they gaue to the English party, from whom (with the slaughter of about fif∣teene hundreth) they recouered a great booty, speci∣ally of Cattel which the English had gotten in the Countries of Nugion and Main, but thus intercep∣ted vpon their return into Normandy. Charles (which Paul. Aemylius omitteth) doubteth that successe: for Polyd. Verg. l. 23 Meulan vpon Sein is by him taken where all the English are put to the sword: but the possession was short, and the reuenge speedy: Thomas Montacute Earle of Salisbury (a man (saith Polydor) more like the old Romans then people of that age, so great was his vertue and cheualrie) hauing with him Iohn of Lux∣emburg, Generall of the Burgundian horsemen, reco∣uers the place, killing all the French which were found therein. (6) At the Citie of Stows Annals. Amiens in Picardie the three great Dukes of Bedford (Regent of France) Burgoign and Britaine meet to consult of the whole course & summe of affaires. There they renued the League, adding, that each should be others friend, and that all of them should defend King Henries right with their best forces. For the better assurance of this profitable a∣mity, the Regent (then a Bachelour) tooke to wife the Lady Anne, sister to Philip Duke of Burgundie: while the Regent was absent from Paris vpon these iust occasions, the Parisians (who not long before had Polyd. Verg. l. 23 sent Ambassadors into England, to acknow∣ledge their obedience to King Henry) practised with Charles to deliuer their City. The Regent had no∣tice of this dangerous treason, and with his presence retained them in duety. The chiefe Actors paied their liues for satisfaction of the trespasse. In good time there arriued out of England ten thousand fresh Souldiers. Ouer them hee ordeined Captaines, The whole field∣forces of the English in France vnder the Duke of Bedford. the famous Earle of Salisbury, William Pole Earle of Suffolke, Robert Willoughby and others. Himselfe lead about with him for the generall seruice, eigh∣teene hundred horsemen, and eight thousand foote. With these field-forces the maime of the English e∣state in France was held together, though not with∣out difficulty, and diuers aduentures. In them he tooke from Charles sundry strong Townes, and For∣tresses as Rob. Fab. Crotoy, Baside, Riol, Rula, Gyrond, Basile, Mer∣mound, Milham, Femel, Seintace, and many other. (7) The Regents chiefe designe was to draw Charles to fight, hoping by his ouerthrow to con∣clude many daies workes in one. For this cause he drew into Normandy. Charles was then in Polyd. V rg. lib. 23. Tourain, where he mustereth his people. The Regent pros∣pers in the meane time, and takes by siege a place of good importance, presuming so to dare the French out to a Battell. Iohn Duke of Alanson is sent with an Army and instructions to fight, if occasion serued, but Charles himselfe was not suffered to hazard his person. Not farre from the Towne Gagwin. of Vernoil, which the Paul. Aemil. English had taken before the Hect. . l. 16. Duke of Alanson, and his Charolines could succour it, the two Armies embattelled themselues. The fight be∣gan with shot, which seeming not quicke enough to dispatch the work, the battels came to hand-stroaks, where for some houres, there was maintained a con∣stant and doubtfull battell with great furie on both sides. The English enured to the French warres, hauing borne the first heats of their enemies, (which are in that Nation most ragefull:) by perseuerance The Regent victory at Ver∣ il in Perch. vtterly brake and put them to flight. The Regent Stowes Ann l. himselfe with a battle-axe fought most fiercely, winning immortall honor in that bloody iourney. There were slaine of the enemies side: Iohn Hect. Bo t. li. 16. Earle of Boughwhan Constable of France: Archenbald Dowg∣las Duke of Tourain and Lieutenant of France; Ar∣chembald his sonne Earle of Wigton, with many other of the Scots. Of the French there were slaine the This battell was fought, 7. of Aug. Anno Domini, 1425. saith Stow. Earle of Vantadowr, and sundry others. In all there died vpon that side certaine thousands. None writes of fewer then foure or fiue thousand, nor any of a∣boue fifteene. The great number of the slaine, is not the measure of a victory, but the vse and effects which it drawes. The Duke of Alanson himselfe was taken prisoner, with about two Poly. Verg. li. 23. hundred others of speciall worth. The English paid for this noble vi∣ctory, the bodies of about two thousand of their souldiers which lost life there, for it was fought vpon faire termes in the open fields, and carried by meere manhood. That which followeth till the siege of Orleance, Paul I Carol. 7. Aemylius comprehendeth in some few lines. The fierce Conquerour besiegeth Mants in Main, and with Ordinance beates downe part of the wals. It yeelds heereupon. The English Garrison left therein, after the taking not being sufficient to containe the Towne in due subiection, is compelled to flie to a Tow∣er for their safetie, the enemies which were admitted into it by the Burgers enioying the rest. The Lord Talbot (the most noble Captaine of the English) presently arriues to the rescue, and puts the malefactors to death. The English Empire extends it selfe to the Riuer of Loyr. Charles they call in scorne the King of Berry. Thus roundly he. In nine Articles and capitulations drawne and The murtherers of Iohn Duke of Burgoin excepted in capitulations. concluded at the yeelding of M nts, this was one, as perhaps it was in euery like occasion. That if any persons were found within the City, which had beene con∣senting to the murther of Iohn Duke of Burgoin, father to Philip Duke of Burgoin, in full reuenge whereof, he had hither to adhered to the English, that Rob. Fab. Chro . they should simply bee at the Regents mercy. (8) The chiefe things which passed in England, Iames the first King of Scots set at liberty out of England. during these happy proceedings in France, were brief∣ly these. Iames Steward the young King of Scots, hauing beene casually taken vpon the Sea, in the reigne of King Henry the fourth; and after his fathers death not sufficiently tendered nor respected by the Scots, re∣mained still a Prisoner. The rather therefore to hinder the Scots, (that was the hope) from aiding the French, it was now thought fit by the Councell of England to enlarge him. Which was accordingly done vpon pledges. Not long after the which, he married the Ladie Iane, daughter to Iohn Earle of Som∣merset, neere cosen to King Henry. Principall setters forward of this marriage (as by likelihood of his li∣berty also) to honour their family with a Kingly al∣liance, were the Earle of Sommerset and the Bishop of Winchester, both of them Beauforts, who together with sundry other of the English Nobility, condu∣cted the new married Couple to the Scottish Bor∣ders. Much of his ransome was abated, and his new kinsemen bestowed vpon him Hect. oct. l. 17. Grafton. store of plate, gold, and siluer, & among other gorgeous Ornaments suit of hangings, in which the labors of Hercules were most curiously wrought. But this wise King (ha∣uing had the benefit of excellent and Princely edu∣cation in England) did not suffer any obligations contracted in the time of his durance, to preponde∣rate with him the Generall state of Scotland, whose freedome did much depend vpon the fortune of France, whereby the maine drift of his enlargers was not much aduanced. The reason notwithstanding which lead this action was probable, and so much the more commendable, for that it was tempered with humanity. The forreine mischiefe thus how∣soeuer intended, hereby to be auoided or qualified, Sir Iohn Mortimer (a dangerous firebrand at home) being Prisoner in the Tower was arraigned for many treasonable speeches vsed to a yeoman, (seruant to Sir Robert Scot Rob. Fab. 1. C . keeper of the Tower of London) to draw the said yeoman to let him escape: promi∣sing him great matters. The points of his speeches were as that fellow charged vpon him in open Parliament, 1. That the said Mortimer meant to flie into Wales to the Earle of March, and with an armie of forty thou∣sand men to enter England, and strike off the Protectors head, and the Bishop of Winchesters. 2. That the Earle of March ought by right to bee King of England, and if the Earle would not, that then The title of Mor∣timer to the Crowne sought to be crusht. hee himselfe was next heire. 3. That if he could not safely reach to the Marches, he would saile to the Daulphin of France, and there serue with honor, which he was assured of. For these ouertures of escape, and conspiracie the Knight was drawne hanged and headed: Of whose death no small Hal. Chron. slander arose. Perhaps he that writes so doth meane that the whole was but a stratageme to rid him out of the way. Edmund Lord Mortimer Earle of March, the party whom the said knight mentioned, was sent not long after with many other Lords, and competent numbers of men, into Ireland, where he deceased without issue, whose great patrimony descended to Richard Plantagenet Earle of Cambridge, the fatall disturber of the Realme of Camb. England, vpon the pretence of Mortimers title to the Crowne. (9) The amity with the Duke of Burgoin, which the English had hitherto found so auailable toward their Conquests, hauing otherwise receiued some few slight flawes was now in danger of vtter break∣ing The Duke of Glocester rashly marieth another mans wife. vpon this occasion. Humfrey Duke of Glouce∣ster Protector of the Realme, following councell vnworthy of his person and place, contracted him∣selfe with the Lady Iaqueline of Ba aria, Inheretrix of Holland, Zeland, Hena lt, and many other faire domi∣nions in the Netherlands, notwithstanding that Iohn Duke of Brabant, her former husband was then liuing, and that the suit of diuorce commenced by Iaqueline G r. Hist . by Edw. Gri st. depended still betweene them. The Duke of Burgoin held with Brab t. This bred bit∣ter humor in the Duke of Glocester, who being not vsed to meet with any rubs or confrontments, and now when in person he came with an armie to take seison of Henault in right of his supposed wife, fin∣ding The Duke of Burgoin challen∣ged by the Duke of Glocester to fight. himselfe hard set vnto, by the aids which Bur∣goin ministred to the Duke of Brabant, he challen∣geth Combat of the Duke of Burgundy, calling him traitour. It was accepted and the Stowes Annal. lie strongly thrust vpon Gloucester, who (leauing the light Lady at her Towne of Monts in Henault) returned into England, doing nothing of that for which at that time he came. Mediation tooke vp the quarrell afterward betweene the Duke of Burgundy and him. Not long after the returne of the Duke of Gloucester into Eng∣land, the first marriage which had beene made and consummated betweene the Duke of Brabant, and the said Lady Iaqueline, was pronounced lawfull by Pope Martin the fifth. Hereupon the Duke of Glo∣cester An. D. 1425. A. Reg. 4. (hauing susteined many losses aswell of friends as treasure in punishment of that great sinne, in ta∣king anothers wife) forthwith marries Eleanour, daughter to Reignald Lord Cobham of Sterborough, whereby he made her amends for that Stowes Annal. vnlawfull familiarity which had formerly passed betweene them. Meanewhile the Court of England doth well shew that the King was an infant, for it was full of dange∣rous Court-factions in England. emulations and sidings, the Duke of Gloucester (whose high office it was to tender the welfare of the King and State) laying sundry grieuous accusati∣ons *See Foxe his Martyrologe in H. 6. against the Cardinall Beaufort (sonne of Iohn Duke of Lancaster) Bishop of Winchester and Lord Chancellor as being a person very dangerous vn∣to both. (10) The news of these home-contentions com∣ming to the Duke of Bedford into France, easily drew him home, though the state of that Realme could not well want his presence. For Iohn Duke of Britaine, (notwithstanding his late renouation of league with the Regent at Amiens) iealous of the Polyd. Verg. Lib. 23. English great∣nes turned sodeinely to Charles, and with him, Ar∣thur, Earle of Richmond his brother. This puts fresh spirit into the drooping Prince. Arthur is by Charles made Constable of his France, in place of the Scottish Earle, who was slaine at the bloody Battell of Vernoil. The Duke of Britaine ouerliues this re∣uolt but a small time. Arthur to declare his for∣wardnes on the behalfe of Charles, assembleth about twenty thousand men, and with them sodeinely be∣siegeth The new Con∣stable of France miscarrieth in his first enter∣prize. S. Iean a Towne of Normandy, vpon the fron∣tier of Britaine; which Edmund Duke of Sommerset, Gouernour of Normandy, had lately fortified and stuft with souldiers. The vnexpected arriuall of the French, did greatly at the first perplex the English, but vpon better aduise, they valiantly sallied out vp∣on them, both before and behind, which stroke so great terrour into the enemy, that with losse of their Artillery, and many of their people they forsooke the siege. To redeeme this dishonour, he turnes his fury vpon the Countrey of Angio , which in many parts he depopulates and spoiles. The Regent be∣ing resolued to returne into England, leaues behind him Bea champ Ho . Earle of Warwicke; as lieutenant, who was lately arriued in France, hauing six thousand fresh Souldiers in his company. (11) The presence of the Duke of Bedford Regent The Duke of Bedford returne into England to appe se the Court▪ factions. of France, was to the State of England very necessary. For the wisdome and authority of so great a Prince, being eldest vncle to the King, and one whom many great deedes made famous, allaied the distemper which he found at his arriual. It was a worke wor∣thy of his labour, and he also found it to be a worke indeed, and not easily effectuable. The differences were debated first at Saint Albans, then at Northamp∣ton, lastly in a Parliament at Leicester, which continu∣ed there till toward the end of Iune. The Duke of Bedford himselfe, to auoid the note of partiality, for that his brother of Glocester was a party did not intermeddle otherwise then as in Generall words to perswade amity, but the whole cause was referred to arbitrators of greatest Nobility and prudence: by whose endeuours all those differences and greeuan∣ces were equally thrust into one sacke, to be sealed vp for euer by obliuion, and without mention of a∣mends The Protector and the Bishop made ends. on either side, the Duke and Bishop (the one hauing sworne by his Hol sh. Princehood, the other by his Priesthood, truly to obserue the award,) shooke hands, and were fully for that time reconciled. After which holy and necessary worke of priuate attone∣ments, ensued acts of festiuitie and honor. For in The King re∣ceiue Knight∣hood and dub∣beth Ri ard Duke of Yorke. the same Towne of Leicester the young King, not then fiue yeeres of age, was at the high feast of Pente∣cost dubbed Knight by the Regent of France. Im∣mediately whereupon the King honored Richard Earle of Cambridge, (who by the fatall errour of the Counsell was at this Parliament created Duke of Yorke, the same who was father to Edward the fourth) with the order of knighthood, and about forty more with him. This Richard Duke of Yorke was hee, who brought vpon this Kingdome and nation most dolefull diuisions to the vtter extirpation of all the male lines of either house, that is to say, his owne, and that of Lancaster, whereof the young King was head. From Leicester the King was conueighed to Killingworth, and Thomas Duke of Excester dying, Beauchamp Earle of Warwicke, was constituted Guardi∣an and Tutor to the King. (12) The Regent hauing thus worthily prouided A. D. 1427. A. reg. 5. The Regent and the Lord Talbot with fresh forces passe into France. for the quiet estate of the King and Country, returns to his charge in France. There went ouer at the same time a choise and great number of fresh men, vnder the conduct of that immortally renowmed, the L. Talbot, whose victories (saith Polydor) were so many, that his name was not onely most dreadfull to the French, but most famous through the world, euen at this present. That yee may know the man not to haue beene studious of fine Phrases; vpon the one Talbot . side of his sword-blade was engrauen, Sum Talboti, and vpon the other this boisterous blunt sentence; Pro vincere inimicos meos. The Duke of Alanzon (taken at the Castell of Ver∣noil) was set at liberty vpon payment of two agwin. hun∣dreth thousand Scutes of gold. At Mountarges a∣bout Orleance the English receiued an ouerthrow with the losse of about fifteene hundreth of their num∣bers, and in Britaine the French sustained great dam∣mages by a Captaine of the Duke of Sommersets. These were petty matters: They of Mantz in Maine had drawne in the French by night, who massacred the English. William Earle of Suffolke Captain of the place sends to Iohn Lord Talbot for succour. It came, and that so vnexpectedly, that the French were alike distrest. All but souldiers were spared, and many al∣so of them, though thrust into prisons. The Trai∣tours which had caused so much mischiefe, had their deserts by death. From hence the Lord Talbot mar∣ched to other enterprises. The quality of our taske cals vs to the maine. (13) Thomas Lord Montacute Earle of Salisbu∣ry, being with the Regent at Paris, and considering what forces of men, and all prouisions the English then enioied, bethought himselfe of some action, which might answere the greatnesse of his owne name, and of the publike meanes. The siege of Orleance is by him propounded to the Councell. The credite of the Motioner was alone an argument of power to conuince the possibility. His desires were therefore furnished with all competent proui∣sions. They of Orleance hearing what a storme was comming (for the name of this Earle was worthily terrible) with great diligence ordaine for their de∣fence. The P l. A ll. Suburbes (answerable in bignesse to a good City) they leuell with the earth, that the ene∣mie might not from thence annoy them. Men, vi∣ctuals, The siege of Or∣leance. munition, and constant intentions to fight for their liberty, and safegard abounded. The Earle of Sarisburie, the Lord Talbot, and a dreadfull puissance vnder most expert commanders present themselues before it. Orleance was and is an Episcopall See, a Parliament Towne, and Vniuersity, richly scituate vpon the riuer of Loir, whose best glory it is, being the chiefe City which that renowned streame wa∣tereth. No enemies appearing abroad, he Polyd. Uerg. approa∣cheth close to the walles. Assaults Paul. Aemyl. prouing vain, he entrencheth about it, and to secure his Campe, casts vp ramparts and other works, one of which (by reason of the hugenesse thereof) was called London, by the name of the chiefe-City of England. The Fort which stood at the Bridge foot beyond the Loyr, hee seiseth vpon and closeth them vp on euery side. Charles of France could minister no sufficient succor. God, when mans helpe failes interposeth his hand, which as all of vs daily feele, so is it most conspicu∣ous in the deliuerance of Nations. The City is dri∣uen to some miserie through the beginning want of all things; for the siege had now endured about 60. daies Polyd. Virg. l. 23 not without much bloudshed on both sides. The Earle of Salisburie impatient of such delay, pur∣poseth to giue a generall assault. The better to con∣sider vpon the course, hee stands to take view at a window barred with Iron which ouerlookt the Ci∣ty toward the East. Behold how God began to vn∣cutte the knot of those bands with which the English held France bound, a bullet of a great piece (which The Earle of Salisbury aine with a great shot before Orleance. lay ready leueld at that window) discharged by the Gunners . sonne, a lad, stroke the grates, whose splin∣ters so wounded the Earle, and one Sir Thomas Gar∣graue, that they both dyed of the incurable hurts within few dayes. Heare now the common iudge∣ment of Writers concerning this Earles losse: Polyd. Uerg. Pre∣sently after the death of this man the fortune of the war changed. Paul. Aemyl. Now both mortall and immortall powers be∣ganne to looke fauourably vpon the State of France. This to the Fabi . English was Initium malorum: for after this mishappe they rather lost then wanne, so that by little and little they lost all their possession in France: and albeit that somwhat they got after, yet for one that they wan, they lost three. So that Polydor not without cause (after many other great praises) doth elsewhere call him the man in whom the safety of the English state consisted. The vertue therefore of a fortunate Generall is inestimable. (14) Howbeit the siege did not determine with his life, William Earle of Suffolke, the Lord Talbot & the rest maintained the same all the winter. The The siege conti∣nued notwith∣standing the Earles death. wants of the Campe were relieued from Paris by a conuoy, vnder the guard of Sir Iohn Fastolfe and fif∣teene hundred souldiers who arriued safe in despite of all the attempts to distresse thē, which the French made. The City would yeeld it selfe, but not to the English. The Duke of Burgundie they were content should haue the honour. A subtle stratagem, rather Orl ce offers to become Bur∣gundian, but the English would not admit there∣of. then an offer of yeelding, for there was likelihoode in it to breake thereby the amity betweene the Eng∣lish and him. The Regent and his Counsell being sent vnto, thought it not reasonable (Aemylius erro∣niously makes the late Earle of Salisbury the Author of that refusall) neither indeed was it, theirs hauing beene the cost and labour. The Duke of Burgundy construed this repulse sowerly, which marred his taste of the English friendshippe euer after: yet the Regents answere was iust and honest. That the warre was made in King Henries name, and therefore Orleance ought to be King Henries. Among these difficulties stood the French affaires. Charles of France vnder∣standing the miserable straites of his deare City, & ignorant how to remedy so neere a mischiefe; there presented herselfe vnto him at Chinon a yong maid about eighteene yeeres old, called Ioan of Loraine, Serres amlet by Edward Grims . Ioan the martial maid miraculou∣sly sent to deli∣uer Orleance and Fr . daughter to Iames of Arck dwelling in Domremy neere Va caleurs, a P l. Aemyl. Shepheardesse vnder her fa∣ther, whose flockes shee tended, bids him not faint, and constantly affirmes, that God had sent her to de∣liuer the Realme of France from the English yoake, and restore him to the fulnesse of his fortunes. Shee was not forthwith credited; but when the wise of both sorts, aswell Clerkes as Souldiers had sifted her with manifold questions, she continued in her first speech so stedfastly, vttering nothing but that which was Serres Inuentar. modest, chast and holy, that honour and faith was giuen vnto her sayings. An Poly. Uerg. old woman directed her. Ioan armes her selfe like a man, and requires to haue that sword which hung in Serres Inuentar. S. Katherines church of Fierebois in Touraine. This demaund encreased their admiration of her; for such a Polyd. Verg. sword was found among the old Donaries or Votiue tokens of that Church. Thus warlikely arrayed she rides to Blois, where forces and fresh victuals lay for the reliefe of Orleance. Shee with the Admirall and Marshall of France enters safe. This did greatly encourage the fainting French. Ioan the maide of God, so they cal∣led her, (though Gerard. Seg de Haillin, & some other French Authors. some haue written that it was a practise or imposture) writes thus to de la Pole Earle of Suffolke, who succeeded Salisbury in the maine charge of that siege. (15) King of England do reason to the King of hea∣uen, for his bloud royall; yeeld vp to the Virgine the Serres out of the Originall Copie translated by Edw. Grimst . keyes of all the good Cities which you haue forced. She is come from heauen to reclaime the bloud royall, and is ready to make a peace, if you bee ready to doe reason: yeeld therefore, and pay what you haue taken, King of England: I am the chiefe of this war, wheresoeuer I encounter your men in France, I will chase them wil they or no. If they will obey, I will take them to mercy. The Virgine comes from heauen to driue you The Virag her letter to the English General before Orleance. out of France. If you will not obey, shee will cause so great a stirre as the like hath not beene these thousand yeeres in France. And beleeue certainly, that the king of heauen will send to her, and her good men of Arms, more force then you can haue. Goe in Gods name into your Country: bee not obstinate, for you shall not hold France of the King of Heauen, the sonne of S. Marie, but Charles shall enioy it, the King and lawfull heire to whom God hath giuen it. Hee shall enter Paris with a goodly traine; you William de la Pole Earle of Suffolke, Iohn Lord Talbot, Thomas L. Scales Licutenants to the Duke of Bedford, and you Duke of Bedford terming your selfe egent of the Realme of France, spare innocent bloud, and leaue Or∣leance in liberty. If you doe not reason to them whom you haue wronged, the French will doe the goodliest exploit that euer was done in Christendome. Vnder∣stand these newes of God, and of the Virgine. Yet Charles had at this time no whole Countries vnder his obedience, Serres. but Languede and Daulphin against which both the Sauoyard and Burgundian pre∣pared, but miscarried, the Prince of Orenge the third confederate being discomfited. (16) This letter was entertained by the English with laughter. Ioan reputed no better then a Bed∣lam or Enchantresse. Though to some it may seem more honourable to our Nation, that they were not to bee expelled by a humane power, but by a diuine, extraordinarily reuealing it selfe. Du Serres describes this Paragon in these words. Shee had a modest coun∣tenance, sweete, ciuill, and resolute, her discourse was The description of Ioan la Pucel∣le de Dieu, or the maid of God. temperate, reasonable and retired, her actions cold, shew∣ing great chastity without vanity, affectation, babling, or courtly lightnesse. Let vs not dissemble what wee finde written. By her encouragements and con∣duct The siege of Orleance raised. the English had Orleance pluckt out of their hopes, after they had suffered the Duke of Alanson to enter with new force, and with much losse were driuen to raise the siege. Ioan herselfe was wounded at one sallie in which shee led, being shot through the arme with an arrow. Iudge what she esteemed of that hurt, when shee vsed these admirable and ter∣rible words. This is a fauour, let vs goe on; they cannot escape the hand of God. In all aduentures she was one and formost. The English lost at this siege, the Earle of Salisbury, the Lord Molins, the Lord P ynings, and many other. But doe not rashly beleeue Serres in say∣ing, that of all sorts were slaine in such Sallies, as the martiall Virgine made eight thousand. Our Writers say but S wes A ls. six hundreth. The Lord Talbot marched away with aboue nine thousand, whom Ioan would not suffer the French to pursue. In memory of this admirable deliuerance, they of that City erected a monument, where Charles the seuenth king of France and Ioan the Martiall maide were represented, knee∣ling in Armour, eleuating their eyes and handes to heauen, in signe of thankes and acknowledgement. (17) There was an interchangeable taking and recouering of Townes and places of importance vp∣on The reflux or ebbe of the Eng∣lish greatnesse in France. both sides. The Lord Talbot tooke Lauall, and the Earle of Suffolke puts himself into Iergeaux. Thi∣ther the Duke of Alanson with Ioan and other great Captaines come, which they force by assault. Sir Alexander Pool the Earles brother was slaine, with many others in the fight, the Earle himselfe remai∣ned prisoner. The Duke added some other places to this Conquest: soone after his numbers are aug∣mented by the repaire to him of Arthur Constable of France, the Earle of Vandome, the Lord Dalbret and others, so that now their whole Army contay∣ned about twenty and three thousand men. With these they encounter the Lord Talbot (who had scarce the fifth part of their numbers) at a village called Patay, whom they charged so sodainely, that his Archers had no time to fortifie their battels (af∣ter their manner) with a Palizado, or empa ement of Polyd. Verg. stakes, so that the chiefe fight must bee made vpon horsebacke. After three houres bloudy resistance, the English were put to the worst. Stows Annal. The Lord Scales The L. Talbot taken in battel. the Lord Hungerford, Sir Thomas Rampstone, and e∣uen the Lord Talbot himselfe (being first wounded in the backe) were taken. The footmen enforced to trust to their Polyd. Verg. swords vnder the shelter of such horsemen as remained, retreated in order, and came to a place of safety. The English lost aboue a thou∣sand, the French aboue 600. This blow shooke the whole fabricke of the English greatnesse in France, at the very foundations, awaking multitudes (euen of those who before had vowed fealty to the English, and now had colour of diuine warrant for violating that vow) to ioyne with the victors for the recoue∣ry of common liberty. There followed the present reuolt of sundry townes; neither was it long before Charles crowned King of France at Rheimes. Charles himselfe issues out in Armes, recouers the City of Aunerre and Reims; where according to the Maides direction, hee was solemnly crowned King. Hitherto shee might bee thought propheticall and fortunate. It should seeme now that the chiefe part of her imployment was accomplished, yet she flou∣rished a while longer. The Duke of Bedford to but∣tresse the shrinking state of English affaires in France, and to encounter euill fortune in the face, vpon the vnpleasant newes of Orleance rescued, and Talbots taking, musters his whole present forces which made aboue ten thousand English, besides certaine wings of Normans: with these he marcheth out of Paris, and opposeth himselfe to the Current of Charles his new hopes who meant to attempt that City, some of whose Citizens held strict and secret correspondence with him. But vpon this affrontment he suspended the execution of that design, hauing as then no hope to atchieue it. The Regent returnes to Paris, Ioane the Pucell disswaded Charles from fight. (18) Places of speciall note as Campeigne and Beauuois yeelded themselues voluntarily to Charles. The Regent hauing setled the Estate, and Garrisons of the Chiefe City, passeth into Normandy, to pro∣uide for a safe retreat there, if perhaps the English (by the ineuitable will of God) should bee enforced to quit their other holdes and dominions: which hee began to suspect, for that he had intelligence of a secret purpose, which the French pursued to winne the Burgundians from King Henries side. While the Regent was absent vpon this occasion, Charles got the Towne of Saint Denis, (a neighbour to Paris) though hee held it not long by practise. From thence he sends the Duke of Alanson and Ioane to trie their friends and fortunes at Paris. They found not hoped successe, for the English gaue them so rough an encounter, that Ioan her selfe was P l. Aemyl. Ioh Til. Chr. woun∣ded; and the rest with much slaughter driuen to fall off. The Regent hearing of these attempts, entru∣steth the Coast-Townes of Normandy, to the care of Richard Duke of Yorke, and Roan (the Capitall City of that Dutchy) to Edmund Duke of Sommerset, himselfe speedes to Paris, where he commends the souldiers and Citizens for that they had not imitated the dis∣loyaltie of their Neighbours. New supplies came out of England. The next enterprize was to reduce Campeigne to obedience. Iohn of Luxemburg with Burgundians and some English besiegeth it. Here the glory of Ioan vnfortunately ended; for comming to the rescue shee entred indeed, but afterward sally∣ing Ioan taken pri∣soner. forth, her troupes were beaten, and her selfe (being betrayed, say her fauourers) taken prisoner Chron. de Bretaig. apud Holinsh. p. 604. by the said Burgundian Serres saith by the bastard of Vandome. Knight, who for the value of her ransome (ten thousand pounds Turnoys, and three hundreth Crownes yeerely rent) deliuered her vnto the English. The siege was notwithstanding raysed; they sent her to Roan, where she (about nine Holinshed. or ten moneths after) was burnt to death. Claelia She is burnt for a witch at Roan. was saued by Tit. L . Pata . D cad. 1. Porsenna; and it is not to be doubted, but that the magnanimity of the English would haue spared her, had they not found it necessary to deface the opinion which the French euen with su∣perstition had conceiued of her. Our See Holinsh. in Hen. 6. Writers shew how the course of her life being legally examined by the Bishoppe of Beauois (in whose Diocesse shee was taken) and shee thereupon for sorcerie, bloud∣shed, The French got this sentence to be reuersed by the Pope 26. yeeres after. and vnnaturall vse of manlike apparrell, and habiliments contrary to her sex, condemned to die, was notwithstanding vpon her solemne abiu∣ring of such her lewd practises, pardoned her life, till againe conuicted of periurious relapsing, though acknowledging her selfe a Stow. strumpet, and fayning to be with child, she deseruedly vnderwent that punish∣ment which she sought to delay. The rumor of her end, and the ignominious cause thereof was some∣what incommodious to the affaires of Charles. It K. Henry in to come in person into France. was thought that the comming of King Henry to Paris would be much more. (19) Hee had already with great solemnity receiued the Crowne of England at Westminster, being about nine yeeres olde, a most fashionable and waxen age for all impression either of good or bad. The next yeere after his Coronation in England, he passeth ouer into France there also to receiue the diademe thereof. The Constableship of England, was Richard Duke of Yorke made Constable of England. before his departure, assigned by Patent for terme of life to Richard Duke of Yorke (which gaue him a more feeling of greatnes and secretly whetted his ambiti∣ous appetite,) vpon this occasion. One Iohn Vpton, of Feuersham in Kent Notarie, accused Iohn Down of the same place Gentleman, That hee and his com∣plices did imagine the Kings death at his Coronation. The combat was granted, and in Smithfield (the Duke of Yorke exercising the office of high Consta∣ble) they fought in lists. In the end the Kings name was vsed to part and forgiue them. It is a vice to suspect too farre. The Duke of Yorke (a most subtle man) seemes neuer in heart to haue beene a true sub∣iect to King Henry: yet no man saith, hee was any author in this. Henrie (the common wealth hauing yeelded to liber all grants of money) is now ready to enter Paris. England remained vnder the gouern∣ment of the Duke of Glocester. (20) There is no doubt that the English there A. D. 1431. A. Reg. 10. at their Kings presence, set forth their greatnes to the full shew. The yong King attended vpon with two English Cardinals, Yorke, and Winchester, and great Princes of his blood, Dukes, Earles, Barons, Prelates, and the flower of our nation, with many aswel French and Burgonians, as Normans and others, excellentlie well appointed, makes a triumphant entry into the head City of that most noble Monarchy. There Henry crowned King of France in Paris. was no signe in the People but of ioy and welcome; the showes were many and magnificent. Vpon the seuenth day of December, he was solemnely Crow∣ned King of France, by the P l Aemyl. Cardinall of Winchester, his great vncle, in the Ioh. Tyl. Chr. Chiefe Church of Paris, called of our Lady. The Duke of Bedford entertained the minds of the Assembly with a set speech, wherein he declared, King Henrie his Nephewes vndoubted title to that Crowne, and commended the same to their fidelities, adding ample promises of honour and emolument. Such of the French Nobilitie as were present, did their ho∣mage. The people had good and gratious words giuen vnto them, and certaine Polyd. Verg. quantities of money, Corne, and wine, in the nature of a donatiue, liberal∣ly distributed among them. Proclamations were made, that all Frenchmen who came in by a day there named, should be protected. The Kings Patents and grants touching French matters, passed vnder the seale and stile of Henry King of the Ga orum, to di∣stinguish, (it see∣meth) from the former meere ti∣tular, of Galli Rex; so also the French King v∣sually stile them∣selues. Frenchmen and of England, which Seale (for variety) we haue prefix∣ed, as we found it annexed, *to a writing directed by the King to his Court of Requests in his Pallace at Paris; but for English affaires he vsed another Seale, being in euery point like vnto that In Custodia Io. Guill m H raldi pe iss. Dat. H. 6. 7. of King Henry the fourth, and (as some thinke) the very same stamp, (which therefore we haue here omitted,) as likewise some Inter Chart Colleg Et . Charters of his there are, whereunto he af∣fixed the seale of his father. Charles of France estee∣med not himselfe the lesse a King for all this, but pursues his affaire. His people tooke the City of Char∣tres by a stratagem, the Bishop whereof (because a Burgundian) they also put to the sword with others. Neither were the English idle. Iohn Duke of Norfolke, Thomas Earle of Arundel, Richard Beauchamp Earle of Warwicke, the Earle of Suffolke, and others, made vp this losse with aduantage. Their actions are placed by some as done before the Coronation which is likely. The King hauing thus taken possession of France, not long after tooke his farewell thereof. His returne was by Roan, and so ouer land to Callais, from whence The King re∣turnes into Eng∣land. vpon the eleuenth day of February, hee arriued safe at Douer. His vncle the Duke of Glocester was able to giue an honest, and good account of the Gouernment during the kings absence. The suppres∣siō of an insurrection, beginning at Abingdon in Ox∣fordshire The Protector breakes an insur∣rection at Abing∣ton in the Shell. was not the least seruice. A weauer (the Ba∣liffe of the Towne) was the vlcerous head, to which that corruption gathered; who had changed his own name, and called himselfe; Iacke Sharpe of Wigmores land in Wales. The speciall colour of his attempt was Stowes Annal. to haue massacred Priests; whose heads (he said) hee would make as cheape as Sheepes-heads; that is, two or three, or ten for a penny. But the mention of Wig∣mores lands, the ancient inheritance of Mortimer, (then the possession of the fatall Duke of Yorke, who afterward in the right of that name, challenged the Crowne of England from King Henry) insinuates somewhat further. The varlet forfeited his head and foure quarters for his attempt. It is to be won∣dred that the Councell of Estate vnder King Henry, hearing that title so often glanced at, prouided not better against the mischiefe. But the eies and hearts of the wise are blinded, when God hath a purpose to reserue a scourge, or to hide the fire which shall af∣terward be vsed to consume a nation. Vnquiet hu∣mors were aswell abroad as at home. The souldiers of Callais discontented with their wages as to little began to be mutinously troublesome. The Regent A mutinie be∣ginning in Callais appeased. comes thither in person in Easter weeke, where he ex∣erciseth necessary discipline seuerely. Foure, the most faulty lost their heads, one hundred and ten are cashered, and banisht from the Towne, as sixe score others had formerly beene. Why dwell we vpon so petty accidents? The losse of the Kingdome of France is imminent. Let vs diligently note the de∣grees which God found out to depriue our Nation of that honor. In this iourney of the Regent, King Henries interest was not aduanced. The Regent (a widdower) roade from thence to Turwin, where The Duke of Bedford marri∣eth the Earle of Saint Pauls daughter. (without the Burgundians priuity) he married the Lady Iaquet, aged about Holinsh. seuenteene yeeres Serre . daugh∣ter to Peter of Lutzembourg Earle of S. Paul no friend to the Burgundian. This was nothing prosperous to the English affaires. For Anne, the Regents for∣mer wife, sister to the Duke of Burgundy, being, while shee liued, a strong reason and assurance of amitie, weakened the same by her death; and this second marriage, not pleasing the Burgundian, did yet more diminish it. These were but degrees. In the meane space, the accidents of warre between the English and French, were manifold and perplext, now wee, now they leesing, or gaining, as opportu∣nity serued: which vncertainties brought forth their ordinary progenies, fearefull outrages, and Ioh. Til. Chron. s rcitie of all things needfull for the vse of man. It would be wearisome, and not much necessary, to recount the particular lesser actions, neitheir indeed is it easie; for who can readily tell the sieges, surprises, skirmishes and the like, being so confusedly set down by Authors, wherein diuers of both Nations wanne to themselues much honour, and serued the vses of those times, and their owne. The vttermost effect of those great labours, was, that the English Regency fell not forthwith into nothing. Permanent lea∣ders in those publike seruices were the Regent him∣selfe; their maine Pillar and Chiefe life, Thomas Earle of Arundel, Richard Earle of Warwicke, Henry his Sonne, the Lord Willoughby, the thrice noble Iohn Lord Talbot, (who was now at liberty,) the Lord Scales, besides Knights, Esquires, and other valiant Cap∣taines a multitude. (21) The fortune of Renate Duke of Barre, is not to be omitted, for that afterward; our King vn∣luckely married into his house. He had to Paul. Aemil. wife I∣sabell the daughter, and heire of Charles Duke of Lor∣raine, by whom he had issue two sonnes, and two daughters, the youngest of which was Lady Marga∣ret, whom King Henry afterward tooke to wife. Charles Duke of Lorraine dying, Renate thinkes to suc∣ceed in that estate. Antony Earle of Vallemont, bro∣ther to Charles presumes he hath a neerer right. The matter comes to be determined by blowes. Charles King of France was a stedfast supporter of Renates claime▪ in lieu of like offices performed by Renate to him in the times of most difficulty. The Regent and Philip Duke of Burgundy, stood for the Earle. Renate Duke of rrain and Barre taken prisoner. Their aides preuailed so much, that Renates forces were beaten with losse of about Polyd. Verg. l. 23. three thousand, from the siege of Vallemont, and himselfe with not fewer then two hundred others remained prisoner to the Duke of Burgundy, one of whose subiects com∣manded in chiefe at that enterprise. This Paul. Aemil. Renate was afterward entituled to the Crowne of Naples and Sicilia, by the testament of Ioane Queene of them. The King of France might seeme to haue susteined a grieuous losse by the enthralment of this Duke: but the English gained nothing thereby: for his perswasions, and priuate offices on the behalfe of King Charles, did not a little prepare the Burgundi∣ans heart (which now was knit to the English but with feeble Arteries) to accept in time the holy im∣pression of reconcilement. The French who liued vnder the Regency, or in danger of the English, made choise of the Burgundian to protect them, which could not be embarred to them, for that he was as yet King Henries pretended friend. Indeed this Scene and vnstable state of affaires was full of hor∣rour, which Polyd re Vergill describeth well enough. While the English and French (quoth he) contend for Dominion, Soueraignty and life it selfe, mens goods in France were violently taken by the licence of warre, Chur∣ches spoiled, men euery where murthered, or wounded, o∣ther, put to death, or tortured; Matrons rauished, Maids forcibly drawne from out their parents armes to be de∣flowred, The miserable face of France by occasion of th se warres. Townes daily taken, daily spoiled, daily defaced, the riches of the Inhabitants carried whither the Con∣querors thinke good; h sen and villages round about set on fire: no kind of cruelty is left vnpractised vpon the miserable French; omitting many hundreth kinds of other calamities, which all at once oppressed them. Adde here∣unto that the Commonwealth being destitute of the helpe of lawes, (which for the most part are mute in times of warre and muti ie) floateth vp and downe without any anchorage at right or iustice. Neither was England her∣selfe voide of these mischiefes, who euery day heard the newes of her valiant childrens funerals, slaine in perpetu∣all skirmishes and bickerings, her generall wealth continu∣ally d, and wained, so that the euils seemed almost equall, and the whole Westerne world ecchoed the groanes and sighes of either Nations quarrels, being the common argument of speech and compassion throughout Chri∣stendome. (22) The course certainly which the English held, did only faintly keepe aliue the Generall State of the Regency, without giuing period to the warre, either by finishing the Conquest, or setling that which was conquered. Some would haue had large supplies of men, and treasure leuied, that King Charles might no where haue any rest: Of this opi∣nion were Bedford Poly. Verg. himselfe, the Dukes of Yorke and Sommerset. This Counsell was not followed, but another, in shew more frugall, which fed the euils, but redressed none. Present sparings doe oftentimes draw after them infinite wasts, and no husbandrie proues so ill, as vnseasonable Parsimony. In the mean time, the Earle of Arundel and the Lord Talbot, car∣ry about victorious Armes, and terrifie Angiou, Main, and other places with their successes. In Normandie, neuerthelesse the common people drew together in huge multitudes. There were three∣score Serres. Inuent. thousand of them rebelliously knotted toge∣ther in Vexin, Norman, and twenty thousand in C ux. Their purpose was (through dislike of the Eng∣lish Gouernment, or practise of the French) to haue reacht one hand to King Charles, and to haue thrust King Henries officers out. What is a multitude with∣out The Commons of Normandy rise against the English. aduise? To stoppe their insolency and course which Holinsh. they held toward Caen, the Earle of Polyd. Uerg. Arun∣del, and Robert Lord Willoughby, with about thirteen hundred light horse, and sixe thousand Archers, march against them, by direction of the Dukes of Yorke and ommerset, who had the chiefe Leiutenan∣cies in Normandy. They diuide their forces to vse them with the more aduantage. The Earle stayes in Ambush with two parts, the Lord Willoughby drawes them into it with the third. A thousand of the Re∣bels were cut down before the souldiers hands could be stayed to spare the rest, who basely (as it became them) threw away their weapons, and fell to the earth, crying mercy. The multitudes were suffered to returne, their ringleaders lost their liues. All that the world could collect by this popular insurrection was, that the Normans would be gladly rid of the Eng∣lish. Nothing else was done. This Earle of Arun∣dell The Earle of Arundel slaine. hauing done sundry noble deeds during the wars in France, receiued his deathes wound shortly af∣ter in a skirmish at Gerberoy in Beauuo sine, where La Hire (a famous Captaine among the enemies) had the day. (23) The Regency yet held, and the miseries of France (being burnt vp by the fiery reflections of two Counter-Sunnes) were nothing diminished: Who should giue to them a Period? while the Duke of Burgundy continued English, it could not be. To prepare therefore a separation betweene them, such of the Nobility as went ouer to the Burgundian Duke told him, Paul. Aemyl. That King Charles vpon all occasions (when speech was ministred) spake of him honourably, and inwardly wished him well, and that he neuer heard any mention of the murther committed vpon the Duke his fa∣ther, (cause of the sonnes hatred to France) but he hearti∣ly sighed, protesting hee was neither party nor priuy thereunto. These and the like mollifying salues ap∣plyed to the tumors of his reuengefull affections, did worke strongly, the rather for that his minde heretofore possessed with the English amity, was now vacant in that part, the same (by the means of sundry iealousies and auersions) lying open to con∣trary impressions. There wanted but an outward ho∣nourable meanes to fashion him entirely to the French partie. Let vs heare I ent. of Fr. Serves in this point: The Deputies of the Generall Councell presse both French, English and Burgundians to end all quar∣rels by some good composition. The City of Arras is allowed of them all to treat in. From the E nius 4. Pope and Councell of Pisa, there came the Cardinals of S. Crosse and Cypres, with twelue Bishoppes. For the ners of he English, French and Burgundians. King of France, there was the Duke of Bourbon, the Earle of Richmond Constable of France, the Arch∣bishoppe of Reims, Chancellour of France, and many others, great, noble, wise and learned men. For the King of England, the two Cardinals of Yorke and Winchester, the Earles of Suffolke (* Iohn Holland Earle of Huntington) the Bishoppe of Saint Dauids, Iohn Holinsh. Ratcliffe Keeper of the great Seale, the Lord Hun∣gerford, Ralfe the wise Officiall of Canterbury, and some Doctors of Diuinity. For Philip Duke of bur∣gundy, the Duke of Guelders, the Earle of Nassau, the Bishoppe of Cambray, Count Vernamb urg, the Bishoppe of Leige; fiue other great Earles, be∣sides the Deputies of many his best Townes, suffi∣cient to shew, that though hee was in title but a Duke, yet that his greatnesse was equall to a King. When it came to communication, the English being also in possession, vrged farther for themselues the right of descent, and the act of Charles the sixth, father to this Charles, by which act the Crowne of France was setled vpon Henry the fifth, and the issue of the Lady Kathe∣rine his wife, and therefore they propounded no other condition of peace, but that Henry their King might haue all, and Polyd. Verg. lib. 3. Charles to hold of him. The French offered Nor∣mandie and Guien. There ended the hope of agree∣ment betweene them, for neither party would ac∣cept. King Charles therefore resoluing to maime the English faction vpon any termes (how base soe∣uer) sends Duke Philip a blanke, bids him therin to Serres in Char. 7. prescribe his owne conditions and demands: he did so: and his Conditions were so vnreasonable, and so ma∣ny, euen a great volume full, (saith a French man) as it Serres. is strange, so great a Monarch should stoope so much to his subiect and v ssall, but that necessity hath no law. They Serres. ioine hereupon most firmely, and the Duke The French and Burgundian agree. 24 Sept. 1435 (a man wholy transported by profite) declares him∣selfe a publike enemie to all the enemies of King Charles, and friend to all his friends. This was the first parting stroke which seuered the French Domi∣nions from the English Soueraignty: the euent de∣clared, that the English had done more wisely, if they had accepted Normandy and Guyen; but as the case stood, then they could not in honour doe it; and Councels are not to bee measured by euents; for so the most foolish may sometimes passe for prudent. King Henry not onely lost now hereby a most need∣full friend, but was compelled to relie vpon his single strengthes, aswell against King Charles his na∣turall enemie, as against the Duke of Burgundie, who plainely seemed to haue betrayed the cause. To set a glosse vpon this fact, the Duke Polyd. Verg. dispatcheth Am∣bassadors into England to King Henry (who as In C l. 7. Ae∣mylius erroneously saith was present at this treaty of Arras) to make known the reasons of his peace with King Charles, and to perswade the King to enter∣taine the same. This Ambassage was so odious to the English, that they forbare not to call the Duke a deceitfull man, a turn-seruer, a periured person, and a Traitor. (24) The popular hatred also was such against the Dukes Subiects, resiant in London, that they were beaten and slaine many of them, before the fu∣rie thereof could be stayed by Proclamation. The Ambassadors returne with honest admonitions to their Master, against which, his eares and senses were strongly mured; for King Charles had set about them as it were a Barricado of royalties, priuiledges, The incredible rate at which K. Charles pur∣chased the Bur∣gundians good honours, money, Cities, Townes and whole Pro∣uinces, which he confirmed to the Duke, onely to withdraw him from vs. The whole Counties of Paul. Aemyl. A , Erre, Ponthieu, Bolein, Artois, the towne of * Polyd. Uerg. Abb lle, and other lands, the Cities and Townes in Picardy, vpon the water of So e, Amiens, Corbie, Pe∣r n, S. Quintin, but these last as it were in gage till Paul. Aemyl. foure hundreth thousand Crownes were satisfi∣ed: Briefly, what not? the Charity of King Charles was so feruent to make the Duke of Burgundy a true Frenchman once againe: hee paide so deare for it, that wee may thinke him worthy to obtaine his de∣sire; yet was it worth his cost; for Aemylius saith most truly, that the ceasing of that indignation did re∣deeme the French from a forraine gouernment, as the first assuming thereof had made the English, Lords ouer France. But, howsoeuer the high and iust displea∣sure, which this Prince tooke for the wicked mur∣ther of his father, (aboundantly satisfied-for by this A. D. 1435. A. reg. 14. The Burgundian renounceth to the Regent his friendship with England. treatie) moued him first to embrace the English amity, hee afterward most subtilely conuerted the reuenge (by way of taking amends) to the enlarge∣ment of his proper riches, power and amplitude. After his Ambassadors returned, hee sends backe all contracts to the Duke of Bedford at Paris, and renounceth the alliance of England with a watch∣word, that euery one should looke to himselfe. (25) Each man hereupon (saith Inuent of Fr. Serres) shar∣pens his sword and scoures his Armes, to recouer that by force which they could not obtaine by rea∣son; Serres might better haue said, reasoning. All things certainly fauoured the French designes; for this was the generall estate of the English affaires. King Henry scarce out of his Child-hood; and when he came to mans age, not Man enough to manage so turbulent occurrents; the Princes of the blood weakely vnited in loue, for the common good; the Protector vigilant ouer England, the Regent carefull for France, but both priuately enuied; Richard Duke of Yorke (whose strenghts daily increased, which in time he meant nothing lesse then to vse for the be∣nefit of King Henry,) ambitiously reseruing himselfe for a deare day; most of the great warriours slaine; and in briefe a great inability (for want of a Soule, willing and fit to looke so sterne and dismall aduen∣tures in the face) through the whole body of the English forces; which though otherwise they might haue lingred out the warre, and kept their footing, yet the death of the great Duke of Bedford Regent of France doubled the difficulty, or rather the im∣possibility. The Duke of Bedford Regent of France dieth at Paris. In taking this triumphant Peere away, God made it manifest, that he held the English vn∣worthy and vnfit to continue their Empire among the French any longer. This Prince not long after this reuolt of Duke Philip, died at Cambden in Bedfordshire: saith he was slaine in battell before Ve noyle. Paris, vncertaine to some, whether through griefe of the euils he fore∣saw, or other malady. But the Analogy and colour of his whole former life, doth contradict their con∣ceit, who think that such a grief should determine his daies, because it could not but proceed from a kind of feare and despaire, an humor absolutely opposite to Magnanimitie, wherein hee abounded. How mighty a Prince he was this his Master Camb∣den loc. cit t. style sheweth: Re∣gent of France; Duke of Bedford, Alanson, and Aniou, Earle of Maine, Richmond, and Kendale; and Constable of England. But (which excelleth his greatnes) he was one of the best Patriots and Generals, that euer blossomed out of the roiall Rosiar of England. His valour was not more terrible to the enemy, then his memory honorable. For (doubtfull whether with more glorie to him, then to the speaker) Stowes Annals. but Master Cambden saith it was Charles 8. Cambd. ibid. Lewis the eleuenth being afterwards counselled by certaine en∣uious persons to demolish and deface his stately Tombe, (wherein, with him, *saith one, was buried all the Englishmens good fortune in France) which was ere∣cted ouer his body in the Northside of the high Al∣tar, in our Ladies Church at Roan, vsed these indeed most Princely words. (26) What honor shall it be to vs, or you, to breake this Monument, and to pull out of the ground the bones of him dead, whom in his life-time, neither my father, nor King Lewis his Princely testi∣mony of the late Regents vertues. your Progenitors with all their puissance, were once able to make flie one foot backward? who by his strength, polli∣cie, and wit kept them all out of the principall dominions of the Realme of France, and out of this noble Dutchy of Normandy? wherefore I say first, God saue his soule; and let his body now lie in rest: which when he was aliue, would haue disquieted the proudest of vs all: And as for the toombe, I assure you, it is not so worthy, or conuenient as his honor and acts deserued. (27) The Regent being now dead, the late peace made at Arras betweene King Charles and Philip Duke of Burgundie, presently disclosed, and put forth effects most dangerous to the English; for many Townes voluntarily yeeld, and multitudes of the French (who hitherto through feare contained themselues) starting away, all the English domini∣ons were full of priuate conuenticles, practises, and correspondences with the Enemy. Such English as then were in France, are not altogether sloathfull, but yet, through a fatall either security or negligence at home, there was not speedy sufficiencies of resi∣stance ministred. (28) Richard Duke of Yorke, (whose seruices ne∣uer Richard Duke of Yorke made Re∣gent of France. did good to the English common-wealth) is crea∣ted Regent of France, and Edmund Duke of Sommer∣set (his perpetuall riual, or perhaps an intelligent cen∣sor of his manners) continues his commands in Nor∣mandie. The Duke of Sommerset Holinsh. Stow Annal. opposed the ad∣uancement of Yorke to that slipperie dignity. He was no babe in so doing, but more fore-seeing then the Protector, and all the Councell of England. Yet his opposition was vnseasonable, and fruitlesse, for the others carriage had woonne such a party about the King, (whom he meant by embracing to pull down) that notwithstanding the disaduantage of his silen∣ced title, which was alone a great cause to haue made him euerlastingly incapable of so great trust and meanes, he preuailed. But before he could arriue, Paris was lost. Robert Lord Willoughby was Gouer∣nour there for the English, who had with him but a∣bout two thousand, the faith of the Citizens was presumed vpon to make vp the rest at a pinch, for a common resistance. On the contrary, they percei∣uing vpon what termes the English affaires stood in France, chiefly after the late Regents death, conspire against them. The treason was carried so cunning∣lie by some of the principall Magistrates of the Towne, who capitulated for a generall pardon from King Charles (which was gladly yeelded vnto,) that the mischiefe sooner tooke effect, then it could be discouered. Thomas Lord Beaumont began the losse with his misfortune; for Arthur Earle of Richmond, The Parisians conspire to dis∣possesse the Eng∣lish. Constable of France, houering about Paris, in hope to recouer the same, the Lord Beaumont with certaine hundreth of English, fell into his danger about Saint Denis, and were distressed. While as yet the terror of this discomfiture (not great in regard of the num∣bers slaine, but in regard of the Circumstances) was freshest, the French aduance their Banners vp to the City, where a gate was opened vnto them by their partisans. What should the English doe in this gene∣rall mischiefe? The townesmen, lately vassals, turne enemies on a sodaine: women and children assaile the English from their windowes with all sorts of mis∣sill things. Many are beaten downe and massacred in the streetes. The Lord Willoughby Gouernour of Paris, Lewis of Luxemburg Bishop of Ther an, Chan∣cellour of France for the English, the Bishops of Lisie∣ux and Meaux, with other, flie to Paul. Aemyl. S. Anthonies gate and the Bastile, places which they had reserued for defence till extreme necessity. Many more had been saued in those places, but that the perfidious Citi∣zens drew chaines thwart the streetes, and empea∣ched their retreat. Heare the rest in a Serres Inuent by Edw. Gri st. Frenchmans words. (29) All runne to the Bastile. The Tournels are presently seized, and all approaches vnto the Bastile are soone won. Such as were within it, at first made some shew of defence, but all things were prepared to force them: they demand a Parlea, and agree to depart with The City of Paris yeelded vp. to the French. their liues and baggage. They are conducted about the Towne beneath the Loure, to embark vpon the Riuer of Sein, and so passe to Roan. They could not well haue pas∣sed through the City. The people hereof aduertised runne to the walles, and cry out with great shoutes, Rob. Fabians Chronicle. Gagwin. baiting the English like Dogs, whom a little before they had feared, and honoured as their masters. Who of the English reades these things without indignation? but they are the perpetuall manners of the base multitude, & the fortune therin of the English, the same which fol∣loweth all like accidents. Some will thinke that the Lord Willoughby, and his people might haue done more nobly, to haue taken vp their graues in the place which they pretēded to make good against the French. Fortitude is neuer separated from Pru∣dence. Succour was despaired. The Duke of Yorke was not as yet arriued, and in maintaining their strengthes against the whole City of Paris, and all the present French forces for the space of about ten dayes, they sufficiently cleared themselues both in point of honour and loyalty. Paris 27. Feb. A. D. 1436. is thus lost in the worst time for an Army to march in. They did wisely to choose so vnseasonable a season, their mar∣ket might haue else beene marred; for the new Re∣gent (not so much hindred from sooner comming by the Duke of Somersets emulations, which some af∣firme, The new Regent comes with an Army into France. as by the very quality of the winter weather) arriued afterward, accompanied with the Earles of Salisbury and Suffolke, the Lord Falconbridge, and o∣ther worthy persons, with an Army of eight thou∣sand men. But this Regent did neuer good in France: Hee who so writes, might haue also safely added, nor *Stows Annal. elsewhere. The English affaires were not as yet come to the very breake-necke point. They held (in the late conquered parts of France) Normandy entire, though not without much trouble; for the people againe rebell in Caux: but that mischiefe was destroi∣ed with the greater and more mercilesse confusion of the Authors and Actors, then the former. A∣bout fiue thousand of them were trampled to death by the iust fury of the English, vnder the leading of the Lord Scales, the Lord Hoo and others. They burnt all their dwellings, made booty of their goods, draue their whole numbers out of the Country. The Lord Scales not long after discomfited La Hire, and his Companie not farre from Roan. The war was hand∣led on all sides without full or complete armies. Skirmishes were the ordinarie formes of fighting. The French were schooled from setling their rest vpon a pitcht field. Thus houered the affaires. (30) Philip Duke of Burgoigne had as yet in person Calais besieged by the Burgun∣dian. giuen no proof against the English of his affection to King Charles. Now hee addresseth himselfe to an enterprise worthy of that expectation, the recouery of Calais. You would suspect that hee continued still a friend to the English, in making choice of a seruice, wherein hee was most likely to waste his time in vaine, and yet make shew of much forward∣nesse; but hee was reall, though the rather stirred therunto by the desire of priuate reuenge. The Eng∣lish, vpon his forsaking their alliance, had attemp∣ted to kindle the Gauntois, and other of the Flemish townes (Subiects to the Duke) to rise in rebellion: but the opinion that K. Henries fortunes in France were desperately stooping, made their wils too dank to take fire. The notice notwithstanding of this at∣tempt came to the Duke, which sharpened him to reuenge, whereof (as the former passages abundant∣ly declare) hee was not ordinarily thirsty. He brings his Armie before Calais. Chiefe commanders there for King Henry were the L. Dudley who had charge of the Castell, and Sir Iohn Ratcliffe of the Towne. The Dukes purpose was to haue cloyed the har∣bour by sinking shippes laden with stones, and such like choaking materials; but vpon the bbe-water the Calisians deliuered the hauen from that perill. The King of England aduertised that his precious The Protector of England rescues Calais with a great Fleet and ho t. Fort and Towne of Calais were thus emperilled, Humfrey Duke of Glocester the Protector comes in person with a very great Fleete (some write fiue hundreth saile) to the rescue, and in it a great puis∣sance, with full purpose to giue battell, glad per∣haps that hee might now reuenge old grudges. It is able to moue choler, to consider how Writers torture vs with the diuersities of reports; but the ge∣nerall agreement is, that the Duke of Burgundy did raise his siege before he was fought with. Some Polyd. Verg. l 13 say the very rumor of the Protectors approch draue him away, and that the Protector came the next day af∣ter the Burgundians flight. Others excuse him (pro∣bably enough) in saying that the Flemings grew vn∣weildie to his commandements, and would needes home. (31) The Protector was master of the Dukes Camp, and spent eleuen dayes in his Dominions, burning He returns with hon ur into England. Poppering and Bell, and greatly damnified him about Grauelin and Bolognois, then setleth hee the state of Calis, and Serres. Rob. Fab. returnes with great honour to his charge into England. But the English were thought to haue created store of worke for this busie Duke at home, where many great tumults rose, in Serres. one of which, his owne person was endangered at Bruges, Lisle-Adam the Captaine of his guard being there pre∣sently slaine. Hence it came perhaps that a meane Polyd. Verg. l. 23. was found by contracts made with Isabel the Dut∣chesse his third wife (a most witty woman a Portu∣gesse) to hold a league with England, and yet no breach with France. (32) These haue hith erto beene the actions of Men, let vs not neglect two great Ladies, because An. D. 1437 much concerning our historie depend on their cour∣ses. Queene Katherine, the widdow of King Henrie the fifth, and mother by him of this sixth Henrie, a∣bout Katherine Queen of England. this time departed out of the world. This most noble Lady, when her husband the King was dead, being not of iudgement (by reason of her ten∣der yeeres to vnderstand what became her greatnes, or hauing found perhaps that greatnes was no part of happinesse,) secretly marrieth one Owen ap Theo∣dore or Teder P l. Aemyl. the most noble and most goodlie gen∣tleman of all the Welsh nation, and endued with Polyd. Verg. ad∣mirable vertues, who drew his descent from holie Cadwallader, last King of the Britaines. This husband had by her sundry children, two of which, Edmund and Gasper doe beare a part in the royall history, and King Henry the sixth (their halfe brother) created the first of them Earle of Richmond, the other of Pem∣broke. This Edmund is he, who by Margaret the daughter of Iohn Duke of Somerset, (grandechilde King, nry the 7. her Grand∣child. to Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster) had Henry the 7. the most famous and prudent King of England. (33) In that yeare in which this excellent Queen died, the young Dutchesse Dowager of Bedford (wid∣dow to the late Regent of France) married also (be∣low her degree) a vigorous English Knight, one Stowes Annals. The Dutchesse Dowager marri∣eth Wood le. Sir Richard Wooduile, of which match yet Serres needed not to haue spoken so contemptibly, calling him an English aduenturer, of small account; shee thereby (saith he) giuing cause to laugh at her: which censure tasteth perhaps of the French leuen and pre∣iudice, because the Lady was sister to the Earle of S. Paul, who would not make one in the peace of Ar∣ras, but held with the English. (34) But let vs see the sequell. Out of this Ma∣trimony also sprung Queenes; for her husband (af∣terward made Earle of Riuers) had sundry children by her, whereof Elizabeth being one, had the honour Elizabeth wife to Edward 4. daughter of that bed. to marry Edward the fourth King of England, and hereby was both herselfe a Queene and a Pro∣genitresse of those glorious Kinges and Queenes which followed: for from her and this match sprang another Elizabeth, the renowned wife of King Henry the seauenth, as King Henry himselfe did of the for∣mer: both those marriages proued most fortunate to England: but another marriage which then threat∣ned present danger to King Henry, was that which Iames the first King of Scots made with France, who gaue his daughter the Lady Margaret, to Lewis the Daulphin for wife, and sent new supplies of men a∣gainst the English: hee meant also to haue attemp∣ted some personall hostility, but that hee was most The murder of the first of Scotland. wickedly murthered by certaine bloudy Traitors in Perth, suborned thereunto by Walter Earle of Athol, (his owne neere kinsman) in hope to attaine the Crowne; crowned indeed he was, but not (as his Withces & Sorcerers had ambiguously insinuated) with the Crowne of that Realm, but with a Hect. B et. l. 17. Crown of red-hote yron, which was clapt vpon his head, be∣ing one of the tortures wherewith he ended at once his wicked dayes and desires. (35) Let vs now cast our eye to the doings of our new Regent the Duke of Yorke, that we may be wit∣nesses, how farre by his endeauors, the affaires of The new Regent doth nothing. King Henry were aduanced in France. The silence at this time is euery where very great, yet had he op∣portunitie to haue atchieued somwhat. Two Iauent. of Fr. thou∣sand French horsemen were mutined, and roued vp and downe in great disorder. Paris was fearefully pu∣nished with famine, and the attendants of famine, pestilentiall maladies. The Countries about lay o∣pen: the Courtiers were discontented and diuided: Nothing is yet done by our Regent, which Stow. p. 616. some impute to Edmund Duke of Somersets opposition, who out of enuy and disdaine hindred his dispatch. Wee must in the meane time find out them that did somewhat. The Duke of Sommerset himselfe ac∣companied with the Lords Talbot and Fanconbridge, with other Gallants, and a competent force of the English, besiege Harflew, which the Normans in the Harflew recoue∣red by the Duk of Sommerset. late rebellion tooke from them, and still maintained against them vnder French Captaines: King Charles sends some of his principall Commanders with foure thousand men to rescue the Towne; who did their best, but not able to effect any thing, Harflew was rendred to the Duke. (36) In Nouember Richard Earle of Warwicke came as Regent into France, being surrogated in that of∣fice The Earle of Warw cke comes Regent into France, and Yorke returne . to the Duke of Yorke, who returned into Eng∣land. Hee carried with him a thousand fresh Soul∣diers, and arriued at Harflew, from whence he repai∣red to Roan, the chiefe seat (Paris being now lost) of the English Dominions in North France, as Burdeaux was in the South; whether now the Earle of Hun∣tingdon, with certaine troupes and companies of Souldiers, was sent as Seneschall. This new Regent busied himselfe in the generall affaires of his place. A. D. 1438. Vnder him the Duke of Burgoins forces were driuen from Crotoy. Abbeuile freed from the danger of a Bastile, with which the Duke had pent that Towne in; and the English for twentie dayes space toge∣ther tooke their pleasure in spoiling the Country of Picardy about Amiens and Artois. These and some other actions hauing beene worthily carried during this Regents gouernment, himself dyeth. The Duke The Duke of Yorke Regent againe. of Yorke againe succeedes him. Our interest in France was retained, not so much by King Henries mini∣sters and Armies, as by remissenesse of King Charles, whom also Lewis the Daulphin (afterward King) did greatly trouble by rebellious decessions, and absent∣ments of himselfe. The feare of the English recon∣ciled the sonne to the father the sooner. K. Charles was now fallen into dislike with his people, but to King Charles and his sonne recon ciled against the English. redeeme his credite, hee attempts the recouery of P ntoyse (a towne neere to Paris) which the Lord Clifford had not long before surprised by stratageme and money (an ordinary meanes as then for the ex∣pugnation The siege of P ntoyse. of places) and comes in person to the en∣terprize. There attended vpon him for that seruice about ten or twelue thousand men. The L. Clifford is within, and makes a braue defence. (37) The Duke of Yorke lately landed in Norman∣die, as Regent, assembleth his maine strengthes, be∣ing about seuen or eight thousand; offers the French King battell. Hee keepes himselfe within his tren∣ches. The Duke (according to the ancient humor, and discipline of the English, who loue to set all vp∣on a push) desirous to fight, vnexpectedly passeth the riuer of oyse, which ranne betweene the two Campes. King Charles dislodgeth so fearefully, that the French doe not ouer boldly excuse him of Serres. fly∣ing. The Duke hauing had the spoile of the French Kings Campe, refortifies Pontoyse, and assaults a Ba∣stile, where Charles had left three thousand Souldiers to maintaine the face of a siege. It was held better to pursue the King, who was gotten to Poisie. There King Charles pur∣sued by the Duke of Yorke. the Duke of Yorke againe very nobly prouokes him to a field. It would not be; King Charles saw the hazards were not equall, and therefore endures his brauado. What could the Duke doe more? hee is of necessity to returne to the maine of his charge in Normandy, and doth so. King Charles ran into such obloquie and contempt with his people by this dis∣honourable retreat, but chiefly with the Parisians; that if hee had not attempted again and preuailed a∣gainst Pontoise, it might haue ieoparded his whole estate; for there was a faction which would haue made vse of his disgrace. He returnes in great fury to Pontoys taken by King Charles. the siege, and finally enters the town, not without much bloudshed. Serres saith, that fiue hundred English left their dead bodies at the breach. The King was one of the first that entred, choosing ra∣ther to be thought temerarious then timerous. This exploit established his opinion among the people. A satietie of warre filled both sides, and the estate of England vnder King Henry, whose softnesse and le∣nitie gaue way to sundry dangerous Court-factions, needed quiet Commissioners meet at Callis: nothing Charles Duke of Orleance set at liberty by the English. is concluded but the enlargement of Charles Duke of Orleans for the summe of three hundred thousand Crownes. Hee had beene Prisoner in England about twentie and sixe yeeres, euer since the Battell of A∣gincourt, where hee was taken. The Duke of Burgun∣die was a speciall Actor in his enlargement, with a purpose to secure his owne greatnesse by benefites: this high borne Prince for the murther of his father, being naturally the head and chiefe of that deadly fewde, which had most mortally raged between the houses of Burgundie and Orleance. Humfrey Duke of Glocester prudently foreseeing the dangers like to en∣sue on Orleance his enlargement, stoutly opposed himselfe thereunto, and that vpon important rea∣sons which R . Pate . de 6. 18. the copy whereof I had from the learned M. Iohn Claph . hee required to haue registred, that they might remaine on Record for a testimony and discharge of his duty in that behalfe. 1 First, for that the French King wanted discre∣tion and iudgement to order his affaires, which de∣fects might bee supplied by the Duke, (being a man of experience and very subtle) if hee should bee set at liberty. 2 That the said Duke might procure an vnion of the factions (now hotely maintained in France a∣mong the Nobility) to the preiudice of the Crowne of England, and hazard of the losse of the Kings ter∣ritories in France. 3 That the Dutchie of Normandy (hauing sustai∣ned a great charge in maintaining the warre) seeing the Duke of Orleance deliuered, and no royall Army on the English part to withstand the common ene∣my, was likely inough to reuolt. 4 That if the Duke should be deliuered, it might be probably coniectured, that he would sooner break his oath, which he should (being prisoner) make to the King of England, then the oath of his alleageance to the French King his Soueraigne Lord, of whom he holdeth his lands and dignity. 5 If the Articles concluded between his Maie∣sty and the French on the Dukes behalfe, should not be performed, what remedy might his Maiesty haue or expect? 6 That considering his cosen of Huntingdon was to leaue the Dutchy of G yenne, and for that the al∣liance betwixt the said Duke, and the Earles of Ar∣minack and Foix, and the Lord de la Bret, was to bee suspected as dangerous, it was very necessary that good prouision should be made for defence of that Country, being his Maiesties ancient inheritance. 7 That his Maiesty hath no allyance with any Christian Prince, but onely the King of Portugall (be∣ing but of tender yeeres and farre off:) And therfore it was not safe for his Maiestie to deliuer him, that was likely to proue his Capitall enemie, and to seeke meanes to depriue him of those lands which his noble father had left him. 8. That if any of his Maiesties kinred, or other Lords on that side the Sea, should happen to be ta∣ken prisoners, the said Duke of Orleance might ransom 4. or 5. of them. 9. That it were fit to take aduise of the Lords, and other his Maiesties subiects in the Realme of France, and dutchy of Normandy, whether they thought it expedient that the said Duke should be deliuered or not. Otherwise the world might crie shame thereon, when men should call to minde the losse of his brethren of Clarence, and Bedford, and other noble Personages, in defending and keeping those Lands. 10. If he (the said Duke of Gloucester) should con∣sent to the said Dukes deliuerance (the same being also quite-contrary to the last will of his Maiesties Father) such inconueniences, as would ensue there∣upon▪ should be imputed to him. (38) Notwithstanding the weight of so many thousand Crownes ouer▪peysed all these important and ponderous reasons; and the warre eates on still in the body of France, but not with so sharpe teeth, nor so full engorgement as before. Townes and peo∣ple are taken on both sides. The Countie of Ami∣ens was spoiled by the English Lords, Willoughby and Talbot; The Regent and the Duke of Sommerset, march into Angiou, where they charged their carria∣ges with much spoile and returned. Then the Duke of Sommerset seuers himselfe, and doth sundry ex∣ploits in and about Britaine. Diep in Normandy be∣ing besieged, was rescued by the Dolphin of France to our losse. The contemplation of these mutuall vi∣olences touched all Christendome: for the Turke, common enemie thereof, encreased. Ambassadors are sent from all parts, to determine these bloody differences. William de la Pole Earle of Suffolke, was chiefe for the English. A truce was hereupon taken A short truce and a match conclu∣ded for King Henry with the titularie King of Sicils daugh∣ter. A. D. 1444. A. Reg. 22. for eighteene months, between King Henry and King Charles, and an hope of perpetuall amity, weakely grounded vpon a match, which the Earle of Suffolke contracted for King Henry, with Margaret the daughter of Renate, titulary King of Sicile, Naples, and Ierusalem, Duke of Angiou and Lorrain, Prince of the blood. To effect this, the Earle couenanted that the English should abandon the possession of Angiou, and Main to her father. A strange purchase of a wife, who though shee brought youth, beauty and hope of a perpetuall peace with France, (the more profi∣table opportunity whereof, the English had more brauely then happily neglected) yet was shee other∣wise without portion. The Earle notwithstanding (whose drift herein could not be without manifest ambition, to make himselfe one of the greatest of England, by this gratification of the French, with his Masters charge and dishonour) is not abashed to ex∣pect publike thanks for this high seruice, and an whole fifteene for the charge of her transportation. Sundry Lords of Councell and the King himselfe thought him worthy, and according to his deuise and ouerture, the whole affaire was carried. Suffolke made Marquesse is sent ouer with many honorable persons, both men and women, to conduct the faire and goodly (but most vnfortunate and fatall) Bride into England. Hist. Angl. li. 23. Polydore giues vs no vnfitting Cha∣racter of this Lady. Shee was prouident enough, very desirous of glory, abounding in discourse, coun∣sell, gracious behauiour, and manly courage; but not free from womens humour, which (saith he) is vsually vehement and apt to change. In England ye may easily suppose, that shee was most roially entertai∣ned; Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, among others, mee∣ting her with a traine of Holinsh. Rob. Fabian. fiue hundred horsemen in a liuery, that worthy Poet Iohn Lydgate Monke of Burie, deuising the speeches for such gratulatory tri∣umphs as were made at her entrance into London. The King being married lawfully enioyes her em∣bracements, from which he was often afterward vio∣lently Shee is married to King Henry and Crowned. separated by the miseries of a most crueil warre, wherein shee had her piteous portion Suffolke in the meane time hauing the most assured fauour of the Queen pursues his ambitious purposes. Shee in the meane time was solemnly Crowned Queene of England at Westminster vpon the A. D. 1445 A. reg. 23. thirtieth of May. (39) Would to God it stood now with the qua∣lity of this argument, to turne our eies from the view of those actions which ensued; for here the mournefull tragedies of our poore Countrey began. But we cannot but open those olde and most exe∣crable sores, that, in their example, all true English blood may the rather be tender ouer their bowels, beholding such effects as the diuell and all the furies of hell were (by Gods seuere permission) Actors in. Fabian giues vs the causes and contents of those ef∣fects, in these graue and few words. (40) It appeareth that God was not pleased with Fabian. that marriage: For after this day, the fortune of the world began to fall from the King, so that he lost his friends in England, and his reuenues in France: For shortly after, all was ruled by the Queene and her Coun∣sell, to the great disprofit of the King and his Realme, and to the great mauger (it is Fabians word) and ob∣loquie of the Queene, who (as since hath beene well proued) had many a wrong, and false report made of her. All which miserie fell for BREAKING OF THE PROMISE, made by the King vnto the This contract by proxie is said to haue beene made in the twentieth yeere of King Henrie; and that the Earle of Suffolke was chiefe, if not sole actor in breaking it. Earle of Armenacks* daughter, as most writers agree: Which misery in this Story shall some-deale appear by the loosing of Normandy, (as all things else, except Callais, which the English held in France) the diuision of the Lords within this Realme, the rebellion of the commi∣nalty against their Prince and Soueraigne, and finally the King deposed, and the Queene with the Prince faine to flee the land, and lost the rule thereof for euer. Thus he: but all this farre short of the euils that were the brood and ofspring of the following times. The Parliament in the meane time grants aides of money, that vpon expiration of the truce there might bee present abilities to maintaine warre. The Duke of Yorke is reuoked, and the Duke of Sommerset (in an e∣uill The Duke of Sommerset Re∣gent of English France. houre) is sent in his place, with such prouisions as were reputed competent. (41) Humfrey the renowned Duke of Gloucester, The Duke of Gloucesters trou∣bles. AD. 1447. Lord Protector, felt the first stroke of the euill An∣gell, which was sent to punish England, and to roote out her Nobles. This Duke was much hated of the Queene, and her faction, as the onely man who by his prudence, as also by the honor and authoritie of his birth and place, seemed to empeach that so∣ueraigne command, which they pretended to settle in the Kings owne person, but meant indeed (as the manner is vnder soft Princes) to reigne themselus in anothers name. Many great Lords were drawne on (at the time of a Parliament then In February. holden at Saint Edmunds Bury,) to concurre for his ruine, not per∣ceiuing, that thereby they pluckt vp the floodgate, at which the Duke of Yorke entered, ouerwhelming all of them in a deluge of blood. Whether they had any true or iust feare of Gloucester himselfe, least per∣haps he should take reuenge vpon some particular persons among them, is doubtfull, though it be pro∣bable enough, that they had. Heare some things that forewent this Parliament. About fiue or sixe yeers before, Stowes Annal. The Dutchesse of Gloucester ar∣raigned of sorce∣rie and treason. the Dutchesse of Gloucester Eleanor, was conuented for witchcraft and sorcerie, and afterward endited of treason in the Guild-Hall in London, before the Earles of Huntington, Stafford, Suffolke, and Nor∣thumberland, and certaine Lords, as Fa hope, and Hun∣gerford, with others, and Iudges of both benches; of which crimes shee was appealed by one B ling∣brook an Astronomer, and Thomas Southwell a Cha∣non, which Southwell was charged to haue said Mas∣ses ouer certaine instruments, by which the Astrono∣mer should practise Necromancy against the life of the King. These being taken, accused her as accessa∣rie, shee hauing desired the helpe of their Art, to know what would befall her. Some part hereof shee confessed, for which shee was put to publike and solemne penance in London vpon three seueral daies, with wonderfull shame to her person, and after shee was committed to perpetuall prison vnder the ward of Sir Thomas Stanley in the Castle of Chester, but from thence remoued to Kenelworth. Her pride, fal∣shood, auarice, and lechery were causes of her confusion, saith Stow; who hath set forth that businesse very diligently, though not seeming to attribute much credit to that accusation of treason. The Duke of Glocester her vnhappy Lord and husband (whom shee by loue-cups and enchantments was said to haue enucigled, vsing therein one Margerie Gurd∣main a witch of Ey in Suffolke, who was burnt in Smithfield) stung with this reproach, might reasona∣bly be thought not vnwilling to doe somewhat. Howsoeuer that was, his destruction borrowed countenance from that opinion. The Duke there∣fore being come to attend in this Parliament at Bu∣rie, was arrested of high treason by Iohn Lord Beau∣mont high Constable of England, the Dukes of Buc∣kingham and Sommerset with others. Certaine of the Kings houshold were appointed to guard him. Not long after he was found dead. His body was The Duke of Glo∣cester dead. shewed to the Lords and Commons, as if he had di∣ed of a palsey or an aposteme. Of thirty and two of his seruants which were attached, Sir Roger Cham∣berlaine Knight, Richard Middleton, Thomas Herbert, Arthur Tursey, Esquires, and Richard Nedham Gen∣tleman, were condemned of high treason, and had this vnexampled punishment. They were drawne from the Tower to Tiburn, hanged, let down quick, A strange sparing of life forfeited for treason. stript naked, marked with a knife to be quartered, and then a Charter of pardon shewed for their liues by the Marquesse of Suffolke. But the yeoman Record. apud Stowes Annals. of the Crowne had their liuelihood, the executio∣ner their cloathes. Their pardons were thus obtai∣ned by the earnest diligence of Doctor Gilbert Wor∣thington, a famous preacher, parson of S. Andrewes in Holborne. Thomas Wilde Esquire, the Dukes ser∣uant also, being condemned and pardoned among other, had for a preamble in his letters patents words importing, Record. ibid. that hee had beene one among many other traitours against the King, with Humfrey Duke of Glou∣cester, who went about, and practised to deliuer Eleanour, late wife to the Duke, from out of prison, for which pur∣pose he had gathered a great power, and number of men, to come to the Parliament at Berie, there to haue contriued the Kings destruction. (42) Such was the end of this great Prince, who, notwithstanding this open shewing of his body, and these pretended crimes, was by the people of Eng∣land thought to be doublie murthered, by detracti∣on, and deadly practise. He was not only a true louer of learned men, but himselfe also Polyd. Verg. lib. 83. learned, and (saith our Author) a father of his Countrey. His maine opinion concerning the gouernment of King Hen∣ries French dominions, was as mainely opposed by the Cardinall of Winchester and others, who altogether perswaded Peace, to which the noble Duke (standing precisely vpon the honor and Maiesty of the Eng∣lish name,) was Hall in the Dukes Articles against the Car∣dinall. an absolute enemie. From this troubled fountaine of diuided Councell many fol∣lowing blacke aduentures did flow. The Duke thus brought to his end, goodmen (saith Polydore) fear∣full of their owne safeties, did of their owne accord forsake the Court, into whose roomes many succeeded, who for the more part looking how to rise in dignity made open an ea∣sie way for new factions. The Cardinall of Winche∣ster (the other halfe-arch of the Kingdome) ouerliued not the Duke aboue fifteene or sixteene daies. The The Cardinall of chester de∣ceaseth. whole frame of gouernment was thus drawne to re∣pose it selfe vpon the Queene, and such fauourites, as the King by her commendation the rather liked. (43) The Marquesse A. D. 1448. A. reg. 26. Suffolke made a Duke. of Suffolke, prime man in grace, was created Duke, which made him a more conspicuous marke of enuie, then that any shadow of the King or Queene could shelter or protect. Af∣ter the Cardinals Stows Annal. death, the affaires in France (where Sommerset was now Regent) wereneither duel e looked vnto, nor the gouernours of the Countrey well aduised. But the King and Realme of England lay, much more then France, open to the ineuitable, deepe, and perni∣cious conspiracies of Richard Duke of Yorke. Hee (by the error of King Henry, and the euill starres of our Countrey) being of himselfe a great Prince, and growne stronger by affected popularitie, perceiuing the King to be a Ruler, and not to Rule, began secretlie to Richard Duke of Yorke practiseth to attaine the Crowne. allure his friends of the Nobilitie, and priuily declared to them his title to the Crowne, as likewise he did to certaine Gouernors of Cities and townes, which attempt was so politickly and closely carried, that his prouision was Stowes Annals. readie, before his purpose was opened. The very state of things inuited this fatall conspiracie: a mil∣der King then England was worthy of; a Councell out of fauour with the people; manifold losses and di∣shonours abroad; a turbulent and iealous condition of things at home. Of all which and much more, the Duke of Yorke, hauing King Henrie the fourth (the enemie of his house) for a perillous example, made his pretious vse, cherishing the popular auersions, without seeking to redresse any euils, but represen∣ting them worse then they were, thereby to ripen that breach of loialty in the hearts of men, which his ambition wrought vpon. His displacement from the Regency of France, did not a little (perhaps) of∣fend him at first, because the Duke of Sommerset got it ouer his head; but it will not be long, before Som∣mersets euill carriage of that trust, and the declining fortune of England, will giue him occasion to reioice The losse of Nor∣mandy occasio∣ned by breach of truce. at the foile of his dreaded enemy. Let vs not be long in the rehearsall of the publike shame and dam∣mage of our nation. (44) During the truce betweene England and France, one Sir Francis Surien an Arragonois (Knight Serres. of the Garter) seruing vnder the Regent, vnlawfullie surprized Fougers, a towne of Britaine vpon the con∣fines of Normandy. Restitution is demanded. The Duke of Sommerset (a proud man (saith Serres) who thinking to d e better then the rest, did absolutely ruine the English affaires) contrary to good discipline, cheri∣shing his souldiers in their riots and disorders, negle∣cted the iustice of nations in that point. The French make this their example, and surprize Port del' Arch, and towne after towne, so many and so fast, that King Charles (who, that he might haue God on his side, and wrong on his enemies, conteined himselfe with great modesty, till Serres Normandy lost. he saw all quiet restitution desperate,) recouered Roan, Caen and all Normandie within a short space after. (45) Thus Sommerset, and the English, are com∣pelled to quit Normandy, not only inglorious, but al∣so A. D. 1449. A. D. 1450. Secundùm. Io. Tili. in England it selfe vncommiserated. The next maine parcell of the English inheritance, beyond our Ocean, was Gascoigne. King Charles and his people desirous (against plaine right) to make all that theirs, whatsoeuer was comprehended within the French language, inuaded that Dutchie also, and within verie A. D. 1452. saith Polyd: and Til. few yeeres after (the fortune of warre, and disloialty of the people euery where fauouring them) extor∣ted the same out of the English-mens possession, after it had continued theirs about two hundreth foure∣score and nine yeeres, to the immortall dishonour Gascoigne lost. and dammage of our nation. The Duke of Yorke in the meane time, who thirsted for the Crowne of England, hath occasion ministred to impe more fea∣thers into his aspiring wings. Ireland is in tumult. Thither the Duke passeth, and not only appeaseth the disorder of that Nation, but Stewes Annal. wan such fauour a∣mong them, as could neuer be separated from him, and his linage. Thus diligently the Pioner makes his mines into the quiet and felicity of his Countrey, calling his cause the quarrell of right and iustice, as preten∣ding that the Crowne of England appertained to his name and familie. (46) But the odor of this vile successe in France, comming into England, filled mens hearts and sen∣ses with great perturbation. The Queene and Suf∣folke suffer obloquie for these effects in the generall iudgement. The common wealth is not silent. A Parliament is called to be holdē at Westminster, which from thence was assigned to be kept at Leicester. The place likes not; few appeare. It is brought backe to Westminster. There the whole body of publike counsell meetes. Many Hall Chron. Articles are exhibited by the lower house against the Duke of Suffolke; where∣in hee is charged with euill demeanor, misprision and The Duke of Suf∣folke committed prisoner to the Tower and en∣larged. treason: who thereupon is committed prisoner to the Tower: from thence, within fowre or fiue weeks hee is discharged, which more augmented the gene∣rall indignation then his commitment had mini∣stred satisfaction. The perilous Duke of Yorke warms himselfe at these blazes, and vnderhand cherisheth them as opportunity wil permit, hauing his cunning factors and instruments fitte for such occasions se∣cretly spread ouer the Realme, to instill the poy∣sons of discontentment, and desire of change into the giddie multitude. When wee reade in our vul∣gar Chronicles, that about this time Adam Molins The Duke of Yorke procures the murther of the Lord Priuie Seale. Bishoppe of Chichester, Ke per of the Kings Priuy Seale (through the procurement of Richard Duke of Yorke) was by shipmen slaine at Portsmouth, and yet no cause of so foule and wicked a murther expressed, it cannot but offend any curious Reader, who would receiue satisfaction rather by the reasō ofactions then by the euents. His guiltinesse in the fact was so apparant, that K. Henry in his answere made a yeere or two af∣ter to the Dukes dissembling, and deceitfull letter, confidently mentioneth the same, where thus hee speaketh. Sooth it is that long time among the people hath beene vpon you many strange language, and in spe∣ciall anone after your disordinate and vnlawfull slaying of the Bishoppe of Chichester, diuers, and many of the vn∣true shipmen and other, said (in their manner) words a∣gainst our state, making menace to our owne person by your sayings, that yee should bee fetched with many thou∣sands, and you should take vpon you The Crowne of England. that which you neither ought, nor as wee doubt not will attempt, &c. What cause led the Duke to commit this so impious a deed, may easily now be coniectured, being none other but the common hatred hee bare to all such wise or valiant persons, as might in any sort vphold the most iust and gracious Henry, and this sincerity in the Bishoppe could not be but a grieuous crime in the Dukes ambitious eyes, whose greatnesse was e∣uen then too intollerable; for where was the Kings iustice when such a fact might hope of impunity? The Duke did effect it by his bloudy complices as hee did many other most seditious and perfidious things, while hee was absent in Ireland. Thomas Tha∣nie notwithstanding calling himselfe Blew-beard A fuller execu∣ted for treason. being a Fuller of Canterburie, and attempting to ga∣ther the people, miscarrieth in his treason, and for that was hanged and quartered: this was a pream∣ble to the following tumults. The Duke of Yorkes whole and onely hopes were reposed in the general perturbations of his Country. (47) The Duke of Suffolke (a principal pillar of K. The Duke of Suffolke King Henries chiefe stay, accused by the Commons at the Parlia∣ment. Henries safety) being set at liberty, attends the King and Queene in their Parliament at Leicester. Behold the humour of the Commons which were sowred with the pestilent leauen of Yorkes conspiracy. They cannot endure the sight of this Prince, because his readuancement seems done in despight of them. Ca∣lumniations & odious surmises are exhibited against him: hee must downe to make way for K. Henries most vnworthy ruine. The most vile part of this Parliamental accusation was, that they should charge that for a crime vpon Suffolke which themselues had vniuersally in another former Parliament assented vnto and ratified. Which was the deliuery of An∣iou and Main vpon the marriage, concluded (for the good of England, if others had not inuerted or inter∣rupted the successe by their temerity) with Renate, father of Queene Margaret. N ither did the enuy onely of the secret York s ouerlade this noble Gen∣tleman, but the impotency of the Duke of Sommer∣sets faction, whose rashnesse and vanity hauing lost all Normandy, would gladly find any others shoul∣der, vpon which to cast the imputation, either in part or whole. In that former Parliament assembled immediately vpon Suffolkes returne from that trea∣ty with Renate out of France, this was the summe of the whole proceedings. Suffolke (as hee was very eloquent) made knowne to both housen, his coun∣sels and seruices, and the effect of his Embassie, pray∣ing they might be approued, and enrolled for his discharge. Whereupon This was in A. D. 1446. the next morrow, Burley Speaker of the lower house, and the body therof re∣paired to the Kings presence, then sitting among the Lords, and there Stowes Anna . humbly required, that the request of the Marquesse (afterward created Duke of Suffolk) might be granted: and the Lords made the like peti∣tion, kneeling on their knees. The King condiscen∣ded to their desires, and so the whole matter was recorded for his acquitall. (48) What can bee more euident? or who can enough admire the vanity of popular mutabilitie? The Duke the (principall marke, though the Bishop of Salisbury, the Lord Say, and others were also accu∣sed) vnable to stand the push of so generall an op∣position, must be banished. The King vnwillingly giues this sentence against the Duke, or rather a∣gainst his owne life and safety: fiue yeeres are li∣mited to his exile. Being vpon the sea, hee is taken by his enemies, who at Douer-road stroke off his head The Duke of Suffolke going in∣to ban ment is wickedly mur∣thered. vpon the side of a Cocke-boat. This diuelish mur∣ther (for it was none other, the Kings authority be∣ing not vsed therein) committed vpon so great a Prince, was the lesse pittied, for that hee was noi∣sed among the people to haue beene a priuy actor in the Noble Duke of Glocesters death, who perished (saith a Ca bd. in Glo∣cest. learned Author) by the fraud and practise of a woman (belike) Queene Margarite. The Bishop of Salisburie before said more impiously, and irregu∣larly lost his life in the following tumults, being murthered (after he had finished diuine seruice) by his owne Tenants, who dragged him from the Al∣tar The bloody ef∣fects of the Duke of Yorkes popula∣ritie. to an hill-top, and there (while hee was making his last prayers) cleft his sacred head: The Lord Say Treasurer of England fell likewise into the peoples fury, and had his head cut off by the commande∣ment of that execrable rebell Iacke Cade, at the Stan∣derd in Cheape, as yee shall hereafter learne. (49) This William Duke of Suffolke Cambden in Sul∣folke. was indeed a great and worthy person, for when his Father, and three Brothers had valiantly powred forth their liues for their Country in the warre of France, hee serued in them foure The noble and great deserts of he Duke of Suffolke. and thirty yeeres, in seuenteene of the which hee neuer re∣turned home, hee was once taken prisoner, being then but a Knight, and paied for his ransome twenty thou∣sand pounds sterling, hee was fifteene yeeres priuy Coun∣sellour, and thirty yeeres Knight of the Garter. Notwith∣standing all which, the same Author truly addeth: That as for these causes he was in highest grace with the King, so he was the more disgratious or hated of the peo∣ple, and for I de c s qu par liquebant. certaine very sleight matters, and those not very apparant, hee was driuen into banishment, and (as you haue already heard) was intercepted vpon the sea in his passage to France, and by his aduersaries killed. What honest heart doth not melt at the relation of these violent contempts of all religion, honour, rea∣son and iustice? yet are they but the drops which doe forego those many bloudy showres, which the cloud of Yorkes faction rainde vpon our miserable Nation. They who murthered this great triumphant Gentleman, were certaine persons who wafted vpon the Seas in a Barke called the Nicholas of the Tow∣er, which belonged to Iohn Stowes Annal. Holland Duke of Exce∣ster, Constable of the Tower of London, whom Gods reuenging hand shall not leaue vnpunished. (50) The Yorkists hauing thus rid Suffolke out of the way, thought it now a fitte season to spring their practise. Hereupon the Commons of Kent, (who haue seldome refrained in such turbulent times) The Kentish rebels vnder Iacke Cade giue out the name of Mortimer. while the Duke of Yorke was as yet in Ireland, take Armes. One Iacke Cade is their Captaine: hee had beene the seruant of a Sussex Knight, Sir Thomas Da∣gre; kils a woman with Child; abiureth the land; turnes French; swearing seruice to them, and now returning, is the instrument to hang out Mortimers name, like a flagge to draw a party, faining him∣selfe to bee a Cosen to the Duke of Yorke. A pesti∣lent deuise, to sound the affections of the multitude, and to proclaime the Title to the Crown, which the Duke (as heire of that family) afterward challenged; for who would not aske, what should moue him to vse the name of Mortimer? This Cade whom some (by contraries) call Iohn Amend-all (that is, Iohn Marre-all) hauing drawn great numbers to follow him, encampes at Blacke-Heath by Greenewich, and in his writings cals himselfe the Captaine of Kent. His pretences (as of al like disloial actions) were the com∣mon good and such other. The King at the report of these stirres is stirred. The Captaine of Kent de∣maunds. 1 That Richard Duke of Yorke bee called out of Ire∣land, Cades demands. and (with certaine others named for stales and co∣lour) be principally vsed in Counsell. 2 That as the Duke of Glocester was falsly proclaimed a Traitour, so the Authors of his death might bee pu∣nished. 4 (For the third Article contained no demand, but onely seandalous matter to aggrauate hatred a∣gainst the dead Duke of Suffolke, and his liuing ad∣herents:) That all the extortions (so the Rebels phra∣sed them) daily vsed among the common people, might be laid downe: that is to say, the greene waxe, which is falsly vsed to the perpetuall destruction of the Kings true Commons of Kent. Also the Kings Bench, the which is too grieuous to the Shire of Kent, without prouision of our Soueraigne Lord, and his true Councell. And also in ta∣king Stowes Annal . wheat and other graines, beefe, mutton, and all o∣ther victuall, the which is importable to the saide Com∣mons, without the briefe prouision of our said Soueraign Lord, and his true Councell, they may no longer beare it. And also vnto the Statute of Labourers, and the great extortioners, the which is to say, the false Traitors, Sleg, Cromere, Isley, and Robert East. (51) Thus traiterously to the Kings welfare, and scandalously to his most gentle gouernment, writes this arrogant Captaine of Rebels. The King vpon view of these braues, beginnes to feele the indig∣nity and danger. An Armie is raised, Cade retires to Seuenoke in Kent. The King supposing hee had fled, sends after him Pygot. Sir Humfrey Stafford Knight, and other Gentlemen with some forces. Wee reade none of these things without a suspition, that the King was alwayes betrayed by such hypocrites about him, as would not haue him prosper. Marke the euent. At Seuenoke Cade abides, probably not without encouragement from secret Traitours, and after long fight slew Sir Humfrey with many o∣thers. The first ciuill conflict vnder this King, where Cade hath the victorie. Hee armed himselfe in the dead Knights a∣billements with guilt spurres. The King and Queene hearing of this mishappe, leaue the Tower of Lon∣don to the custodie of the Lord Scales, and of that re∣nowned Esquire Mathew Gowgh; and London it selfe to the Lord Maiors fidelity, themselues depar∣ting to Kenilworth. The headlong crewes of London fauour the Rebell, and giue entrance. Robert Horne Alderman, like an honest wise man, would haue Horne a worthy Alderman of London perswa∣ding the resi∣stance of Cad is in canger of his life. had them resisted. This free necessary speech en∣dangered his life; honourable in his memory for the hazard onely, what should hee haue beene if hee had gloriouslie lost it? but money buyes out his perill with the Tyrant, who fined him at Rob. Fab. fiue hun∣dred Markes. The time was very slippery and loose; for the Essex men also were encamped vpon Mile∣end by London: All men are afraid of their owne e∣states; such secret well-wishings attended vpon the Arch-Rebels pretences. The King before hee had left London was enforced (by such hollow friends as were about him) to commit the Lord Say Treasu∣rer of England to the Tower, after that the valiant and loyall Sir Humfrey Stafford was slaine, and the A. D. 1450. newes of his vnlucky defeate were confirmed. (52) Cade therefore being admitted into London vpon the second of Iuly with his forces, (where for a short while to delude the people with a shew of Cades behauiors in London. conscience, they abstained from robberies) strikes with his sword vpon London-stone, saying; Now is Mortimer Lord of this City. At night hee returnes into Southwarke: One Stowes Annal. ad A. D. 1458. Robert Poinings of South∣warke Esquire was his Sword-bearer and Caruer. It is needlesse to be particular in this Rebels behaui∣our: The next day hee returnes, and the Lord Say is beheaded in Cheapside (as is before said) at Cades commandement, and his body cut into quarters. The King being by the losse of so trusty and graue a seruant, not a little weakened. (53) The next tragedie was Cromeres an Esquire, and high Sheriffe of Kent (the Lord Sayes sonne in law) who is drawn out of the Fleet (and to appease the Essex Rebels) sacrificed by beheading without any triall at Mile-End. The City stirres not for all this. Malpas and Gerstie, two rich Citizens, at whose houses Cade had seuerally dined, being spoi∣led and robbed by him (left perhappes it might ap∣peare, that he who durst commit treasons, had not also the heart to commit felonies) teach what others are to expect. The Maior, Thomas Chalton and the wiser wealthy ones, ouerruled by faction till then, see their danger now, and secretly send to the Lord Scales for aide. Mathew Gowgh at night is come among them as sent by him. The Kentish-men, Cades second ciuill conflict vpon London bridg . hearing their entrie was barred, runne furiou∣sly to armes. Cade endeauors to open his way by force; but in despight of all his power, the Citizens made good & defended London- bridge against him, though with the losse of many valiant and honest men, for the conflict endured all night till nine in the morning. Among such as were slaine on the Kings side, were Iohn Sutton Alderman, Mathew Gowgh Alderman Sut∣ton and Mathew Gowg slaine in the conflict. Polyd. Verg. l. 13. himselfe, and Robert Heysand Citizen. This Gowgh (an Esquire of Wales) was a man of excellent vertue, manhood, and zeale to his Country, and of great renown in the warre of France, where he had serued with spe∣ciall commendations faithfully, for the space of a∣boue twenty yeeres. His deserts at this time de∣serued a Statue in the City, for whose safety hee spent his last bloud. To giue a quicke end to these miseries, impunity is proclaimed for all offenders, and sent to them in the Kings name by the Archbi∣shoppe of Canterbury, Lord Chancellour, vnder the great Seale of England: the rebels are scattred with this assurance of their safeties, and euery man retires in peace from following so pestilent an Impostor. A The Kings proclamation. Cade proscribed and killed. thousand Markes (when Cade afterward attemp∣ted new troubles) are promised to him, who kils or takes this counterfeit Mortimer. Alexander Eden, a Gentleman of Kent, had the happinesse to discouer and kill him at Hothfield in that County: his wretch∣ed carkase was brought to London, where his false head was set sentinell vpon London-bridge, and his quarters were aduanced for terrour in seuerall parts of Kent. There died also by the stroke of iustice twenty and sixe more, whereof eight were executed at Canterbury, and the rest elsewhere in Kent and Sussex. The multitude it selfe Feb. 23. came naked in their shirts to the King on Blacke-heath, humbly pray∣ing mercy which they obtained. (54) The Kentish rebellion thus pacified, farre greater and farre more dangerous troubles ensued, as it Polyd. Uerg. l. 23 fareth in humane bodies, which relapsing into sicke∣nesses, are shaken so much the more terribly. These trou∣bles had their fountaine and mediate Originall, from Richard Duke of Yorke, no degenerous sonne of that Richard, whom King Henry the fifth had created Earle of Cambridge, and enriched with much wealth, honoring him aboue others in regard of his blood and parentage; but T . Wal. in H. 5. no bountie, nor benefits could change a treacherous disposition, for (as you haue heard before) he conspired to murther his benefactor King Henry the fifth, as the Duke of Yorke (his true progenie) labo∣red to depose this King Henrie his aduancer. The humors of the popular body, were, in the last com∣motion, not obscurely discouered. The Common weale had perhaps some few enormities, through the abuse of Magistrates and men in place, but yet such, as the maladie was infinitely lesse pernicious then The Duke of Yorke comes out of Ireland. the remedy. Vpon this intelligence the Duke comes sodeinely out of Ireland, and to begin his v∣surped censureship and dictature, apprehends S wes Annal. Iohn Sutton Lord Dudley, Reignald Abbot of Saint Peters, at Glastenbury, and another, whom he imprisoneth within his Castle of Ludlow. Intollerable beginnings of more intollerable sequele. Edmund Duke of Som∣merset was the man, who (after Suffolks death) most supported the Kings side by Poly. Uerg. li. 23. his vigilancie, caresdan∣gers, and good Counsels, endeuouring by all meanes to cleare the Realme from factions, and to preserue the King and state in quiet. (55) Yorke seeing this, doth find that Suffolke perished in vaine, if Sommerset held like grace; against whose person he had a particular pretence of quar∣rell, for that the City of Caen in Normandy, which was the Duke of Yorkes charge, was rendred vp to the French by him, when the English affaires grew despe∣rate in those parts; Sir Dauid Hall Knight, being at that time Captaine there for his Lord and Master the Duke of Yorke, and not allowing it, although the renowned Talbot himselfe was present at the render, and became an hostage for performance of the Ca∣pitulations. Yorke hereupon consults with his spe∣ciall friends, Richard Earle of Salisbury, and Richard his son, (who was afterward that most seditious & great fighting Earle of Warwicke,) Thomas Courtney Earle of Deuonshire, Edmund Brooke Lord Cobham, and others, how Yorke might get the Crowne of England, and for that cause how to ruine or fret out the Duke of Sommer∣set, who standing, they were to looke for strong op∣position. In the end, they conclude to take armes, The Duke of Yorke armes vp∣on pretence to reforme the state. but yet to smother the mention of the Duke of Yorkes ti∣tle, giuing out to the world for the reason of their doings, that they meant all honour and obedience to King Henry, and only to remoue certaine bad men from about his per∣son, who afflicted the people, and made a pray of the Com∣mon-wealth: which, to gaine the more credit, and to blind the good King, the subtile Duke declares by A. D. 1452. Proclamation; Dat. 9. Ia . 30. H. 6. at the Dukes Castell of Lud∣low. wherein, thus speaketh that Ambiti∣ous Hypocrite. God knoweth from whom no thing is hid, I am, haue beene, and euer will be his true liege man; &c. And to the very proofe it is so, I offer my selfe to He publisheth a declaratory sche∣dule in his iusti fication. sweare that on the blessed Sacrament, and receiue it, the which I hope shall be my saluation, at the day of doome. &c. In that it was the euill hap of the Duke of Som∣merset, that Normandy was lost during his Regencie, his enemies had the more commoditie to incommo∣date him with the people, who forbare not at his re∣turne to offer to him sundry dishonours and iniu∣ries, till vpon paine of death they were restrained, for breach of which Proclamation, one had his head cut off in West Cheap London. (56) The King (notwithstanding all his Cosens The King mar∣cheth against the Duke of Yorke. arts and dissimulations) seeing the hooke through the baite, and the snake through the grasse, by the aduise of his trusty friends, chiefly of Edmund Duke of Sommerset, thinkes not fit to relie vpon his enemies good nature, but hauing a strong power, and store of honorable men to conduct them, he marcheth to∣ward Wales against the Duke. The King did here∣in wisely, but not so much as the cause required. Yorke hauing notice of the Kings approach turnes a∣side, and with all speed marcheth toward London. That City, (the vaine hope of all Rebellions,) would not harken; Thereupon he slides with his people into Kent, the nest of his hopes, and at Brent-heath neere Dertford (a towne about twelue miles from London) encampeth, meaning to fight. The King is not slow, but leauing his march toward Wales, pitcheth vp his roiall pauilion vpon Black-Heath, with a purpose to teach his cosen of Yorke more duty. Behold the fortune of England. God The Kings army eing greater hen the Dukes, eace i vnhap∣pily made. puts an excellent opportunity into the Kings hands of tearing vp the danger of his house by the rootes, for the Duke was farre inferiour in numbers. Such therefore as secretly fauoured him, fearing his ouer∣throw, were willing to aduise a reconcilement. Mes∣sengers goe betweene the hosts. The Duke, in his wonted manner, pretends loialtie and particular iniu∣ries, as that the Kings seruants, Sir Iohn I albot at Holt Castell, Sir Thomas Stanley in Cheshire, and others in o∣ther places, were set to harken vpon him. That by literis Regi & Duc . two of the Norrices, Bulkeley, Grust, Bould (and other Gentle∣men) he was forbidden to land at Bewmaris, or to haue any refreshment, affirming that he (the Duke of Yorke) was against the Kings intent and as a Traitour. The King stoupes so much as to answere the letter, letting him to knowe: That the suspition vniuersally conceiued of his behauiours moued those effects: neuer thelesse, in re∣gard of the humble obedience which was now protested, he, for the easing of the Dukes heart, doth declare, repute and admit him as a true, and faithfull subiect, and as his wel∣beloued Cosen. The Duke then aduanceth his pra∣ctise one step further, and writes to the King, that Iustice might be done vpon all persons of what de∣gree soeuer, which were guilty, or noised to be guiltie of treason: aiming at the Duke of Sommerset, whom he doubted not to ouerwhelme with sleights and ca∣lumnics, as hee and his had done the Duke of Suffolke. (57 The King is contented (such weake or treacherous counsels he relied vpon) that Sommerset (for his satisfaction) should be commanded Prisoner to his Poly. Verg. li. 23. owne house, and Yorke (hauing first dissolued his armie) should come in person, and put himselfe into the Kings hand. When he was come, he exhibites a great complaint against the pride and auarice of the Duke of Sommerset, and cunningly accusing none but him, he seekes the good-will of all others. A cunning drift as any, considering that hereby he deriued vp∣on his enemie all the enuie of the people, and left him single to withstand the effects. Sommerset (a Prince of great spirit and wit) not thinking it reasonable, as well in regard of his owne honour as the Com∣monwealthes interest, to endure such indignity, pre∣sents himselfe to the King against his accuser, and resoluing not to be tender-mouthed in the so appa∣rent perill of the King and Realme, whose quiet was vndermined, answeres Yorke face to face, and, in plaine termes accuseth him of highest treason, as hauing conspired to depose the King, and take vpon himselfe the Soueraignty: vehemently vrging: That The Duke of Sommerset confi∣dently accuseth the Duke of York of treason. the Duke of Yorke might be committed and arraigned, to the intent that by his deserued death, and the disenablement of his sonnes, Ciuill warre might be extinguished, praying finally that God would not suffer the enemie of the Kingdome to escape the hand of iustice. (58) This had in likelihood beene done, but that the publike faith seemed to stand engaged for the Dukes indemnitie, he hauing come in vpon the Kings word, and also for that the hearts of men were not well assured to the King, which by executing Yorke would perhaps haue beene more vnsetled, be∣cause (not looking into the depth of the Kings perill) it would haue beene thought that he had beene de∣stroied to gratifie Sommerset, and not to secure the Realme. There was hope likewise to recouer A∣quitain, for that Burdeaux had offered to returne: Lastly, the Dukes sonne and heire, Edward Earle of March (afterward King) was reported to be ready with a great force of Welshmen to succour his father. Vpon these and other reasons, the Duke is no lon∣ger restrained, as vpon Sommersets most weighty ac∣cusations he had beene, and to assure the gentle and indulgent King, of his allegiance, he makes his sub∣mission, The Duke of Yorke tak h Oath to be true to King Henry. and solemnely TAKES HIS OATH to bee true, faithfull and obedient subiect. This was done vpon the tenth of March in the Church of S. Paul in London, the King himselfe, and most of the chiefe nobility being present, as the Dukes of Buckingham, Norfolke, & Sommerset, nine Earles, the Vicounts, Beau∣mont and Wels, manie great Barons: Of the Clergy, the Cardinall of Yorke the Archbishop of Canterbu∣rie, the Bishops of Winchester Elie and London. (59) Let vs view the forme and words of this Caution vpon which King Henrie (measuring other mens hearts by his owne) aduentured to repose his life and Kingdome, which are these. I Richard, Duke of Yorke, confesse and beknown The Dukes Oath and submission. that I am and ought to be humble subiect, and liegeman to you my Soueraigne Lord, King Henry the sixt, and owe therefore, to beare you saith and truth, as to my Soueraigne liege Lord, and shall doe all daies to my liues end: and shall not at any time will or assent that any thing be attempted or done against your most noble person, but wheresoeuer I shal haue knowledge of any such thing *Ex vetust. Cod. imagined or purposed, I shall with all speed and diligence possible to me, make, that your highnesse shall haue know∣ledge thereof, and, ouer that, doe all that shall possible be to me to the withstanding, and let thereof to the vtter∣most of my life: I shall not any thing take vpon me a∣gainst your roiall estate or obeisance that is due thereto, nor suffer anie other man to doe, as farre forth as shal be in my power to let it. And also shall come at your com∣mandement, whensoeuer I shall be called by the same, in humble and obeisant wise, but if I be letted by any sick∣nesse or impotencie of my person, or by such other cause as shall be thought by you my Soueraigne Lord reasona∣ble. I shall neuer hereafter take vpon me to gather any rowt or to make any assemblie of your people without your commandement, or licence, or in my lawfull defence, in interpretation or declaration of the which my lawfull defence I shall report me at all times to your highnesse, and, if the case require to my Peers; nor any thing attempt against any of your Subiects, of what estate, degree or condition that they be. But whensoeuer I find my selfe wronged and agrieued, I shall sue humbly for re∣medie to your highnesse, and proceed after the course of your lawes, and none otherwise, sauing in mine owne lawfull defence in manner abouesaid, and otherwise haue to your highnesse as an humble and true subiect ought to haue him to his Soueraigne Lord. All these things abouesaid I promise you truly to obs rue and keep by the holy Euangelists conteined in the booke that I lay my hand here vpon, and by the holie Crosse I here touch, and by the blessed Sacrament of our Lords body, that I shall now with his mercie receiue. And ouer I agree me, and will that if at any time hereafter, as by the grace of our Lord God I neuer shall, any thing attempt by way of feate, or otherwise against your roiall Maie∣stie and obeisance, that I owe thereto, or any thing take vpon me otherwise then is aboue expressed, I from that time forth be vnabled, held, and taken as an vntrue and openly forsworne man, and vnable to all manner of worship, estate or degree, he it such as I now occupie, or a∣ny other that might in any wise grow to me hereafter. And this I haue here promised and sworne, proceedeth of mine owne desire and free volunt, and by no constrai∣ning nor Coaction. In witnes of all which things a∣boue written, I Richard Duke of Yorke aboue write subscribe with mine owne hand and seale. This Oath he also tooke at Westminster and Couen∣tree at sundrie times. Who now can consider the effects of this so publike and solemne Oath, and doth not tremble in euerie part? Let vs hasten to their view, least God perhaps may quietly seeme to haue beene mockt to his face by a vaine ambiti∣ous man. (60) To diuert these home-breeding rancors Hope conceiued to recouer Gas∣coigne. and practises, by employing the wits and bodies of men in other more honest things, the Earle of Candal (sonne Serres. to Captal de Budie who had vpon necessitie submitted his Seignouries to Charles the French King, but reserued his person out of that obedience) and the Lord L'Esparre, come secretly from Burdeaux and pray an Armie, for that Burdeaux and the Gas∣coigns would returne to the English, if they might be supported. An Armie is decreed for their reducti∣on. Iohn Lord Talbot the first Earle of Shrewsburie of his name as Generall in that enterprize, lands in Gascoigne, where he doth sundry exploits, and the fame of his former cheualrie flying before with ter∣rour, makes many places the rather to yeeld. Burde∣aux her selfe secretly opens a gate vnto him, which the French Garrison perceiuing fled out at a Postern, but many being ouertaken were slaine by the Lord L'Esparre and the English. New supplies and victuals arriue, whereof the Earle of Shrewsburies yonger sonne, (Vicount Lile by his wife,) was a principall conducter . Burdeaux thus throughly mand and fortified, the Earle is aduertised that the French lay at siege before Castillion, a place of importance vpon the riuer of Dardonne. Thither the Earle marcheth, and with too great a confidence charging the ene∣mie The Earle of Shrewsburie and his younger son slaine in battell. vpon vnequall termes, was there slaine, together with his sonne the Vicount Lile and others. Burdeaux receiued such as fled. The English fortunes and hopes which began to quicken, made this vnhappie Cata∣strophe in * Iulie, to the infinite losse of our nation and griefe of the Gascoigns, who generally misliked the An. D. 1453 A. reg. 31. French, and inclined to the English, hauing so hono∣rablie, and for so long a time gouerned those domi∣nions. This was the end of that great Earle, after he had for the space of twentie and foure yeeres serued his Prince and Countrey in the French warres, with highest commendation; a Cambden in Sh o shire. Polyd. Verg. in Hen. 6. most noble and most valiant man, by whose vertue the English name did chiefly become terrible in France. Burdeaux it felfe, and all other pla∣ces after this, were by siege brought againe vnder the French King, who prosecuted those affaires in per∣son. From that time forward the English neuer ob∣tained there any hold or further footing, the felicity The English quite expelled out of all Aqui∣tain. of this attempt breaking all combinations of the Gascoignes. This Dutchie of Aquitaine Stowes Annal. contained foure Archbishopriks, foure and twenty Bishopriks, fifteen Earledomes, two hundred and two Barons, and aboue a thousand Captainships and Bailywickes. The losse of so goodly an inheritance which had continued Eng∣lish for almost three hundred yeeres, the world may easily coniecture how iustly it was greeued and la∣mented for. In this falne estate of the English, the Queene vpon the thirteenth day of October was de∣liuered of her first sonne who was named Edward, prouing the child of sorrow and infelicity. Prince Edward is borne. (61) It were to be wished we might now rather number the following euils of England, then describe them; for what can we learne out of such vnnaturall and sauage destructions, but matter of horrour and detestation? but sith they must be handled, (the law and necessitie of our taske exacting it,) the sooner to be quit of so vnpleasing obiects, it will bee best a∣bruptly to thrust into the narration. The Duke of Yorke (wickedlie carelesse of an Oath so religiouslie and publikely taken,) to make his way to the A. D. 1454. Crowne more easie, hath now procured his chiofe and most fearefull enemie the Duke of Sommerset to be sodeinely arrested of high treason, (doubtfull whether by any authority but his owne) in the Queenes great Chamber, and sent to the Tower of London, vpon pretence that he had capitall matter to charge him with. Yorkes principall friends (vpon confidence of whom he dared so high things) were Richard Neuil Earle of Salisburie second sonne of Ralfe Neuil Earle of Westmorland, whose daughter the Duke of Yorke had married. This Richard was Earle of Salisbury in right of Alice his wife, sole heire to Tho∣mas Montacute, the famous Earle, slaine at the siege of Orleance. The Dukes other maine hope was Richard Neuil (sonne of the former Richard Neuill,) who in right of his wife, the Lady Anne (sole sister, and heire of the whole blood to Henry Beauchamp, Duke of Warwick) was by this King Henry the sixth created Earle of Warwick in a most vnhappie houre both for the King & kingdome, being Cambd. in Warw. inuicto animo &c: a man of an vndaunted mind, but flitting faith. (63) The King in the meane space, while the Duke of Sommerset was thus endangered, lay sicke; and Yorke (as Regent) swayed and ouerswayed in Court; but when the king (perceiuing malice and practise to be the chiefe bases of Yorkes accusations) had recouered his health, and resumed the gouern∣ment, Sommerset is set at liberty and made Captaine of Calleis; Yorke and his adherents repaire to open force: They leuy their armie about the Marches of Wales, with which they repaire toward London, the maine obiect of Pretendents. The King hearing The King mar∣cheth to Saint Albans against the Duke of Yorke. of his enemies approach, is accompanied with Hum∣frey Duke of Buckingham, Edmund Duke of Sommerset, Humfrey Earle of Stafford, Henry Percie Earle of Nor∣thumberland, Iames Butler Earle of Wiltshire, and Or∣mond, Beaufort Earle of Dorcet, Iasper Theder Earle of Pembroke the Kings halfe-brother, Thomas Courtney Earle of Deuonshire, the Lords Clifford, Sudley, Berners, Rosse and others, and with them enters into Saint Albans in warlike manner, hauing certaine thousands of common souldiers. Thither also the Duke of Yorke and his adherents came. This was toward the end of May: The Dukes request to the King was, that he would deliuer such persons to be deseruedly puni∣shed as he would name. The King (to let them know who he was) returnes this confident answere. That hee and the rest were Traitors, and that rather then they should haue any Lord from him who was with him at that time, hee himselfe would for their sake in the quarrell vpon that day liue and die. (64) The Yorkists hereupon assaile the Kings peo∣ple The Duke of Sommerset slaine and the King ta∣ken in battell. within the Towne, and Warwicke breaking in through a Garden, a sharpe battell is begun. The losse fell lamentably vpon King Henries side; for be∣sides the Duke of Sommerset, there were slaine the Earles of Northumberland and Stafford, the L. Clif∣ford, with sundry worthy Knights and Esquiers, of which forty and eight were buried in Saint Albans, there being slaine aboue fiue thousand of K. Henries party, and of the Yorkists about sixe hundreth. The King himselfe was shot into the neck with an arrow; & other of his chief friends were likewise sore woun∣ded and taken. The Earle of Wiltshire, and Thomas Thorpe, Lord chiefe Baron of the Exchequer, with others saued themselues by flight. The Duke of Yorke, the Earles of Salisbury and Warwicke with the King, (whome they in shew did vse most reuerently, and as if they had meant nothing vnto him but good faith) vpon the morrow ride to London, where in Iuly immediately following, a Parliament is holden in King Henries name. The fore-runner whereof was a Comet, or blazing starre, which appeared in the moneth of Iune, the beams whereof extended them∣selues into the south. The first popular act of this assembly, was to restore the memory of Humfrey Duke Humfrey Duke . Glocester decla∣red to haue been a true subiect. of Glocester to honour, declaring him to haue beene a true subiect to the King and Realme. (65) The next prouisions which the Yorkists made, were for themselues, and their owne security, willing and commanding that the Duke of Yorke & his partakers should incur no blame by reason of the iour∣ney at Saint Albans: the whole fault whereof was laid vpon the dead Duke of Sommerset, the Lord Chiefe Baron, and one William Ioseph Esquier, who (say they) kept from the King a pacificatory letter which the Duke of Yorke had sent. It is a wonder and a shame to reade how officiously these violent Lords (meaning nothing lesse) behaued themselues to the King, of whose maiesty they will needs seeme to be the onely Champions and conseruators. The Duke of Yorke in the same Parliament creates himselfe Protector of England, the Earle of Salisbury is made The Duke of Yorke protector of the Realme. Lord Chancellour, and the Earle of Warwicke (his sonne) Captaine of Caleis: they spared as yet to touch King Henries life, because the people did wonder∣fully honour, esteeme, and reuerence him for his singular holinesse, and for that he had great friends left aliue, and Poly. Verg. in H. 6. a sonne. In the meane space, that they might without trouble, and at their pleasure, vncrowne or kill him, they by little and little displaced the ancient Counsellors, and substituted their ass ed fauourites. Another Act of that absolute force and fraud, which they exercised in this dreadfull perturbation of all things, was the drawing of Ionn Holland Duke of Excester out of Sanctuarie at Westminster, conuaying him to Pomfret Castle in the North. (66) Henry Beauford Duke of Sommerset, (sonne of the former) the Duke of Buckingham, (whose A. reg. 34. sonne and heire the Earle of Stafford was slaine at S. Albans) and other the Kings friends, perceiuing whereunto this faire shew tended, consult with the Queene at Greenewich concerning her husbands dan∣ger, The Duke of Yorke i dischar∣ged of the ∣ped Protector∣ship. and how to preuent it. Hereupon the Duke of Yorke is displaced from the Protectorship, a ridicu∣lous title to be assumed, where the king was aged a∣bout fiue and thirtie, and had no other fault or vn∣fitnes, but that he was too good to liue among them. The Earle of Salisbury was also depriued of his Lord Chancellorship. (67) The King hauing thus recouered his digni∣ty and authoritie, but not sufficient meanes to sup∣presse The French take Sandwi in Kent and Fo in Deuonshire. his dangers, the French take courage at our in∣testine diuisions, and landing at Sandwich with fif∣teene thousand men (part of their forces) they kill the Maior, Bailifs, and other Officers of that Towne, with sundrie Gentlemen of the Countrey, spoile all they could lay hand vpon, and among all they rob two great vessels laden with merchandise, which lay there bound for London and departed. Another part of them, burnes Foway and certaine other townes in Deuonshire. On the other side the Scots hostillie entred into Northumberland, but vpon no∣tice that the Duke of Yorke approached with a pow∣er, they returned, hauing not as yet done any great harme. (68) These indignities and losses might haue v∣nited the disioined affections of true English hearts, which was greatly desired by such as loued their Countrey: For which purpose the King, Queene, and their chiefe friends, being at Couentrie, the Duke of Yorke, the Earles of Salisbury and Warwicke are The King at Co∣uentrie, from whence the Duke of Yorke and the York sts depart sodeinely. sent for by the Kings letters vnder his priuie Seale, to giue their attendance, whither they come, but they (either warned of some plot contriued against them, or fearing it, or faining to feare) sodeinely leaue the Court, without leaue, the Duke departing to Wigmore in the Welsh marches, the Earle of Salisburie to his Castell of Midleham in the North- Countrey, and the Earle of Warwicke to Calleis, whose bodies though thus diuided, their mindes continued most firmely factionated. But the King (a patterne of Camb. in Suthrey. pag. 114. Christian goodnes) being tender ouer the generall estate of his Countrey, and wonderfully desirous to reconcile differences among his subiects, that they might the better withstand their imminent forrein enemies, returnes to London there to consult how to effect his holy wishes. The great Lords are per∣swaded to In Ianuar. A. D. 1458. A. reg. 36. meere there; which they did; but yet not without store of followers, for the Duke brought with him foure hundred men, the Earle of Salisburie fiue hundreth, the Earle of Warwicke sixe hundreth: The Dukes of Excester and Sommerset eight hun∣dreth, The Lords meet the King at Lon∣don to compose all quartels. the Earle of Northumberland, the Lords Egre∣mond and Clifford fifteene hundreth. This was the fashion of that swording age. (69) In March the king and Queene with a very roiall company alight at Westminster, to accom∣plish, if it were possible this charitable and necessa∣ry worke of attonement and reconciliation. Godfrey Bolein was at that time Lord Maior of London, (being the ancestor of two renowned and vertuous Queenes Godfrey Bolein at this time Maior of London the ancestor of two Queenes. of England, Anne second wife to King Henry the eight, and Elizabeth their daughter,) through whose great vigilancie and prouidence, the City stood so well guarded, that the Kings peace was dutifullie kept, notwithstanding the great Lords of both the factions (Yorkists and Lancastrians,) were with so great troupes of followers lodged within, and about the same: for during the whole time of their abode he had Rob. Fab. Chro. fiue thousand Citizens in Harnesse, himselfe riding daily about the City and suburbs, to see the publike quiet preserued: and for the night watch there were assigned to three Aldermen two thou∣sand corslet-men. (69) During this watch, a great Councell was holden by the King and Lords, where at length by the diligent trauaile, good exhortation, and prudent aduise of the Archbishoppe of Canterbury, and of o∣ther learned and godly Prelates, the parties offended were induced to a communication, and afterward to a finall accord: the points whereof, considering they held so short a while, (for as Rob. Fab. one saith truly, the dissimuled loue day hung but by a small threed) it were friuolous to dwell in their rehearsall. The King him∣selfe (a singular testimonie of the opinion which all parties had of his integritie) was whole arbitrator of The quarrels ended by the Kings award with shew of common liking. their differences. Certaine satisfactions were awar∣ded to be made by the Duke of Yorke, with the Earles of Warwicke and Salisbury, for the death of Edmund Duke of Sommerset, and others slaine at S. Albans. And the same Duke of Sommerset, the Earle of Northumberland, and Lord Clifford (slaine in that battell by the Yorkists) are declared for true liege∣men to the King at the day of their deathes, aswell as the Duke of Yorke, the Earles of Warwicke and Salis∣burie. So both parts stand iustifide and recti in curia. Many other articles and awards were made, to solder and glue together their alienated harts and affecti∣ons. The reioicement caused by this seeming peace (which on the behalf of the kings persō was vndoub∣tedly sincere and true) was wonderfully great among all good Englishmen, who flocked to the publike celebration thereof. For vpon our Martii. 25. Ladies day in Lent, a solemne procession was made within the Ca∣thedrall Church of Saint Paul in London, where the King (adorned with Crowne and robes of maiestie) went in person, before whom went hand in hand the Duke of Sommerset, and the Earle of Salisburie, the Duke of Excester, and the Earle of Warwicke, and so of either faction one and one, and behind the King himselfe, came the Queene and Duke of Yorke with great familiarity in all mens sights. O religion, ô honour, ô sinceritie, that your diuine vertue should not haue contained these spirits in the harmonie of sweet obedience; but if you could not, what alas should? England must be more seuerely scourged, then that so goodly a blessing of publike reconcilia∣tion should continue, whereby the proud tops of her nation (offensiue to God and men) being taken off, the way might be opened to other names or races, which as yet were nothing thought on. (70) There is no reason to doubt, but that the Duke of Yorke (a man of deepe retirement in him∣selfe) The probable condition of things after the reconcilement. secretly continued his purpose for the Crowne, notwithstanding all these his vernished pretences, and did only therfore not as then put for it, because he presumed the time was incommodious. Againe the Queene (true head and life of the contrary part) aswell in regard of her selfe, her husband, and young sonne, may in likelihood be thought to haue laid downe any thing, rather then the wakefulnesse and iealousie, which former perils and the enemies pre∣sent strength might worthily keepe aliue in her. The thinne ashes therefore, which couered these glow∣ing coles, were thus againe first vnraked and set to blaze. (71) The King and manie of the Lords, still be∣ing at Westminster, there hapned (or perhaps Polid. Uerg. l. 23 makes it doubtfull, . was plotted) a fray betweene one of the Kings seruants and a follower of the Earle of Warwicke, who hurt the Kings seruant. Hereupon his fellowes of all sorts (as Cookes with their spits &c:) in great disorder assaile the Earle himselfe, as he was comming from the Councell, and had there slaine him, but that the euill fate of England and his owne, reserued him to doe and suffer greater mischiefes. The Earle hardly The Earle of Warwicke assaul∣ted, and escaping speedes to . gets to his Barge, and reputing all things vnsure a∣bout the King, gets ouer to his place at Calleis. The Yorkists directly charge the Queene with this, as with a plot drawne for the Earles destruction. Not long after this, the young Duke of Sommerset is sent Captaine to Calleis. Warwicke will resigne no roome, notwithstanding the Kings command, alleaging he was made by Parliament: Sommerset is reiected with danger to his person. Warwicke partly main∣tains himselfe, and such as stucke to him in that charge, with spoiles which he got at Sea; How law∣fullie it appeares not; though Warwicke is said to haue been Admirall by Patent, though now reuo∣ked. The Ordinarie bookes haue, that he, with foureteene faile of men of warre, set vpon three Ca∣ricks of Gene or Genoa, and two of Spaine, greater then the Caricks: three of which Merchant-fleete (which how they should be lawfull prize, we see not) he vanquished after two daies fight, with the losse of about an Rob. Fabian, who also reports a much greater number of Mer chants ships. hundreth men of his owne, and a thousand of theirs: The bootie was worth, at meane rates ten thousand pounds; such also as followed the Duke of Sommerset comming into his hands, he be∣headed at Calleis. These were strange darings in the Earle of Warwicke; whom yet the vnskilfull, and drunken multitude so highly praise: but what are these in regard of them which will presentlie follow? (72) The Duke of Yorke in the meane time, and Warwicke with his father, the Earle of Salisbury (the Triumuirs of England) consult of their affaires: Salis∣burie The ciuill warre begins againe. is resolued with sword in hand to expostulate the danger and iniury offered to his sonne at West∣minster. The Queene (a Lady of incomparable magnanimity and foresight) confident in this, that now King Henry, or the Duke of Yorke must perish, and that one Kingdome was not wide enough for both their Families, bestirres her selfe to maintaine the posses∣sion of a Crowne, and to aduance to the same her owne flesh and bloud Prince Edward, by ruining his house, whose whole building consisted of Lancastri∣an beneficence. She consults, she sends, she speakes, she giues, and strengthneth her selfe with friends on all sides, chiefly in Cheshire, causing her sonne to distribute siluer swannes (his badge or deuise) to all the Gentlemen of that County, and to many other Battell at Blore-heath where K. Henries side hath the worst. through England. Salisbury sets forward from his Castell at Middleham with foure or fiue thousand men. Iames Touchet, Lord Audeley encounters him vnaduisedly vpon Blore-heath neere Muckelstone. The fight was long and bloudy, but in the end K. Hen∣ries euill fortune gaue the better of the day to the Earle of Salisbury, where, besides the valiant Lord Audeley himselfe, were slaine not fewer then two thousand and foure hundreth, but the chiefe losse fel vpon the Cheshire men, who ware the Princes Li∣uerie. (73) The Earle of Salisbury in this sort opened to himselfe a way to Ludlow, where the head of their combination, Richard Duke of Yorke, busied himself to gather forces: being met, they conclude, that seeing the matter was now become deadly, they would deale in cloudes no longer, but fight it out to the extremity. Men are drawne out of all parts with large hopes & promises of sharing in their fortunes, and the Earle of Warwicke bringing with him from The Duke of Yorke and his friends take Armes. Caleis (which he left with his friends) that valiant Captaine Andrew Trolop, and a band of stout and choise Souldiers, comes to the generall Rendeuo of the Yorkists, the Castell of Ludlow. The King in the meane space, (and not before it was need and time) hath assembled a great puissance of faithfull Subiects, and being . attended with the Dukes of Sommerset and Excester, and other of his chiefe friends marcheth against his enemies. His first worke was, to offer them generall pardon. It is re∣fused, and called by them a staffe of reede, or glasse Buckler. The sword must decide the quarrels; wher∣upon the king commands his Standards to aduance: while he was in his March, D ed at Lud∣low 10. October. a letter fraught with the wonted hypocrisies) is deliuered to the King. There A. D. 1459. are in it among many other insinuations these also: Most Christian King, right high and Mighty Prince, and our most dread Soueraigne Lord, &c. Wee sent vnto your good grace by the Prior of the (Cathedral) Church (of Wor∣cester) and diuers other Doctors, and among other by M. William Linwood doctor of Diuinity, which ministred vn∣to vs seuerally the blessed Sacrament of the body of Iesus, The horrible abuse of Christi∣an Sacraments to beguile the King. whereupon wee and euery of vs deposed of our said truth and duty. (74) Thus these prophane and ambitious men play with God, who in the end will seuerely bee a∣uenged on them for their impietie: but the letter made no ouerture of any course, vpon which they would yeeld to lay downe Armes, alleadging, they wold but make their way to the king for redresse of abuses, & that they were enforced to stand together for their own defence, against such great Courtiers and Fauourites, as (say they) intended their destruction; meaning indeed such persons whose vigilancy and manhood might protect and guard him from their practise and vio∣lence. The King is now in sight, whom the Tri∣umuirs Yorke, Warwicke and Salisbury being strong∣ly entrenched before. Ludlow, Graston Chron. meane to assaile. An∣drew Trollop (who had in the Kings pay done great seruice vpon the French) was acquainted with all their counsell, and finding himselfe extreamely de∣ceiued, (for hee thought and so by the Earle of War∣wicke Captaine An∣drew Trollop forsakes the Triumuirs or Yorkists Campe. was made to belieue, that the preseruation of the King was intended, and not destruction) aban∣dons the Yorkists Campe at midnight, & with a choise number of trusty men presents himselfe and seruices to the King, who graciouslie receiued him and his. The truth of the Triumuirates plot, and bottome of their conspiracies was thus made clearely knowne: The Yorkists vpon notice of Trollops act, despairing of successe, at that present flie. The Duke of Yorke The Yorkists are scattered without Battell. with the Earle of Rutland his yonger son into Ire∣land, the Earle of March his eldest sonne and heire, Warwicke and Salisbury, with much difficultie escape to Caleis, which place (as Poly. Verg. l. 23. one saith probably) if Henry had in time taken from his enemies, they had with∣out question beene forthwith irrecouerably ruined. (75) The multitude which serued vnder Yorke found mercy, but their Tenants were many of them executed, maimed, or generally ransackt. The town of Ludlow it selfe was spoiled to the bare wals, and Dutchesse of Yorke depriued of all her goods. What lesse could bee the effects against the friends of such aduersaries, vpon so publike an act and aduantage? The point is followed more sharpely vppon the great Offenders in the next Parliament which was The Duke of York and others attainted of hie treason by Par∣liament, holden at Couentree: there Richard Duke of Yorke, Edward Earle of March, Richard Earle of Warwicke, Edmund Earle of Rutland, Richard Earle of Salisbury, Alice Countesse of Salisbury (in whose right her husband was Earle) two or three Lords, 9. Knights, and certaine other, were openlie of high Treason at∣tainted, and their whole estates confiscated. (76) Caleis, a most important piece, being in the meane space violently possest by Warwicke, the Duke of Sommerset, the Lords Rosse and Audley, are sent with forces to take it; their successe was euill, for the Duke was glad to flie, his Souldiers were robbed by Warwicks men of their harnesse, the Lord Audley is taken into the Towne, and the Lord Rees hardly es∣caped. Letters are hereupon written into forraine parts, entreating In Articul. ad Archiep. Cant . Duce Ebor. miss. Articul. 8. that no reliefe bee ministred to the Traitors who kept Caleis against the King, and all men are at home forbidden to transport any victuall or re∣freshment thither. Euident it is, that the Councel of England rather wished that the Town and Castel had beene French againe, then as it was; neither therein erred they, for it could not be so mischieuous to the maine of their cause, as now it was. The Duke of Sommerset being in Guines, a neighour Castle, doth daily by his Souldiers skirmish with the Caliseans: Warwicke meditates other things. Hee must speake with the Duke of Yorke, at whose commandement all Ireland (where hee abode) seemed to be readie; but is aduertised that the King had certaine shippes, which lay at Sandwich to transport supplies and suc∣cours to the Duke of Sommerset. Hee meanes not The Earle of Warwick take the Lord Riuers and some of the Kings Name at Sand∣wich. to leaue such a perill behind him vnremoued; ha∣uing therefore espied his time, hee wils his people to slippe ouer in the night to Sandwich, which they accordingly did, tooke the Lord Riuers, and his son Anthony Wooduile prisoners, and brought away all the shippes, except one called Grace de Dieu: one Sir Baldwine Fulford Knight, hauing (after this) assu∣med to doe seruice vpon the Earle of Warwicke, and to take him, returnes empty. Warwicke sailes now to Ireland. The King makes the Duke of Excester The King arms to Sea, but can∣not take the Earle, who ret ns from Ireland to Ca is. Admirall, and giues him commission to apprehend the Earle of Warwicke. The Duke with a great na∣uie puts forth to Sea from Sandwich. Behold the ill carriage of things. At Dertmouth many of his Soul∣diers, pretending want of money and victuals, for∣sake him. Meanewhile the Earle of Warwicke passeth by the Duke, not daring to assaile him, nor he wil∣ling to assaile the Duke, for that hee was Admirall and of the Kings bloud. Such was the act and cun∣ning of the Yorkists to pretend reuerence vnto that, which most of all they thirsted to shed: Fiue hun∣dreth fresh souldiers attend at Sandwich to bee shipt ouer to the Duke of Sommerset for safe-conducting him into England. Warwickes men sodainely come vpon them, slew Montfort their Captaine, and ma∣ny other, and disarmed the rest. Such was the di∣stracted estate of our poore Country at this time, through the pride and restlesse ambition of one or two vnhappy men. But though nothing was more plaine then that the Duke of Yorke sought the crown of England; yet nothing is truer, then that they as yet pretended nothing lesse for the veneration of King Henries purity of life, would haue preuailed with the people greatly to their preiudice. (77) The King failing thus to obtaine the per∣son of Warwicke, or his Towne of Caleis, the Yorkists send ouer certaine Articles into Kent, in which (as if they were the onely Patriots and best Subiects of the world) they complaine of certaine generall enormi∣ties concerning iniuries done to the Church, and the ill The Yorkists send ouer Ar∣ticles to seduce the people. ministration of iustice, abuse of purueyers and takers, the Kings pouerty by the corruption of his officers, and the like plausible stuffe: where they speake of the King, they sequester him from all exception, as be∣ing of so noble, so vertuous, so righteous, and so blessed disposition: (these are their words and the truth) as a∣ny Prince earthly. Where they speake of their ene∣mies, (that is, the Kings principall friends and faith∣full subiects) they name the Earle of Salisbury, the Earle of Wiltshire, and the Lord Beaumont which must euer bee an honour to their memories, and put the blame (if it were blame-worthy) of such attaindors which were enacted against the Yorkists at Couentree, vpon these three Lords specially. Where they speake of themselus & their intentions, they professe al sinceri∣ty and loyaltie to King Henry, and that they onelie meant to come vpon their guard to speake with him concerning the common-wealth, and their owne safeties, and that now they would attempt the same againe, in the name of the Land, and not to suffer such mischiefes to raigne vpon them. The conclusion of their cunning and painted pretences hath these fained holy words: Requiring you (the people) on Gods behalfe, and praying you in your owne, therein to assist vs, doing alway the duety of Liegemen in our per∣sons to our said Soueraigne Lord, to his estate, preroga∣tiue and preheminence, and to the surety of his most no∣ble person, whereunto wee haue euer beene, and will bee as true as any of his Subiects aliue: whereof we call God, our Lady Saint Marie, and all the Saints in heauen, to witnesse, and record. But of the thing it selfe (that is to Crowne the Duke of Yorkey they make not the least mention: what wanted in these men to the height and depth of humane malice? They pre∣uaile with the multitudes; a shallow braind, but a great and many headed beast. The Lord Fawcon∣bridge is sent to sound their affections, and to draw the purulent matter to an head: he finds great for∣wardnesse. The Earles of March, Warwicke and Salisburie aduertised of all things, land in Kent. But the people onely were not deluded; for Thomas Bourchier Archbishoppe of Canterbury, and other The Earle of Warwicke lends his side an Oath. graue men, beleeued they meant sooth; which that they might the rather doe, the Earle of Warwicke made open oath vpon the Crosse of Canterbury, that they had euer borne true faith and alleagiance to King Henry. A strange humor in the English, that could neither brooke bad nor benigne Princes. The King had before their comming quit the City of London, as not greatly trusting the affections which the peo∣ple thereof bare toward such as the Yorkish faction had made odious about him, and appointed the Rendeuow of his forces at Northampton where he a∣bode. The enemy (shewing friend) aduanceth thi∣ther. It is a shame to reade that some of the great Prelates would simply bee drawne to countenance such an enterprise: but their intentions were diffe∣rent; they hoped to reconcile enmities, the Earles, to make Yorke King. Meanewhile their complices labour to take the Tower of London, within which there were for King Henry these loyall Nobles. The Lord Scales, Hungerford, Vescie, Louel, Delaware, and Candal a Gascoigne with sundry others. (78) At Northampton things were carried thus: The King meaning there to abide his aduersaries, when it was not thought meete to admit the Earle of Warwicke to his presence, (which thing was cou∣lourably sued for to raise a ground of iustification for battell) they prepare on both parts. The Earles of March and VVarwicke (with like or greater cun∣ning, then they had desired admission to the Kings speech) let cry through the field, that no man should lay hand vpon the King, nor common people, but vpon the Lords, Knights and Esquiers. (79) The hoasts ioy ne. No stroke they gaue but seemes to wound vs also. Let vs swiftly turne our eyes from so vnnaturall slaughters. The The Battell Northampton where the King is taken. L. Grey of Ruthen began the discomfiture of the Kings side, for hee (let the world iudge with what commenda∣tion,) hauing the point, did quit his place and fled to the Earles. The kings armie is defeated, and vt∣terlie broken. Many were slaine and drowned. Po∣lydor and Grafton say ten thousand: The chiefe of the Nobles who there lost their liues, were the Duke of Buckingham, Iohn Earle of Shrewsburie (a Stowes Annals. who varieth in many circum∣stances of this battell from some other wri∣ters most hopefull young Gentleman, and in all points like his heroicke Ancestors) Iohn Vicount Beaumont, Thomas Lord Egremond, and among sundry other prime men, Polyd. Verg. Graft. Ghron. Sir William Lucie, who making hast to the fight, was vpon his first approach chopt downe with an axe. The Kings Ordinance could not play, there fell so great a raine. (80) This wofull battell was fought vpon the Rob. Fab. Graft. Chron. An. D. 1460 A. reg. 38. ninth of Iuly. The King (as a man borne to all calamities and miseries, though he not therefore the lesse, but the more happy through that excellent fortitude of mind, with which hee inuincibly su∣stained them) comes into his enemies hands; but the Queene and the Prince, and the remains of their scattered fortunes flie into the North, there to re∣enforce their powers, and to Rob. Fab. Chron. subdue (as shee caused them to be proclamed) the Kings Rebels and enemies. The Tower of London after this misfortune renders it selfe. The Lord Scales is wickedly murthered vpon the Thames by Wherrimen, belonging to the Earle of Warwicke, as hee intended to passe to Stowes Annal. San∣ctuary at Westminster. The Earles when they were possessed of the King, continued their admirable hypocrisies (which God will terribly plague them for) thereby to leade the people on, and had to him these words. (81) Most noble Prince, displease you not, though it hath pleased God of his grace to grant vs the victorie The Earle words to the King. of our mortall enemies, who by their venemous malice haue vntruly stirred and moued your Highnesse to exile vs out of the land, and would haue put vs to finall me, and confusion: wee come not to vnquiet or grieue your said Highnesse, but to please your noble person, desiring tenderly the high welfare and prosperity thereof, and of all your Realme, and to be your true Liegemen while our liues shall endure. Our soules are amazed at these arts, and men blush to publish to the world things so vn∣worthy. (82) The . Florentine Secretary was scarse borne at this time, but the Diuell was as great a Master then as afterward. The King and Earles in the meane time goe to London, where a Parliament was sum∣moned in his name to be holden in October follow∣ing. The Duke of Yorke (aduertised of his victo∣rie) speedes from Dublin, the chiefe City of Ireland, to bee at that Parliament, where wee shall at last see the true face of his purpose, his owne selfe taking a∣way the maske which hitherto concealed it. (83) Scotland, by reason of late affinity with the house of Beaufort, whose chiefe and toppe was the Duke of Sommerset, (descended from Iohn Duke The humanity of Scotland to K. Henries friends distressed. of Lancaster by the Lady Katherine) was a speciall backe, and Second to King Henry in all his tempestu∣ous aduersities; but now that refuge was also ha∣zarded: for King Iames the second, partly in fauour of King Henry, and partly as making vse of the trou∣bles in England, laieth siege to Rocksbrough (Bellenden the Scot calleth the same Castle He . Boet. transl lib. 17. c. 5. Marchmont) being in the custody of King Henries enemies, where while himselfe (whose . in Ia . 2. skill and delight in shooting of Ordinance was great) comming down the trenches to see the Graftons Chron. Lion (a new great piece which had lately beene cast in Flanders) and the other Artillery dis∣charged, one of them brake, and with a shiuer ther∣of Iames the second King of Scotland slaine with the shiuer of a great piece. A. D. 1460. slew the king, and dangerously wounded the Earle of Angus. This vnhappy accident hapned vp∣on a Sunday, the Le e in Iac. 2. third day of August. The Queen of Scotland neuerthelesse maintaineth the siege, and aswell obtaines that place, as the Castle of Warke, both which shee (in reuenge) threw to the earth, Iames the third, a child of seuen yeers old succeeded to his father, aswell to the cherishment of the distres∣sed English, as to the Crowne. (84) The Parliament being begunne, about the * eight of October at Westminster in King Henries An. reg. 39. The Duke of Yorke returnes out of Ireland to claime the Crowne of Eng∣land. name, thither comes with flying speed, Richard Duke of Yorke, who brake open the Kings lodging Chamber, and placed himselfe therein, suffering the King to prouide elsewhere. Then makes hee his claime to the Crown of England, and publisheth it in open Parliament together with his pedigree. The whole house (such among them excepted as were pri∣uie to the Dukes intention) was Rob. Fab. greatly dismayed both for that hee did set himselfe in the Kings seate, and for this his vnexpected challenge: But the Duke though at first hee greatly meant to haue deposed King Henry, and with speed to bee crowned him∣selfe at Alhallontide next, yet finding such amasement and silence, hee sends them his pedigree and his claime in writing, that they might the better consi∣der, yeelding (as it seemes) to be ordered therein, ac∣cording to their generall agreement during the trea∣ty whereof he would not visite King Henrie, allead∣ging himselfe was peerelesse in England. The maine points of his Title were as followeth. King Edward the third had issue, Edward Prince of VVales, VVilliam The main point in the Duke of Yorks Pedegree. of Hatfield, Lionell Duke of Clarence, Iohn of Gaunt D. of Lancaster, Edmund D. of Yorke, Thomas D. of Glocester, and VVilliam of VVindsor. Edward Prince of Wales dyed, liuing his Father, and left issue Richard the second King of England, who died without Issue: as did also William King Edwards second sonne. (85) Lionel the third sonne had issue Philip his daugh∣ter and heire, married to Edmund ortimer Earle of March, who had Issue Roger Earle of March, who had Issue Edmund Earle of March, Roger, Anne, and Ele∣anor, which Edmund, Roger, and Eleanor died without Issue. Anne (the heire of that house) marrieth Richard Earle of Cambridge, the sonne of Edmund Duke of Yorke, fifth sonne to King Edward the third, which Earle of Cambridge had Richard commonly (saith the Booke,) cal∣led Duke of Yorke. (86) Iohn of Gaunt the fourth son and younger brother to Lionel, had Issue Henry, who immediately after King Richards resignation, vnrighteously (saith the Booke) en∣tred vpon the same, for that Edmund Earle of March, sonne of Roger Earle of March, and of Philip daughter and heire of the before said Lionel Duke of Clarence, el∣der brother to Iohn Duke of Lancaster was then aliue, and that aswell the said Henry, eldest son to Iohn Duke of Lancaster, as his descendents haue hitherto holden the Crowne of England, &c. vniustly, for that himselfe the said Richard Plantagenet Duke of Yorke was the lawfull heire, being the sonne of Richard Plantagenet Earle of Cambridge, and of Anne before said. (87) This was the effect of the Duke of Yorks ti∣tle, which for the points of the Pedegree was very true, though in barre thereof the friends of King Henry (without denying any part of the premises, being all of them more euident then that they could be honestly denied) had not a little to say for him: Allegations for K Henry the 6. and the Lanca∣strian title. for they could among other things alleadge, that Richard the second resigned vp his Crowne and Regali∣ty at large; and that none else making claime but Hen∣ry Duke of Lancaster, hee was thereunto by the consent of all the three Estates admitted; that Richard Earle of Cambridge was for high Treason attainted and executed, and his Issue made incapable of any inheritance, that this Richard his sonne now challenging the Crowne of Eng∣land, being restored by the meere clemency and goodnesse of this King Henry the sixt, had voluntarily acknowled∣ged him for his lawfull Soueraigne, and sworne the same, and that the said Richard was finally for treason attain∣ted, and adiudged vninheritable: they could hereunto haue added sundry Acts of Parliament, made to establish the right of the Lancastrian line, the succession of three Kings, all Henries, that is to say, the fourth, fifth and sixth; the politicke addresses of the first of those Kings, the noble victories of the second, and the holy life of the third; which three Kings liues contained of raigne about three∣score yeeres, in which number this was the nine and thir∣tiethof King Henry the sixth, who was descended of the male line, and the Duke of Yorke but of a female: of which female line none had euer been in possession of the Crown. Great and weighty points, (if any) and the rather to bee considered, for that King Henries person beeing (in very truth) Prisoner, no act of his to establish Yorkes title could bind in law or conscience, and the lesse, for that hee had a wife, and by her a sonne, who was at liberty, and ready with Armes to free his father, or hazard to destroy the whole English name. But they who (on Yorks behalfe) abstractiuelie disputed these highest questions, knew a rule of law, which saith, Iura sanguinis nullo iure ciuili dirimi pos∣sunt'; and the Lancastrians were not without their speculatiue and remote considerations, to counte∣nance the particulars of their cause. Thus we see that in Monarchies (though the noblest forme of Regiment) where lineall succession is the rule of in∣heritance, there sometimes fall out as great and as indeterminable difficulties, as where Election desig∣neth the Successor: whereof the French tragedies which our Nation made among them, and now these in England, are without all exception, the most feare∣full instances. For France had heretofore her time of affliction, but now (O dearest England) it was thine. (88) While this weighty controuersie was deba∣ted, a Crowne which hung for garnishment in the middle of the roofe, where the Knights and Burges∣ses Signes forego∣ing the end of King Henries raigne. of the Parliament met to consult, and the crown which for like cause stood vpon the highest Tower of Douer Castell, Caxton. Chron. fell sodainely down, which were vulgarly construed Grafton. to portend That the raigne of K. Henry was at an end, and that the Crown should be trans∣ferred from one royall line to another. But the Queene, her sonne Prince Edward, and her fast friends in the North (the seate of their hopes) being nothing dis∣couraged at their late ill fortunes, prepare all the forces they can to recouer K. Henrie and the King∣dome; which thing whiles they are pursuing, the conclusion of the Parliament concerning the crown, was, That Henry the sixth should raigne, and bee King Henry to bee king for of , and the Duke of York after his death. during his life, the remainder to rest in Richard Duke of Yorke, and the lawfull heires of his body in generall tayle, King Henries heires to bee excluded. The Duke in the meane time is proclaimed heire apparant, and called Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, Earle of Chester, and Protector of England. The agreement was en∣grossed, sealed and sworn vnto. The Queene will haue nothing to doe in this bargaine, being so dan∣gerous and preiudicious to her selfe; her husband, and her sonne; and therefore when the King (at the Duke of Yorkes instigation) sent for her to repaire vnto him, shee relying vpon the Dukes of Sommer∣set and Excester, and other the Kings friends, vtter∣ly refuseth: Henry continueth king. The Armes therefore, which she taketh for his deliuerance, haue the more iustice. The Duke of Yorke missing the prey hee expected, leaues the king with the Duke of Norfolke, and the Earle of Warwicke at London; himselfe with the Earles of Salisbury and Rutland, and certaine forces, Mense Decem. The Duke of Yorke pu ueth the Queene in the North. setteth forward to Wakefield to pur∣sue the Queene and her sonne, sending direction to the Earle of March that hee should follow with all his power. The Castell of Sandall standeth plea∣santly vpon a small hill, in view of the faire town of VVakefield; there the Duke of Yorke (comming thither vpon Christmas Eue) reposeth himselfe, and expecteth the encrease of his numbers. The Queene aduertised, thinkes it wisdome to fight be∣fore the Duke grow too strong; and thereupon mar∣cheth forward, hauing an Army of eighteene thou∣sand men, led by the Dukes of Sommerset and Ex∣cester, the Earles of Stows Annal. Deuonshire and Graft. Chron. Wiltshire, the Lords Neuill, Clifford, Rosse, and in effect all the Northerne Nobility. The host (or so much ther∣of as they thought necessary to shew) presents it selfe before Sandall, to prouoke and dare the Duke The Queenes Army comes to Wakefield. to battell. His bloud impatient of these braues, & ignorant perhaps that the enemy had so great a mul∣titude, will needes fight, though the Earle of Sa∣lisbury, and Sir Dauid Hall (an ancient seruant of his, and a great Souldier) gaue him aduise to stay, till his sonne (the Earle of March) approched with such Welshmen and Marchers, as hee had in great numbers assembled. But God would forbeare him no longer, but like a seuere Master meanes to take a present account: at which he found whether all the kingdomes of the earth are worth the least sinne, much lesse a wilfull periurie. (89) The Queene therefore addeth stratageme, and wit to her force, to the entent hee might not escape her hands; whereupon the Earle of Wiltshire vpon one side of the hill, and the Lord Clifford vp∣on the other, lie in ambush to thrust between him and the Castell; the Dukes of Sommerset and Exce∣ter, stand embattelled in the open field. Their poli∣cy had the wished successe; for the Duke being not fully fiue thousand strong, issueth out of the Castle downe the hill. The battels which stood in front, ioyne furiously, when sodainly the Duke of Yorke sees himselfe inclosed, and although hee expressed great manhood, yet within one halfe houre, his whole Armie was discomfited, himselfe and diuers They ouerthrow the Duke of Yorke and kill him. his deare friends beaten downe and slaine. There lay dead about him the Lord Harington, Sir Thomas Neuill sonne to the Earle of Salisburie, Sir Dauid Hal, with sundry Knights and others about two thou∣sand, & two hundred; among which were the heires of many Southern gentlemen of great account, whose Graft. Chron. bloud was shortly after reuenged. Let vs not lin∣ger vpon the particular accidents of this battell, but consider what it wrought for King Henries aduance∣ment; yet these few things are not to bee vnremem∣bred. The Earle of Rutland (a yonger sonne to the Duke of Yorke) being about twelue yeeres old, was also slaine by the Lord Clifford, (who ouertooke him flying) in part of reuenge for that the Grast. Chron. Earles father had slaine his. A deed which worthily ble∣mished the Author; but who can promise any thing temperate of himselfe in the heat of martiall furie? chiefly, where it was resolued, not to leaue anie branch of Yorke line standing, for so doth Grastons Chron. one make the Lord Clifford to speake. (90) That mercilesse proposition was common (as the euent will shew) to either faction. The Duke of Yorkes head, crowned with paper, is presen∣ted to the Queene. Cruell ioy is seldome fortu∣nate. Caesar wept ouer Pompeis head, but the Queen (ignorant how manifold causes of teares were reser∣ued for her owne share) makes herselfe merrie with that gastly and bloody spectacle. The Earle of Salisburie, after wounds receiued, being in this battel taken prisoner, is conueighed to Ponfract Castle; from whence the common people (who loued him not) Stowes Annals. violently haled him, and cut off his head; which perhaps was not done without the good liking of others. The Dukes head, together with his, were fixed on poles, and set vpon a gate of Yorke, and with them (if Grafton say true) the heades of all the other prisoners which had beene conducted to Pomfret. (91) This battell (called of Wakefield) was fought vpon the last day of December; of whose weathers complexion if their courages had partici∣pated, mischiefe might haue made her stop here, which now is in her swiftest course. (92) For the Earle of March, sonne, and heire to this late valiant Duke of Yorke, hearing of this tragi∣call A. D. 1461. A. reg. 39. The Earle of March pursues his fathers de∣signes. aduenture, giues not ouer: but, hauing gathered an armie of about twenty thousand to march against the Queene, he findes emploiment neerer hand: be∣ing certified, that Iasper Theder Earle of Pembrooke (halfe brother to King Henrie) and Iames Butler Earle of Ormond and Wiltshire, had with them a great force of Welsh and Irish to take him. The youthfull and valiant Earle of March, whose amiable presence and carriage made him gratious with the people, (and the rather for that he had the generall good word of Phil. Comin. women,) meanes to try his fortune against the said Earles. He sodeinely therefore turnes backe from Shrewsbury, and at a place called Mortimers Crosse neere Ludlow, where the enemie abode, he sets vpon them; It was Candlemas day in the morning, at The battell at Mortimers Crosse where Edward is victorious. which time there appeared (as some write) three Sunnes, which sodeinely ioined in one. This luckie prognosticon, and ominous Meteor exceedingly fi∣red the Earle of March, and was (some say) the reason, why he vsed for his Badge, or roiall deuise, the Sunne in his full brightnesse. The Battels maintaine their fight with great furie; but, in the end, the Earle of March obtaines the victorie, killing of his enemies three thousand, and eight hundreth men; the Earles saued themselues by flight. The sonne of ho∣nour and fortune did thus begin to shine through Clouds of blood and miserie, vpon Edward, whome shortly we are to behold King of England. There were taken Graft. Chron. Stowes Annal. Sir Owen Theder (father to Iasper Earle of Pembrooke,) who was beheaded by Edwards com∣mandement, as also Sir Iohn Skudamor knight with his two sonnes, and other. (93) The Queene on the other side (hauing or∣dered her affaires in the North, setled the estate there∣of, and refreshed her people,) within a while after drawes neere with her Northern armie to S. Albans. There came before them an euill fame of their beha∣uiour to London, whose wealth lookt pale knowing it selfe in danger; for the Northern armie, (in which were Scots, Welsh, and Irish aswell as English,) made bold by the way with what they liked, making small distinction of sacred or prophane, after they were once past the riuer of Trent, Captaine Andrew Trolop being their Coronell. King Henry himselfe in per∣son, with the Dukes of Norfolke and Suffolke, the Earles of Warwicke and Arundel, the Lord Bonuile, & other, with a great puissance encampe at S. Albans, to giue the Queene battell, and stop her farther pas∣sage toward London. But the Lords of her faction being ready to attempt on her behalfe, assaile the Kings forces within the Town, and after some sharpe affronts, breake through, and driue their aduersaries out with much bloodshed, till they fell vpon a squa∣dron or battalion of the Kings, wherein there were about foure or fiue thousand men, which made good The second bat∣tell at S. A bans where the Queene is victo∣rious and reco∣uers the King. their ground for a while with great courage, but in the end the Queenes side clearely wanne the day. There perished in this conflict about two thou∣sand. This hapned vpon Shroue-tuesday, the seuenteenth of Februarie. The King, Queene and Prince meet ioifully, where he knights his sonne, (being eight yeeres old,) and thirtie others. The Lord Bonuile and Sir Thomas Tirel saith Rob. Fab. Kiriel of Ken being taken in the fight, were beheaded, but all the other great men elcape. The common people of London doe not∣withstanding stand wholy for the beautifull Earle of March, and stand the more confidentlie, because they had sure intelligence, that he had vanquished the Earle of Pembrooke in the Marches of Wales, and that the Earle of Warwicke, escaping from S. Albans, had met with the Earle of March neere Costwold, and that both with ioint forces were marching toward London. These newes made the King and Queene retire into the North, and leaue that Citie and the The King and Queene returne into the North. Southern Countreys to their Enemie, till they might recouer a fairer opportunitie or more suffici∣encies. Edward vpon notice of the Kings departure, entreth London, and giues period to Henries reigne, which is accounted to take end after he had succes∣siuely ruled this Land the space of thirtie eight yeeres, sixe moneths, and foure daies. His Wife. (94) Margaret the wife of King Henrie, was the daughter of Reyner King of Ierusalem, Sicilie, and Arragon, Duke of Andegauia, Lorraine, Barre, and Cala∣bria, Earle of Prouince, Cenomania, and Guize. Shee by proxie was espoused vnto King Henrie, at the Citie Towers in Touraine in the Church of Saint Martin; William de-la-Poole being Procurator to the king in the presence of the French king and his Queen, which king was vncle to the Brides Father, and the Queene Aunt vnto her mother. Shee with great pompe was conueyed to South-hampton, and thence to the Abbey of Tichfield, where the yeere of grace 1445. and twen∣tie two of Aprill, shee was solemnly married to king Henry; and honorably attended by the greatest E∣states of the Land, was crowned at Westminster the thirtieth of May following. Shee was exceedingly beautified in face, and of goodly feature, of a great wit and deepe pollicie, but of stomacke farre aboue her sexe, as in the managing of those trouble some times did too well appeare. Shee was his wife twen∣tie sixe yeeres, and twentie nine daies: and (after her husbands depulsion from his regall throne) her forces being vanquished at the battell of Tewksburie, in a poore religious house, whether shee had fled for the safetie of her life, was taken prisoner, and so carried Captiue to London, where shee remained in durance, till Duke Reiner her father did purchase her liberty with great summes of money, vnto whom shee returned, and lastly died in her natiue Countrie. His Issue. (95) Edward the only Child of king Henrie and Queene Margaret his wife was borne at Westmin∣ster the thirteenth day of October, the yeere of Christ 1453. and the 31. of his fathers Raigne, and the next yeere following vpon the fifteenth of March, by authoritie of Parliament, was created Prince of Wales & Earle of Chester: For the title of Duke of Cornwal (as it is noted by warrant of record) is repu∣ted Orig. 35. Hen. 6. vnto the Kings eldest sonne, the very day of his natiuitie, and by vertue of a speciall Act is presumed and taken to be of full and perfect age, so as he may ue that day for his liuerie of the said Dukedome, and ought by right to obtaine the same; hauing his roialties in the Stannary, wrackes at Sea, Customes &c: the first Duke thereof was Edward commonlie called the Blacke Prince, whome his Father, King Edward the third created in great Estate Duke of Cornwall by a wreath on his head, a ring on his fin∣ger and a siluer verge. He proued a Prince of great hope and forwardnes, being skilfull in martiall knowledge, matters of gouernment, and Lawes of the Realme. At the age of seuenteene, the better to bandie against his Fathers Competitor, King Ed∣ward, (the Maul of the Lancastrians claime) a ian∣ced in France, Anne the second daughter of Richard the Make-king, Earle of Warwick; whose other daugh∣ter was married to George Duke of Clarence. This Prince when the day was lost at Tewkesburie, sought to escape thence by flight, but being taken, was brought into the presence of king Edward, whose re∣solute answeres enraged the Conqueror so much, as he dashed him (an vnprincely part) on the mouth with his gauntlet, and Richard the crooke backe ranne him into the heart with his dagger. His Body was buried without all solemnity among the poore and meane persons slaine, in the Monasticall Church of the blacke Friers in Tewkesburie. Anno Domini 1471. EDVVARD THE FOVRTH, FIRST Monarch 54 Edward IIII KING OF THE HOVSE OF YORKE, KING OF ENGLAND AND FRANCE, LORD OF IRELAND, THE FIFTIE FOVRTH MO∣NARCH OF THIS LAND, HIS RAIGNE, ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XVII. E Dward, borne at Roan in Normandy, and bearing the title of March in England, hauing unne the battell at Mortimers Crosse (though the Lords his Confederates had lost that of Saint Albans) from Ludlow hasted towardes London, & on his way was Edward Duke of Yorke and Rich. Earle of War∣wick come vnto London. seconded by Richard Neuill, the stout Earle of War∣wicke, to the great encrease of his number and pow∣er, which so terrified Queene Margaret, now ∣dy to po se the South hus so , i , to the vpon which now Yorke, pre ly p ed pr ∣ry powerfull, and the other in poss consulted for their safest estate; when on the sud∣daine Edward with VVarwicke entred their gates, The City of London doubtf vnto whether part to yeeld. whose warlike visages so daunted the aduerse affec∣ted, that they beganne with the to make him way to the throne, & the Noblemen likewise made him offers of their seruice, to establi claime, neither were the Clergy to learne the obseruance of time, or to sway with the man vpon whom the world smiled. All these se n Counsell to confer of the , Duke Edward made knowne his title to the Crowne, and i well s red, how the body of the who Par ment formerly , d H ry selfe sub∣ ith hi h d; whose , though Pri Edward his right to the Crowne. now through des y what right L er had, they all , and how di our did wi gh his neg∣lect, who si ity euer his pri∣uate deuotions, then the potent managing of a So∣ueraignes command. (2) These things vrged (and most of them true) their voices went current, that Edward was the vn∣doubted King, whereunto the Londoners the sooner yeelded, for that his dreaded Northerne Army was then encamped in Saint Iohns field: neither was any reseruation made (as before) of Henries naturall King Henry depriued of his Crowne. life, but hee is now absolutely neglected as vnwor∣thy of his Crowne, how acceptable soeuer he had raigned till then, whose following miseries were not so much lamented, as his constant patience was admired in vndergoing the same. Edward thus moun∣ted, before his foot had well touched the first steppe, was vpon Sunday the second of March, among his Northerne Souldiers proclaimed King; William L. Edward Duke of Yorke proclai∣med King of England. Fan onbridge Earle of Kent declaring his claime, and disabling K. Henry of stile or Gouernement, whose weake head (as hee alleadged) had ouer long blemi∣shed the English Crowne. (3) Vpon the next day, with all pompe hee was conueied to Westminster, and set vpon the Kings seat March 3. in the Hall, where holding the scepter of Saint Ed∣ward in his hand, the voice of the people was againe demanded, and againe granted; such was the hap of vnfortunate Henry, and condition of the multitude euer to dislike the present, and to affect the new: but no interim left to disswade or attempt, the next day his stile and title was again proclaimed by the name of King Edward the fourth, being the fourth of March and He was borne A D. 1 41. April 29. about the 20. yeere of his age. (4) These sodain alterations made the richer sort somewhat fearefull, especially, those whose heart stood firm for K. Henry, (who was now in the North The feares of the Londoners. new mustering of men) and among those, London af∣forded many, as King Edwards iealousie suspected, whereof one Walker a substantiall Citizen and Gro∣cer Walker a Citizen beheaded for word . was a sufficient proofe, who for wordes spoken concerning his owne sonne, that hee would make him heyre of the Crowne (meaning his house hauing that Signe) was the eighth day of this Kings raigne apprehended, and beheaded in Smithfield. And al∣beit his words intended no treason, (the rocer not once dreaming to touch King Edwards title) yet Dangerous to meddle with a Crowne. the time being when the Crowne lay at stake, the tenture of the Law made them his death. This rough beginning moued many to doubt, that they Grost. had wronged themselues in wronging King Henry, which opinion was more confirmed in that hee re∣tained 18000. pounds. a great summe of money borrowed of the Staplers-Merchants, and disbursed in his affaires, whose restitution he vtterly denyed with an austere King Edwards beginnings somewhat dis∣liked. commandement to surcease the demand. But hea∣ring how Henry was beloued in the North, & what followers were gathered to recouer him the Crown; vpon the twelfth of March with a complete Armie K. Edwards expedition into the North. hee sets forth of London, accompanied with his brethren, and many other Nobles: with whome marching towards P freit, he there appoints the Lord Fitzwater to keepe the passage of Ferribrig, o∣mitting no directions of a worthy commander. (5) King Henry for his part though nothing so warlike, yet thought it best policy to imploy such leaders as desired against the house of Yorke; such were the Duke of set, the Earle of Nor∣thumberland, and the Lord Clifford, whose had been s ine in the first battell of S. Albans, which last, though in degree the least m n, yet sought to his same with the first, and therefore to no attempt vnassayed, hee dainely ch ged vp∣on the Troupe appointed for , th the . . vn ed (only with a po in his ) to the Brigge, thin The Lord Fitz∣ er and . his owne Souldiers, where, with the of ▪ d many of hi were th ▪ (6) Th brute of which▪ ust blowne, i one ▪ hee mounted his Co , and po∣ i , p ing, blowing and of breath, said, Sir I pray God haue mercy on their soules Earle Warwicks approach and speech to King Edward. which in the beginning of your enterprize haue lost their liues; I see no succour in the world, but in God, to whom I remit the vengeance. And so alighting, forthwith slew his horse with his sword saying, Let him flie; that flie will, I will tarry with him that will tarrie with me: which hee confirmed by kissing the crosse of his sword, the vsuall complement of couenants made by martiall men. The valiant Lord Fancon∣bridge fearing left this beginning would giue an edge to the sequell, got ouer the riuer at Castleford, three miles from the bridge, meaning to inclose the ta∣kers vpon their backes, which Clifford perceiuing, sought to auoide, and whether for haste, heate, or The L. Clifford s ine with an headlesse arrow. paine, put off the gorget he wore, when sodainly an arrow without an head, shot from the Bow of some laide in ambush, pierced through his throat, and stucke in his necke, which set a period vnto his life. (7) The next day more fatall for Englands bloud, was celebrated with speares in stead of palmes, vsu∣ally A. D. 14 Difference of Authors hath here bred some confusion of yeeres. borne on March 29. that Saboth of Lent, in whose daw∣ning, the Lord Fanconbridge, who commanded the foreward (the Duke of Norfolke being sicke) tooke the field on a plaine, betwixt the townes of Towton and Saxton, where King Edward ioyning his whole forces (being forty eight thousand, and six hundreth sixty persons, as King Henries were also threescore thousand) caused proclamation to bee made, that K. Edwards proclamation much forwarded his seruice. hee who feared to sight, might forthwith depart, but if any Souldier abiding, should seeke to flie or turn backe, hee should bee slaine by his next fellow, and the slayer to receiue a great reward, besides the sti∣pend of a double pay. (8) Both Armies ready to ioyne, a small sleet of The battell a Touton. snow hapned to fall, which with the wind was car∣ried into the face of the Lancastrian host, whereby their sight was much empeached, which aduantage Fanconbridge soone espying, forth with commanded his Archers to shoot each man a light, and then to stand without further proffer. The Northern men A politicke pra∣ctise in . feeling the arrows, but not seeing the Archers, made haste to acquite them with the like, and shot their whole sheaues of arrowes without intermission, but short of the mark threescore yeards at the least; which storme being past, and all their store spent, the worthy Fanconbridge aduanced forward, and within reach of his Archers sore galled the enemie, making a double aduantage of what they had done: for their owne quiuers being full, when the others were empty, they gathered vp & shot theirs, against their owne shooters, yet left some of them sticking to gall the legges of their pursuers: by which onely stratagem, as was constantly auerred, the battell and day was lost and wonne. (9) The sight was bloudy and continued tenus howres, for all being English, acquit themselues Eng∣lish-like, no taking of prisoners, nor looking for ransome, but all to retaine, and to get honour that day; wherein died the Lords , Neuill, Wil∣loughby, Well , , Gray, D , Be ∣kingham, and Clifford, (who died the day before) the two b ds of Exce r, Knig & Gen∣tlemen . a great number, and in all thirty fiue thousand ninety and one, so that onely the stained with English blood, b the riuers r red for a great distance, is this battell of Englands ch wars. (10) Henry, who neuer was victor whe hee came, hearing losse which seemed K Henry , with hi Queene and where, of ally tained, . indeed the better warrier) passed thence into France, where, of King Lewis and her father Reiner shee ob∣tained Queene Marga∣ret passeth into France. more men, then her coffers were able to re∣lieue with pay; the bane of all courage in aduentures of warre. (11) Victorious Edward, after those his prospe∣rous successes in the North, in triumph returned to London, and the eight & twentith of Iune with great solemnity was Crowned at Westminster, where in S. Peters Church, the next day it was againe most so∣lemnly A. D. 1461. King Edward crowned. set on his head, and the third day so Crow∣ned he came to Saint Paules in London, and therein was censed with great applause of the People. In No∣uember following a Parliament began, wherein King Henrie, Queene Margaret, and Prince Edward their King Henry and Prince Edward disherited by Parliament. sonne, were disherited of their right to the Crowne; the Dukes of Excester and Sommerset, and the Earle of Deuonshire, with an hundred and forty moe, were at∣tainted also and disherited; so fortune dallieth in set∣ting the dice of her fauours, or frownes. (12) Queene Margaret stored with men, but in want of money, with her French powers made in∣to A. D. 1462. Queene Marga∣ret returned into Scotland. Scotland; whose comming was most welcome to the two Kings there, and thence, with great shew of enterprize, hoised her sailes for England, but hauing touched the y of Tinmouth (whether vpon better aduise, or feared with their owne sha∣dowes,) shee with her French put backe to the Sea, where such a sore tempest tooke them, as had not Queene Margaret in a small Caruell got vnto Bar∣wicke, shee had not liued to vexe the new King, nor seene the vnfortunate losse of her husband, her son, and Realme, nor the miserable calamities of her Bastard Ogle o∣uercommeth the French. owne old age; her French by Bastard Ogle were hea e into Holy Iland, many slaine, and foure hundred of them put to their ransomes. (13) This inting French enterprize, though it dulled the edge of some spirits, yet did it nothing An. D. 1463. daunt the courage of the Queene, her better hopes being fixed vpon the Scots valour; so, (leauing Prince Edward for safetie in Barwicks,) with her husband and Scots shee entred Northumberland, tooke the Ca∣stle Queene Marga∣ret entreth Nor∣thumberland in hostile manner. of Bamburgh, and so passed forward vnto the Bi∣shopricke, their forces daily increasing through the confluence of such English, fauoured King Henrie. (14) King Edward hearing these stirres in the North, made his preparation both by Sea and King Edward commeth to T rks. Land, and with his brethren and Nobles came to Y rke, from whence he sent Iohn Neuil Lord , with a power of men, as some what mistrusting the loialties of the Northumbrians, who passing for∣ward, vpon H gely-Moore was sodeinely encountred by the Lords Hungerf rd and Ro s, with whom was The skirmish vpon egely More. Sir Ralph Ferci , a most valiant Knight, but Monta∣ , accompanied with such as would neither looke backe, nor stand ga ing on, hode the encounter, and at the first push put back the two ords, and slew the said , who no waie would depart out of the field; but in dying said, I have saued the in my rest, meaning this oath m e to King The saying of Sir Ralph Percie at his death. . (15) vi∣ctory at . valiantly their Camp, as after great slagh∣ter, May. 15. Lord and . The disgrading of Sir Ralph . ▪ . King Henry to flight. (saith Grafton) hee fled into Scotland which is more Rich. Grafton. likelie. (16) Edward thus cleered of the Cloud threat∣ning storme, thought best ere others did light, to pro∣uide for himselfe, and therefore he raised Bulwarks, King Edwards care and prouisi∣ons. built new Fortresses in places of danger, put forth his espials vpon the Marches of Scotland, and com∣manded that none should keepe Henrie or Margaret in secret, whose sight, he feared, would draw the affe∣ctions of many, which otherwise stood in case of obedience. But ouer-borne Henrie (whether past al feare, or inforced by destinie) in disguised apparell King Henrie dis∣guised commeth into England, and is apprehended. past into England, where he was soone apprehended by one Ca tlow; but Stow saith by Thomas Talbot in Cletherwood besides Bungerley Hipping stones in Lan∣cashire, being betraied in Waddington Hall as he sate at dinner, and thence brought to London with his legs bound to the stirrups, arrested by Warwicke, his guilt King Henry hard∣ly vsed, arrested and committed prisoner to the Tower. spurres taken off, and committed Prisoner to the Tower of London. (17) The Lyon thus pent, his pawes cut or pa∣red, and Queene Margaret in France with her father Rei er; King Edward now quiet set his minde vpon Gouernment for the good of his Realme. In his Court of Kings Bench he vsed to sit in person certaine daies together, to see how his lawes proceeded with Iustice; ordained penall Statutes against exces∣siue King Edwards care of Iustice. pride in Apparell, especialle against long picked shooes then vsually worne, which grew to such an extreme, that the pikes in the Toes were turned vp∣ward, and with siluer chaines, or silke laces tied to the The pride and abuse in shoo . knee. But among many good prouisions, one pro∣ued very bad, as the sequell shewes; for concluding a league with King Henrie of Castile, and Iohn King of Arragon, he granted a licence to transport certaine numbers of C teswold Sheepe, which are since growne Sheep transpore ted into Sp e, verie hurtfull vn∣to England. to such an exceeding increase, as the Clothes made of their woolles is a great hindrance to our Marchants, which aduenture in the Leuant Seas. (18) His next care was to finde a fit Queene, both King Edwards care for choice of his Queene. for the hope of issue to succeed, and for alliance and power to assist ed were) against Henries claime. Fist therefore minding to send into Scotland, to desire in marriage the Ladie Margaret, (sister to king Iames the third) thereby to frustrate H tes further hope; was made to belieue that the said Ladie was, by rea∣son of sickenesse, not capable of conception, which altogether declined his affection from that way. Next, as some say, a motion was made for Lady Eli∣zabeth sister and heire apparant vnto Henrie king of His second pro∣iect for a Rich. Grafton. Castile, as a much most conuenient; considering king Edward had thereunto a Claime, whose great Grand∣mother was one of the heires of Castile, being the daughter of Don Peter the king, besides which high match, and combination of Alliances, hope was Cambden. Rich. Grafton. conceiued that the Dutchies of Guien and Aquitaine, might be recouered by the assistance of these Castili∣ans, without great charge or trauell to the English. But the tender spring of the one, and the lusty growth of the other, would not be grafted into one stocke to fruit , shee little aboue , and he about twenty three, unfit to taine till shee could giue him content. (19) A third Princesse , against whom His third a y for a wife. ; The allegations the of . feared. This match being most approued in coun∣sell, Lady Bona fitte st Queene for Edward. Neuil the great Earl of Warwick. none was held more fit to solicite the businesse then Lord Richard Neuil the great Earle of Warwick, a man esteemed for power a Demy-King, and for magnificence and hospitality matchlesse: in whose house at London (as some haue verified) sixe oxen were spent euery day, and most Tauernes in the Ci∣ty full of his meat. Rob. Fab. (20) Warwicke in great state arriued at Tours, & his message knowne, was accordingly entertained in the French Court, where he wrought the Queen her Warwicks wooing and entertaine∣ments in France. selfe to be the chiefest Agent; who drew on her sister Bona, with recommending the state and stile of a magnificent Queene (a sound very tunable in a La∣dies eare,) and her husband Lewis, with assurance of a potent and wise Allie, a pleasing theame to soft natured Princes, as the French King was. And in∣deed to all shee vndertooke all good contentments; so as on that side all things were cleare, and Warwicke dismissed with Courtly French complements; the Earle Damp-martin was to passe into England for the finall confirmation. (21) But whilest Warwicke had beene industri∣ously wooing in France, King Edwards affection in K. Edwards last & sodaine choise of his wife. England was working another way; for being on hunting in the Forrest of Wychwood beside Stony-Stratford, hee there found other game, that made game in his eye, which was the Lady Elizabeth Gray attending the Dutchesse of Bedford her mo∣ther, who then soiorned at his Mannour of Graf∣ton, whither hee repaired for his recreation. She had beene attendant vpon Queene Margaret the Ioh. Hardings . wife of King Henry the sixt, and had beene mar∣ried vnto Iohn Gray Esquier, knighted, and slaine at the battell of S. Albans vpon King Henries part, who now was a suiter vnto the King, for something The Lady Eliza∣beth Gray a sup∣plicator to king Edward. taken away in the extremity of that time, to bee re∣stored towards the maintenance of her . But howsoeuer her suit pierced his eare, her sweetly com∣posed feature strangely affected his heart; more for∣mall shee was, and louely in countenance, then ei∣ther tall or exceedingly faire, yet both sufficient to meete in one person, of an excellent witte, a sober demeanour, a modest looke, a smile, and her speech vttered in such a turall eloquence as The beauty and feature of the Lady Elizabeth Gray. her answeres euer set on edge King Edwards desires, which howsoeuer di full to the appetite of his wanton bed, (aff ming with , ee accounted herselfe most vnworthy of the name of his Queene, so shee held her selfe of mort worth, & her chast honour dearer then to bee his C bine) yet held they him in chase till shee had im in the snares of her loue. (22) Their many meetings and comple∣ments, made the old Dutchesse of Yorke (the Kings mother) much to suspect it would bee a match; to K. Edwards mo∣ther seeketh to , his loue. hinder which, with a par authority shee entred discourse, alleadging it honourable, , and of much profite to linke with some great Princesse in The counsell and conference of the old Dut∣chesse of Yorke with her K. Edward. raine , both for the of po ions abroad, and (as the se stood) to at home: that had gone suite in Fr , as if in himselfe n w , their displ res would . To mar∣ry his Subiect held , cially one without , alliance, or , other thing mouing, but a wanton do ge ; and although that in Lady be , yet was there nothing so ; the incorp , mo as tought of a . A (quoth she) is most side; whose , vnto it was ex∣ a to marry. . (23) K. Edwards rea∣son for his free choise. owne desires, and knew himselfe to bee out of his mothers rule, partly in earnest, and partly in plea∣sance, made her this reply: That marriage being a spirituall type, ought rather to be conioyned where God had framed the parties to consent (as this of his was) then in regard of any temporall respect whatsoeuer. That his choice was pleasing to him∣selfe, and would be to his subiects he certainly knew, whose amity before all other Nations hee most pre∣ferred and desired; neither could he giue them bet∣ter occasion of loue then in this, that being their So∣ueraigne, hee disdained not to marry into their Tribes; and so likewise for his Issue, there could not any Prince be better beloued then he that was their naturall Prince so borne of both parents. That if forraine alliances were so needfull, hee had many of his kin, to contract them, and that with content of all parties: but for himselfe, to marry for pos∣sessions, or to please others with displeasing his own affections, hee saw it no wisdome, hauing already sufficient of the one; and the other offended, euen sweet pleasure would seeme sowre pils; especially, the choice that is made by another mans eye. That there are many comparable to her, said hee, I make no question, and am the more glad, let them haue them that like them, I will not repine, neither I hope will any abridge mee of that which I allow vn∣to others: the Prouerbe is (Mother) that marriage goes by Destiny, but to be wiued against a mans own liking is an earthly Purgat ry. And therefore my Cosen Warwicke I am sure, neither loueth me so lit∣tle, to grudge at that I loue, nor is so vnreasonable to looke that I should in choise of a wife, rather be ruled by his eye, then by mine owne: as though I were a W rd, that were bound to marry by the ap∣pointment of a Gardian: I would not bee a King with that condition, to forbeare mine owne libertie, in choise of mine owne marriage. As for po ∣ty of more inheritance by new affinity in land, it proues oftner the occasion of more trou∣ble then profite, and wee haue already title by that meanes, to so much as sufficeth to get, and keep well in one mans dayes. That she is a widdow, and hath already children, by Gods blessed Lady I am a Ba∣chelour, yet haue some too, and so each of vs hath a proofe, that neither of vs is like to bee barren. And therefore (Madam) I pray you bee content, I trust in God, shee shall bring a young Prince that shall play on your lappe to your eat pleasure, and your selfe shall blesse the wombe that bare such a be: and as for your obiection of , let the Bi∣shop hardly lay it in my way, when I come to take Orders; for I vnderstand it is forbidden a Pri , but I neuer wist, that it was forbidden a Prince. (24) The Dutchesse seeing the King so set on his owne choice, that she could not pull hi , such , that vnder o her His thers deuise cr his pur . for which act, vnder of a contract with , owne co ce, which was the o stacle, as either the Bishops , or the proceed to the solemniz of this wedding, were clearely purged, Lady to of King Edward. King tooke to wife this later beloued Lady Elizabeth K. Edward marri∣ed Lady Eliza∣beth Grey. Grey, who had beene formerly married vnto his e∣nemy, and many times prayed full heartily for his losse, in which God loued her better then to grant her her boone, reseruing greater honour for her selfe and her posterity. (25) She was honourably descended, especially by the surer side, whose mother was Iaquellin daugh∣ter The descent and parentage of the Lady Elizabeth Grey. to Peter of Lucemburg, Earle of S. Paul, and Dut∣chesse to Iohn Duke of Bedford Regent of France; after whose death shee married Sir Richard Wooduile knight, and among others bare vnto him this Eliza∣beth, Englands faire Queene, who being priuately married at the Manour of Grafton, was afterwardes crowned Queen at Westminster with all due celebra∣tions, vpon the sixe and twentieth of May, Anno, Queene Eliza∣beth crowned. 1465. Her father then by this new made sonne in law, and Soueraigne Lord, was created Lord Riuers, and made high Constable of England, her brother Lord Anthony, married to the sole heire of the Lord The Queenes kindred highly preferred. Scales, and her sonne Thomas Grey borne to her first husband, was created Marquesse Dorset, and married to the heire of the Lord Bonuile. (26) But when Warwicke had knowledge the wan∣ton King had got a new wife, and his courting of Lady Bona, to bee but a ball to make Edwards play; hee stormed not a little, whose credite hee tooke to be crackt in the French Court, and himselfe rather Earle Warwicke sore offended against K. Ed∣ward. thought to haue dallyed in this motion, then to deale by commission from his King, for which cause hee conceiued so inward an indignation, that his af∣fection was withdrawne from King Edward,, and thenceforth ranne vpon Henrie retained in prison, to which end he temporized with the present king, applauded the Queene, and bare countenance in Court with no discontented shew: The King as wa∣ry Temporizing betwixt the king and Earle of Warwicke. as Warwicke was, cast no eye of dislike, or of any suspition, gaue him countenance in Court, and in familiar conference heard him before others; yet lest the stem of his greatnesse should ouertop his crown and his brethren the spreading branches shadow his designes, hee tooke the Chancellorshippe from George Neuill, the one of them, then Bishoppe of Ex∣cester, afterward Archbishoppe of Yorke, and from the other Iohn Neuill Baron Montacute, the Earle∣dome Francis Goodwin Catal. of English. Bishope. of Northumberland, bestowing the same (at the suite of the Northumbrians, set on by himselfe) vpon Henry Percy, whose father was slaine at Touton, and himselfe at that present fled into Scotland for safety. Whereupon Montacute was remoued, and to auoid suspition was created Marquesse, a greater Iohn, Neuil crea∣ted Marquesse Montacute. name, but farre lesse in power. And to haue a stake in store howsoeuer the dice chanced to turne, hee sought to ioine friendshippe with forraine Princes, hauing offended France for the refusing of his Queenes sister: so as hee sought, and obtained the a∣mity of Henry King of Castell, & of Iohn King of Ar∣ragon, and tooke a truce with his neighbour the Scotish King for fifteen yeers following. (27) But these confederates for the more part too farre to be called for by whistle, fortune beyond Rich. Grafton. A. D 1468. expectatiō set him another euen at his elbow, which was Philip Duke of Burgundy, Prince of Flanders, Bra∣bant, and Zealand, whose onely sonne legitimate, (Charles Earle of Charoloys a widdower, and without A marriage mo∣ued betwixt Earle Charles and Lady Margaret. any sonne) hee sought to conioine to King Edwards faire sister, not so much for any loue hee bare to the house of Yorke, himselfe being a Lancastrian by his mothers side, as to bandy against Lewis King of Philip. Com. l. 3. cap. 4. France, whom he had lately ouercome in a battell at Montleherry, and as then stoode vpon his defence, as hee was sure King Edward did. This motion king Edward and his Councell well liked, only Warwicke withstoode it, in fauour of the French: but the Lady Margaret sent ouer according to her estate, and Warwicke left fuming with a discontented mind, af∣ter The mariage celebrated. some complements of mirth with his brethren the Archbishoppe and Montacute at his Towne of Warwicke, brast forth into warlike consultations for the deposing of Edward, and restauration of Hen∣ry, whose wrongs (as he alleadged) did crie for right Earle Warwicke plotieth K. Edwards deposi∣tion. at their hands. The Bishoppe lightly consented to side for King Henry; but the Marquesse would hard∣ly bee drawne from King Edward, which War∣wicke perceiuing, laid his lime twigges yet another way. (28) For being à man of a deepe reach and witte, hee well saw that George Duke of Clarence the Kings second brother, bare not the best liking to the sway of the times: him therefore hee sought to allure to his fist, which once mand, Edward should loose the best Faulcon for his game; him therefore by Pro∣blemes hee meant first to proue and according to their digest, purposed to proceed. So falling in fa∣miliar conference with Clarence, beganne to com∣plaine Warwicke draw∣eth Clarence into action against the King his brother. of some vnkindnes in the King, both in breach of some promises, and staine of his honour in the French Court. The Duke as discontented as War∣wicke, interrupted his tale before it was told, why my Lord (quoth Clarence) doe you looke that a Leo∣pard should haue no spots in his skinne, or a Came∣lion no colours, but one, in faith you are deceiued, and loose but your labour to wash the naturall Black∣amore: for will you haue him kind that is by na∣ture vnkind, and to be respected of him, that respects not his owne bloud: or thinke you (a Cosen and Allie) to be raised by him, that seeth (if not seeketh) his owne brethrens fals. For the heire of the Lord Scales (you see) hee hath married to his wiues bro∣ther, the heire of the Lord Bonuill and Harington to his wiues sonne, and affianced the heire of the Lord Hungerford to the Lord Hastings, marriages indeede more meete for his two brethren and kinne, then for such new fondlings as hee hath bestowed them vp∣on. But by my George I sweare, if my brother of Glocester would ioyne with mee, wee would make him know that wee are all three one mans sons, and of one and the same mother. (29) Earle Warwicke hauing that which hee gree∣dily sought after, seconded the resolution with his owne assistance, imparting now boldly what con∣federates he had made, and to ioine more faithfully in this his designe, hee proffered Clarence his eldest daughter Lady Isabel in marriage, faire and well qua∣lified Warwicke and Clarence make affinity. with the one halfe of his wiues inheritance, she being sole heire vnto Henry Beauchampe Earle of Warwicke her brother, and nothing inferiour to any of those whom Edward had bestowed vpon others, which no sooner was spoken, but was as presently embraced, and the plotte conferred how to proceed, which was concluded, forthwith to saile vnto Cal∣leis (whereof the Earle was Captaine, and where the virgine Lady lay) aswell to confirme the con∣tract betwixt them, as to be absent whē the commo∣tion A. D. 1469. should beginne, as the safer from suspition and the surer to strike when the Ball came to hand, to stir which, the Archbishoppe and Montacute were ap∣pointed for the North. (30) The occasion pickt to make Malecontents, was the abuse of Charity vnto an hospitall dedica∣ted The occasions found for a com∣motion. to Saint Leonard in the City of Yorke, whose re∣uenew stood most vpon corne yeerly receiued from Farmers in the Country, as an oblation of their first graine. This, the factious made their onely ground vnder a holy pretext (forsooth) that the poore were defrauded, and the Master and Priests onely fed & waxen fat. To redresse which one Robert Hulderne entred in action, and with fifteene thousand strong Hulderne Cap∣taine of the Commotion. enterprised for Yorke, in which City the Lord Mar∣quesse Montacute was President for King Edward, who with a small number, but well chosen, issued out against the enemy, put them backe, and stroke off the head of their Captaine before the gates of Yorke: but whether hee did it in policie to grow more in trust with the King, or else of duety of oblige, not moulded throughly to the commotion, is vncertain. But certaine it is, the Rebels were nothing daunted at Huldernes death, but rather made resolute to continue what they had begunne. (31) To which end they choose them two Chieftaines, of greater account, and eminent calling, which were Henrie sonne and heire to the Lord Fitz-hugh, and Sir Henrie Neuill, sonne and heire to Two Captaines made by the re∣bels. the Lord Latimer, the one of them being Nephew, & the other Cosen-germane vnto the Earle of War∣wicke; these but young, and not altogether experien∣ced in Armes, choose for their Tutor Sir Iohn Cony∣ers a Knight of such courage, skill and valiantnes, as Sir Iohn Coniers chosen generall of the rebels. in the North-parts few were his like: who meaning to strike at the head, determined to march forthwith to London proclaiming in his way, that Edward was neither a iust Prince vnto God, nor a profitable King vnto the Common-weale. (32) King Edward hearing of these Northern proceedings, and that his brother and Warwicke The Lord Her∣bert Earle of Pembrooke made Lord generall. were preparing against him, sent for the Lord Her∣bert whom he had created Earle of Pembrooke, to be his Generall in the North (who partly to deserue the Kings liberality in aduancing him to such honour, and partly in emulation he bare toward Warwicke, Discontents be∣twixt Pembrooke and Warwicke. being the sole obstacle (as he tooke it) why he obtai∣ned not the wardship of the Lord Bonuils daughter and heire for his eldest sonne) did not a little reioice of that his imploiment. And therefore accompa∣nied with Sir Richard Herbert his brother and eigh∣teene thousand well furnished Welshmen, marched towards the enemie, and after him was sent Hum∣frey Lord Stafford with sixe thousand Archers to second him in his warres. These Lords meeting to∣gether, ad notice by espials that the Northern made forwards towards Northampton: to intercept whom, the Lord Stafford lately made Earle of Deuonshire was imploied and Sir Richard Herbert, who with two thousand horse laid themselues couertly by the side The Lord Staf∣ford repulsed. of a wood, and sodeinely set vpon the rereward; the rest hauing passed: but the Northern verie nimbly turned about, and bad the Welshmen such wel∣come as few of them returned to tell of their en∣tertainement. (33) The King vnderstanding of this hard be∣ginning, mustred his subeicts on euerie side, inten∣ding K. Edward prepareth a∣gainst the Earle of Warwicke. to cope with the Northern himselfe. And Earle Warwicke as forward to forward his fortunes, gathered his friends, with purpose to encounter with Pembrooke and his Welsh. But before any supplies came to either of both; it chanced the Armies to meete at vnawares, vpon a faire plaine called Danes more neere to the Towne Hedgecot, three miles from Banburie and presently fell to a bickering, wherein Sir Henrie Neuill Knight, sonne of the Lord Latimer, vpon a lusty courage, venturing somewhat too farre was taken prisoner, and notwithstanding he yeelded himselfe to his Takers, was cruelly slaine, which vn∣martiall act rested not long vnrepaied with the losse of most of the Welsh the next day. For the field withdrawne the Lord Stafford repaired to Banberie and there tooke his lodging, where his affections were much enamoured vpon a faire damsell in the Pembrooke and Stafford fall out for their Inne. Inne. But the Earle of Pembrooke comming to the same Towne, tooke into the same Inne, and comman∣ded the Lord Stafford to prouide him elsewhere, contrary to their agreements made before, whereat Stafford was displeased, and departing thence with his whole Band, left the Earle naked of men in the Towne, and disabled the field of the Archers, where∣by the day was lost vpon the kings part, for which he shortly lost his owne head. (34) The Northern enflamed for the death of young Neuill, the next morning most valiantly set vpon the Welshmen, and by the force of Archers, draue them from their ground of aduantage, which Pembrooke wanting, supplied with his owne prow∣esse, and Richard his brother with his Pollaxe twice made way through the battell of the Northern, with∣out anie mortall or deadly wound▪ so that by their The valor of Pembrooke and of Sir Richard Her∣bert. valours it was verily supposed the field had beene wonne, had not Iohn Clappam an Esquire and ser∣uant to Warwicke displaied his Lords Colours with his white-beare, and from an eminent place cried a A. D. . Warwicke, a Warwicke, whereat the Welsh were so terri∣fied, as they turned and fied, leauing their General and his brother alone in the field, who valiantly figh ting were incompassed and taken with the of fiue thousand of their men. The Earle with h The Earle of with others beheaded. brother Sir Richard Herbert were brought to Banbery, where with ten other Gentlemen they lost their heads, Conyers and Clappam being their Iudges. (35) This second victory thus got, and the Nor∣thern now fleshed; vnder the leading of Robbin of Robert of Riddis∣dale captaine of the . Riddisdale, hasted to the Kings mannor of Grafton, where the Earle Riuers father to the Queene then lay, whom with his sonne Iohn, they sodeinely sur∣prized, and in Northampton strucke off their heads The Earle Riuers with his sonne Iohn surprised and beheaded. without any iudgement. The deathes of these Lords the King greatly lamented, and sought to re∣uenge: first therefore writing his Commissions for the apprehension of Lord Humfrey Stafford of South∣wicke (who by diligent search was found at Brent∣march and beheaded at Bridgewater, as he worthily Lord Stafford be∣headed. deserued) next he prepared a mighty Armie, and with the same marched towardes Warwicke, his com∣pany increasing euer as he went. (36) King Edward set downe his tents at Wolney Io. St . Annal. foure miles from Warwicke, where the Duke and the Earle of Warwickes host lay readie for Battell, but by the mediation of friends a peace was intreated, and letters written from either parties, expressing the griefes and wrongs sustained, with proffers of re∣dresse, in amending all, and in shew so farre it pro∣ceeded, as the King conceiuing a certaine hope of peace, rested secure, not fearing any foule-play, which politique Warwicke (by his spiall perceiuing) thought it not wisdome to loose the aduantage, and thereup∣on in the dead of the night with a selected Company he entred the Kings Camp, killing them that kept the King Edawrd taken at Wolney. watch, tooke the king in his bed, and brought him his prisoner to his Castle of Warwicke, and thence by easie iourneys in the night had him conueyed to Midelham Castle in Yorkeshire not farre from Richmond, where vnder the custody of his bro∣ther Is imprisoned in Middleham Ca∣stle. George Neuill Archishop of Yorke hee was reteined. (37) His vsage was Princely, and according to his estate, which he often acknowledged to the Arch∣bishop with all kind thankes, and complements of wordes, whereby he wrought himselfe into such trust and fauour, as he had the Forrests to hunt in, and the parkes for his pleasure, whose pales are well knowne, vnsufficient wals to pen the lyon in, as ap∣peared by this King, who being abroad and on hun∣ting, King Edward e∣scaped out of prison. Sir VVilliam Stanly, with Sir Thomas Burgh brought him fresh horse, and such a crew of followers that his keepers more feared their owne liues, then were forward to force him backe againe to prison, and so let the game goe without further chase. King Edward thus escaped, VVarwicke like a wild man fu∣riously raged, but seeing no remedy made vse of ne∣cessity, and gaue forth that himselfe so caused it, ha∣uing power to make Kings and to vnmake them a∣gaine. Warwicke sayings to make and vn∣make kings. (38) The King forthwith repaired to Yorke, where with great honour hee was ioifully receiued, and abode certaine daies, which made him well hope of a further supply of friends and men, but fayling thereof, and fearing the Archbishops pursuite with a small traine he posted to Lancaster, where he found the Lord Hastings his Chamberlaine well accompa∣nied Warres prepa∣red vpon but part . for his Conuey: his spirits then reuiued, and traine daily increasing, with speedie iourneyes hee came vnto London: where all his studies and con∣sultations were, how to be reuenged vpon these di∣sloiall Lords, his brother, and Earle VVarwicke, and they againe fretting at the Archbishoppes follie sought to make stronger their factions against the King. (39) The Land thus rent by these vnnaturall diuisions, and no estate sure to enioy what was theirs, the Nobles anew began to sollicite the parties vnto The miseries of ciuill warres. a Peace, hauing first obtained libertie to post to and fro without their impeachments, and so effectually laid downe the state of the Land whose ruines now were so eminent by these intestine warres, that the Natiues lamented, the Forrein reioiced, and God they saw highly displeased, whose sword thus gi∣uen into their hands, was to be feared would be the destruction of the English, as Nabucaednezzars of Ba∣bell was of Iudea, and indeed so effectually wrought, that the Duke and Earle vpon perfect confidence came to London, accompanied with a small number in respect of their great danger: where falling into conference with the King, he tasked them with di∣sloialtie, The King and the Lords meet at London. and they him with ingratitude, so that their splenes were nothing appeased, but much more in∣creased and with high wordes departed, the King vnto Canterbury, and they againe to VVarwicke. (39) The stout Earle whose stomacke must haue vent, otherwise the Caske must needs breake, A. D. 1470 A commotion in Lincolnshire. caused new stirres to be raised in Lincolnshire, vnder the leading of Sir Robert VVels, an expert souldier, and sonne of the Lord VVels, who with thirtie thou∣sand Commons, disturbed the Countrey, and in eue∣rie place proclaimed King Henrie; setting downe his battel not farre from Stamford, meaning to abide the encounter of his opposers; which when the King heard of, he sent for the Lord VVels his father, com∣manding him to write to his sonne to surcease the warres, and so marching toward Stamford tooke VVels in his companie, with a good hope that the sonne would not beare armes against his own father in field; but howsoeuer he had writ, or the King con∣ceiued, Sir Robert went on in his former designes, which so sore moued Edward, that he beheaded Lord VVels with Sir Thomas Dimocke that had married The Lord Wels and Sir Thomas Dimocke behea∣ded. his daughter, although he had giuen them promise of safety and life. (40) Young VVels then hearing of his fathers death, sought the reuenge vpon this vntrusty Prince, and not staying for VVarwicke who was in prepa∣ring to come, set manfully vpon the King and his power, where betwixt them was performed a most bloody fight, till at last Sir Robert was taken, with Sir The battell at Stanford. Sir Robert Wels taken. Thomas Deland and others, whereat the Lincolnshire men were so terrified, that casting off their Coates, they all ranne away, in regard whereof this battell to this day is called, the battell of Loscoat field, wherein Loscoat field. were slaine ten thousand men at the least: after which victory the King commanded VVels with many o∣ther of note to be put to death, as the chiefe causers of these dangerous Commotions. Sir Robert Wels put to death. (41) This vntimely conflict and vnfortunate ouerthrow, made Clarence, and VVarwicke, at their wits end, who vnprouided to field against Edward, gaue way to necessity, and from Dartmouth in De∣uonshire embarked themselues and wiues for France, both to instigate king Lewis no friend vnto Edward, and to secure themselues in Callis (whereof VVarwick was captaine) till fortune had changed the hand of her play. These crossing the Seas cast Anchor be∣fore the Towne of Callis, and gaue notice they were Warwicke and Clarence flee into France. ready to land, but the Lord Vawclere a Gascoigne, whom VVarwicke had substituted his deputie, dis∣charged diuers peeces of Ordinance against them, and sent word flatlie they should not come there: meane while the Dutches of Clarence fell in trauell, Phil. Comines lib. 3. cap 4. and was there on Shippe-board deliuered of a faire sonne, which Child the Earles deputie would scarce∣ly suffer to be baptized in the Towne, nor without The Dutches of Clarence deliue∣red of a son vpon shipboard. great entreaty permit two flagons of wine to be con∣ueyd aboard to the Ladies lying in the hauen. For which his good seruice King Edward by his letters Patents made Vawclere chiefe Captaine of Callis, and discharged the Earle as a Traitor or Rebell a∣gainst him. The Duke of Burgundy bends himselfe against Earle Warwicke. (42) Charles Duke of Burgundie, being then at S. Omers, owing Earle Warwicke an old grudge for gaine∣standing his marriage, thought now a fit time to re∣quite the discourtesie; and therefore sent many thankes vnto Vawcler, with promise of a thousand Crownes pension by yeere, if he stood firme for his wiues brother King Edward, himselfe laying the Coast to impeach his arriuage. But how Mounsieur Vawclere stood affected, whatsoeuer shew he made, The double dea∣lings of Vawcler. Comines the French Kings Historian doth tell, who sent Warwicke word the danger he stood in, of the said Duke, and of Duras the Kings Admirall, so as to land, would be his finall confusion: His Counsell therefore was that he should make into France, vnto whose King he should be most welcome; and as for the town of Callis, he willed him to take no thought, but promised to make him a good reckoning there∣of, when time should best serue. Whereupon the Earle waied anker for Normandy, and in his way Earle Warwicke saileth into Nor∣mandie. tooke many rich Ships of the Duke of Burgundies subiects, which netled him not a little, but yet found no docke to rub out the smart. (43) King Lewis hearing of the arriuage of War∣wicke, and knowing his troubles to arise for his Am∣bassage to Bona, and faith vnto France, sent certaine Princes to conduct him to the Castle of Amboys, King Lewis relie∣ueth Warwicke. where a supply was made against all necessities, and himselfe and traine most honorablie intertained, whereat the Duke of Burgundy sore repined, and sent Lewis word that he disliked his doings with threats of reuenge, if he aided him against his wiues brother. This, notwithstanding the French King gaue all comforts to these fugitues, and prepared Burgundy offen∣ded with Lew for relieuing his enemie. his assistance for their restorations, and the raising a∣gaine of godly King Henrie. (44) Queene Margaret hauing fled England and soiourning in France with her Father Reiner (a Reiner of great stile and small power. King in name, but scarcely able to beare the State of an Earle) saw now the Iron hot, and ready to be strucke, therefore with her sonne Prince Edward, Iohn Earle of Oxford, and Iasper Earle of Pembrooke (who latelie had escaped out of prison in England) came vnto Amboyse, where by meanes of the French King a combination of Alliance was confirmed be∣twixt the Prince of Wales, young Edward, and Anne A marriage con∣cluded betwixt Prince Edward and Anne daugh∣ter of Earle War∣wicke. the second daughter to the Earle of Warwicke, then present with her mother and sister in France. That King Henry should be againe restored, the Duke of Clarence, and the Earle tooke a solemne Oath neuer to desist whiles they had power, and in the nonage of the Prince they iointly were to be deputed his Protectors, and the Lands sole Gouernors. (45) Edward in England hearing what Queen Mar∣garet, his brother Clarence, & stout Warwicke in the French Court had done, was strucke into a sodaine King Edward driuen into his dumps. dumpe, being as doubtfull of friends, as fearefull of foes, and therefore such as were alied to the Lanca∣strians, or fauourits of the down-cast K. Henrie, he be∣gan somewhat roughly to deale with: many there∣fore that were guilty daily tooke Sanctuarie, or yeel∣ded themselues to his mercie, among whom Iohn Marques Montacute brother to Warwicke was one, who with fairest words of promises, was receiued Marques Monta∣cute is taken into King Edwards fauor. into fauor, and vpon whose example many others came in, which notwithstanding meant to stand out if occasion should serue. But no busier was Edward to keepe the Crowne on his head, then these Lords in France were resolute to strike it off: in midst of whose consultations behold how it happened. (46) There came from England to Calleis a dam∣sell belonging (as shee said) to the Dutches of Cla∣rence, A maid Ambas∣sador vnto the Duke of Clarence. who signified vnto Monsieur Vawclere that shee came from King Edward with a declaration of peace, which hee fearing to impart the conditions to other, had made her the instrument, the better to passe without any suspect, and he glad to heare for the Earles sake (whom he entirely affected) gaue her his safe conduct vnto the Duke of Clarence then at The conference of the damsell with the Duke of Clarence. Amboys; where hauing priuate accesse vnto him, shee told, that it was neither naturall nor honoura∣ble for him to take part against the house of Yorke; that the house of Lancaster, was not onely by the whole Court of Parliament debarred to bee the in∣dubitate Heire of the Kingdome, but that K. Henrie himselfe had discharged his Issue from claime, as it standeth (said she) vpon Record to be seene, contrary to which, as he might well perceiue this marriage of Prince Edward with the Earles daughter, did onely aime and intend to the vtter extinct of the house of Yorke, whereof himselfe was one, and in neere pos∣sibility of the Crowne, Edwards Issue young, and not many, and the King very wanton, a sinne com∣monly punished with want of posterity, which if it so chanced, then hee, or his were the next. These reasons wayed, so ouer-wayed the Dukes further designes, that hee promised thereafter a more bro∣therlike affection, as (saide hee) Edward should The Duke of Clarence incli∣neth to his bro∣ther. find; with which good newes shee returned into England, Warwicke vtterly ignorant what was said or done. (47) All now in a readinesse for the return, ships, money and men supplied by the French King, the Warwicke and Clarence returne into England. Admirall of France was sent to secure them from the Duke of Burgundies Fleet, which with an extraordi∣nary number and power lay in the mouth of Seyne to fight with Warwicke when he should loose out of Harborow: but see how the heauens fauoured, and frowned vpon the parties, for the night before they should hoise saile, such a stormy tempest tooke the Dukes Fleete, lying more remote from the Lee, that they were scattered asunder, some into Scot∣land, some into Denmarke, and many of them drow∣ned. But the Seas calmed, and the wind seruing faire, the English set saile and landed at Dartmouth, whence they had shipped into France almost six mo∣neths Septemb. 13. A. reg. 10. before. (48) King Edward relying vpon Burgundy abroad, and thinking all friends who fawned at home, gaue King Edwards security. himselfe daily to follow the hound and the hawke, and nightly to his court pleasures in dancings and da∣liances with damsels, little minding their approach that meant to marre his mirth; for Warwicke now landed, proclaimed King Henry, commanding all Earle Warwicke in the West pro∣claimeth king Henry. from sixteene to sixty, vpon a great penalty to take Armes against Edward Duke of Yorke, the most vn∣iust vsurper of Henries rightfull Crowne, and vncre∣dible it was, to see the confluence of them which came armed to him, who ere-while applauded & approued none but King Edward. Thus making to∣wards London, his company daily encreased; which the youthfull King seemed little to regard, but veri∣ly supposing hee had now Warwicke in his trappe, K. Edwards opi∣nion touching Warwickes ap∣proach. wrote to Burgundie to secure the seas, lest he should escape againe into France, and to his Lords of Eng∣land, to attend him in his wars; but very many neg∣lected his commaund, and few or none made their repaire. Which when Edward perceiued hee was strucke into a great feare, and with his brother of Glocester, the L. Hastings his Chamberlaine, and the Lord Scales the Queenes brother, hee hasted to∣wards Nottingham there to determine what was to be done. (49) In the mean while the bastard Faulconbridge in the west, and the Earle of Pembroke in Wales, eue∣ry where proclaimed King Henry; and to forward the matter, D. Godard preaching at Pauls Crosse decla∣red Sunday after Michaelmas. Stowel Annal. Doctor Godards sermon. Marquesse Mon∣tacute reuolteth from K. Edward. by reading of Billes, and diuers other proofes, that King Henry was the vndoubted and true heire vnto the English Crowne. Neither is the L. Mon∣tacute now the man that he was, who hauing muste∣red sixe thousand in the name of King Edward, and brought them forward almost to Nottingham, on the sodaine drew backe his forces, alleadging that Edward was vngratefull, & regardlesse of his friends as himselfe said, himselfe was the example, who ha∣uing serued him in many bloudy battels, was rewar∣ded with a verball word Marquesse, without any maintenance at al, no not so much as Pyes poor nest: & therfore he had iust cause neuer to draw his sword in his quarrell any more, and them that did, hee as∣sured them should receiue the like reward in the end. (50) These with the like distastures, diuulged a∣mong the rude multitude, it was a world to see the How vncertaine it is to stat on the . face of this new World, for in euery streete Bonfires were made; in euery Church bels rung, Ditties were sung at euery meeting, and euery man cried K. Hen∣ry, King Henry, whose Eccho likewise redoubled, a Warwicke, a Warwicke, and indeed all so applauded the passage now on foot, as King Edward hearing the rumor, thought it not safe any longer to stay, & K Edward is for∣ced to flee England. October. 3. therefore with those trusty Lords and some others, hee fled from his hoast besides Nottingham, passing the Washes towards Lynne with greater difficulties then was befitting a Prince to aduenture; and thus without any order taken for his Realme, in two Hulkes of Holland, and one English shippe destitute of all necessary prouisions, set sayle toward Burgundy and in the way was encountred by the Easterlings, Englands great Enemies, hauing much adoe to cleare Edward in dan∣ger of taking on seas. himselfe from their surprise. (51) In these times of misery the Queene (whose marriage was the onely cause of all these stirres) vpon Queene Eliza∣beth tooke Sanctuarie in VVestminster. the first of October had stolne out of the Tower, and taken Sanctuary at Westminster, where like a woman forsaken shee solitarily remained, and on the fourth of Nouember following was deliuered of a sonne, which without all pompe more like a priuate mans Prince Edward bo e in the Sanctuary. child then a Prince, was there also baptized by the name of Edward, who after his fathers death, a while was King of England, as shall be said; other Sanctu∣aries were full of King Edwards friends, that praied deuoutly for his prosperous health, and well hoped the world would againe turne, as shortly it did. One King thus fled, and the other in prison, the Kentish, The Kentish Commotioners doe much hurt about London. whose conditions are mutable at the change of Prin∣ces, came to seeke prey in London, where they knew it was to bee had: Ratcliffe, S. Katherins, and South∣warke they robbed, and within the City did some hurt besides, yea and surely more had done, had not Earle Warwicke in good time come to the rescue which encreased his name, that was great enough before. (52) Earle Warwicke accompanied with his bro∣ther the Archbishoppe of Yorke, the Prior of Saint Iohn Fortescue. Iohns, the Duke of Clarence, the Earle of Shrewsbu∣rie, Bastard Faulconbridge, Lord Stanley, and o∣ther The States take K. Henry out of the Tow∣er. Gentlemen, some for loue, some for feare, & some to gaze at this wauering world, vpon the sixt of October entred the Tower of London, where∣in King Henry had beene retained prisoner al∣most the space of nine yeeres, and there again elec∣ted him for their lawfull King, and forthwith con∣uaied him robed in a long blew veluet gown through London vnto the Bishops pallace, where a pompous Court was kept vntill the thirteenth of the same K. Henry againe restored goeth crowned to P moneth, vpon which day hee went in procession crowned to the Cathedrall Church of S. Paul, the Earle of Warwicke bearing his traine, and the Earle of Oxford the sword, the people on euery side crying, God saue K. Henry. (53) Thus farre proceeded, and Henry reesta∣blished, a Parliament was begunne at Westminster the six & twentieth of Nouember following, wher∣in King Edward was declared a Traitor to his coun∣try, an vsurper of the Crowne, and all his goods K. Edward de∣barred from go∣uernment by Parliament. The Parliament Rowle. Iohn Tiptoft Earle of Worce∣ster beheaded. confiscated; the like iudgement passed against all his partakers; wherein also it was enacted, that all such persons as had taken Armes in his quarrell, should bee seuerely punished; among whom, Iohn Typtoft Earle of Worcester, and King Edwards Lieu∣tenant in Ireland was attainted, who being found hid in the toppe of a tree, in the Forrest of Waybridge, not farre from Huntington was brought to London, and vpon Tower-hill beheaded. Moreouer, all Sta∣tutes made by King Edward were clearely reuoked, abrogated, and made frustrate: the Crowns of Eng∣land The Crownes of England and France entailed to K. Henry. and France entayled to King Henry, and the Heyres-male lawfully begot of his body, and for the want of such heires vnto George Duke of Clarence, and his heire males lawfully produced, and the said Duke to be the next heire to his father Richard Duke of Yorke, disabling his elder brother Edward, by the George Duke of Clarence entailed to the Crowne. vertue of his Atteindor; and Iasper Earle of Pem∣broke, Iohn Earle of Oxford with other attainted by the vsurper Edward, to be restored in bloud, digni∣ties, Earles restored. and ancient possessions; and finally, Earle War∣wicke the good common-wealthes man, made Go∣uernour of the Realme in these turbulent times, vn∣to whom was associated George Duke of Clarence this great Earles sonne in Law, and Warwickes brother Montacute vpon his submission obtained his pardon, Earle Warwicke made gouernour of the Realme. which was the easilier gotten for his seruice at Not∣tingham. (54) Queene Margaret appointed to follow in∣to England, if fortune did fauour these great Lords successe, now hearing of the faire Sun-shine, wherein Queene Mar∣garet hindred by tempest to come into England. her husband King Henry was set, amidst the stormie winter blasts which the season afforded, with Prince Edward her sonne, set saile from France, towardes that wished and temperate climat, where the spring of new Regality beganne to bud forth, but was met with such tempests and storming seas, as shee was forced to returne and deferre her iourney vntill ano∣ther time, to her great griefe and sore discontent. In like perplexity was the Burgundian Duke, who The Duke of Bur∣gundy perplexed. neither durst giue Edward his outward assistance (the French and Warwicke being so mighty opposites) nor leaue him in distresse, lest the sparkes of discon∣tent should flie from the eyes of his faire wife, and therefore to know whether Vawelere the Gouernor of Calleis stood resolute for him according to Coue∣nants, he secretly sent Philip Comines the hony-mouth Historian, to drop some of his sweet eloquence into Phil. Com. lib. 3. his gold-thirsting eare. (55) Comines comming to Calleis, and obseruing the sequence for which he was sent, saw euery man wear the Earle of Warwicks badge, for no head could Earl of Warwicks esteeme in Callis. bee gallant that was not adorned with his ragged staffe, nor no dore frequented that was not pain∣ted with his white Crosse. Insomuch that Vawelere himselfe had a Iewell in his hatte, wherein was a white ragged staffe, embrodered with gold, and o∣thers his followers the like wrought in silke, gold, and siluer; and to stampe the print deeper, a liking report was brought to the towne, that Warwicke had prepared foure thousand valiant men to warre vpon the frontiers of Burgundy. But Comine in conference so wrought with the Councell, and they againe with Earle Warwicke as he was contented to leaue off the enterprise, Duke Charles promising to side with K. Henry. (56) King Edward hearing what his brother of Burgundy had done, and being dayly solicited from King Edward coueteth aide of his brother the Duke of Burgun∣dy. his friends in England, thought it no policy long to delay, lest Henry should take growth to a bigger steame; and therefore repairing to his brother in the towne of Saint Paul, required his aide, as the onely man on whom hee relied, aswell for the bond of al∣liance in the marriage of his sister, as also in regard of the orders which they both ware, the King that of his which was the golden Fleece; and the Duke the Gartar and Robe of Saint George. In the Court of Burgundy at that time lay Edmund Duke of Sommer∣set, The Duke of Sommerset dis∣swadeth Burgun∣dy to aid K. Ed∣ward. cosen-germane remoued vnto Duke Charles, a great enemy against the house of Yorke, and now set himselfe to thwart King Edwards suite, alleadging, that it was more honourable for the Duke of Bur∣gundy to side with the Lancastrians, from whom he was descended by his Grandmother the daughter of Iohn of Gaunt: as also in the vprightnes of King Hen∣ries title, held good in her brother, and his Grandfa∣ther, and in her Nephew his father without all ex∣ceptions. (57) The Duke perplexed betweene these great supplicants did then, as many doe now, speake much and meane nothing lesse, or else say little, & Burgundie tem∣porizeth with his suites. meane to doe much. To Sommerset for Henry hee outwardly promised all helpe and assistance, but ne∣uer gaue the least, and to Edward no comfortable words of supply, and yet vnderhand he hired him shippes, furnished him with munition, and lent him fifty thousand Florences in money. And now the season seruing for warre, K. Edward with two thou∣sand strong besides his Mariners made ouer for Eng∣land, K. Edward pas∣seth into Eng∣land, pretending no more then to be Duke of York. attempting to take land in Norfolke; but those coasts guarded, hee waffed more Northward, and entring Humber, landed at Rauenspur in Yorkeshire, when laying aside al claim to the Crown, and preten∣ding nothing but his Dutchy of York, he shewed the rude multitude the letters, and seale of the Earle of Northumberland, which as he affirmed, & made them beleeue was sent for his safe conduct to enioy the same, and in euery place where he came proclaimed A. D 1471. March 14. King Henry himselfe, wearing an Estrich feather, which was Prince Edwards Liuery, and passing to Yorke in no other shew then a Subiect, his oath first taken to be true to King Henry, entred the City, K. Edward straines his oath to winne the City of Yorke. which presently hee surprised and assumed to him∣selfe. (58) Earle Warwicke now hearing that Edward was landed before he had marched very farre in the main, sent strait charge to his brother the Marquesse Montacute then residing at Pomfret (with a sufficient Earle Warwicke writes to his bro∣ther Marquesse to impeach King Edwards passage. Army to secure those parts) that hee should not suf∣fer his accesse vnto Yorke, lest he grew more potent, then was to bee wished; himselfe making ready with all possible speed, to repaire into those parts; but whether the Marquesse purposely winked, or else (and that rather) would not see at all, hee made no great hast to forelay his way to Yorke, neither sought to empeach the passage: when Edward from thence marched in a more hostile manner towards Nottingham; taking his way not farre from Pomfret, and as it were through the middest of his enemies; which encouraged many to fauour his designes, hol∣ding that Montacute was either a friend, or afraide to deale against so powerfull an enemy. (59) The White Rose thus bloomed, and the red falling his leafe, all tooke the time of this pleasant K Edwards Army encreased. spring, and flocked to Edward as to their April Sun, who now more able, and therefore more bold made forward towards Leicester, where the Earles of War∣wicke and Oxford with a great power were, but be∣cause Clarence was absent, they let Edward hold on Iohn Stow. without any encounter, whose traine as hee passed was like to a riuer that in the running is euer encrea∣sed with new springs, which Warwicke perceiuing, thought it more then time to giue battell, well knowing that his brothers forbearance had giuen him that head. And to that end sent vnto Cla∣rence then about London in leuying of men, but hee Warwicke taketh into the City Couentrie. March. 29. somewhat too backeward, and Warwicke too for∣ward, tooke into the City Couentry, meaning from thence to set on the enemy. But Edward whose star had now past the darke threatning cloud, pitched his tents neere vnto that City in a plaine field, and valiantly bad the Earle come to battell. But he then mistrusting (as in truth hee had cause) that the bold∣nesse K. Edward chal∣lengeth Earle Warwick to fight. of Edward was backt by a Clarence, kept close within the wals, with a purpose to see how the world would goe. (60) Edward loth to loose time about one Cities siege, raised his Campe, and hasted forward toward K. Edward draw∣eth towards London. Warwicke, vnto which Towne likewise his brother Clarence, with foure thousand strong was on march: these meeting vpon a plaine, three miles from the Towne, set their Battels in Aray, as if they meant to haue fought, but the King, his brother Gloucester, Lord Riuers, Hastings, and others, without any gard made towards Clarence, which when he beheld, him∣selfe accompanied with some of estate encountred his brother with a louing countenance and friendly cheare, so as no sparke of hatred was perceiued be∣twixt them, but with all brotherly affections entred K Edward and his brother Cla∣rence meet and are reconciled. into amitie and peace, which afterwards proued the confusion of the Duke. Clarence thus got sought to draw Warwicke into the same traine, to which end he sent certaine messengers vnto him; first to ex∣cuse his owne fact, as too vnnaturall for him to vn∣sheath his sword against his owne brother, as also he Clarence seeketh to draw Warwicke vnto K. Edward. sought to stay the effusion of English blood, which in these quarrels lay ready to be shed: His peace with Edward he promised to worke, and that with such honour as Warwicke should know himselfe not only a father to Clarence, but likewise vnto Edward great Englands King. Vnto all which motion Warwicke gaue eare only with this replie, Goe tell your Duke (said he) that I had rather bee an Earle, and alwaies like my The words of Warwicke in an∣swer to Clarence. selfe, then a false and periured Duke, and that ere my oath shall bee falsified (as his apparantly is) I will lay downe my life at my enemies foote, which I doubt not but shall bee bought very deere. (61) This stout resolution made Edward more warie, and therefore to obtaine London, the only key K. Edward mar∣cheth forward. that opened the dore to the Crowne, he hasted thi∣therward, whose Citizens hearing of the increase of his host, and waying that Henrie was but a milke∣sop to him, thought it most safety to saile with the fairest winde, and therefore set open their Gates, and with publike applaud cried, King Edward. Which when the Duke of Sommerset with others left to at∣tend London receiueth King Edward. the innocent King Henry, heard, they fled for their liues; and left him in the Bishops Palace at Lon∣don, where his Competitor King Edward tooke him, and sent him againe prisoner to the Tower. With so many winds are the sailes of their ships fil∣led, which seeke the Port of their safety by the affe∣ctions K. Henrie againe taken and sent to the Tower of London. of the people: for euen the same day had Hen∣rie beene carried through the Citie (as it were) in triumph, and had heard the shoutes of the Com∣mons in euerie streete crying; God saue King Henrie. (62) But Earle Warwicke hearing how things went in London, and now fully conceiuing that the Ed. Hall. hazard of Battell must determine either with, or a∣gainst him, being come to Saint Albans, fell into a deepe consideration what was to be done: His as∣sistants Earle Warwicke commeth to S. Albans. were Iohn Duke of Excester, the Earles of Ox∣ford and Sommerset, and Marquesse Montacute his brother, whom notwithstanding he did not greatlie trust, being alwaies too fauourable to the contrarie faction. These in Counsell held it best pollicie to follow the Enemie, and before the bodie grew too great, to lop off the branches, least they should shad∣dow their Sun-shine too farre. In which resolution, they hasted forward, and came vnto Barnet, with a full purpose to recouer London: but Edward well knowing the state of the City vnfurnished for siege, and readie to take stampe of any impresse, ment not to be pent within those weake wals; and therefore taking with him vnfortunate Henry, least any confe∣deracy should be made in his absence, he marched K. Edward carri∣eth K Henrie with him to bat∣tell. with all possible hast, to encounter his opposites, be∣fore they came too farre, and vpon Gladmore neere vnto Barnet set downe his Tents close to the enemie, the eue of Christs resurrection, so careles is Mars of diuine celebrations, that the holiest feast is propha∣ned, when his sword is drawne. (63) The next day being the Paschall whereon Christ rose from death, which with due reuerence is Apr. 14. celebrated in all the Christian world, these English contenders for a terrestriall Crowne, with Irefull hearts and hands as readie, made ready to digge each others graues: for at breake of day Warwicke began Barnet field fought vpon Ea∣ster day. to Marshall his Army, which he diuided into three battalions: The right wing was led by the Mar∣quesse his brother, with the Earle of Oxford, consisting chiefly of horsemen, himselfe with the Duke of Exce∣ster led the left; and the maine battell was com∣manded by Edward Earle of Sommerset, which was supplied for the most part with Archers. K. Edward The orderings of the battels. likewise ordered his men. The foreward was led by Richard Duke of Gloucester his brother, a good souldi∣er and sufficient for aduise, the middle by himselfe, and his brother Clarence, hauing King Henry in their companie; And the rereward was commanded by the Lord Hastings, euer most firme for the house of Yorke, reseruing a fresh supplie, when occasion should serue. (64) The Battels ioined, were manfully main∣tained by the prowesse of Oxford, vpon that part of the Kings, against which he fought, which with great violence he forced backe, so that many of them fled to London, bringing newes that with Warwicke went the day: and surely in great forwardnes it was, had not fortune thwarted it by an vnexpected chance: for the day being foggy, and ouercast with mists, I Stow. A mistaking of the soul ieis which was the losse of the field. hindred their eies of any farre sight, so as the starre embroidered vpon the Earle of Oxfords mens Coates, were mistaken for the Sunne, which King Edwards men wore, in which errour Warwickes Battell let fl e at their owne fellowes, who were in great forward∣nes to haue wonne the day, and they not knowing the cause of the error cried, treason, treason, we are all betraid. Whereupon the Earle of Oxford with eight hundred fled the field, leauing the chance to be cast for the Crowne; which when Warwicke perceiued with words like a souldier, he incouraged his men, and seeing the fresh supply of his enemie draw now vnto fight, he furiouslie rushed into the midst of their Battell, wherein he aduentured so farre as he Great Warwick slaine in fight. could not be reseued, but valiantly fighting was strucke downe, and among them slaine, hauing re∣paid his danger with many a wound. The Mar∣quesse Montacute made forward to second his bro∣ther, Marques Monta∣cute slaine in battell. (who till then had beene the Mars and Make-King of England) but was so ouerlaid by his Oppo∣sites, that they sent his soule likewise from his bodie whereby was ended that bloody daies taske. (65) In this Battell vpon King Edwards part, died, the Lord Cromwell, the Lord Bourcher, the Lord Nobles and o∣thers slaine at Barnet field. Barnes, sonne and heire to the Lord Say, and Sir Iohn Lisle Knight: In the quarrell of Henrie died Richard Neuill Earle of Warwicke, and Iohn Neuill Marquesse Montacute his brother, and vpon both sides of com∣mon souldiers saith Hall ten thousand, Stow saith Edw. Hast. Ioh. Stow. Rob. Fabian. saith 1500. foure thousand, as Fabian farre lesse: all which were buried vpon the same Plaine; where afterwards a Chappell was built: the Duke of Excester being left for dead in the field, recouered, and tooke Sanctuarie at Westminster. Edmund Duke of Sommerset, and Iohn Earle of Oxford escaped the field, and fled into Wales, The Duke of Sommerset and the Faile of Ox∣ford fled into Wales. where with Iasper Earle of Pembrooke they still plot∣ted to set vp King Henry, whom God and destinie would haue to be cast downe. (66) The same King Edward vpon the same day as an absolute Conquerour, lead the vnfortunate Rich. Grast. Henry his Captiue to London, and entring the City in triumph wise, offered his roiall Standerd in the Cathedrall Church of Saint Paul, whither the slaine bodies of Warwicke and Montacute in two Coffins Edward trium∣pheth and o eth his banner in S. Pauls. were brought, and lay there bare faced, and vnburied the space of three daies, least a false Brute should be made that they were not dead. After which they were conueied to Bilsam Abbey, and interred in that Priorie among their Ancestors. (67) Edwards affaires thus farre prospered at London, the windes that had crossed Queene Marga∣ret Queene Marga∣ret with Prince Edward landed at Wey . before, came fauourably about to fill her Sailes for England, & indeed to accomplish the decree, which heauen had appointed: shee with her sonne Prince Edward and their French followers, landed vpon Ea∣ster Eue at Weymouth, and the Countesse of Warwicke at Portesmouth, who hearing the sorrowfull newes of her husbands death, tooke Sanctuary within the Abbey of Beaulieu. And Queene Margaret vnder∣standing of the losse of Barnet-field, withdrew as de to the Abbey of Ceerne, vnto whom presently resorted Edmund Duke of Sommerset, with Lord Iohn his bro∣ther; The Lords com∣fort Queene Margaret. Iohn Courtney Earle of Deuonshire, Iasper Earle of Pembrooke, Iohn Lord Wenlock, and Iohn Longstrother Prior of Saint Iohns. (68) These with many words of hope, comfor∣ted the sorrowfull Queene, and proffered her their assistance to erect Prince Edward her sonne, though it were done with the losse of their owne liues, requi∣ring her only to vndertake the authority of the war, and themselues would vndergo the charge and bur∣den thereof, by whose valor and power, they doub∣ted not to daunt the pride of the vsurping Edward; who now held himselfe sure, and beganne to grow carelesse. To these their resolutions the warlike Queene most gladly consented, and gaue all encou∣ragements vnto them shee could; when falling in counsell how to proceed, her care (according to the naturall affection of a mother) was most vpon the Queen Marga∣rets care for Prince Edward her sonne. safety and life of her sonne: and theresore aswel for their owne parts (if fortune should faile in this their first attempt) as for the feare which the Yorkist would possesse (who whiles Prince Edward his cor∣riuall hued could not account the Diadem his Bride) shee thought it best to send him backe againe into France, till God had set the Crowne where it should stand: whence hee might supply them with new forces, or at least wise ouer-awe Edward for tyranni∣zing too farre. But the Lords contrariwise allead∣ged, The opinions of the Lords. that Prince Edward being the morning Sunne of the Lancastrians hopes, and the rayes very splen∣dent to most English eyes, was to be present in field himselfe, whose sight would both heat the courage of his owne Souldiers, and attract the glance of his aduersaries hearts, either to fight faintly, or else, and that rather, to come to his side. Thus their counsel at that time preuailed; and thus resolued, euery man departed to make ready his power, the Queene with her French repairing to Bath. (69) But Edward in London had not sate two daies in rest, before hee heard of Queene Margarets arri∣uage, King Edward prepareth against Queen Marga∣ret. and the confluence of people out of Cornwall, Deuonshire, and of the Westerne parts, which houre∣ly flew to giue her assistance; wherefore commit∣ting to the Tower King Henry, and George Archbi∣shoppe of Yorke with a selected company, he march∣ed King Henry com∣mitted to the Tower of London to meet them, intending to cut off many springs before they should ioyne to the body of a riuer, whose streame without danger could not be passed: therefore from Windsor, Abington, Chichester, and Malmesbury hee proceeded, seeking and vrging his enemies to battell: but the Queene and her for∣ces fearing to abide in Bath, remoued to Bristow, Berkeley, and Glocester, and lastly at Tewkesbury, Duke Sommerset her Generall pitched down his Tents not staying the comming of the Earle of Pembroke: his battell he marshalled into three fights, whereof him∣selfe and his brother Iohn Lord Sommerset lead the foreward; the middle Battalion was commanded by Edward the young Prince, vnder the conduct of The ordering of Queene Marga∣rets battels. the Lords Saint Iohn and Wenlocke, and the Rere∣ward gouerned by Iohn Courtney Earle of Deuonshire, a mortall enemy against the house of Yorke. (70) King Edward who was come now within sight of his enemies, diuided likewise his Army into 3. Battalions, cōmitting the Foreward vnto the gui∣dance of his brother Richard D. of Glocester a good Souldier, and of a deepe reach and policy: the Main The ordering of K. Edwards battels. hee vndertooke to gouerne himselfe, and the Rere∣ward was commanded by the Lord Hastings his Chamberlaine. The field thus marshalled, and the signe of battell being giuen, a most bloudy fight be∣ganne, the King had planted his Ordinance at most The battell at Tewkesbury. aduantage, which Glocester frankly bestowed among the Dukes men, and they lodged betwixt ditches, bushes and hedges, with their showers of arrowes galled Glocesters followers, so as by his command his battell gaue backe, as though they would shrinke, which Sommerset no sooner perceiued, but that he came on, and ouercome with courage, came out of his strength, when by a certaine passage before hand prouided, he came vnto the place where King Ed∣ward was embattelled, thinking verily that Wenlocke had followed at his backe, who as it seemed meant Edw. Hall. nothing lesse. (71) The aduantage espied, Duke Richard made good his retreat, and with fresh supplies of two hun∣dred This battell was fought vpon Saturday the 4. of May, the 11. of K. Edwards raigne, and yeere of Christ, 1471. speares so charged Sommerset, as his battell was disordered, and put to fearefull flight, himselfe re∣couering the Midle-ward, found there the L. Wenlock idle, whilest others were thus working for their liues, whom he most opprobriously reuiled in the termes of a Traitor, & with his Battell-axe stroke his brains L. Wenlocke slain for not following Sommerset. out of his head; when presently Glocester, and after him the King entred the Trench, wherein all of the Queenes part went to wracke; for there were slaine in this battell on her side Iohn L. Sommerset, Iohn Courtney Earle of Deuonshire, the Lord Wenlocke in Lords slaine at Tewkesbury. manner as wee haue said, Sir Iohn Delues, Sir Edward Hampden, Sir Robert Whittingham, and Sir Iohn Lewkener, with three thousand others besides. (72) Among them that fled, Prince Edward was one, whome Sir Richard Crofts apprehended be∣fore Prince Edward apprehended. hee got to Tewkesbury, but Edmund Duke of Sommerset, Iohn Longstrother, Prior of Saint Iohns, ma∣ny Knights and Esquiers tooke Sanctuary in the Abbey, and other places of the Towne, notwithstan∣ding they were taken forth and arraigned before Richard Duke of Glocester, who that day sate Con∣stable of England, where they were condemned and The Duke of Sommerset and others executed. had iudgement of death, which they immediatelie suffered vpon a Scaffold set vp in the Town. With these two Lords died twelue worthy Knights, be∣sides others of inferior degrees. (73) Then was Proclamation made for the ap∣prehension of Prince Edward, promising to his taker an annuitie of an hundred pounds during his life, & if the Prince were liuing, his life to be spared, vpon which promises Sir Richard Crofts presented young Prince Edward apprehended and answers. Edward vnto the King, whom with a sterne counte∣nance hee a while beheld, and as sternely demanded, how he durst so presumptuously with Banner dis∣played enter into his Realme; wherunto the Prince made this reply; to recouer (said hee) my fathers Kingdomes and his most rightfull inheritance posses∣sed by his Father and Grandfather, and from him immediately belonging vnto me; how darest thou then which art his Subiect display thy colour against him thy Liege-Lord? which answere moued King Edward so much, as with his Gantlet hee dashed the Prince on his mouth, whom Richard Duke of Gloce∣ster with others of the kings seruans most shameful∣ly Prince Edward most shamefully slaine. murthered, euen in his presence, and at his feete: whose body was buried without all solemnity a∣mong other poore and meane persons, in the church of the Monastery of the Blacke-Fryers in Tewkes∣burie. (74) Queene Margaret in this fatall day of bat∣tell fled towards Worcester, and by the way tooke in∣to a poore religious house in that her present di∣stresse: Queene Marga∣ret taken out of her Sanctuary. but three dayes after shee was apprehended and brought vnto Worcester to King Edward, who committed her to sure and straite keeping, in which City she a while remained. But sodain news brought him, that the Northern men were in Armes, and meant to aduenture for her liberty the Conquerour marched to Couentrie, and there made preparation further to proceed: which when these hote spirits pefectly vnderstood, their courages grew colder, & their weapons cast away, they came thronging to Edward to offer him subiection; yet the Lancastri∣ans were not so minded, but rather in ended once The Northerne men submit vnto K. Edward. more to trie whether fortune would afford them her smile. (75) A fitte instrument they had to forward the enterprise, namely Thomas Neuill bastard Fancon∣bridge sonne of Lord Fanconbridge Earle of Kent, a great supporter of King Edwards Crowne: how∣beit this Bastard being a man of a turbulent spirit, Bastard Fancon∣bridge Captaine of the Lancastri. and forward for action, Earle Warwicke had made him his Admirall to keepe the narrow seas, that none should haue way to strengthen King Edward, which his office he executed beyond his Commis∣sion, and became a taker of all Merchants goods, being aided with 300. Malecontents from Calleis. (76) His enterprise desperate, and his name growne fearefull at sea, hee meant to make it no lesse on the land; for putting in at Douer, many mis∣gouerned and loose persons dayly drew to him, so as his power grew to bee seuenteene thousand strong: with these through Kent he made his way towards London, meaning to doe much, the land so molested Fauonbridge assaileth London. with intestine warres; and lodging his hoast on the Southside of London, commanded the Citizens to giue him accesse, that with King Henry (whom hee meant to release from the Tower) he might passe through their streetes, to meet and encounter the vsurping Edward. But the Londoners knowing the rudenesse of these Rakehels kept their gates shut and garded the same with sufficient strengthes: whence The Citizens withstood his ance. some Lords of the royall bloud therein residing, sent vnto Edward of their present danger, who presently sent them fifteene hundred of his best Souldiers, af∣ter whom in person hee warily marched, leading with him his prisoner Queene Margaret, whose bounds hee well knew, gaue him the full scope of liberty. (77) Fauconbridge in the meane while thirsting af∣ter spoile with his shippes secured the Thamesis a∣boue S. Katherines, purposing with his land Forces to passe the Riuer at Kingston: but hearing that Ed∣ward was on his March, and fearing to bee cut off from the benefite of his ships, hee altered his mind; when to open his way into London, hee caused the Bridge to bee fiered, and three thousand of his men being set ouer Thamesis by his ships, diuided them∣selues into two Companies, the one assaying to en∣ter at Algate, and the other at Bishopsgate, both Fauconbridge for∣ced backe to his ship . which they likewise set on fire, so that the Citie was in three places fired and assaulted at once, but with such euill successe to the assailants, that seuen hundred were slaine, and the bold Bastard driuen to his ships. (78) Vpon the twentieth of May the Conque∣rour Edward with his Captiue Queen Margaret en∣tred London, and so into the Tower, the one in pomp commanding the place at his pleasure, the other in teares to remaine a most pensiue prisoner, where her K. Edward with his Captiue Queene Marga∣ret enter London. husband, the downcast King Henry was kept in hard durance. The place being thus charged with the presence of two Kings and their Queens: the Croke∣backe of Glocester intended to cleare by taking him a∣way, that stood in his brothers way, whose successor as is thought hee then meant to bee; and making his inward mind more deformed then were his outward lineaments, without regard of bloud-defiled hands, stabbed the most innocent Henry to the heart with King Henry ur∣thered in the Tower by Rich∣ard Duke of Glocester. his dagger, in which act at once beganne the ones happy rest, and the others foule guilt, which ac∣companied his conscience to the day of his death. (79) The body of this murthered King was vp∣on the Ascention Eue laide in an open Coffin, and from the Tower guarded with many bils and glaues, K. Henry carried bare-faced through the streetes of Lon∣don. was so carryed through the streetes vnt Cathe∣drall Church of Saint Paul, where it rested vncoue∣red one day, and beganne to bleed againe afresh, a sorrowfull spectacle to most of the beholders, and thence was it carried to the Blacke-Fryers Church, where it likewise lay bare faced, and bled as before, all men being amazed at the sorrowfull sight, and lastly, it was put in a boat without Priest, Clerke, Stowes Annals. Torch or Taper, singing or saying, and was ferried vnto the Abbey of Chertsey in Surrey, & there with∣out pompe enterred. But afterwards King Henry K. Henry b ied Chertsey, and , to Windsor the seuenth translated his body vnto his Castle of Windsor, where in a new Tombe at the entrance in∣to the Chancell of the Chappell, and south dore of the Quier, it was princely bestowed, but since the Tombe is remoued, and where the Corps is now laid is not vulgarly knowne. (80) Thus liued and thus dyed this innocent and iust King, who had beene proclaimed in his Cradle, The of K. . crowned in his Infancy, and againe at more age had the Emperiall Diadem of France set on his head, li∣uing vprightly, louing his Subiects, and raigning thirty eight yeeres, was in that time tossed with va∣riable successe, for twice he was imprisoned, and de∣priued of his Crowne, betrayed, smitten, and woun∣ded, and in all things became a worthy example of fortunes vnconstancy: hee was of stature very seem∣ly, of body slender, of face beautifull, and by a natu∣rall inclination abhorred all vice, farre from pride, giuen to prayer, well read in the Scriptures, vsing The vertues of K. Henry. works of Charity, and so chast, as no suspition of incontinency could be conceiued in him: nay, so farre to the contrary, that when certaine Ladies pre∣sented themselues before him in a maske, with their haire loose, and their breasts vncouered (hee then a Holinshed. Bachelour, and able of marriage) hee immediately rose vp, and departed the presence, saying, fie, fie, forsooth yee are to blame. Oath he vsed none, but in weighty matters, his affirmation was forsooth, and forsooth, very mercifull to the poore, and so pittifull to Malefactors, as he commanded the quar∣ters of Traitors to be taken downe from the Gates, and buried, and so farre from reuenge, that hee wil∣lingly pardoned the greatest offences against him; for a Ruffian intending his death, wounded him in the side with his sword, what time he lay prisoner in the Tower, and being restored to his kingly estate, he freely forgaue the fact; and another like Ruffi∣an striking him on the face, hee punished with this onely reprehension, forsooth you are to blame to strike mee your annointed King: for these and his other pa∣tient vertues, King Henry the 7. assayed to haue Camb. Brit. in descript. of Surrey him canonized a Saint. but Pope Iulius the 2. deman∣ding too great a summe, the King went no further in the suite: notwithstanding, in the repute of the vul∣gar hee was taken for no lesse, so as his red hat which hee had worne, healed the head-ach, when it was put on, as the simple beleeued. (81) The monument of his zeale to true piety, and care for posterities, are his famous Colledges of Eaton and Cambridge, the Chappell of which last, shewes the magnificence that the whole should haue beene of, had their Founder raigned to haue finished them himselfe: for the performance whereof hee enfeo ed certaine Bishops with other noble perso∣nages by his letters Patents with lands and possessi∣ons, to the yeerely value of thirty foure hundred pounds very neere: but as his life ended, before that nature had thereunto set her owne seale; so these re∣main vnperfected of the excellent beauties intended, which their zealous Founder meant to haue adorned them withall. (82) And his sorrowfull Queene Margaret, who Kings Colledge in Cambridge and Eaton in Barkshire, found by K. Henry. twentie sixe yeeres before this his death, with all pompe and royalty had beene crowned Queene of England, and had ruled all in all, now a poore Priso∣ner in distresse and wants, weares out her time in teares and laments, and wisheth for nothing more then the day of her death; which Duke Reiner her Father well vnderstanding, made suite to King Ed∣ward to haue her released by ransome; and lastly, Queen Marga∣ret ranso . bought her liberty at so deare a rate, as hee first paw∣ned, and afterward solde to Lewis the French King, the Kingdomes of Naples, and of both the Siciles to pay and repay the price of her redemption, vnto which poore father, this sorrowfull daughter retur∣ned and ended her aged dayes, where shee had be∣gun the dayes of her life. (83) Victorious Edward thus leading Mars chained to his Chariot, and now himselfe led by Fortune to the high chaire of Estate, sits an absolute Monarch sure, and without opposite, vnto whose rayes all eyes turne a submissiue aspect: onely ba∣stard Fauconbridge depatted, from London (as we haue said) and withdrew vnto Sandwich with his disquiet crew, made shew to doe much, and did somewhat more then befitting, by rape, and robbing, where those rude Mariners came, which Edward hearing of, hasted to Canterbury in person himselfe, fully re∣solued to weede vp by the rootes those new sprow∣ted blades of rebellion, and made great preparation to accomplish the same, which the Bastard hearing Bastard Faucon∣bridge with his vnruly crew yeeld to King Edward. (though strong in his Sea-men) durst not bandy a∣gainst, but sent his submission with proffer of seruice and loiall obedience, and indeed so temporized with the king, as besides his pardon obtained, the sword Bastard Faucon∣bridge pardoned of life, and re∣warded with Knighthood. of knighthood was laid vpon his shoulder, & he was presently made the Kings Vice-Admirall for the Seas. In which his office he so bare himselfe (either by his owne deserts, or the Kings Conceit) as he not long enioied the same, but was at Southampton beheaded, Rob. Fabian. and other of King Henries old fauourites likewise Bastard Faucon∣bridge beheaded. sought after and daily indangered. (84) In which times of feare, Iasper Earle of Pem∣brooke, with his Nephew young Henry Earle of Rich∣mond, A. D. 1472. fled into Britaine, where, of that Duke they were most courteously entertained, with assurance made, that no wrong should be offred them, during their stay in his dominions. And so these two Earles Henry of Rich∣mond fled into Britaine. the vncle and nephew, there attended the day of their wished successe. (85) But Iohn Earle of Oxford, who had with∣drawne himselfe from Barnet field first into Wales, and thence into France, was farre more vnpatient of The storie of Iohn Earle of Oxford. those rough times, for hauing gotten store of proui∣sion by strong hand at Sea, with seauentie seuen men only surprized Saint Michaels Mount in Cornewall, and made that peece good against the King, which he kept and reuictualled, but whether by force or fa∣uour King Edward much suspected, and therefore the more willingly came to a composition with his Subiect, who vpon the pardon of his life deliuered the Mount to the King: and as some say the rather, for that his minde was then troubled with many ominous signes. For certaine Bo nes about this Waters brake out of the Earth. time burst out of the Earth, as VVoe-mere at Market in the County of Bedford, whose name carried the quality of his nature. In Kent, at Canterburie, Leui∣sham, and Langley Parke, at Croyden in Surrey, and at Iohn Stow. Annals. Hungeruill neere Dudley Castle one running verie foule: all of them predictions, as that credulous age beleeued, of great troubles to come: and therefore not trusting a new reconciled enemie, King Henrie The Earle of Oxford sent pri∣soner into France. sent the said Earle Prisoner vnto the Castle of Hames in Normandy, where he remained the space of twelue yeeres, vnto the last of K. Richard the 3. most securelie guarded, and so straitly kept, as Lady Margaret his Countesse could not be suffered to haue accesse vnto The hard and inhumane vsage of the Countesse of Oxford. him, in all that time. Neither was shee allowed any thing out of his reuenewes, or from the king, to maintaine her estate, but was forced to liue vpon the Charity of others, & by the workes that shee made with her Needle; both of them very short to supply her great wants. This vnmercifull and almost vn∣humane vsage, was the more extremely followed, for that Oxford himselfe, his father and brother, had euer sided with the Lancastrians. And her selfe be∣ing sister vnto Richard Duke of Warwicke, the Capi∣tall obstacle against king Edwards proceedings, was held either dangerous, if her wealth ballanced her birth and estate, or else vnworthy of his fauour, whose good fortunes as was suggested, shee euer ma∣ligned. (86) But much more miserable was the estate of The storie of Lord Henry Hol∣land Duke of Ex∣cester. Lord Henry Holland, Duke of Excester, and Earle of Huntington, who flourished so long, as king Henries pillar stood crowned on his base, and the Lancastri∣ans (of whose house himselfe was) ouerswaid the times; he being the sonne of Lady Elizabeth the se∣cond daughter of Iohn of Gaunt, and hauing marri∣ed the sister of Edward the then raigning King, was notwithstanding driuen to such want, as he may serue an example to all, how vncertaine Adams sons are of any continuing greatnes. For (saith Philip Co∣mines) I once saw the Duke of Excester runne on foote Phil. Comines. lib. 3. cap. 4. bare legged, after the Duke of Eurgundies traine, begging his bread for Gods sake, but he vttered not his name, he be∣ing the neerest of the house of Lancaster, and brother in law vnto King Edward, and being knowne what he was, Burgundy gaue him a small pension to maintaine his e∣state. (87) But when King Henrie was againe restored, & the Title of the Crowne laid vpon the successe of Barnet-field, this man Lord Henrie bare himselfe most Ed. Hall. brauely against king Edward, and in fight was strucke downe, and left for dead, where, in his bleeding woundes he lay most part of the day, but yet recoue∣ring, and got to Westminster, he there tooke Sanctuary to saue his life, for which, he became Suiter vnto the king, but his wife Lady Anne sister vnto king The vnlouing parts of an vnlo∣uing wi e. Ioh. S w. Edward, sued as earnestly for a diuorce, which with great instancy shee lastly obtained against him. How he released himselfe from the wrath of the king, is vncertaine, and how he came by his death no man can tell, for his body was found cast vpon the shoare of Kent, as though he had perished by shipwracke The Lord Henrie supposed to haue been drowned. vpon the Sea. (88) Now Edward to finish all factions, thought best to lop off both bough and branch, that gaue any shadow to the Lancastrians designes, to which end he rather picked, then found occasion of treason, in The Archbishop of Yorkes goods, seized vpon. George Neuill Archbishop of Yorke, whose goods, lands, and Lordships, he seized vpon, got possession of his rich plate and Iewels, whereof one in his Mi∣ter was of such valew, as the King caused it to be set in his Imperiall Crowne, and the Archbishop to be sent ouer Sea to the Castle of Hames, where he remai∣ned a Prisoner a long time after, with no such curte∣ous intertainement, as himselfe had vsed to Edward when he was Prisoner. (89) But the escape of Pembrooke and Earle Rich∣mond troubled the King not a little, the onely men now left to bandy against them, and therefore were most followed with a suspicious eye. In somuch as Edward wrote vnto the Duke of Britaine their recei∣uer, K. Edward sends into Britaine to recouer Rich∣mond and Pem∣brooke. with promises of heapes of gold to haue them sent backe and deliuered vnto his hands: but the Duke that had giuen them his safetie before, answe∣red the English Ambassadors, that it stood not with honour, so to betray these distressed Princes, fled to him for relief, yet, he faithfully vndertook, that they should be so followed, as King Edward should sleepe quiet from their molestations, which being no better, Edward notwithstanding made the best of it. (90) All now in quiet, and Edward raigning with∣out any Competitor, or malignant disturber, caused a high Court of Parliament to be assembled at West∣minster, wherein he reestablished those Acts, which Henrie had abrogated, and abrogated those that K. Edward abro∣gates King Hen∣ries lawes. were made against his fauourites; at which season the Duke of Burgundie sent his Ambassadors vnto Ed∣ward, crauing his aide against the French King, which was the more willingly heard and granted, as well for his fauors receiued of the Duke, in time of his necessitie, as for spleene against Lewis, who had aided Burgundie sends for aid into Eng∣land against France. Warwicke dispossesse him of his Crowne. And in∣deed this s a sparke, that was likely to set the hearts of the English on fire, to recouer France lost by Henrie the last King. (91) All things in a readinesse King Edward re∣paired to Douer, and there embarked himselfe for A. D. 1474. K. Edwards expe∣dition into France. Callis, with the greatest Army that euer from Eng∣land set sailes into France: for he had in his Compa∣nie fifteen hundred Noble-men, and men at Armes, all of them mounted, and most of them barbed, who Phil. Comines. lib. 4. cap. 5. with the Archers on horsebacke also made vp the number of fifteene thousand, besides a great num∣ber of footemen and others to pitch Tents, to attend The great prepa∣ration of King Edward. the Artillerie, and inclose their Campes. Before the Kings departure from England, he had sent Gartar King at Armes vnto King Lewis with a letter of de∣fiance: whose contents demanded no lesse, then the whole Realme of France, which if he refused, ee threatned to inuade his dominions with and King Edwards . sword. (92) The letter receiued, and read in secret by Lewis his confe∣rence with the English Herald. Lewis his confe∣rence with the English Herald. Lewis himselfe, he priuately sent for, and conferred with the Herald, telling him that it was not Edward, but Burgundy that raked abroad these dying sinders, who as a man discomfited & vnfurnished for warre, would draw in the English, by his slie dealings, to their inestimable Charges, to supply his defects; that Bur∣gundy being of the house of Lancaster hated most deadly the family of Yorke; and more for feare then loue married Edwards sister. As touching the Con∣stable he told him, though Edward had married his Neece, yet hee would deceiue him, as he had done his owne Master of France, who had heaped manie and extraordinary benefits vpon him. And lastly with the gift of three hundred Crownes, and the promise of a thousand more, he instigated the He∣rald to worke a peace. Gartar very thankefullie K. Lewis moneth Gartar to be a meanes for peace. tooke the French gold, and counselled Lewis to send a Herault vnto his Master King Edward to demand a safe-conduct for conference: and so openly rewar∣ded with thirtie Elles of Crimson-veluet he de∣parted. (93) King Lewis nothing so pompous as other Princes are, nor attended with Heraulds continual∣ly in his Court, was therefore inforced vnto this pre∣sent shift: he caused a seruant of the Lord Hales to Phil. Com. lib. 4. cap. 7. be arraied like an herauld in a trumpets banner, and sent him in hast into King Edwards Camp; where A counterfeit Herald sent to K. Edward. hauing audience, he shewed the great desire the King his Master had of peace, whose amity with England he had euer held, excusing his receit of Warwicke with the necessity of time, whom he aided not against Edward, but against Burgundy, who as he instantly al∣leaged, had now drawne the English to this excessiue The Heralds perswasions. charges, that he might thereby conclude a better composition for himselfe, and to amend the broken state of his owne affaires; lastly he desired that the King of England would grant a safe-conduct vnto the Ambassadors of the French King his Master, who should more fully informe his Maiestie, and giue his safe-conduct for a further conference in these af∣faires: and so wisely this counterfeit worded his mes∣sage, that the King and Nobles liked well the ouer∣ture, and thereupon granting a safe-conduct sent An English He∣rald sent to King Lewis. with him an English Herauld, to receiue the like and other assignements from the French King. (94) But when the Duke of Burgundy vnderstood that a peace was trauersed betwixt Edward & Lewis, he stormed not a little, and with no small hast from The Duke of Burgundy com∣meth to the King. Lutzenburgh accompanied with sixteene horse only, came to his brother King Edward, and in a great rage reproued him of breach of promise, and vn∣courteous requitall of his former kindnes, that thus would enter amity with his great foe, and in out∣ward semblance more ready to bite then to barke, burst into these reproofes. Haue you (quoth hee) brother, passed the Edw. Hall. ol. 231. Seas, entred France, and without killing of a poore flie, or burning of a silly Sheepecote taken a shame∣full truce?. Oh S. George! did Edward your noble Burgundies hot speech vnto K. Edward. Ancestor euer make Armie into France, and retur∣ned without battell or Conquest? That victori∣ous Prince King Henry the fifth (as neere of kinne vnto you as me) whose blood you haue either rightfullie or wrongfully (God knoweth) extin∣guished and destroied, with a small puissance con∣quered Normandy, kept it, and neuer would come to composition, till he had the whole kingdome of France offr d him, and was made heire apparant vnto that Crowne. Contrariwise you without a∣ny thing done, proffer of battell, or gaine of honor haue now condiscended vnto a p ce as profitable for Engl s is a poore peascod: haue I (thinke you) for my particular vse drawne the English for∣ces into France (which am able of my selfe to de∣fend mine owne cause?) I tell you plainly no, but rather to aid you, to recouer your ancient Territo∣ries wrongfully withholden: and that you shall wel know I need not your aide, I will heare of no truce with the French, till moneths after your arri∣ ge in England at the least; And reupon furiously arising, he threw downe the Chaire, wherein he had sare and offred to depart. (95) Nay stay brother Charles (quoth K. Edward) sith I with patience haue heard you speake what K Edwards reply to his brother of Burgundy. you would, you shall now perforce heare from me what you would not: First therefore for my thus entrance into France, no man knoweth the occasion better then your selfe: for, mauger your owne great power you speake of; you doe remember I know, how the French King tooke from you the faire Towne Amiens, and the strong Pile Saint Quintins, with diuers other peeces which you neither durst, nor were able either to rescue or defend, since which time he hath gotten from you, your best bo∣some friends and secret Counsellors, so as your selfe stood in doubt (determining to besiege Nusse) whether the losse would be greater in your absence (the French King waiting as a fox for his pray) or gaine more in Germany by your power and pre∣sence: and to keepe this wolfe from your fold, was the principall cause why you so earnestly prai∣ed me, and continually sollicited me to passe ouer the Seas, promising mountaines, but performing not a Mole-hill, bragging a supply both of horse and foote, but neuer sent me a hoofe, nor a lackie. Thinke you (brother) if wee had entred this enter∣prize in our owne quarrell, we would haue expe∣cted your aide? I assure you nothing lesse, for if we had intended any such Conquest, we would with Souldiers fire and sword, haue so infected the aire with the flames and slaine of France, as should haue annoied your Countreys of Flaunders and Brabant, and giuen you leasure to sit still and tell of our euer atchieued great victories, nothing doub∣ting but to haue gotten and kept with like man∣hood, and in as great glorie, as any of our Ance∣stors before vs had done. But the occasion of warre being yours, and you wilfully (I will not say cowardly) neglecting the same, I meane not to pro∣secute, for e French King neuer offended me nor my Subiects, except in fauouring Warwicke against me, nay I may say against you, and now offreth such honorable ouertures of peace, which I by Gods grace meane not to forsake, but will obserue Burgundy depar∣teth displeased from King Edward. and keepe. God send you ioy thereof, quoth the Duke, and so abruptly departed from the King. (96) The peace thus resolued vpon, betwixt the two kings of England and France, the place appoin∣ted The conference for peace Amiens. for conference was neere vnto Amiens, and the parties assigned for the French, were the Bastard of Bourbon Admirall of France, the Lord S. Pierre, and the Bishop of Eureux. For the English, were the Lord Howard, Sir Thomas St. Leger, and Doctor M ∣ton Co ioners for peace. Lord Chancellor of England. These meeting, pre∣sentlie fell to a conclusion of peace: the conditions whereof were: That the French King should forth∣with pay to the King of England seuenty two thou∣sand Crownes. That the Daulphin should mar∣rie Conditions of the peace. Lady Elizabeth, King Edwards eldest daughter, and that shee should haue for her maintenance the Dutchy of Guien ; or else fifty thousand Crownes yeerely to be paid in the Tower of London, for nine yeeres space. This peace was so acceptable to Lewis his libe∣rality for oy of the peace. King Lewis, as he sent sixteene thousand Crownes to bee distributed amongst the English Souldiers, with plate and great presents to men of any sort: & in∣deed gaue them such entertainment in Amiens as was most bounteous, whereof if any desire further to know, let him read Comines vpon the same text. Ph. Com. l. 4. c. 9. (97) To graft which peace with a louing begin∣ning, the two Kings were desirous to see each others, The kings of England and France d to see each others. for which end Commissioners were sent to a gne the place: and lastly agreed, that the Tow ne about three leagues from Amiens, seated in a bottome, through which the Ri Some ranne, was the fittest: ouer which a strong bridge was built, and the place of the kings. in the thereof, a grate made ouer-thwart with barres, no wider asunder then a man might well thrust in his Arme, couered with boords ouer head to auoid the raine, & the bridge so broad that twelue might stand in a rancke on both sides. (98) The day approched, and the two Kings come to the place, hee of France came first to the A. D. 1475. Aug. 29. Grate, accompanied with twelue personages, as was the appointment; wherof Iohn Duke of Bourbon and the Cardinall his brother were the chiefest: King Edward entring the bridge on the other end, with his brother the Duke of Clarence, the Earle of Nor∣thumberland, the Lord Hastings his Chamberlaine, and the Lord Chancellor, himselfe apparelled all in cloth of gold, with a rich Iewell of precious stones, in forme of a Flower de Luce: aduanced forward, and within fiue foote of the Grate, put off his cap, and bowed his knee within halfe a foote to the The of the two kings. ground. King Lewis as readily doing his likely re∣uerence vnto Edward. Where, after imbracements through Grate, the Chancellour of England who was Prelate and Bishop of Ely, made an eloquent and learned Oration, which done, he read the Articles of peace and demanded the Kings whether these were done with their full consents. Which granted by both: either of them laying their one hand vpon the Missall, and the other vpon the Holy-Crosse, tooke The Kings swear the league. their solemne Oathes to obserue the same. And then falling into a more familiar and Courtly Com∣plementall conference, King Lewis told K. Edward that he would one day inuite him to Paris, there to Court his faire French Ladies, with whom if hee committed any sinne, he merrily told him, that Car∣dinall Bourbon, should be his Confessor, whose pe∣nance would be the easier, for that Bourbon vsed to busse faire Ladies himselfe; which no sooner was spo∣ken, or howsoeuer meant, but Edward was as for∣ward of thankes and acceptance, and indeed so rea∣dy, that King Lewis rounding Commines his bosome seruant in his are, told him flatly he liked not Ed∣wards K. Lewis loth that Edward should visite Pa∣ris. forwardnes to Paris, too many English Princes hauing beene there before: and s the con∣ference ended, and king Edwards busines in France, hee returned into England, and into the City of London was receiued little lesse then in triumph∣wise. A. D. 1475. Sept. 2 . (99) But though Edwards fortunes thus outward∣ly flourished, yet inward feares nipped his still trou∣bled mind, one branch hauing sappe, whose growth hee much feared would shadow his Crowne, which was Henry Earle of Richmond, aliue and at liberty in the Duke of Britaines Court. To bring therefore his purpose to passe, hee sent D. Stillington and others, Henry Earle of Richmond ught after by K. Ed∣ward. Ambassadors vnto Frances Duke of Britaine, with store of gold and good words, as that hee meant to match his eldest daughter Lady Elizabeth vnto the young Earle of Richmond, whereby all cause of An intent pre∣tended, which as∣ r came to passe. dissentions might at once be cut off: the Duke think∣ing no danger where the water went smooth, easily consented to shippe him thereon; but ere the prey was embarked, hee had knowledge that the voy∣age should cost young Henry his life; wherefore in all hast hee sent his Treasurer Peter L doys to pre∣uent it, who secretly told Richmond what marriage∣ d Ralph Holinsh. pag. 701. Edward intended; whereat the distressed Earle amazed, was put to his shifts, and for want of better, tooke Sanctuary at S. Mal s, where the English his Henry arle of Richmond taketh Sanctuary. conductors lay for a wind. (100) The Earle thus escaped, the Ambassadors complained to the Duke, imputing the fault as far The English Ambassador complaineth to the Duke of Bri∣taine. as they durst vnto him, who had not dealt li a good Marchant to take their money, and to retain the war ; his answere was, the deliuery was good, but themselues negligent Factors, that made not the commodity to their best aduantage. And yet His Answere. for the loue hee bare to their King, hee vndertooke that Rich nd should be sure kept either in Sanctua∣ry, or else in prison, whence as hee promised hee should not escape: And so with a in their re, they returned, hauing cleared Edward of ney, and care for sure keeping of Henry, who though hee weresore displeased with Stillingtons simplicity; yet the promises that the Duke of Britaine had made, much mitigated and eased his mind. (101) And now the Realme quiet, no warre in hand, nor none towards (but such as no man loo∣ked Sir Tho. Moore. should happen;) hee framed himselfe so to the peoples affections, and held their hearts not in a King Edward beloued of his subiects and lo∣ueth his subiects. constrained feare, but with as louing and ready obe∣dience as any King attaining the Crowne by his sword euer had. Nor was euer any Prince more familiar with his Subiects then this King Edward was, who now hauing his tribute truly paid from France, and all things prospering as was desired, he set heart vpon pleasure, which hetherto had beene afflicted with continuall turmoile: yea and often laid from him the state of a Prince, and would accom∣pany and conuerse with his meane subiects: a load∣stone that doth naturally attract the English hearts; among many others we of London remember this to our grace. Vnto Windsore he sent for the Lord Maior of London, the Aldermen and others, vpon no other Io. Stow. K. Edward sent for the Maior and Aldermen of London to his huntings. occasion, then to hunt in his company, and himselfe to be merry with them: As also at another time he did the like in Waltham, where he gaue them most fa∣miliar intertainment, and sent to the Lady Mairesse and her sisters two harts, sixe Buckes, and a Tunne of wine, which wanne more loue then manifold their worthes. (102) Somewhat he was giuen to Court and con∣uerse K. Edward som∣what licention. slie giuen. with faire Ladies, which fault was well noted and preuented by King Lewis, for his French dames: but in England he had liberty with very large scope, for besides the Lady Lucy and others, by whome he had issue, three concubines he kept, and those of K. Edwards three Concubines. three diuers, and seuerall dispositions, as himselfe would often confesse, one the merriest, another the wiliest, and the third the holiest harlot in his realme, as one whom no man could get out of the Church vnlesse it were to his Bed, the merriest was Shores wife, of whom hereafter we shall speake, the other two were greater Personages, but in their humili∣ty are content to bee namelesse, and to forbeare the praise of those properties. (103) This fault of the King did not greatly of∣fend the people: for one mans pleasure could not extend to the displeasures of manie, it being done without violence, and in his latter daies lessened and well left. But a farre more greater sinne and re∣proach he fell into, among his other Princely dis∣ports: For being on progresse in Warwickeshire, and hunting in Arrow Park , belonging to Thomas Bur∣det Esquire, with the death of much Game he slew Thomas Burdet accused of trea∣son. a White Bucke greatly esteemed of the said Burdet, who vnderstanding thereof, wished his hornes in his Belly, that moued the King to kill the same Bucke, Eng . whereof he was accused and condemned of treason, his wordes being drawne, to wish the ornes in the Kings bellie: for which beheaded h was at Ti∣burne, Register of Gray-Friers L ∣don. and buried in the Gray-Fryers Church at London. (104) But a more lamentable tragedie happened vnto the land, by the death of George Duke of Cla∣rence The story of George Duke of Clarence. the Kings second brother, who being accused of high Treason, was committed to the Tower, where he soone-after ended his life. His attainder was, that the said Duke had caused diuerse of his seruants to enforme the people, that Thomas Burdet his ser∣uant T attainder of the Duke of Clarence. Iohn Stow. likewise, was wrongfully put to death: and fur∣ther laboured (through their reports) to make the world beleeue, t K. Edward wrought by Nigr ∣cie, and vsed to poison such : And al o tha s id Duke vpon pur to exalt him∣selfe and his heires to the dig , sely vntruly pub d that the was a ard, and therefore not capable of raigne. Moreouer th he induced di e of the Ki aturall sub∣iects to be sworne vp the S ent, vnto him and his heires, with ny other rese ations of their all e: for which intent (as there was al∣leaged) hee had gotten an exemplification vnder the great Seale of King Henry the sixt, that if the said king and his sonne Prince Edward died without issue male, the said Duke and his heires should inioy the Crowne: For these in a Parliament begun at West∣minster the fifteenth of Ianuary he was attainted of high treason: but whether guiltie or guiltles, to men (saith Grafton) that haue made large inquisition, yea and A. D. 1478. Rich. Graft. of such as were of no small authority in those daies, the cer∣taintie thereof was hid, and could not truly be disclosed, but by coniectures, which as often deceiue the imaginati∣ons of fantasticall folke, as declare truth to them in their conclusions. (105) I am not ignorant that some haue alleaged the cause of this Noble mans death to arise from a A false prophe∣cie of G. E. foolish prophecie (whereof saith Comines) the English-men are neuer vnfurnished, & this as the Cab sts, who vsed to make an art of their letters, gaue forth for∣sooth Phil. Comin. lib. 4. cap. 10. that a G. should raigne after an E. which must needes be George Duke of Clarence, though Gloucester more craftie lay in winde for the game. This in∣deed troubled the King not a little, but the Queene and her blood much more, and therefore of both King and Queene Duke George was mistrusted, and greatly maligned in all that he did. Who now a widower (for Warwicks daughter was dead) sent vnto his sister Margaret the Dutchesse of Burgundie, to worke a marriage for him with her husbands daughter the Lady Marie. Against which the The Duke of Cla∣rence is suiter vnto Marie the daughter of Bur∣gundie. Queene most earnestly interposed her selfe, and solli∣cited the Ladie in the behalfe of Lord Anthonie Earle Riuers her brother, whereby great discontent was ministred to the Duke, and new iealousies daily bred in the Kings breast. (106) Iohn Serres the French Historian interlacing the life of King Lewis with the Acts of K. Edward and his brethren, saith confidently, that the English King Io. Serres. so much affected the league and alliance with France, as that he caused his brother Clarence to be put in prison, because he intended to haue past the Seas to Clarnce impriso∣ned by his bro∣ther King Ed∣ward. succour the Dowager of Burgundie Ladie Margaret his sister, vpon whose Territories King Lewis en∣croached, after the death of Duke Charles her hus∣band slaine at the battell of Man y. (107) But howsoeuer Clarence had offended, cer∣taine it is, that he was found guilty by the foresaid Parliament, and the eleuenth of March following, after he had offered his Masse-penny in the Tower of London, was drowned in a But of Malmesey, whose body was buried at Tewkesburie in Glocestershire, by George Duke of Cla ce con∣demned by Par∣liament. And drowned in a But of malme∣say. the bodie of his Dutchesse Ladie Isabell Countesse of Warwicke, who being with Child, died of poison a little before. And although the King had consented to his death, yet no sooner was it done, but that he wished it againe vndone, and was so greeued at the remembrance, as when anie made suite for the life of a condemned, he would openly say: Oh fortunate brother; for whose life no would make ite. This K. Edwards ∣pentance for his brothers death. good Duke (for so was he called) left issue behind him, Edward Earle of Warwicke and Margaret afterwards Countesse of Salisbury, both of them in∣fants, The Duke of Clarence his issue. and followers of their fathers fortunes: he a continuall Prisoner, at foure and twentie yeeres of Edward and Margaret the children of Cla∣rence beheaded. age vnder Henry the seauenth, was beheaded vpon the Tower-hill; and shee at sixtie two, lost hers within the Tower, and time of King Henrie the eight. (108) But how dainty soeuer King Edward. was of the breach of amitie, betwixt him and the French King Edward de∣ceiued in King Lewis. King, in regard whereof he suffered Mary the yong Dutchesse of Burgundy the daughter of his owne si∣sters husband to bee molested by of the French, and all in fauour of the contract commenced betweene the & Lady daugh∣ter, yet did for ou : For Ambassadors ploied accomplishing of, they of without o he new were sent without , while indeed Lewis Serres. working for his sonne another way: First to match him with Mary Dutches of Burgundy, but that refused, with Margaret of Flaunders daughter to Duke Maxi∣milian sonne to Fredericke the Emperor: and to hold the world from suspition, in the meane while Ladie Elizabeth the Infanta of England was in the French Court vsually called Madame the Daulphin, and all Lady Elizabeth called the Daulphin. things in France so soundly carried, as Edward suspe∣cted no leake in the Caske: for now growne fat and vnable for paines, he both gloried in his nine fa∣mous victories at home atchieued, and seemed suffi∣cientlie satisfied, that his yeerely tribute from France was so truly paied. (109) At the same time Iames the third of that A. D. 1480. Io. Les , Lady Cicely mo∣tioned in matri∣age vnto Prince of Scotland. name King of Scotland, sent his Ambassadors vnto Edward to obtaine the Lady Cicelie the Kings second daughter to be ioined in marriage with his sonne Iames the young Prince, which was well listened vn∣to, by Edward and his Counsell, and least the motion should goe backe, a great summe of money lent to the Scottish King with this condition, that at a certain time appointed, it should be at K. Edwards choise, whether his daughter should match with that Prince, or else to haue the said summe againe repaid. A∣gainst which alliance and league (as Lesly reporteth,) Lewis King of France interpo∣seth the contract betwixt Prince Iames and Ladie Margaret. Lewis of France much repined, and to annihilate the same sent D r . Ireland, a certaine knight, and another religious man, to moue King Iames to make warre a∣gainst England. (110) These no Peace-makers for Christ, but fire∣brands of Belial, blew the smothered sparkes of dis∣sention into a flame of bloody warre, which fell the more heauy vpon. Scotland, for that K. Iames much Iames King of Scotland much dded to his will. wedded vnto his owne will, and altogether ruled by men of meane worth, whom himselfe had aduanced from nothing, had not only neglected by their insti∣gations the loue of his Nobles, but also banished the Realme of Scotland, Alexander Duke of Albany his Alexander Duke of Albanie bani∣shed Scotland. Iohn Earle of Marre bled to death. second brother; and had caused the veines of Iohn Earle of Marre his other brother, to be opened, whereby he bled to death; these and other discon∣tents alienated his Subiects hearts from him, which laid the land more open vnto the English Inuaders; and yet to draw them more deadly against him, rely∣ing vpon his ownevalor, and the assistance of France, he sent word vnto Edward, that he should not aid his owne sister of Burgundy against K. Lewis, being the Scots Allie; as also with threats of warre commanded K. Iames threat∣neth warre a∣gainst England. him to deliuer to his Ambassadors, the Duke of Al∣banie (then residing in the English Court) and lastlie to make good and repay dammages done vpon the Scottish Borders. (111) King Edward not a little inraged at these double dealings, euen in the winter season mustered his men, prep ed his artillery, and rigged his ships, that nothing should be vnready at the next Spring; which no sooner was come, but that he ordained for his Lieutenant his brother Richard Duke of Glouce∣ster, Richard Duke of Glocester made the Kings Lieu∣tenant against Scotland. who with Henrie Earle of Northumberland, Tho∣mas Lord Stanley, the Lord Louell, G stock and others, (the Duke of Albany marching vnto Gloucesters ban∣ner) with twenty thousand strong repaired into the North: and first sieged the strong Towne Berwick, then en ing the chiefe City Edenborough, vrged K. The Duke of Scotland. Iames to performe his couenants, concerning the marriage betwixt Prince Iames his sonne, with Lady Cicely before agreed vpon, threatning destruction if the match went not forward. The Scottish Nobility considering the eminent danger, put to death the wicked Counsellers of their King, the Duke of Albany the Vicegerent of Scotland, and pro∣mised to repay the money according to Couenants; after which of the strong Towne , of the to the . English possession the , a generall was two , with an Ed ∣burgh (who had vndertaken to disburse the money) to signifie King Edwards minde touching the marri∣age Holinsh. p. 707. intended, and to demand the said summe by a day assigned, which accordingly was repaide. (112) The marriage with Scotland thus broken off, for the Lady Cicely, by K. Edward himselfe; that with France for the Princesse Elizabeth, both he and his Queene greatly desired, and daily sought after. But Lewis the French King, finding the daughter of Austrich more fit for his sonne, dallied out Edward with shewes of firme faith, till he had effected the thing he went about: which musicke sounded so harshly in the English Kings eare, as in no wise hee would suffer that string to be touched, but euer be∣leeued that the French meant him faire play, and al∣though the yeeres of the parties themselues might beget some suspition, shee being much elder then the Phil. Comines. lib. 6. chap. 2. and 9. Daulphin, and the truth thereof confirmed by the Duke of Austriches Leger-Ambassadours residing in England, yet Edward would not so much as sup∣pose King Lewis dal∣l th with King Edward. a suspect against the French King, and therefore suffered Lewis to incroach vpon those parts of Pi∣cardie that ioyned to Callis, and to gaine time till it King Edward vvould not be∣leeue vvhat was confidently tolde him. was past recall: for then the Lord Howard returning from France, confidently told him that hee was pre∣sent, and saw the Lady Margaret of Austrich, daugh∣ter to Duke Maximilian, sonne to the Emperour Frederick, receiued vnto France with great pompe & royaltie: and at Ambois contracted and espoused to the Daulphin. (113) Edward mightily chafed to be thus worked by Lewis, made great preparation for France, but whether with anger, griefe, or melancholy, hee fell A pret ded against France. into a dangerous and deadly sicknesse; some say, of a superfluous surfeit, whereunto he was much giuen: Commines saith, of a Catarrhe, which weake estate King Edward falleth ke. turned his minde another way: for calling his Lords into his sicke presence, and raising his faint body vp∣on his Bed-Pillowes, these words vnto them hee lastly spake: (114) My Lords, my deare Kinsmen, & Allies; in what plight I lie, you see, and I feele; by which the lesse while I looke to liue with you, the more Thom. More. King Edwards speeches at his death. deepely am I mooued to care in what case I leaue you; for such as I leaue you, such bee my children like to finde you. Which if they should (that God forbid) finde you at variance, might hap to fall themselues at warre, ere their discretion would serue to set you at peace. Yee see their youth, of which I reckon the only surety to rest in your con∣cord. For it sufficeth not that all you loue them, if each of you hate other. If they were men, your faithfulnesse happely would suffice: but child∣hood must bee maintained by mens authoritie, and slippery youth vnderpropped with elder counsell; which neither they can haue, vnlesse you giue it, nor you giue it, if you agree not. For where each laboureth to breake that which the The perils of discord. other maketh, and through hatred of each others person impugneth each others counsel, there must it needs be long, or any good conclusion goe for∣ward: And while eyther party striueth to bee chiefe, flatterie shall haue more play then plaine and faithfull aduise, of which must needs insue the euill bringing vp of the Prince; whose minde in tender youth infected, shall readily fall to riot and mischiefe, and draw downe with him his noble Tender youth is infected. Realme vnto ruine: but if grace turne him to wisdome: which if God send, then they that by e∣uill meanes before pleased him best, shall after fall furthest out of fauour, so that euer at length euill drifts draw to nought, and good plaine wayes pro∣sper. Great variance hath there long time beene betweene you, not alwayes for great causes. Som∣time Great variance for small causes. a thing right well intended, our misconstru∣ctions turneth vnto worse, or a small displeasure done vs, either our own affections or euill tongues agreeueth. But this wo I well, ye neuer had so great cause of hatred, as you haue of loue. That we be all men, that wee be Christian men, this shall I leaue for Preachers to tell you (and yet I wot nere King Edwards good counsell. whether any Preachers words ought more to moue you, then his, that is by and by, going to the place that they all preach of.) But this I shall de∣sire you to remember, that the one part of you is of my bloud, the other of my Allies; and each of you with other, either of kinred or affinitie; which spirituall kindred of affinitie, if the Sacraments of Christs Church beare that weight with vs, that would to God they did, should no lesse moue vs to charitie, then the respect of fleshly consangui∣nitie. Our Lord forbid, that you loue together the worse for the selfe cause, that you ought to loue the better. And yet that happeneth, and no where finde we so deadly debate, as among them, which by nature and law ought most to agree together. Such a pestilent serpent is ambition, and desire of vaine glory and soueraintie which among states What the nature of ambition is. where it once entreth, creepeth forth so farre, till with diuision and variance hee turneth all to mis∣chiefe, first longing to be next the best, afterward equall with the best, and at last chiefe and aboue the best. Of which immoderate appetite of wor∣ship, and thereby of debate and dissention, what losse, what sorrow, what trouble, hath within these fewe yeeres growne in this Realme, I pray God as well forget as we remember. Which things, if I could aswell haue foreseen, as I haue with my more paine then pleasure proued, By Gods blessed La∣dy (that was euer his oath) I would neuer haue King Edwards vsuall oath. won the curtesie of mens knees, with the losse of so many heads. But sith things passed cannot be gaine-called, much ought we the more beware, by what occasion wee haue taken so great hurt afore, that wee eft soones fall not into the like againe. Now be those griefes pa ed, and all is (God bee thanked) quiet, and likely right well to prosper in wealthful peace vnder your Cosins, my children, if God send them life, and you loue. Of which two things the lesse losse were they, by whom thogh God did his pleasure, yet should the Realme alway finde Kings, and peraduenture as good Kings. But if you among your selues in a childs raigne fall at debate, many a good man shal perish, and happely he too, and ye too, ere this Land finde peace againe. Wherefore in these last words that euer I looke to speake with you, I exhort, and re∣quire you al, for the loue that you haue euer borne King Edwards last request. vnto me: for the loue that I haue euer borne vnto you, for the loue that our Lord beareth to vs all, from this time forward all griefes forgotten, each of you loue others, which I verily trust you will, if you any thing regard, either God, or your King, affinitie or kindred, this Realme, your owne countrey, or your owne surety. (115) And therewithall the King no longer indu∣ring to sit vp, layd him downe on his right side, his face towards them, who with weeping eyes & words as fitted the time, recomfited the sicke dying King, ioyning their hands, and outwardly forgiuing that, which inwardly they meant not to forget. The King ouer-ioyed to see their willing reconcilements spake not many wordes after, but commending his soule vnto God, in their presence departed this life at his Pallace of Westminster, vpō the 9. day of April, and yeere of Christs appearance 1483. at the age The raigne and death of King Edward. of forty one, when he had worne the royal Diademe, two and twenty yeeres, one moneth and fiue dayes: and was buried at Windsor, in the newe Chappell, whose foundation himselfe had layd. (116) Of personage hee was the goodliest Gen∣tleman Phil. Com. lib. 4, cap. 10. (saith Commines) that euer ine eyes beheld; faire of complexion, and of most princely presence; King Edward de∣scribed. couragious of heart, pol ke in counsell; in aduer∣sitie nothing abashed; in prosperitie rather ioyous then proud: in peace iust and mercifull; in warre sharpe and fierce, and in field bold and venturous: yet no further then wisedome would, and is no lesse commended where he auoided, then is his manhood when he vanquished: eight or nine battels he won, wherein to his greater renowne he fought on foote, and was euer victor ouer his enemies: much gi∣uen Ph. Com. l. 6. c. 2. hee was to the lusts of youth, and in his lat∣ter time, growne somewhat corpulent, which ra∣ther adorned his grauer yeeres, then any waies di∣sliked the eies of his beholders. His Wife. (117) Elizabeth the daughter of Richard Wooduill Earle Riuers by his wife aquelana Dutchesse of Bed∣ford, who was the daughter of Peter Earle of S. Paul, and he the sonne of Peter de Luxembourg, was first married vnto Sir Iohn Grey slaine at S. Albans, where he was knighted the day before his death by King Henry the sixt, vnto whom shee bare two sonnes and a daughter, after whose death shee was priuately remarried vnto K. Edward the fourth, the first day of May, at his mannor of Grafton in Northamptonshire Anno 1464. and in the next yeere following vpon the sixe and twentith of May, was crowned Queen at Westminster with al due solemnities. Shee was his wife eighteene yeeres, eleuen moneths, and nine daies, no more fortunate in attaining to the height of all worldly dignity, then vnfortunate in the murther of her sonnes, and losse of her owne liberty: For in the beginning of K. Edwards raigne, shee was forced to take Sanctuary at Westminster, wherein her first sonne Prince Edward was borne; and at his death did the like in feare of the Protector, and lastly hauing all her lands and possessions seized vpon by K. Henrie the seauenth, liued in meane estate in the Monastery of Bermondsey in Southwarke, where not long af∣ter shee left the troubles of her life, and inioi∣ed . a quiet portion or burying place by her last husband King Edward at Windsore. (118) Elianor Butler, as we find it recorded vpon the Parliament Role, was contracted vnto King Ed∣ward: but how true considering the occasion, and time of the Act, we leaue for others to iudge, onely this is most certaine that this Lady Elianor was the daughter of Iohn Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury, and the wife of Sir Thomas Butler Knight, sonne and heire to Ralph Butler Baron of Sudley, which Elianor died the thirtieth of Iune, the yeere of Christ Iesus 1466. and the eight of King Edward the fourth his raigne. His Issue. (119) Edward the eldest sonne of K. Edward the fourth by Queene Elizabeth his wife, was borne in the Sanctuary at Westminster the fourth of No∣uember, and yeere of grace 1471. being the tenth of his fathers raigne, at that time expulsed the Realme by the powerfull Earle Warwicke; but fortune chan∣ged, and the father restored; the sonne, the first of Iu∣ly and yeere of Christ was eated Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall and Earle of Chester; and had not the ambitious hand of his vncle beene defiled in his innocent blood, he might haue worne the Diademe manie yeeres, whereas he bare the Title of King not many daies. A. D. 1478. Stow. (120) Richard the second sonne of K. Edward the fourth by Elizabeth his Queen, was borne at Shrews∣bury, and in his infancy was created Duke of Yorke, he was affianced vnto Anne daughter and heire to Iohn Mowbray Duke of Norfolke, by which he was intituled Duke of Norfolke, Earle-Marshall, Warren, and Nottingham, but inioying neither Title, wife, or his owne life long, was with his brother murthered in the Tower of London, and in the prison of that Tower, which vpon that most sinfull deed is euer since called the bloody Tower, their bodies as yet vnknowne where to haue buriall. (121) George the third sonne of K. Edward the fourth, by Queene Elizabeth his wife, was also borne in Shrewsburie, and being a yong Child was created Duke of Bedford, but liued not long after, and lieth buried at Windsore. (122) Elizabeth the first daughter of K. Edward the fourth, by Elizabeth his Queene, was borne at Westminster the eleuenth of Februarie, and fifth of her fathers raigne, being the yere of Saluation 14 6. Shee was promised in marriage to Charles Daulphin of France, woed and Courted by her vncle Crouch∣backe, when he had murdered her brothers, and vsur∣ped the Crowne, but better destiny attending her, shee was reserued to ioine the vnion and marriage with the onely heire of Lancaster, which was Hen∣rie of Richmond, afterward King of England, from whom is branched the roiall stemme that sprea∣deth his beauty in this North-West world, euen Iames our dread Soueraigne, and great Brittaines Mo∣narch. (123) Cicely, the second daughter of K. Edward the fourth by Queene Elizabeth his wife, was sought vn∣to, by Iames the third of that name, to be ioined in marriage with Iames his sonne Prince of Scotland, and Duke of Rothsay, which match was promised vp∣on conditions and choise of K. Edward, who lastly brake off from further proceeding, and the Lady married vnto Iohn Vicount Wels, whom shee out∣liued, and was againe remarried, but by neither husband had any issue, and therefore lesse no∣ted; her body lieth buried at Quarrena in the Isle of Wight. (124) Anne the third daughter of K. Edward the fourth, by Queene Elizabeth his wife, was married vnto Lord Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolke, Earle Marshall, and high Treasurer of England: vnto whom shee bare two sonnes both dying without is∣sue, and her selfe without more fruit of wombe, left her life, and lieth buried at Fra ingham in Nor∣folke. 125) Bridget the fourth daughter of K. Edward the fourth by his wife Queene Elizabeth, was borne at Eltham in Kent, the tenth of Nouember and yeere of Grace 1480. being the twentieth of her fathers Raigne. Shee tooke the habite of Religion, and be∣came a Nun in the Nunnery of Dartford, in the same County, founded by K. Edward the third, where shee spent her life in contemplations vnto the day of her death. (126) Marie the fift daughter of K. Edward the fourth by Queene Elizabeth his wife, was pro∣mised in marriage vnto the King of Denmarke, but died (before it could be solemnized) in the Tower of Greenewich, the Sunday before Pentecost the twenti∣eth two of her fathers raigne, and yeere of Grace 1482. and was buried at Windsore. (127) Margaret the sixth daughter of K. Edward the fourth, by his wife Queene Elizabeth, died an Infant without other mention in our Authors. (128) Katherine the seuenth daughter of King Edward the fourth, by Queene Elizabeth his wife, and the last of them both, was married vnto William Courtney Earle of Deuonshire; and Lord of Ocha pton, vnto whom shee bare Lord Henrie after the death of his father Earle of Deuonshire, who by King Henrie the eight was created Marquesse of Excester in An∣no 1525. His Concubines. (129) Elizabeth Lucie is certainly known to haue been King Edwards Concubine, though nothing so certainly mentioned, whose Ladie, or of what Paren∣tage shee was; that shee was conceiued by him with child is before declared, but who that child was, is as obscurely laid downe; therefore in these things we must be silent, and leaue the doubts to be resolued by others. Three other concubines this king had, where∣of Shores wife was not the least beloued, whose life falleth further to be spoken of in the Raigne of the vsurper Richard, where her storie shall be shewed more at large. His naturall Issue. (150) Arthur, surnamed Plantagenet, the naturall sonne of K. Edward the fourth, (whose mother as is supposed, was the Lady Elizabeth Lucie) was created Viscount Lisle by King Henrie the eight at Bridewell in London, the twentie sixth of Aprill, and yeere of Saluation 1533. which title was conf red vpon him in right of his wife Lady Elizabeth, sister and heire vnto Iohn Gray Viscount Lisle, and the late wife and then widdow of Edmund Dudley: who bare vn∣to this Viscount three daughters, which were Brid∣get, Frances, and Elizabeth, all of them afterward mar∣ried. This Arthur Lord Lisle was made Lieutenant of Callis by the said K. Henry, which Towne some of his seruants intended to haue betraied to the French, for which their fact himselfe was sent to the Tower of London: but his truth appearing after much search, the King sent him a rich ring from his owne finger, with such comfortable wordes, as at the hearing thereof a sudden ioy ouercharged his heart, & was so immoderately receiued, that the same night it made an end of his life, whose body was honorably buried in the same Tower. (151) Elizabeth the naturall daughter of K. Ed∣ward the fourth, was married to Sir Thomas Lumley Knight, the sonne of George, Lord Lumley, who died before his father: shee bare vnto the said Sir Thomas, Richard, afterward Lord Lumley, from whom the late Lord Lumley did descend. EDVVARD THE FIFTH, KING Edward 5. OF ENGLAND AND FRANCE, AND LORD OF IRELAND, THE FIFTIE FIFTH MO∣NARCH Monarch 55 OF THIS LAND, HIS RAIGNE, AND DEATH. For the most part written by Sir Thomas Moore. CHAPTER XVIII. T He father thus dying in the strength of his yeeres, and the sonne left to rule before he was ripe, the Synders of dissensions which the sicke King had lately raked vp, presently brake forth into a more raging flame; for the king and Queenes blood that should haue supported young Edwards estate, the one side being suspicious, and e other prouoked by the execrable desire of soueraignty, left the ten∣der king (a Prince of such towardnes as his age could King Edwards raigne vnfortu∣nate and . conteine) destitute and vnarmed, which if either kind or kindred had holden place, must needes haue beene the surest pillars of his defence. The raigne of this King (if we may so cal the shorttime of his So∣ueraignty) began the same day that his father died, Aprill 19. A. D. 1483. though he was neuer Crowned, nor yet comman∣ded the affaires of the Kingdome as an absolute Monarch, his young brothers fortunes being ballan∣ced Richard Duke of Yorke. with his. (2) For Richard Duke of Gloucester, by nature their vncle, by office their Protector, to their Father Richard Duke of Gloucester an vn∣naturall vncle vnto the young King and his bro∣ther. beholden, to themselues by Oath and Alleagiance bounden, all bands broken that holdeth man and man together, without any respect of God or the World, vnnaturally contriued to bereaue them, not onlie of their dignity, but also theirlines. But forso∣much as the Dukes demeanour reth in effect all the whole matter whereof the raigne of this yong and fift Edward must intreat, it therefore conueni∣ent, somewhat to shew you ere we goe further, what man this was, and from whom he descended that could find in his heart so much mischief to conceiue. (3) Know first then that Richard Duke of Yorke, a noble man and a mighty, beganne not Richard Duke of Yorke was the fa∣ther of Rich∣ard Duke of Glo∣cester. by warre, but by law to challenge the Crowne; putting his claime into the Parliament; where his cause was (either for right or fauour) so farre foorth aduanced that King Henries blood (albeit he had a goodly Prince) was vtterly reiected, the Crowne by the authoritie of that high Court intai∣led to the Duke of Yorke, and his issue male in re∣mainder, immediately after the death of King Hen∣rie. But the Duke not induring so long to tarrie, intending vnder pretext of dissention and debate a∣rising in the Realme, to preuent his time, and to take vpon him the rule in King Henries life, was with many other Nobles slaine at Wakefield, leauing three sonnes, Edward, George, and Richard; all of them as they were great states of birth, so were they great and stately of stomacke, greedy and ambitious of autho∣rity, and impatient of partners. (4) For Edward reuenging his fathers death de∣priued king Henry, and attained the Crowne; The second, George Duke of Clarence, was a goodly Noble Prince, and in all things fortunate, if either his owne ambition had not set him against his brother, or the enuie of his enemies, his brother against him. For were it by the Queen and Lords of her blood which highly maligned the Kings kindred (as women commonly, not of malice but of nature hate them whom their husbands loue) or were it a proud appe∣tite Women com∣monly maligne their husbands . of the Duke himselfe, intending to be King: at least-wise hainous treason was laid to his charge, and finally were he faulty, were he faultlesse, attainted he was by Parliament, and iudged to death, as we haue saide. (5) Richard the third sonne, of whom we now The description of Richard Duke of Glocester. entreat was in wit and courage equall with either of them, in body and prowesse farre vnder them both, little of stature, ill-limmed, and crook-backed, his left shoulder much higher then his right, very hard fa∣uoured of visage, and such as in States is called war∣ly, in other men otherwise: he was malicious, wrathfull, and enuious, yea and from afore his birth euer froward. For it is for truth reported, that the Dutchesse his mother had so much adoe in her tra∣uaile, that shee could not be deliuered of him vncut, and that he came into the world with his feete for∣ward, as men be borne outward, and (as the fame run∣neth) also not vn oothed; Whether men of hatred report aboue the truth, or else that nature changed her Course in his beginning, which in the course of his life many things vnnaturally committed. (6) No euill Captaine was he in the warre, as to which his disposition was more inclined then for Richard Crooke∣backe a good souldier. peace; sundry victories he had, and sometimes ouer-throwes, but neuer in default as for his owne person, either of hardines, or politike order; free was he of his dispence, and somewhat aboue his power libe∣rall: with large gifts he gate him vnstedfast friend∣ship, for which he was forced to pill and pole in other places, which gate him stedfast hatred. He was close and secret, a deepe dissembler, lowly o countenance, arrogant of heart, outwardly familiar, where euen now he hated, and not letting to kisse whom he thought to kill: despi efull and cruell he was, not for euill-will alwaies, but oftner for ambition, and ei∣ther for the surety, or increase of his estate. Friend and foe was much what indifferent; where his ad∣uantage grew, he spared no mans death, whose life withstood his purpose. He slew with his own hands, King Henrie the sixth, being Prisoner in the Tower, as men constantlie said, and that without comman∣dement or knowledge of the King, who vndoubted∣ly if he had intended his death, would haue appoin∣ted that butcherly office to some other then his owne brother. (7) Some wise en also iudge, that his drift co∣uertly He vvas the cause of Clorence his death. conueied, lacked not in helping forth his bro∣ther Clarence to his death; which he resisted openly, howbeit somewhat (as men deemed) more faintly, then he that was hartily minded to his wealth. And they that thus iudge, thinke that long time in K. Ed∣wards life, he forcast to be king, in case that his brother (whose life he looked that euill diet should shorten) should happen to decease (as indeed he did) while his Richard of Glou∣cester intended to be King e en whiles K. Edward liued. children were young. And they deeme that for this intent he was glad of the Duke of Clarence death, whose life must needes haue hindered him so intending, (being his elder brother) whether the same Duke had kept him true to his Nephew the young king, or enterprized to be king himselfe. But of all this point, there is no certainty, and who so di∣uineth vpon coniectures, may aswell shoote too farre, as too short. Howbeit this haue I by credible infor∣mation learned, that the same night, in which king Edward died, one Mistlebroke long ere morning, came in great haste to the house of one Pottier dwel∣ling in Red Crosse street without Creeple-gate in Lon∣don: and when he with hasty rapping, quickly was let in, he shewed vnto Pottier that K. Edward was de∣parted. By my troth man quoth Pottier, then will my Master the Duke of Gloucester be king: what cause The speech of Pottier at King Edwards death. he had so to thinke, hard it is to say, whether being toward him knew any such thing intended, or other∣wise had any inkling thereof, for it was not likely that he spake it of no ground. (8) But now to return to the course of this Histo∣ry; were it that the Duke of Glocester had of old fore∣minded this conclusion, & was now thereunto mo∣ued, & put in hope by the occasion of the tender age of the yong Princes his Nephewes (as oportunity & likelihood of speed, putteth a man in courage of that he neuer intended) certaine it is, that he contriued The vncle con∣triueth the de∣struction of his Nephewes. their destruction, with the vsurpation of the regall dignitie vpon himselfe, and forasmuch as he well wist, and holp to maintaine a long continued grudge and hartburning betweene the Queenes kindred, and the Kings blood, either part enuying others au∣thority; he now thought their diuisions should be (as it was indeed) a forward beginning to the pur∣suite of his intent, and a sure ground for the founda∣tion of all his building, if he might first, vnder the pretext of reuenging old displeasure, abuse the anger and ignorance of the one party, to the destruction of the other and then winne to his purpose as many Richards deepe pollicy. as he could, and those that could not be wonne, might be lost before they were aware; for of one thing was he certaine, that if his intent were percei∣ued he should soone haue made peace between both the parties with his owne blood. (9) King Edward in his life, albeit that this dissen∣tion betweene his friends somewhat greeued him, yet in his good health he somewhat lesse regarded it, because he thought whatsoeuer busines should fall betweene them, himselfe should alwaies be able to rule both the parties. But in his last sicknes, when he perceiued his naturall strength so sore infeebled, King Edwards care to set peace betwixt the Queenes kind∣red and his. that he dispaired all recouerie; then considering the youth of his Children, albeit he nothing lesse mistru∣sted then that that happened, yet well fore-seeing how many harmes might grow by their debate, while the youth of his children should lacke discre∣tion of themselues, and good Counsell of their friends, of which either party should counsell for their owne commodity, and the rather by pleasant aduise to winne themselues fauour, then by profita∣ble aduertisements to doe his children good, hee called some of them before him that were at vari∣ance, and in speciall the Lord Marquesse Dorset, the Queenes sonne by her first husband, and William Lord Hastings a noble-man, then Lord Chamberlaine, against whom th Queene especially grudged, for The Queenes iealousie against the Lord C ∣berlaine. the great fauor the King bare him: and also for that shee thought him secretly familiar with the King in wanton company. Her kindred also bare him sore, aswell for that the King had made him Captaine of Callis, which office the Lord Riuers, brother to the Queene claimed of the Kings former promise, as for diuers other great gifts which he receiued, that they looked for. These were the grudges which the king on his death bed sought to remoue, and they in shew seemed to cancell, as we haue said, though the sparks of these displeasures burst afterward into a dange∣rous flame, which consumed most of them, as after∣ward shall appeare. (10) For assoone as the King was departed this life, his sonne Prince Edward drew towards Lon∣don from Ludlow in Wales, which Countrey being King Edward re∣paireth towards London. farre off from the law, and recourse to iustice, was be∣come to be farre out of Order, and growne wilde Robbers, Rouers walking at liberty vncorrected: for which cause this Prince in the life time of his father was sent thither, to the end that the authori∣ty of his presence should refraine euill disposed per∣sons, from the boldenes of their former outrages. To the gouernance and ordering of this young Prince at his sending thither, was there appointed Sir Anthonie Wooduill Lord Riuers, and brother vnto the Queene, a right honorable man, as valiant of hand as politick The Queenes kindred only a∣bout the Prince. in Counsell; adioined were there vnto him others of the same partie, and in effect euery one as he was nee∣rest of kin vnto the Queene, so was he planted next about the Prince. (11) That drift of the Queene not vnwisely de∣uised, whereby her blood might of youth be rooted in the Princes fauour, the Duke of Gloucester turned vnto their destruction, and vpon that ground set the foundation of all his vnhappy building. For whomsoeuer he perceiued either at variance with them, or bearing himselfe their fauour, he brake vnto them; some by mouth, some by writing and secret messengers, that it was neither reason, nor in any wise to be suffered, that the young King their Master and kinseman, should be in the hands and Custody of his mothers kindred, sequestred in manner from their Company and attendance, of which euery one ought him as faithfull seruice as they, and many of them farre more honorable part of kin then his mo∣thers side: whose blood (quoth he) sauing the Kings The Duke see∣keth to displace the Prince. pleasure was farre vnmeet to bee matched with his, which now to be as who say remoued from the king, and the lesse noble to be left about him, is (quoth hee) neither honorable to his Maiestie nor vnto vs, and also to his Grace no suretie, to haue the mightiest of his friends from him, and vnto vs no little ieopar∣dy, to suffer our well proued euill-willers to grow in ouer great authority with the Prince in youth, who is light of beliefe and soone perswaded. Ye remem∣ber I trow K. Edward himselfe, albeit he was a man of age and discretion, yet was he in many things ru∣led by the bend, more then stood either with his honor, or our profit, or with the commodity of any man else, except only the immoderate aduancement of themselues. Which whether they sorer thirsted after their owne weale, or our woe, it were hard I weene to gesse, and if some folkes friendship had not held better place with the King, then any respect of kindred, they might perhaps easily haue intrapped and brought some of vs to confusion ere this; why not as easily as they haue done some other alreadie, as neere of his roiall blood as we? But our Lord hath The crafty com∣plaints of Ri∣chard Duke of Gloucester. wrought his will, and thankes be to his grace, that pe∣rill is past: howbeit as great is growing, if we suffer this young King in our enemies hand; which with∣out his knowledge might abuse the name of his commandement, to any of our vndoing, which thing God and good prouision forbid. (12) Of which good prouision none of vs hath any thing the lesse neede, for the late made attone∣ment, in which the Kings pleasure had more place then the parties wils: nor none of vs, I beleeue, is so vnwise ouer soone to trust a new friend made of an old foe, or to thinke that an howerly kindnes, sodein∣ly contracted in one houre continued yet scarce a fortnight, should be deeper setled in their stomackes, then a long accustomed malice many yeeres rooted. With these wordes and writings and such other, the Duke of Gloucester soone set afire them that were of themselues apt enough to kindle, especially two, Ed∣ward Duke of Buckingham, and William Lord Ha∣stings The effect that his pollicy took. Chamberlaine, both men of honor and of great power. The one by long succession from his Aun∣cestry: the other by his office, and the Kings fauour. These two not bearing each to other so much loue, as both of them hatred vnto the Queenes part, in this point accorded together, with the Duke of Glou∣cester, that they would vtterly remoue from the The conclusion of his designes. Kings Company all his mothers friends vnder the name of their enemies. (13) Vpon this conclusion the Duke of Glouce∣ster vnderstanding, that the Lords which at that time were about the King, intended to bring him to Lon∣don to his Coronation, accompanied with such pow∣er of their friends, that it should be hard for him to bring his purpose to passe, without the gathering a great assembly of people, and in manner of open warre, whereof the end hee wiste well was doubt∣full, and in which the King being on their side, his part should haue the face and name of a Rebellion; he secretly therefore by diuers meanes, caused the Queene to be perswaded and brought in minde, Another crafty pollicy of Duke Richard. that it neither were need, and also should be ieopar∣dous, the King to come vp strong. (14) For whereas now euery Lord loued other, and no other thing studied vpon, but about the Co∣ronation and honor of the King: if the Lords of her kindred should assemble in the Kings name much people, they should giue the Lords of the contrary faction cause to feare and suspect, least they should gather this people not for the Kings safegard, whom no man impugned, but for their destruction, hauing more regard to their old variance, then their new attonement: for which cause they should assemble on the other party much people againe for their defence, whose power shee wist well stretched farre: and thus should all the Realme fall on an vproare: and of all the hurt that thereof should insue, which was likely not to be a little, & the most harme like to fall where shee least would, all the world would put her and her kindred in the blame, and say that they had vnwisely and vntrulie also broken the amity and peace, which the King her husband so prudently made betwixt his kin and hers on his death bed, and which the other party faithfully obserued. (15) The Queene in this wise perswaded, sent such word vnto her sonne; and vnto her brother be∣ing The Queene yeldeth to the Dukes perswa∣sion. about the King: besides, the Duke of Glocester, him selfe and other Lords the chiefe of his bend, wrote vnto the King so reuerently, and to the Queenes friends there so louingly, that they nothing earthly mistrusting, brought vp the King in great hast, but not in good speed, with a sober company. Now was the King in his way to London, gone from Northampton, when the Dukes of Glocester and Buc∣kingham The Lords meet at Northampton. came thither, where remained behind the Lord Riuers the Kings vncle, intending on the mor∣row to follow the King, and bee with him at Stony-Stratford, twelue miles thence, earely ere he depar∣ted. So was there made that night much friendlie cheare betwixt these two Dukes and the Lord Ri∣uers a great while: but incontinent after that, they were openly with great curtesie departed, and the Lord Riuers lodged, the Dukes secretly with a few of their most priuy friends, set them down in Coun∣cell, wherein they spent a great part of the night: & at their rising in the dawning of the day, they sent out priuily to their seruants in their Innes and lod∣gings about, giuing command to make themselues shortly ready, for their Lords were to horse-ward: vpon which messages, many of their folke were at∣tendant, when many of the L. Riuers seruants were vnready. The Keyes of the Inne kept by Richard Duke of Glaucester. (16) Now had these Dukes taken into their cu∣stodies the keyes of the Inne, that none should passe forth without their licence: and besides this, in the high-way towards Stony-Stratford, where the King lay, they had bestowed certaine of their men, that should send backe againe, and compell to returne any man that were gotten out of Northampton to∣wards Stony-Stratford, till they had further order: forasmuch as the Dukes themselues intended for the shew of their diligence, to bee the first that should that day attend vpon the Kings Highnesse out of that Towne. Thus bare they folke in hand: but when the Lord Riuers vnderstood the gates closed, The L. Riuers much troubled at the sodaine action. the wayes beset, neither his seruants, or himself suf∣fered to goe out, considering well so great a thing without his knowledge, could not bee done. for nought; and comparing this present manner, with his last nights cheare, in so few howres to haue so great a change, marueilously misliked it. How beit sith hee could not get away, nor keepe himselfe close hee would not, lest hee should seeme to hide himselfe for some secret feare of his own fault, wher∣of he saw no such cause in himselfe: hee determi∣ned vpon the surety of his owne conscience, to goe boldly vnto them, and to enquire what this matter might meane; whom as soone as they saw, they be∣ganne to quarrell with, saying, that hee entended to set distance betweene the King and them, and to bring them to confusion, but it should not lie in his power. And when he beganne (as hee was a very The L. Riuers imprisoned in Northampton. well spoken man) in seemely wise to excuse him∣selfe, they carried not the end of his answere, but shortly took him, & put him in ward: and that done, forthwith went to horsebacke, and tooke the way to Stony-Stratford, where they found the King with his Company, ready to leape on horsebacke, and depart forward to leaue that lodging for them, be∣cause it was too strait for both companies. (17) And as soone as they came in his presence, they alighted downe with all their company about them; to whom the Duke of Buckingham said, Go The Dukes come to the King. afore Gentlemen, and Yeomen keepe your rooms. In which goodly array they came to the King, and on their knees in very humble manner saluted his Grace, who receiued them in very ioyous and amia∣ble manner, nothing knowing, nor mistrusting as yet what was done. But euen by and by in his presence, they picked a quarrell to the Lord Gray, the Kings A quarrell pic∣ked in the kings presence. other brother by his mother, saying, that he with the Lord Marquesse his brother, and the Lord Riuers his vncle, had compassed to rule the King and the realm, and to set variance among the States, and to subdue and destroy the noble bloud of the Realme: towards the accomplishing whereof, they said that the Lord Marquesse had entred into the Tower of London, & Accusations a∣gainst the Queens kindred thence taken out the Kings treasure, and had sent men to the sea. All which things these Dukes well knew were done for necessary and good purposes, by the whole Councell at London, sauing that som∣what they must say. (18) Vnto which words the King answered, what The King excu∣seth his vncle. my brother Marquesse had done I cannot say: but in good sooth I dare well answere for mine vncle Ri∣uers, & my brother here, that they are inocent of any such matter: yea my liege, quoth the Duke of Buc∣kingham, they haue kept their dealings in these matters farre from the knowledge of your good Grace. And forth with they arrested the Lord Ri∣chard, Sir Thomas Vaughan, and Sir Richard Hawt Knights in the Kings presence, and brought the king and all his company backe vnto Northampton, where The King is brought backe to Northampton. they tooke againe further counsell. And there they sent away from the King whome it pleased them, and set new seruants about him, such as bet∣ter liked them then him: At which dealing the king wept, and was nothing content; but it booted not: and at dinner, the Duke of Glocester sent a dish from his owne Table to the Lord Riuers, bidding him be of good cheere for all should bee well. But the Lord The Duke of Glocester sends a dish of meat vnto the Lord Riuers. Riuers thanking the Duke, prayed the Messenger to beare it to the Lord Richard, with the same message for his comfort, as one to whom such aduersity was strange, but himselfe had beene all his dayes inured therewith, and therefore could beare it the better: but for all this comfortable courtesie of the Duke of Glocester, he sent the Lord Riuers, and the Lord Richard, with Sir Thomas Vaughan into the North Country, into diuers places to prison, and afterward all to Pomfret, where they were in conclusion be∣headed. The L. Riuers & others beheaded (19) In this wise the Duke of Glocester tooke vp∣on himselfe the Order and Gouernance of the yong King, whom with much honour and humble reue∣rence he conuaied towards London. But anone the tidings of this matter came hastily to the Queene, a little before the midnight following, and that in the sorest wise, that the King her sonne was taken, her brother, her sonne, and other friends arrested, & sent no man wist whither, to bee done with God wot what. With which tidings, the Queen in great fright & heauinesse, bewailed her childes raigne, her friendes mischance, and her owne misfortune, damning the time that euer shee disswaded the ga∣thering of power about the King, got her selfe in all hast possible with her young sonne, and her daugh∣ters, out of the Palace of Westminster, in which shee then lay, into the Sanctuary, lodging her selfe, and Queene Eliza∣beth taketh Sanctuary. company there in the Abbots place. (20) Now came there one likewise, not long af∣ter night from the Lord Chamberlaine, vnto the Archbishoppe of Yorke then Chancellor of England, to his place no re from Westminster; and for that The L. Cham∣berlaine sendeth the newes to the L. Chancel∣lor. hee shewed his seruants, that he had tidings of great importance, that his M. gaue him in charge, not to forbeare his rest, they letted not to awake him; nor hee to admit the Messenger vnto his bed side. Of whom hee heard that these Dukes were gone backe with the Kings Grace from Stony-Stratford vnto Northampton: notwithstanding Sir (quoth he) my Lord sendeth your Lordshippe word, that there is no feare: for hee assureth you that all shall bee well. I assure him (quoth the Archbishoppe) bee it as well as it will, it will neuer bee so well as we haue seene it. And thereupon by and by after the mes∣sengers departure, hee caused in all hast all his ser∣uants to bee called vp, and so with his owne hou∣shold about him, euery man weaponed, hee tooke the Great Seale with him, and came yet before day vnto the Queene. About whom he found much The great hea∣uinesse and confusion of the Queene and her seruants. heauinesse, rumble, hast and businesse, carriage and conueiance of her stuffe into Sanctuary, chests, cof∣fers, packes and fardels, trussed all on mens backs, no man vnoccupied, some lading, some going, some discharging, some comming for more, some breaking down the wals, to bring in the next way, and some drew to them to helpe to carry a wrong way. The Queene her selfe sate alone alow on the rushes, all desolate and dismayed, whom the Archbishop com∣forted The Archbi∣shops comforts to the Queene. in the best manner hee could, shewing her that hee trusted the matter was nothing so sore as shee tooke it for, and that hee was put in good hope and out of feare, by a message sent him from the L. Chamberlaine: Ah woe worth him (quoth the Queene) hee is one of them that laboureth to de∣stroy mee and my bloud. (21) Madam (quoth hee) bee of good cheare; for I assure you, if they crowne any other King then your sonne, whom they haue now with them, we shal on the morrow crown his brother, whom you haue The L. Chancel∣lour giues the great Seale to the Queene. here with you: and here is the great Seale, which in like sort as that noble Prince your husband deli∣uered it vnto me, so here I deliuer it vnto you, to the vse and behoofe of your sonne, and therewith hee betooke her the Great Seale, and departed home againe, euen in the dawning of the day: by which time hee might in his Chamber window see all the Thames full of boates of the Duke of Glocesters ser∣uants, watching that no man should goe to Sanctu∣ary, nor none should passe vnsearched. Then was there great commotion and murmur, aswell in other places about, as especially in the City, the people di∣uersly diuining vpon this dealing. And some Lords, Knights and Gentlemen, eyther for fauour of the Queene, or for feare of themselues, assembled in sun∣dry Companies, and went flocke-meale in harnesse: Great feare con∣ceiued of the ouermuch mur∣muring made. and many also, for that they accounted this demea∣nour attempted, not so specially against the other Lords, as against the King himself in the disturbance of his Coronation. (22) But then, by and by the Lords assembled together, towards which meeting, the Archbi∣shoppe of Yorke fearing that it would bee ascribed (as it was indeed) to his ouermuch lightnesse, that hee so sodainely had yeelded vp the great Seale to the Queene (to whom the custody therof nothing appertained) without speciall commandement of the King, secretly sent for the Seale again, & brought The L. Chancel∣lour sendeth for the great Seale to the Queene. it with him after the accustomed manner. And at this meeting, the Lord Hastings, whose truth toward the King no man doubted, nor needed to doubt, perswaded the Lords to beleeue, that the Duke of Glocester, was sure and fastly faithfull to his Prince, and that the Lord Riuers and Lord Richard, with the other knight, were for matters attempted by them against the Dukes of Glocester and Buckingham put vnder arrest for their surety, not for the Kings Perswasions of the L. Hastings that nothing was extreamly meant ieopardy; and that they were also in safeguard, & there no longer should remaine, then till the mat∣ter were, not by the Dukes onely, but also by all the other Lords of the kings Councell indifferently examined, and by other discretions ordered, either iudged or appeased. But one thing he aduised them beware, that they iudged not the matter too farre forth ere they knew the truth, nor turning their pri∣uate grudges into the common hurt, irking and prouoking men vnto anger; and disturbing the kings Coronation; towards which the Dukes were com∣ming vp, that they might peraduenture bring the matter so farre out of ioynt, that it should neuer bee brought in frame againe. Which strife if it should happen (as it were likely) to come to a field, though both parties were in all things equall, yet should the authority be on that side where the King is him∣selfe. (23) With these perswasions of the Lord Ha∣stings, whereof part himselfe beleeued, of part he wist L. Hastings somewhat dissembleth. the contrary, these commotions were somewhat ap∣peased, but especially by that, that the Dukes of Glo∣cester and Buckingham were so neere, and came so shortly on with the King, in none other manner, with none other voice, or any other semblance then to his Coronation; causing the fame to be blowne a∣bout, that these Lords and Knights which were ta∣ken, had contriued the destruction of the Dukes of Gloucester and Buckingham, and of other the Noble False imputation cast vpon the Lords of the Queenes bloud. blood of the Realme, to the end that themselues would alone demeane and gouerne the King at their pleasure. And for the Colourable proofe thereof, such of the Dukes seruants as rode with the Carts of their stuffe that were taken (amongst which stuffe no maruell though some were harnesse, which at the breaking vp of the houshold, must needs either be brought away, or cast away) they shewed vnto the people all the way as they went; saying, loe here be the barrels of harnesse, that these Traitors haue pri∣uily conueied in their Carriages to destroy the No∣ble Lords withall. This deuise, albeit it made the matter to wisemen more vnlikely, well perceiuing that the intenders of such a purpose, would rather haue had their harnesse on their backes, then to be bound vp in barrels: yet much part of the common people were therewith verie well satisfied, and said it How soone the Commons are brought into fooles Paradise. were almes to hang them. (24) When the King approched neere to the City, Edmund Shan Goldsmith then Maior, with Willi∣am White and Iohn Matthew Sheriffes, and all the o∣ther King Edward met by the Citi∣zens, and accom∣panied by them into London. Aldermen in scarlet, with fiue hundred horse of the Cittizens in violet, receiued him reuerently at Haruesey, and ryding from thence, accompanied him into the City, which he entred the fourth day of May, the first and last yeere of his Raigne. The King was lodged in the Bishops Pallace, where was kept a great Councell, and there was sworne to the king, the Duke of Gloucester, the Duke of Buckingham, and all the Lords. But the Duke of Gloucester, bare him in open sight so reuerentlie to the Prince, with all semblance of fowlines, that from the great obloquie Richard Duke of Glocester made Protector of the King and Realm. in which he was so late before, he was sodeinely falne in so great trust, that at the Councell next as∣sembled, he was made the only man, chose & thought most meet to be Protector of the king and his realm, so that (were it destiny, or were it folly) the lambe was betaken to the wolfe to keepe. At which Coun∣cell also, the Archbishop of Yorke Chancellour of England, which had deliuered vp the great Seale to the Queene, was thereof greatly reproued, and the Seale taken from him, and deliuered to Doctor Rus∣sell Bishop of Lincolne, a wise man, and of much expe∣rience, The great Seale is taken from the Archbishop of Yorke. and vndoubtedly one of the best learned men that England had in his time: diuers Lords & Knights were appointed vnto diuers Roomes, the Lord Chamberlaine, and some others, keeping still their offices they had before. (25) Now although that the Protector, so sore thirsted for the finishing of those designes which he had begun, and thought euery day a yeere till they were atchieued, yet durst he no further attempt, so long as he had but halfe his pray in his hand: well witting, that if he deposed the one brother, all the Realme would fall to the other, if he either remained in Sanctuary, or should be conueied to his further liberty: wherfore, incontinent at the next meeting of The Protectors perswasion to take out of Sanctuary the yong Duke of Yorke. the Lords in Councell, he proposed vnto them, that it was a heinous deed of the Queene, and proceeded of great malice towards the Kings Counsellers, that shee should keepe in Sanctuary the Kings brother from him, whose speciall pleasure and comfort were to haue his brother with him: and that by her done, was to none other intent, but to bring all the Lords in obloquie, and murmur of the people, as though they were not to be trusted with the Kings brother, who by assent of the Nobles of the land, were appointed as the Kings neerest friends, to the tuition of his owne royall person. The prosperity whereof standeth (quoth hee) not all in kee∣ping from enemies or ill viand, but partly also in recreation, and moderate pleasure, which hee in his tender youth cannot take in the company of anci∣ent persons, but in the familiar conuersation of those that be neither farre vnder, nor farre aboue his age, and neuerthelesse of estate conuenient to ac∣company his noble Maiesty; wherefore with whom rather, then with his owne brother? And if any man thinke this consideration (which I thinke no A e ch to fetch out the Duke. man thinketh that loueth the King) let him consider that sometimes without small things, greater cannot stand. And verily, it redoundeth greatly to the dishonour both of the Kings Highnesse, and of vs all that are about his Grace, to haue it runne in e∣uery mans mouth, not in this Realme onely, but also in other lands, (as euill words walke farre) that the Kings brother shall bee faine to keepe Sanctua∣ry; for euery man I deeme, will suppose, that there is occasion giuen, why it should so be: and such e∣uill opinions once fastened in mens hearts, hardly can bee screwed out againe, and may grow to more griefe then any man here can diuine. Wherefore The Protector would haue the Queene sent vnto. I thinke it were not the worst to send vnto the Queene for the redresse of this matter, some honou∣rable trusty man, such as both tendreth the kings weale, and the honour of this Councell, and is also in fauour and credence with her. For all which considerations, none seemeth to mee more meere, then is our reuerend Father here present, my Lord Cardinall, who may in this matter doe most good of any man, if it please him to take the pains, which I doubt not of his goodnesse hee will not refuse, for the Kings sake and ours, and weale of the young Duke himselfe, the Kings most honourable bro∣ther, and after my Soueraigne himselfe, my most deere Nephew, Considering that thereby shall be ceased the slanderous rumor and obloquie now go∣ing, and the hurts auoided that thereof might insue, and much rest and quiet grow to all the Realme. And if she be percase so obstinate, and so precisely set vpon her owne will, that neither his wise and faithfull ad∣uertisement If the Queene refuse to deliuer the Duke what is to be done. cannot moue her; nor any mans reason content her: then shall we by mine aduise, and by the Kings authority, fetch him out of that Prison; & bring him to his noble presence, in whose continuall company he shall be so well cherished, and so hono∣rably intreated, that all the world shall to our honor, and her reproach perceiue, that it was only malice, frowardnes, or folly, that caused her to keepe him there: this is my minde in this matter for this time, except any of your Lordships any thing perceiue to the contrary, for neuer shall I by Gods Grace, so wed my selfe to my owne will, but that I shall be ready to change it vpon your better aduises. (26) When the Protector had said, all the Coun∣cell affirmed that the motion was good and reasona∣ble, All the Counsell allow of the Pro∣tectors speech. and to the King and the Duke his brother ho∣norable, and the thing that should cease great mur∣mur in the Realme, if the mother might be by good meanes induced to deliuer him. Which thing the Archbishop of Yorke, whom they all agreed also to be thereto most conuenient, tooke vpon him to moue her, and therein to doe his vttermost endea∣uour: how beit if shee could by no meanes be entrea∣ted with her good will to deliuer him, then thought he, and such other of the Clergy then present, that it were not in any wise to be attempted, to take him out against her will. For it would bee a thing that should turne to the great grudge of all men, and high displeasure of God, if the priuiledge of that holy place should now be broken, which had so manie yeeres beene kept, which both Kings and Popes so A great offence to breake the Sanctuary. good had granted, so many had confirmed, and which holy ground was more then fiue hundred yeeres agoe, by S. Peter in his owne person, in spirite accompanied with great multitude of Angels, by night so specially hallowed and dedicated to God, (for the proofe whereof, they haue yet in the Abbey, S. Peters Cope to shew) that from that time hi∣therward, S. Peters owne Cope was to be seen in Westmin∣ster. was there neuer so vndeuout a King, that durst violate that sacred place, or so holy a Bishop, that durst presume to consecrate it; and therefore (quoth the Archbishop of Yorke) God forbid that a∣ny man should for any thing earthlie, enterprize to breake the immunity and liberty of that sacred San∣ctuary, that hath beene the safegard of many a good mans life: and I trust (quoth he) with Gods grace we shall not need it. But for what need soeuer, I would not we should doe it; I trust that shee shall be with reason contented, and all things in good manner ob∣tained, but if it happen, that I bring it not so to passe, yet shall I toward it with my best, and you shall all well perceiue, that there shall be of my indeauour no lacke, if the mothers dread, and womanish feare be not the let. (27) Womanish feare, nay womanish frowardnes (quoth the Duke of Buckingham) for I dare take The Duke of Buckinghams speech. it vpon my soule, shee wel knoweth, there is no need of any feare, either for her sonne or for her selfe. For as for her, here is no man that will be at warre with a woman. Would God some of the men of her kin were women too, and then should al be soone in rest: Howbeit, there is none of her kin the lesse loued, for that they be of her kin, but for their owne euill de∣seruing. And nay the lesse, if we loued neither her, nor her kin, yet were there no cause to thinke, that we should hate the Kings noble brother, to whose Grace we our selues be of kin: whose honor, if shee as much desired, as our dishonor, and as much re∣gard tooke to his wealth, as to her owne will, shee would be as loth to suffer him from the King, as any of vs bee. For, if shee haue wit, (as would God shee Queene Eliza∣beth held to haue a shrewd wit. had as good will as shee hath shrewd wit) shee reck∣neth her selfe no wiser, then shee thinketh some that be here, of whose faithfull minde shee nothing doub∣teth, but verily beleeueth and knoweth, that they would be as sorry of his harme, as her selfe, and yet would haue him from her, if shee bide there: and we all (I thinke) content, that both be with her, if shee come thence, and bide in such place; where they may be with their honour. Now then, if shee refuse in Not feare but frowardnes kept the yong Duke in Sanctuary. the deliuerance of him, to follow the Counsell of them, whose wisdome shee knoweth, whose truth shee well trusteth: it is easie to perceiue, that fro∣wardnes letteth her, and not feare. But goe to, sup∣pose that shee feare, (as who may let her to feare her owne shadow) the more shee feareth to deliuer him, the more ought wee to feare to leaue him in her hands. For, if shee cast such fond doubts, that she feare his hurt; then will shee feare, that hee shall bee fetcht thence. For shee will soone thinke, that if men were set (which God forbid) vpon so great a mischiefe, the Sanctuary would little let them: which good men might (as I thinke) without sin, somewhat lesse regard then they doe. Then, if shee A great feare without any great cause. doubt, lest hee might bee fetched from her, is it not likely that shee shall send him somewhere out of the Realm? Verily, I looke for none other. And I doubt not, but shee now as sore mindeth it, as we the let thereof. And if she might happen to bring that to passe (as it were no great masterie, we letting her alone) all the world would say, that wee were a wise sort of Counsellors about a King, that suffer his brother to be cast away vnder our noses. And therefore I assure you faithfully for my mind, I will rather maugre her mind, fetch him away, then leaue him there, till her frowardnes and fond feare con∣uay him away. And yet will I breake no Sanctua∣ry therefore: for verily, sith the priuiledges of that place, and other like haue beene of long continued, I am not he that wil goe about to breake them. And in good faith, if they were now to begin, I would not be he that should be about to make them. Yet will I not say nay, but that it is a deed of pitty, that Buckinghams opinion of the Sanctuaries. such men, as the sea, or their euill debters haue brought in pouerty, should haue some place of li∣berty, to keepe their bodies out of the danger of their cruell Creditors. And also, if the Crowne happen (as it hath done) to come in question, while either part taketh other as Traitors, I like well there be some places of refuge for both. But as for Much abuses suffered in Sanctuaries. theeues, of which these places bee full, and which ne∣uer fall from the craft after they once fall thereunto; it is pitty the Sanctuary should serue them, & much more manquellers, whom God bad to take from the Altar and kill them, if their murther were wilfull. And where it is otherwise, there need wee not the Sanctuaries, that God appointed in the old Law: for if either necessity, his own defence, or misfortune draweth him to that deed, a pardon serueth, which either the law granteth of course, or the King of pit∣ty may. Then look we now how few sanctuary men there be, whom any fauourable necessity compelled to goe thither; and then see on the other side, what a sort there be commonly therein of them, whom wilfull vnthriftinesse hath brought to naught: what rabble of theeues, murderers, and malitious hainous Traitors, and that in two places especially? the one Westminster. S. Martins. at the elbow of the City, the other in the very bow∣els. I dare well auow it, weigh the good that they doe, with the hurt that commeth of them, and yee shall finde it much better to lacke both, then to haue both. And this I say, although they were not abused as they now be, and so long haue been, that I feare mee euer they will bee, while men bee afraide to set the hands to amend the, as though God & S. Peter were the patrons of vngracious liuing. Now vn∣thrifts riot, and runne in debt, vpon the boldnes of these places; yea, and rich men runne thether with poore mens goods, there they build, there they spend, and bid their Creditors goe whistle. Mens wiues runne thither with their husbands plate, and say, they dare not abide with their husbands for beating. Theeues bring thither their stoln goods, and liue thereon rio tously: there they deuise new robberies, nightly they steale out, they rob and riue, kill and come in againe, as though those pla∣ces gaue them not onely a safeguard for the harme they haue done, but a licence also to do more; how∣beit much of this mischiefe, if Wisemen would set their hands to it, might bee amended, with great thankes of God, and no breach of the Priuiledge. The residue, sith so long agoe, I wot neere what Pope, and what Prince more pitteous then poli∣ticke hath granted it, and other men since, of a cer∣taine religious feare, haue not broken it; let vs therefore take paine therewith, and let it a Gods name stand in force, as farre forth as reason will, which is not fully so farre forth, as may serue to let vs of the fetching forth of this Nobleman, to his honour and wealth, out of that place, in which he neither is, nor can bee a Sanctuary man. A Sanctu∣ary The true vse of the Sanctuary. serueth alwayes to defend the body of that man that standeth in danger abroad, not of great hurt onelie, but also of lawfull hurt; for against vn∣lawfull harmes, neuer Pope nor King intended to priuiledge any one place, for that priuiledge hath euery place: knoweth any man any place, wherein it is lawful for one man to do another wrong? that no man vnlawfully take hurt, that liberty, the King, the Law, and very nature forbiddeth in euery place, and maketh to that regard, for euery man; e∣uery place a Sanctuary: but where a man is by lawfull meanes in perill, there needeth hee the tuiti∣on of some speciall priuiledge, which is the onely ground and cause of all Sanctuaries: from which ne∣cessity this noble Prince is farre, whose loue to the King, nature and kindred proueth, whose innocen∣cy The Duke of Yorke vncapable of Sanctuary. to all the world, his tender youth proueth, and so Sanctuary, as for him, neither none he needeth, nor none can hee haue. Men come not to Sanctua∣ry, as they come to Baptisme, to require it by their Godfathers; hee must aske it himselfe, that must haue it; and reason, sith no man hath cause to haue it, but whose conscience of his owne fault maketh him faine need to require it: what will then hath yonder babe? which and if he had discretion to re∣quire it, if neede were, I dare say would now bee right angry with them that keepe him there: and I would thinke without any scruple of conscience, without any breach of Priuiledge, to bee somewhat more homelie with them, that be there Sanctuarie Neither Pope nor King can al∣low Sanctuary men to consume other mens substance. men indeed: for if one goe to Sanctuary with ano∣ther mans goods, why should not the King, leauing his body at liberty, satisfie the party of his goods, euen within the Sanctuarie? for neither King nor Pope can giue any place such a priuiledge, that it shall discharge a man of his debtes, being able to pay. And with that diuers of the Clergy that were present, whether they said it for his pleasure, or as they thought, agreede plainely, that by the law of God, and of the Church, th oods of a Sanctuarie man, should bee deliuere payment of his debts, and stolne goods to the owner, and onely liberty reserued him, to get his liuing with the labour of his hands. Verily (quoth the Duke) I thinke you say very truth; and what if a mans wife would take Sanctuary, because she lift to runne from her husband? I would weene if she could alledge none other cause, hee may lawfully without any displeasure to Saint Peter, take her out of Saint Pe∣ters Church by the arme. And if no body may be A man may take his wife out of Sanctuary with∣out any offence to S. Peter. taken out of nctuary, that saith he will bi e there, then if a child will take Sanctuary, because hee fea∣reth to goe to schoole, his Master must let him a∣lone. And as simple as the sample is, yet i there lesse reason in our case then in that; for therein, though it be a childish feare; yet is there at the least wise some feare, and herein is there one at all. And verily, I haue often heard of Sanctuary , but I neuer he of Sanctuary Children. A therefore, as for the Conclusion of my mind, who so may haue deserued to need it, if they thinke it Buckinghams conclusion. for their suretie, let them keepe it; but he can be no Sanctuary man that had neither wisdome to de∣sire it, nor malice to deserue it, whose life or liber∣tie, can by no lawfull processe stand in ieopardie: and hee that taketh one out of the Sanctuarie to do him good, I say plainely that he breaketh no San∣ctuary. (28) When the Duke had done, the temporall men wholy, & most part of the spirituall also, think∣ing no hurt earthly meant towardes the young babe, condiscended in effect, that if hee were not deliuered, hee should bee fetched; how beit they The generall consent of them all. all thought it best, in the auoiding of all maner of rumor, that the Lord Cardinall should first assay to get him with her good will. And thereupon, all the Councell came vnto the Starre-Chamber at Westminster, and the Lord Cardinall leauing the Protector with the Councell in the Starre-Cham∣ber, departed into the Sanctuary to the Queen with diuers other Lords with him, were it for the respect of his honour, or that shee should by presence of so many, perceiue that this errand was not one mans mind: or were it, for that the Protector intended not in this matter, to trust any one man alone, or else, that if shee finally were determined to keepe him, some of that Company had happily secret in∣structions incontinent, maugre her mind to take him, and to leaue her no respite to conuey him, which shee was likely to mind, after this matter broken to her, if the time would in any wise serue her. (29) When the Queene and those Lords were come together in presence, the Lord Cardinall shewed her, that it was thought vnto the Prote∣ctor, The Cardinall doth his errand to the Queene. and vnto the whole Councell, that her kee∣ping of the Kings brother in that place, was the thing which highly sounded, not onely to the great rumor of the people, and their obloquie, but also to the importable griefe and displeasure of the kings royall Maiesty, to whose Grace it were a singular comfort, to haue his naturall brother in Compa∣ny, as it was both his dishonour, all theirs, and hers also, to suffer him in Sanctuary, as though the one brother stood in danger and perill of the other. And hee shewed her, that the Counsell therefore had sent him to require her the deliuery of the yong Duke, that hee might bee brought vnto the Kings presence at his liberty, out of that place, which they reckoned as a prison, and there hee should bee demeaned, according to his estate: and shee in this doing should both doe great good to the Realme, pleasure to the Councell, and profite to her selfe, succour to her friends that were in distresse, and be∣sides that (which he w well shee specially tendred) not onely great comfort and honour to the King, but also to the young Duke himselfe, whose great wealth it were to be together; aswell for many grea∣ter causes, as also for both their disports and recre∣ations; which thing the Lords esteemed not slight, though it seemed light; well pondering, that their youth without recreation and play, cannot endure, nor any stranger, for the con e of both their a∣ges and estates, so meete in that point for any of them, as eyther of them for other. (30) My Lord (quoth the Queene) I say not , but that it were very conuenient, that this Gentle∣man whom yee require, were in company of the The Queenes answere to the Cardinall. King his Brother; and in good faith; I thinke it were as great commodity to them both, for yet it while to bee in the custody of their mother, the tender age considered of the elder of them both, but speci the younger, which besides his infancy, that also needeth good looking to, hath a while been o fore diseased, ed with , and i so newly ra∣ther a little amended, recouered, that I put no his ng b my ly, ing that there is ( Phy∣sitians say) and as wee also find, double the perill in the recidiuation, that was in the first sicknesse, with which disease, nature being sore laboured, fore∣wearied and weakned, waxeth the lesse able to beare out and sustaine a new surfeit. And albeit there might be found other that would happily do their best vnto him, yet is there none that either know∣eth better how to order him, then I that so long haue kept him, or is more like tenderly to cherish him then his owne mother that bare him. (31) No man denieth good Madam (quoth the Cardinall) but that your Grace were of all others most necessary about your children, and so would all the Councell not onely bee content, but glad that you were, if it might stand with your pleasure, to bee in such place as might stand with their honor: but if you doe appoint your selfe to tarry here, then they thinke it were more conuenient that the Duke of Yorke were with the King, honourably at his liberty, to the comfort of them both, rather then here as a Sanctuary man, to both their disho∣nour and obloquie, sith there is not alwayes so great a necessity to haue the child with his mother, but that occasion may sometimes bee such, that it should bee more expedient to keepe him elsewhere, which well appeareth in this, that at such time as your dearest sonne then Prince, and now King, should for his honor, and good order of the Coun∣try, keepe his residence in Wales, farre out of your Company, your Grace was well contented therwith your selfe. (32) Not very well contented (quoth the Queen) and yet the case is not like, for the one was then in health, and the other is now sicke: in which case I maruaile greatly, that my Lord Protector is so desirous to haue him in his keeping, where if the Child in his sicknesse miscarrie by nature, yet might hee runne into slander and suspition of fraud. And where they call it a thing so sore against my Childes honour, and theirs also, that hee abideth in this place: it is all their honours there to suffer him a∣bide, where no man doubteth hee shall be best kept, and that is here, while I am here, which as yet in∣tend not to come forth, and ieopard my selfe after other of my friends, which would God were rather here in surety with mee, then I there in ieopardy with them. (33) Why Madame (quoth another Lord) know you any thing why they should bee in ieopardy? Nay verily (quoth shee) nor why they should bee in pri∣son, as now they bee. But it is I trow no great mar∣uaile though I feare, left those that haue not letted to put them in durance without colour, will let as little to procure their destruction without cause: The Cardinall made a countenance to the other Lord, that hee should harpe no more vpon that string, and then said hee to the Queen, that he no∣thing doubted, but that those Lords of her honou∣rable kinne, which as yet remained vnder arrest, should vpon the matter examined doe well inough, and as towards her noble person, neither was, nei∣ther could be any ieopardy. (34) Whereby should I trust that (quoth the Queene?) in that I am guiltlesse? as though they were guilty: in that I am with their ene∣mies better loued then they? when they hate them for my sake; in that I am so neere a kin to the King? and how farre they be off, if that would helpe, as God grant it hurt not, and therefore as for me, I purpose not as yet, to depart hence. And as for this gentleman my sonne, I minde that he shall be where I am, till I see further: for I assure you, for that I see some men so greedy, without any substantiall cause to haue him, makes me much more fearefull to deliuer him. Truly Madame (quoth he) the more vnwilling that you be to deliuer him, the more vnwilling other men be to suffer you to keepe him, least your causelesse feare might cause you farther to conuey him: and many there be that thinke he can haue no priuiledge in this place, which neither can haue will to aske it, nor malice to deserue it, and therefore, they reckon no priuiledge broken, though they fetch him out, which if you finally refuse to de∣liuer him, I verily think they will: so much dreadhath my Lord his vncle, for the tender loue he beareth him, lest your grace should hope to send him away. (35) Ah sir (quoth the Queene) hath the Prote∣ctor so tender zeale that he feareth nothing, but least he should escape him? thinketh he that I would send him hence, which is not in plight to send out, and in what place could I account him sure, if he be not sure in the Sanctuary? which there was neuer Ty∣rant yet so diuelish, that durst presume to breake. And I trust God is as strong now to withstand his aduersaries, as euer he was. But my sonne can de∣serue no Sanctuary, and therefore he cannot haue it. Forsooth he hath found out a goodly glosse, by which that place that may defend a thiefe, may not saue an innocēt: but he is in no ieopardy, nor hath no need thereof: would God he had not. Thinketh the Protector, (I pray God hee may proue a Pro∣tector) thinketh hee, that I perceiue not whereun∣to his painted Processe draweth? It is not honora∣ble that the Duke abide here: It were comfortable for them both, that he were with his brother, be∣cause the King lacketh a play fellow forsooth. I pray God send them both better playfellows then him, that maketh so high a matter, vpō so trifling pretext, as though there could none be found to play with the King, but his brother, (that hath no list to play for sicknes) come out of Sanctuary, out of his safe∣gard to play with him. As though Princes, as yong as they be, could not play but with their Peeres, or Children could not play but with their kindred, with whom for the most part they agree much worse then with strangers. But the Childe cannot require the priuiledge, who tolde him so? he shall heare him aske it, if he will. Howbeit, this is a gay matter, suppose hee coulde not aske it, suppose hee woulde not aske it, suppose hee woulde aske to goe out, if I say hee shall not: if I aske the priuiledge but for my selfe, I say he that taketh him out against my will, breaketh the Sanctuarie. Ser∣ueth this liberty for my person onely, or for my goods also? you may not take hence my horse from me: and may you take my child from me? He also is my ward: for as my learned Councell sheweth me, sith he hath nothing by discent holden by Knights seruice, the law maketh his mother his Gardian. Then may no man I suppose, take my ward from me out of Sanctuary, without the breach of Sanctuary. And if my priuiledge could not serue him, nor he aske it for himselfe, yet sith the law committeth to me the custodie of him, I may require it for him, except the law giue a child a Gardian only for his goods and lands, discharging him of the cure and safe-keeping of his body, for which only both lands and goods serue. And if examples be sufficient, to obtaine pri∣uiledge for my child, I need not farre to seeke them, for in this place in which now we be (and which is now in question, whether my child may take bene∣fit of it) mine other sonne now King, was borne, kept in his Cradle, and preserued to a more prosperous fortune, which I pray God long to continue. And as you all know, this is not the first time that I haue ta∣ken Sanctuary. For when my Lord my husband was banished, and thrust out of his Kingdome, I fled hither, being great with Child: and here I bare the Prince: and when my Lord my husband returned safe againe, and had the victory, then went I hence, to welcome him home, and from hence I brought my babe the Prince vnto his father, when hee first tooke him in his armes. And I pray God that my sonnes Pallace may be as great a safegard vnto him now raigning, as this place was sometime to the Kings e∣nemie. In which place I intend to keepe his brother, since mans law serueth the Gardian to keepe the In∣fant. The law of nature wils the mother to keepe her child, Gods law priuiledgeth the Sanctuary, and the Sanctuary my sonne, sith I feare to put him in the Protectors hands, who hath his brother already, and were (if both failed) inheritour to the Crowne: and the cause of my feare, hath no man to doe to exa∣mine. But yet I feare no further then the law feareth, which as learned men tell me, forbiddeth euerie man, the custody of them by whose death hee may inherit lesse land then a Kingdome. I can no more: but whosoeuer he be that breaketh this holy Sanctu∣ary, I pray God shortly send him need of a Sanctuary when hee may not come to it, for taken out of San∣ctuary I would not that my mortall enemy were. (36) The Lord Cardinall perceiuing that the Queene waxed euer the longer the further off, & also that shee beganne to kindle and chafe, and speake more biting words against the Protector, and such as he neuer beleeued, and was also loath to heare, hee said to her for a finall conclusion, that he no lon∣ger would dspute the matter, but if shee were con∣tent to deliuer the Duke to him, and to the other Lords present, he durst lay his body and soule both in pledge, not onely for his surety, but also for his estate; And if she wou'd giue a resolute answere to the contrary, he would forthwith depart therewith∣all, and shift who so would with this businesse af∣terward, for he neuer intended more to moue her in that matter, in which shee thought that hee and all others also saue herselfe, lacked either witte or truth; wit, if they were so dull that they could per∣ceiue nothing what the Protector intended: truth, if they should procure her sonne to be deliuered in∣to his hands, in whom they should perceiue to∣wards the Child any euill intended. (37) The Queene with these wordes stood a good while in a deepe study. And for as much as her seemed the Cardinal ready to depart, and the Prote∣ctor himselfe readie at hand, so as shee verily thought she could not keepe him there, but that he should in∣continent be taken thence, and to conuey him else∣where, neither had shee time to serue her, nor place determined, nor persons appointed, all things vnrea∣dy, this message came on her so suddainly, nothing lesse looked for, then to haue him fetcht out of San∣tuarie, which she thought to be now beset in such places about, that he could not be conueyed out vn∣taken, and partly (as shee thought) it might fortune her feare to be false, so well shee wift it was either needlesse or bootlesse: Wherefore, if shee must needs go frō him, she deemed it best to deliuer him, & besides the Cardinals faith, she nothing doubted, neither some other Lords, whom she saw there pre∣sent, which as she feared lest they might be deceiued, so was she wel assured they would not be corrupted: and thought it would make thē the more warily to looke to him, and the more circumspectly to see to his surety, if with her owne hands shee betooke him to them of trust. And lastly taking the young Duke by the hand said vnto the Lords. (38) My Lords, and all my Lords; I neither am Queene Eliza∣beth yeeldeth to deliuer the yong Duke. so vnwise to mistrust your wits, nor so suspitious to mistrust your truths: of which thing I purpose to make you such a proofe, as if either of both lacked in you, might both turne mee to great sorrow, the Realme to much harme, & you all to great reproch. For loe, here is (quoth she) this Gentleman, whom I doubt not, but I could heere keepe safe if I would, whatsoeuer any man say: and I doubt not also, but there bee some abroad so deadly enemies vnto my blood, that if they wist where any of it lay in their owne bodies, they would let it out. We haue also experience, that the desire of a kingdome knoweth no kindred: the brother hath beene the brothers bane: and may the Nephewes be sure of their Vn∣cle? Each of these children is the others defence, The ambitious desire for a crowne. whilest they are asunder, and each of their liues lieth in the others body: keepe one safe and both be sure, and nothing for them both more perillous then to be in one place. For what wise Merchant aduentu∣reth all his goods in one ship? All this notwithstan∣ding, I deliuer him, and his brother in him, to keep, into your hands, of whom I shall aske both, before God and the world. Faithfull ye be, that wot I well, and I know well you be wise, power and strength to Richard Duke of Yorke deliuered to the Cardinall. keepe him, if yee list, neither lack yee of your selfe, nor lack helpe in this case. And if you cannot else∣where, then may you leaue him heere: but onely one thing, I beseech you, for the trust that his father euer put in you, and for the trust I now put you in, that as farre as you thinke I feare too much, bee you well wary that you feare not too little: and therewithall shee sayd vnto the child, Farewell mine owne sweet son, God send you good keeping: let me kisse you yet once, ere you go; for God knoweth when wee shall kisse together againe. And therwithal she kissed him, and blessed him, turned her back and wept, and went her way, leauing the child weeping as faste. When the Lord Cardinal, and those other Lords with him, had receiued the yong Duke, they brought him in∣to the Star-chamber, where the protector tooke him in his armes, and kissed him with these words: Now welcome my Lord, euen with all my heart: In which say∣ing, A Iud kisse. it is like hee spake as he thought. Thereupon foorth with they brought him vnto the King his bro∣ther, into the Bishops Pallace at Paules; and from thence both of them through the Citie of London honourably attended into the Tower, out of which after that day they neuer came againe. (39) The protector hauing both the children now in his hands, opened himself more boldly, both to certaine other men, & also chiefly to the Duke of Buckingham. Although I know that many thought that this Duke was priuy to all the protectors counsell, euen from the beginning, and some of the protectors friends sayd, that the Duke was the first Buckingham pri∣uie to the Prote∣ctors plo . mouer of the protector to this matter, sending a pri∣uie messenger vnto him streight after King Edwards death. But others againe, which knew better the subtill wit of the protector, deny that he euer ope∣ned his enterprise to the Duke, vntil he had brought to passe the things before rehearsed. But when hee had imprisoned the Queenes kindred, and gotten both her sonnes into his owne hands; then he ope∣ned the rest of his purpose with lesse feare to them whom he thought meet for the matter, and especi∣ally to the Duke, who being wonne to his designes, he held his strength more then halfe increased. The matter was broken vnto the Duke by subtil persons, and such as were their crafts masters in the handling of such wicked deuises▪ who declared vnto him that the young King was offended with him, for his kinsfolkes sakes, and if he were euer able he would reuenge them: who would prick him forward thereunto if they escaped (for they would remem∣ber Suspicion with∣out cause. their imprisonment) or else if they were put to death, without doubt the yong King would be care∣ful for their deaths, whose imprisonments was grie∣uous vnto him. And that with repenting the Duke should nothing auaile, for there was no way left to redeeme his offence by benefits, but he should soo∣ner destroy himselfe then saue the King, who with his brother, and his kinsfolkes he sawe in such places imprisoned, as the protect or might with a beck de∣stroy them all: and without all doubt would doe it indeed, if there were any new enterprise attempted. And that it was likely as the Protector had prouided priuie gard for himself, so had he spials for the Duke and traines to haue caught him, if he should bee a∣gainst him, & that peraduenture from them, whom he least suspected. For the state of things, & the dispo∣sitions of men were then such, that a man could not well tell whom hee might trust, or whom hee might feare. These things and such like, being beaten into the Dukes minde, brought him to that point, that where he had repented the way that hee had entred, yet would he goe forward in the same, and since hee had once begunne, hee would stoutly goe through. And therefore to this wicked enterprise which hee beleeued could not be auoyded, hee bent himselfe, determining, sith the common mischiefe could not be amended, he would turne it as much as he might to his owne commoditie. (40) Then was it agreed, that the Protector should haue the Dukes aide to make him King, and The couenants betwixt the Pro∣tector and the Duke of Buckin∣gham. that the Protectors only lawfull sonne should marry the Dukes daughter; and that the Protector should grant him the quiet possession of the Earldome of Hertford, which he claimed at his inheritance, and could neuer obtaine it in King Edwards time. Besides these requests of the Duke, the Protector of his owne accord, promised him a great quantitie of the Kings treasurie, and of his houshold stuffe. And when they were thus at a point betwixt themselues, they went about to prepare for the Coronation of the yong king as they would haue it seeme. And that they might turne both the eyes & minds of men frō perceiuing of their drifts otherwhere, the Lords were sent for from all parts of the Realme, and came flocking vnto the solemnitie. But the Protector and Duke after they had sent the Lord Cardinall Arch-bishop of Yorke, then L. Chancellor, the Bishop of Two counsels to diuers ends. Ely, the Lords Stanley & Hastings, then Lord Cham∣berlaine, with many other Noblemen, to conferre and deuise about the Coronation in one place, as fast they were in another place contriuing the contrary, to make the Protector king: to which counsel, albeit there were adhibited very few, and they very secret; yet began here and there, some muttering among the people, as though all should not long be wel, though they neither knew what they feared, nor wherefore: were it that before such great things, mens hearts of a secret instinct of nature misgiue them, as the Sea without winde swelleth of himselfe sometime before a tempest; or were it that some one man happily The mistrust of the times. somewhat perceiuing, filled many men with suspiti∣on, though hee shewed fewe men what hee knew. Howbeit somewhat the dealing it selfe made men to muse on the matter, though the counsell were close. For by little and little, all men withdrewe from the Tower, and repaired to Crosbies in Bishops∣gate streete, where the Protector kept his house in great state. So that the Protector had the resort, and the King left in a manner desolate. And whilest some for their businesse made suite to such as were in All flocke to the Protector. office for the King, some were secretly by their friends warned, that it might happely doe them no good, to be too much attendant about the king with∣out the Protectors appointment, who then began to remoue many of the Princes old seruants, and in their stead to place about him new. (41) Thus many things meeting together, partly by purpose, & partly by chance, caused at length not onely the common people that moue with the winde, but wisemen also, and some Lords likewise, to marke and muse at the matter; insomuch, that the Lord Stanley, who was after Earle of Darby, said to Lord Stanleyes speach to the Lord Chamber∣lain. the Lord Hastings, that he much misliked these two seuerall counsels. For while we (quoth he) talke of one matter in the one place, little wot we, whereof they talke in the other place. My Lord (quoth the Lord Hastings) of my life neuer doubt you: for while Catesby. one man is there, which is neuer thence, ne∣uer can things be moued that should sound amisse a∣gainst me, but it shall be in mine eares ere it be well out of their mouths: this ment he by Catesby, which was of his neere counsell, and whom hee very fami∣liarly vsed, and in his most waighty matters put no man in so speciall trust, nor no man so much behol∣den vnto him as Catesby was. A man indeed well learned in the Lawes of this Land, and by speciall fa∣uour of the Lord Chamberlaine, in good authoritie, and bare much rule in Leicestershire, where the Lord Hastings power chiefly lay. But surely great pittie it was, that he had not had either more truth, or lesse wit. For his dissimulation onely kept all that mis∣chiefe Catesby the cause of much mis∣chiefe. vp: in whom if the Lord Hastings had not put so special trust, the Lord Stanley and hee had depar∣ted with diuers other Lords, and had broken all the dance, for many ill signes that he saw, which he now construes all to the best. So surely thought he that there could bee no harme towards him intended, in that counsell where Catesby was. And of truth, the Protector and Duke of Buckingham, made very good semblance vnto the Lord Hastings, whom vndoub∣tedly the Protector loued well, and loth was tohaue lost him, but for feare, least his life should haue quai∣led their purpose; for which cause hee moued Ca∣tesby to proue with some words, cast out a farre off, whether hee could thinke it possible to winne the L. Chamberlaine to their part. But Catesby whether hee assayed him, or assayed him not, reported vnto Catesby set to sound the Lord Hastings. them, as hee found him so fast, and heard him speake so terrible words, that hee durst no further breake. True it is, that the Lord Chamberlaine, of very trust shewed vnto Catesby, the distrust that others began to haue in the matter: & therfore Catesby fearing as Lord Haestinge speeches concer∣ning the plot. he affirmed, least their motion might with the Lord Hastings diminish his credence, whereunto only all the matter leaned; hee counselled and procured the Protector hastily to rid him. And much the rather, Catesby false to his founder. for that he trusted by his death, to obtaine much of the rule that the Lord Hastings bare in his Countrey: the onely desire whereof, was the allectiue that indu∣ced him to be partner, and one speciall contriuer of all this horrible treason. (42) Soone after this, vpon Friday the thir∣teenth The counsel sate in the Tower for the ordering of the yong Kings Coronation. day of Iune, many Lords assembled in the Tower, and there sate in counsel, deuising the hono∣rable solemnitie of the Kings Coronation; of the which the time appointed was so neere, that the Pa∣geants and subtilties were in making day and night at Westminster, and much victuall killed, that after∣ward was cast away. These Lords sitting together communing of this matter, the Protector came in amongst them about nine of the clocke, saluting them courteously, and excusing himselfe, that he had beene from them so long, saying merrily, I haue bin The Protectors dissimulation. a sleeper this day. And after a little talke with them, he said to the Bishop of Ely, My Lord, you haue ve∣rie good Strawburies at your Garden in Holborne, I pray you let vs haue a messe of them: Gladly my Lord, said the Bishop, would God I had some better thing as ready to pleasure you as that: and there∣with in all haste hee sent his seruaunt for a messe of Strawburies. Whereupon the Protector setting the Lords fast in conference, prayed them to spare him for a little while, and departed thence. But soone after, betwixt ten and eleuen, hee returned into the counsell Chamber amongst them, with a wonderfull sowre and angry countenance, knitting the browes, frowning and fretting, and g awing on his lippes, sate him downe in his place, all the Lords much dismayed, sore maruelling of this his suddaine The Protector now another man. change, and what thing should him aile: He sitting thus a while, began thus to speake, What are they worthy to haue, that compasse and imagine the destruction of mee, being so neere of blood vnto the King, and Prote∣ctor of his royall person and his Realme? At which que∣stion, all the Lords sate sore astonied, musing much by whom this question should be meant, of which e∣uery man knew himselfe cleare. (43) Then the Lord Chamberlaine, as hee that Lord Hastings speech to the Protectors que∣stion. for the loue betwixt them, thought he might bee bouldest with him, answered & said, That they were worthy to be punished as haynous traitors whatsoe∣uer they were: and the same all the other Lords af∣firmed. That is (quoth the Protector) yonder sorce∣resse my brothers wife, meaning the Queene, and o∣thers with her: at these words many of the Lords that fauoured her, were greatly abashed: but the L. Hastings was in his minde better content, that it was moued by her, then by any other whom hee loued better: howbeit, his heart somewhat grudged, that he was not afore made of counsell in this matter, as hee was of the taking of her kindred, & of their put∣ting to death, which were by his assent before deui∣sed to bee beheaded at Pomfret the selfe same day, in which hee was not aware, how it was by other deui∣sed, that himselfe should bee beheaded the same day at London. Then said the Protector, yee shall all see in what wise that Sorceresse, and that other witch The Queene ac∣cused of Sorcery▪ of her counsel, Shores wife, with their affinity, haue by their sorcerie and witchcraft wasted my body. And therewith he plucked vppe his doublet sleeue to the elbow vpon his left arme, where he shewed a wearish withered arme, and small, as it was neuer other. (44) And thereupon euery mans mind sore mis∣gaue them, well perceiuing that this matter was but a quarrell. For they well knew, that the Queen was too wise to go about any such folly; & if she would, yet would shee of all others, not make Shores wife of counsell, whom of all women shee most hated, as that Concubine whom the King her husband had most loued. And also no man there present, but knew well enough, that his arme was ouer such since The withered a ne of the Pro∣tector by nature, and not by . his birth. Neuerthelesse the Lord Chamberlaine, (which from the death of King Edward kept Shores wife, on whom hee somewhat doated in the Kings life, sauing a it is said, that hee forbare her for re∣uerence towards the King, or else of a certain kind of fidelity to his friend) answered and said: Cer∣tainely my Lord, if they haue so heinously done, they bee worthy of hainous punishment. What (quoth the Protector) thou seruest mee I ween with ifs and with ands, I tell thee they haue so done, and that I will make good on thy bodie Traitor. And therewith as in a great anger, hee clapped his fist vpon the board a great rap: at which token giuen, one without the Chamber cryed, treason, where∣with a dore clapped, and in came rushing men in harnesse, as many as the Chamber might hold, and anone the Protector said to the Lord Hastings, I ar∣rest thee Traitor: What mee my Lord quoth hee? yea thee Traitor quoth the Protector; and another The L. Cham∣berlain arrested. let flie at the Lord Stanley, who shrunke at the stroke vnder the Table, or else his head had beene cleft to the teeth: for as swiftly as hee shrunke, yet came the bloud about his eares. Then were they all quickly bestowed in diuers Chambers, excepting The L. Staley wounded at Councell Table. onely the Lord Chamberlaine, whom the Protector bad speede and shriue him apace, for by S. Paul said hee, I will not to dinner till I see thy head off. It booted him not to aske why, but heauily tooke a Priest at aduenture, and made a short shrift, for a longer would not be suffered: The Protector made so much haste to dinner, which hee might not goe to, till this was done for sauing of his oath. So was hee brought forth vnto the greene, before the Chap∣pell within the Tower, and his head laid down vp∣on a long logge of timber, and there strucke off, and afterward his body with the head, was enterred at Windsor, beside the body of K. Edward. The L. Cham∣berlaine behea∣ded. (45) A maruailous case it is to heare, either of the warnings that hee should haue voided, or the to∣kens of that hee could not auoid: for the self night before his death, the Lord Stanley sent a trusty secret Messenger vnto him at Midnight in all the hast, re∣quiring him to rise, and ride away with him, for he was vtterly disposed no longer to abide, hee had so The L. Stanleys dreame. fearefull a dreame: in which he thought, that a Bore with his tuskes, so razed them both by the heades, that the bloud ranne about both their shoulders. And forasmuch as the Protector gaue the Bore for his cognizance, this dreame made so fearefull an im∣pression in his heart, that hee was throughly deter∣mined no longer to tarry, but had his horse ready, if the Lord Hastings would goe with him, to ride yet so farre the same night, that they would be out of danger before it was day. Ah good Lord (quoth the Lord Hastings to the Messenger) leaneth my Lord thy Master so much to such trifles, and hath faith in dreames, which either his owne feare fan∣tasieth, or doe rise in the nights rest, by reason of the dayes thoughts? Tell him it is plaine Witch∣craft, to beleeue in such dreames, which if they The L. Hastings answere to the L. Stanleye. me age. were tokens of things to come, why thinketh hee not, that wee might be as likely to make them true, by our going, if we were caught and brought back (as friends faile flyers) for then had the Bore a cause likely to rase vs with his tuskes, as men that fled for some falshood: wherefore, either there is no peril, nor none there is indeed, or if any be, it is rather in going then abiding. And if wee must needs fall in perill; one way or other, yet had I rather, that men should see, it were by other mens falshood, then thinke it our fault or faint-heart. And therefore goe to thy Master man, and commend me to him; and pray him to bee merry and haue no feare; for I assure him, I am as sure of the man that he wotteth of, as I am of mine owne hand. God send Grace Sir (said the Messenger) and went his way. (46) Certaine it is also, that in riding towards Predictions to∣wards the Lord Hastings. the Tower the same morning in which hee was be∣headed, his horse twice or thrice stumbled with him, almost to the falling; which thing, albeit each man knoweth daily hapneth, to them to whom no such mischance is toward, yet hath it beene of an olde fite and custome obserued, as a token often∣times, notably foregoing some great misfortune: Now this that followeth was no warning, but an enuious scorne. The same morning before he was vp, came a Knight vnto him, as it were of curte∣sie, to accompany him to the Counsell; but of truth sent by the Protector, to haste him thither∣wards, with whom he was of secret confederacy in that purpose, a meane man at that time, but now of great authority. This Knight, when it hapned the Lord Chamberlain by the way to stay his horse, and commune a while with a Priest whom hee met in Towerstreet, brake his tale, and said merily to him; what my Lord, I pray you come on, wherto talke you so long with a Priest, you haue no need of a Priest yet, and therewith laughed vpon him, as though hee would say, yee shall haue soone. But so little wist the other what hee meant, and so little mistrusted his present perill, as hee neuer was mer∣rier, nor neuer so full of good hope in his life, which selfe thing is often seene a signe of change; but I shall rather let any thing passe me, then the vaine surety of mans mind so neere his death. Vpon the very Tower-wharfe, so neere the place where his head was strooke off soone after, there met he with one Hastings, a Purseuant of his owne name. And The Lord Ha∣stings speech to a Purseuant. of their meeting in that place, hee was put in re∣membrance of another time, in which it had happe∣ned them before, to meet in the like manner toge∣ther in the same place. At which other time the L. Chamberlaine had been accused vnto King Edward by the Lord Riuers the Queenes brother, in such wise as hee was for the while, (but it lasted not long) farre fallen into the Kings indignation, and stood in great feare of himselfe. And forasmuch as hee now mette this Purseuant in the same place, that ieopardy so well passed, it gaue him great plea∣sure to talke with him thereof; with whom hee had before talked therof in the same place, while he was therein. And therefore he said, ah Hastings, art thou remembred that I met thee once here with a heauy heart? yea my Lord (quoth hee) that remember I well, and thanked bee God, they got no good, nor you no great harme. Thou wouldest say so (quoth he) if thou knew so much as I know, which few know else as yet, and more shall shortly. That ment hee by the Lords of the Queenes kindred, which were taken before, and should that same day bee beheaded at Pomfret: which hee well wist, but was nothing aware, that the axe hung ouer his owne head; In faith man (quoth he) I was neuer so sor∣ry, nor neuer stood in so great dread of my life, as I did when thou and I met here. And loe, how the world is changed, now stand my enemies in the dan∣ger (as thou maist hap to heare more hereafter) and I neuer in mylife so merry, nor neuer in so great sure∣ty. The vaine and suddain state of man. Oh good God, the blindnes of our mortall na∣ture, when he most feared he was in good suretie, when he reckened himselfe surest, he lost his life, and that within two, houres after. Thus ended this honorable man, a good Knight and a gentle, of great authority with his Prince, of liuing somewhat disso∣lute, plaine and open to his enemies, and secret to The description of the Lord Ha∣stings. his friends, easie to be beguiled, as he that of good heart & courage forestudied no perils; a louing man, a passing well beloued: very faithful, and trusty e∣nough, trusting indeed too much. Now flew the fame of this Lords death swiftly through the Citie, and from thence further, like a winde in euery mans eare. (47) But the Protector immediately after din∣ner, intending to set some colour vpon the matter, Citizens sent for into the Tower to the Protector. sent in all hast for many substantiall men, out of the City into the Tower, at whose comming thither, himselfe with the Duke of Buckingham, stood harnes∣sed in olde rusty briganders, such as no more, man should weene, that they would vouchsafe to haue put on their backes, except that some suddain neces sity, had constrained them thereto. And then the Protector shewed them, that the Lord Chamber∣laine, and others of his conspiracy, had contriued to haue suddainly destroied him and the Duke there the same day in Counsell. And what they inten∣ded further, was not yet well knowne. Of which their treason he neuer had knowledge, before ten of the clocke, the same forenoone, which suddain feare droue them to put on for their defence, such har∣nesse as came next to hand: and so had God holpen The fained feare of the Lord Pro∣tector. them, that the mischiefe returned vpon them that would haue done it: and this he required them to report. (48) Euerie man answered him faire, as though no man mistrusted the matter, which oftruth no man beleeued; yet for the further appeasing of the peo∣ples minde, he sent immediately after dinner, in all haste, an Herauld of Armes, with a Proclamation to be made through the City in the Kings name, con∣teining that the Lord Hastings with diuers others of his traiterous purpose, had before conspired the A Proclamation made to publish the Lord Ha∣stings treasons. same day, to haue slaine the Lord Protector, and Duke of Buckingham, sitting in the Councell, and af∣ter to haue taken vpon them, to rule the King and the Realme, at their owne pleasures; thereby to pill and spoile, whom they listed vncontrolled. And much matter there was in that Proclamation, deui∣sed to the slander of the Lord Chamberlaine, as that he was an euill Counseller to the Kings father, en∣tising him to many things, highly redounding to his great dishonour, and to the vniuersall hurt of his Realme, by his euill company, sinister procuring, & vngratious example aswell in many other things, as in the vicious liuing, and inordinate abusion of his body, both with many others, and especially with Shores wife, who was one also of his most secret Counsell, in this hainous treason, with whom hee lay nightly, and namely, the night last past, before his death, so that it was the lesse maruell, if vngraci∣ous liuing brought him to an vnhappy ending, which he was now put vnto, by the most dread com∣mandement of the Kings highnesse, and of his ho∣norable and faithfull Counsell, both for his deme∣rits, being so openly taken in his falsely conceiued treason, as also least the delaying of his execution, might haue encouraged other mischieuous persons partners of his conspiracy, to gather and assemble themselues together in making some great commo∣tion for his deliuerance, whose hope being now by his wel-deserued death politickely repressed, all the Realme should by Gods grace, rest in good quiet and peace. (49) Now was this Proclamation made within The Protectors subtilty further knowne by his Proclamation. two houres, after that he was beheaded, and was so curiously indited, and so faire written in parchment, in so well a set hand, and therewith of it selfe so long a processe, as euery child might perceiue, that it was prepared before. For all the time between his death, and the proclaiming, could scant haue suffised vnto the bare writing alone; had it beene but in paper, and scribled forth in hast at aduenture. So that vpon the proclaiming thereof, one that was Schoole-ma∣ster of Paules; of chance standing by, and comparing the shortnes of the time, with the length of the mat∣ter, said vnto them that stood about him; Here is a gay goodly cast, foule cast away for hast: and a Merchant The Schoole-masters opinion. answered him, that it was written by Prophecie. Now then by and by, as it were for anger, not for couetousnesse, the Protector sent the Sheriffes of London, into the house of Shores wife (for her hus∣band dwelled not with her) and spoiled her of all The Sheriffes of London carrie Shores wife to prison. that shee had, aboue the value of three thousand markes, carrying her through London vnto the Tow∣er, and there left her Prisoner, where (for fashion sake) he laid to her charge, that shee went about to be∣witch him, and that shee was of Counsell with the Lord Chamberlaine to destroy him: in conclusion, when no colour could fasten vpon these matters, then laid hee hainously vnto her charge, the thing that her selfe could not deny, that all the world wist was true, and that neithlesse euery laughed at, to heare it then so suddainly, so highly taken, that shee was nought of her body. And for that cause (as a good continent Prince; cleare and faultlesse himselfe, sent out of heauen into this vitious world for the amendment of mens manners) after shee had laine Prisoner in Ludgate, he caused the Bishop of London to put her to open penance, going before the Crosse in procession vpon a sunday, with a taper Shores wife did pennance. in her hand. In which shee went in countenance and pace demure so womanly, and albeit shee were out of all array saue her kirtle only, yet went shee so faire and louely, namely while the wondering of the people cast a comly rud in her cheekes (of which be∣fore shee had most mist) that her great shame, wan her All commend and pitie Shores vvife. much praise, among those that were more amorous of her body, then curious of her soule. And many good folke also that hated her liuing, and glad to see sinne so corrected, yet pitied the more her penance, then reioiced therein, when they considered that the Protector procured it more of a corrupt intent, then any vertuous affection. (50) This woman was borne in London, wor∣shipfully The description of Iane Shore. friended, honestly brought vp, and very well married, sauing somewhat too soone; her hus∣band an honest Citizen, young, and goodly, and of good substance. But for asmuch as they were cou∣pled ere shee were well ripe, shee not very feruently loued, for whom shee neuer longed; which was hap∣ly the thing that the more made her incline vnto the Kings appetite, when he required her. How∣beit the respect of his roialty, the hope of gay appa∣rell, ease, pleasure, and other wanton wealth, was able soone to pierce a soft tender heart. But when the King had abused her, anone her husband (as he was an honest man, and one that could his good, not pre∣suming to touch a Kings concubine) left her vp to him altogether. When the King died, the Lord Chamberlaine tooke her, which in the Kings daies, albeit he was sore enamoured vpon her, yet he for∣bare her, either for reuerence, or for a certaine friend∣ly faithfulnes: proper shee was, and faire; nothing in her body that you could haue changed, vnlesse you would haue wished her somewhat higher. Thus they say that knew her in her youth. Albeit some that now see her (for as yet shee liueth) deeme her neuer to Shee died the eighteene yeere of King Henry the eight saith Iohn Harding. haue beene well visaged, whose iudgement seemeth to me somewhat like, as though we could gesse the beauty of one long before departed, by her scalpe taken out of the Charnell house: for now shee is olde, leane, withered, and dried vp, nothing left but riueled skinne, and hard bone; and yet being euen such, who so well aduise her visage, might gesse and deuise, which parts how filled, would make it a faire face. Yet delighted not men, so much in her beau∣ty, as in her pleasant behauiour, for a proper wit shee had, and could both reade well and write, merry in company, ready and quicke of answere, neither mute nor full of babble, sometime taunting without dis∣pleasure, and not without disport: in whom King Edward tooke speciall pleasure, whose fauour to say the truth (for sinne it were to belie the Diuel) Shores wife did much good, but no man hurt. she neuer abused to any mans hurt, but to many a mans comfort and reliefe, when the King took dis∣pleasure, shee would mitigate and appease his mind; where men were out of fauour, shee would bring them in his grace, for many that highly offended shee obtained pardon. Of great forfeytures shee gate them remission. And finally, in many weigh∣ty suites shee stood many men in great stead, either for none, or very small rewards, and those rather gay then rich, either for that she was content with the deed it selfe well done, or for that she delighted to bee sued vnto, and to shew what shee was able to do with the King, or for that wanton women and wealthy, bee not alwaies couetous. I doubt not some shall thinke this woman too slight a thing to be written of, and set among the remembrances of The Subiect not vnworthy to bee written. great matters: which they shall specially thinke, that happily shall esteeme her onely by that they now see her. But to my seeming, the chance is so much the more worthy to be remembred, in how much she is now in the more beggerly condition, vnfrien∣ded, and worne out of acquaintance, after good substance, after so great fauour with a Prince, after so great suit, and seeking to, of all those, that in those dayes had businesse to speede, as many other men were in their times, which bee now famous onely by the infamy of their ill deedes: her doings were not much lesse, albeit they bee much lesse remem∣bred, because they were not so euill: for men vse, if they receiue an euill turne, to write it in marble: and who so doth vs a good turne, we write it in the dust; which is not worst proued by her: for at this The state of the world. day shee beggeth of many, at this day liuing, that at this day had begged if shee had not been. (51) Now it was so deuised by the Protector and his Councell, that the selfe same day in which the L. Chamberlaine was beheaded in the Tower of Lon∣don, and about the selfe same howre was then (not without his assent) beheaded at Pomfrait, the fore∣remembred The Lords of the Queenes bloud beheaded at Pomfrait. Lords and Knights, that were taken from the King at Northampton and Stony-Stratford; which thing was done in the presence, and by the or∣der of Sir Richard Ratcliffe Knight, whose seruice the Protector specially vsed in that counsell, and in the execution of such lawlesse enterprises, as a man that had beene long secret with him, hauing experience of the world, and a shrewd witte, short and rude in speech, rough and boisterous of behauiour, bolde in mischiefe, as farre from pitty, as from all feare of God. This Knight bringing them out of prison to the Scaffold, and shewing to the people present, that they were Traitors, not suffering them to speake, or declare their innocency, lest their wordes might haue inclined men to pitty them, and to hate the Protector and his part; caused them hastily without Iudgement, processe or manner of order to bee be∣headed, and without all guilt, but onely that they were good men, too true to the King, and too nigh to the Queene. (52) Now when the Lord Chamberlaine, and those other Lords and Knights were thus beheaded The Protector sought to strike whiles the yron was hote. and ridde out of the way: then thought the Prote∣ctor, that while men mused what the matter meant, while the Lords of the Realme were about him out of their owne strengthes, while no man wist what to thinke, nor whom to trust, before they should haue space to dispute, and digest the matter, and make parties, it were best hastily to pursue his pur∣pose, and put himselfe in possession of the Crown, ere men could haue time to deuise how to resist. But now was all the study, by what meanes the matter being of it selfe so hainous, might be first broken to the people in such wife as it might bee well taken. To this counsell they tooke diuers, such as they thought meet to bee trusted, likely to bee induced to that part, and able to stand them in stead, eyther by power or policy: Among whom they made of counsell Edmond Shaa Knight, then Maior of Lon∣don, The Maior of London made of the Protectors counsell. who vpon trust of his owne aduancement, wher∣of he was of a proud heart, highly desirous, should frame the City to their appetite. Of Spiritual men they tooke such as had wit, and were in authoritie among the people, for opinion of their learning, and had no scrupulous conscience. Among these had they Iohn Shaa Clerke brother to the Maior, and Fryer Pinker Prouinciall of the Augustine Fri∣ers, both of them Doctors in Diuinity, both great Preachers, both of more learning then vertue, and of Shaa and Pinker two flattring Preachers. more fame then learning: for they were before great∣ly esteemed of the common people; but after that neuer. Of these two, the one made a Sermon in prayse of the Protector before the Coronation; the other after, both so full of tedious flattery, as no mans eare could abide them. (53) Pinker in his Sermon so lost his voice, that he was forced to leaue off, and came downe in the Pinker preached at S Marie Hospitall, and Dotor Shaa at Pauls Crosse. middest. Doctor Shaa by his sermon lost his hone∣sty, and soone after his life, for very shame of the world, into which he durst neuer after come abroad. But the Fryer forced for no shame, and so it harmed him the lesse. Howbeit some doubt, and many thinke, that Pinker was not of counsell in the mat∣ter before the Coronation, but after the common manner, fell to flattery after: namely, sith his ser∣mon was not incontinent vpon it, but at S. Ma∣ries Hospitall in the Easter weeke following. But cer∣taine it is, that Doctor Shaa was of counsell in the beginning, so farre forth as they determined that he should first breake the matter in a Sermon at Paules Crosse, in which hee should by the authority of his preaching, incline the people to the Protectors ghostly purpose. But now was all the labour and study, in the deuise of some conuenient pretext; for which the people should bee content to depose The plot and deuice how to entitle the Pro∣tector to the Crowne. the Prince, and accept the Protector for King. In which diuers things they deuised: but the chiefe thing and the weightiest of all, the inuention rested in this, that they should alleadge bastardy, either in K. Edward himself, or in his children, or both. So that hee should seeme disabled to inherite the Crowne, by the Duke of Yorke, and the Prince by him. To lay bastardie in King Edward, sounded openly to the rebuke of the Protectors owne mother, who was mother to them both: for in that point could bee none other colour, but to pretend that his own mo∣ther was an adultresse, which notwithstanding to further the purpose hee letted not: but yet, hee The sonne ma∣keth the mother an adultresse. would that point should bee lesse, and more fauou∣rably handled, not fully plaine and directly, but that the matter should be touched aslope, and craf∣tily, as though men spared in that point to speake all the truth for feare of his displeasure. But the o∣ther point, concerning the bastardie that they de∣uised K Edward and his children made bastards. to surmise in K. Edwards children, that would hee should bee openly declared, and enforced to the vttermost. The colour and pretext whereof, was a contract pretended to bee made by King Ed∣ward vnto the Lady Lucy, whereof we haue spoken in the raigne of the said King: which inuention how simple soeuer, yet it liked them, to whom it suffi∣ced to haue somewhat to say, while they were sure to be compelled to no larger proof then themselues list to make. (54) Now then it was by the Protector and his Councell concluded, that Doctor Shaa should sig∣nifie in his sermon aforesaid, that neither King Ed∣ward himselfe, nor the Duke of Clarence were law∣fully begot, nor were the very Children of the Duke of Yorke, but begot vnlawfully by other persons, by adulterie of the Dutches their mother. And also that dame Elizabeth Lucy was verily the wife of K. Edward, and so the Prince and all his other children begot by the Queene, were all of them bastards. And according to this deuise Doctor Shaa vpon Sunday the nineteenth of Iune at Pauls Crosse in a frequent assembly, took for the theme of his sermō this saying, Spuria vitulamina non agent radices altas: Bastard slips shall neuer take deepe root. Whereupon, when he had The text and contents of Do∣ctor Shaas ser∣mon. shewed the great grace that God giueth, and se∣cretly infundeth in right generation after the lawes of Matrimonie, then declared he, that commonly those children lacked that grace, and for the punish∣ment of their parents, were for the more part vnhap∣py, which were begot in base, but specially in adulte∣ry. Of which though some by the ignorance of the world, and the truth hid from knowledge inherite for the time other mens lands, yet God alwaies so prouideth, that it continueth not in their blood long, but the truth comming to light, the rightfull inheritors be restored, and the bastards slip pulled vp ere it can take any deepe roote. And when he had laid for the proofe and confirmation of this sentence cer∣taine examples taken out of the old testament, and o∣ther ancient histories, then he began to descend into the praise of the Lord Richard, late Duke of Yorke, calling him the father to the Lord Protector, and de∣clared the title of his heires vnto the Crowne, to whom it was after the death of King Henry the sixt, entailed by authority of Parliament. Then shewed he, that the verie right heire of his body lawfully be∣gotten, was only the Lord Protector. For he decla∣red then that King Edward was neuer lawfully mar∣ried vnto the Queene, but was before God, husband vnto Dame Elizabeth Lucy, and so his children ba∣stards. And besides that, neither King Edward him∣selfe, nor the Duke of Clarence, among those that Shaas shamlesse assertions. were secret in the houshould, were reckoned very certainly for the children of the Noble Duke, as those that by their features, resembled other knowne men, more then him from whose vertuous conditions, he said also, that King Edward was farre off. But the Lord Protector he said, the very Noble Prince, the speciall patterne of Knightly prowesse, aswell in all Princely behauiour, as in the lineaments and fauour of his visage, representing the very face of the noble Duke his father: This is he (quoth he) the fathers owne figure, this is his owne countenance, the verie print of his visage, the very vndoubted Image, and plaine expresse likenesse of that noble Duke. (55) Now it was before deuised, that in the spea∣king of these words, the Protector sould haue come in among the people to the sermon ward, to the end that those words meeting with his presence, might haue beene taken among the hearers, as though the holy Ghost had put them in the Preachers mouth, Thē Preachers intention pre∣uented. and should haue moued the people euen then to crie, King Richard, King Richard, that it might haue beene after said, that he was specially chosen by God, and in manner by miracle. But this deuise quai∣led, either by the Protectors negligence, or by the Preachers ouer much diligence, for while the Prote∣ctor found by the way tarrying, lest he should pre∣uent those wordes, and the Doctor fearing least he should come ere his sermon could come to these wordes, hasted his matter thereto, who was come to them and past them, and had entred into other matter ere the Protector came. Whom when hee beheld comming, he suddainly left the matter with which he was in hand, and without anie deduction thereunto, out of all order, and out of all frame, be∣gan to repeate those wordes againe: This is the verie Noble Prince, the speciall paterne of Knightly prow∣esse, which aswell in all Princely behauiour, as in the lineaments and fauour of his visage, representeth the very face of the Noble Duke of Yorke his father: this is the fathers owne figure, this is his owne counte∣nance, the very print of his visage, the sure vndoub∣ted Image, the plaine expresse likenesse of the noble Duke, whose remembrance can neuer die while he liueth. While these wordes were in speaking, the Protector accompanied with the Duke of Buckin∣gham, went through the people, into the place where the Doctors commonly stand in an vpper story, where he stood to heare the sermon. But the people were so farre from crying King Richard, that they stood as if they had beene turned into stones, for wonder of this shamefull sermon. After which once ended, the Preacher got him home, and neuer after durst looke out for shame, but kept himselfe out of Gods heauy punishment vp∣on the false flat∣tering Preacher. sight like an Owle. And when he once asked one, that had beene his old friend, what the people tal∣ked of him, albeit that his own conscience well shew∣ed him that they talked no good, yet when the o∣ther answered him, that there was in euery mans mouth spoken of him much shame, it so strucke him to the heart, that within few daies after, he withered and consumed away. (56) On the tuesday following this sermon, there came into the Guild-hall in London the Duke of Buc∣kingham, The Duke of Buckingham com∣meth to the Guildhall. accompanied with diuers Lords & Knights, more perchance then knew the message which they brought. And there in the East end of the Hall, where the Maior keepeth the hustings, the Maior, and Aldermen being assembled about him, and all the commons of the City gathered before him: af∣ter silence commanded in the Protectors name vp∣on great paine, the Duke stood vp, and (as he was nei∣ther vnlearned, and of nature maruellously well spo∣ken) hee said vnto the people with a cleare and loud voice in this manner. Friends, for the zeale and harty fauour that we beare you, we be come to Buckinghams ora∣tion to the com∣mons of London. breake vnto you, a matter of great weight, and no lesse weighty, then pleasing to God, and profita∣ble to all the Realme: nor to no part of the Realme more profitable then to you the Citizens of this noble City. For why, the thing that we wot well you haue long time lacked, and so longed for, that you would haue giuen great good for, that you would haue gone farre to fetch, that thing we be come hither to bring you, without your labour, The fine glosings of the Duke of Buckingham. paine, cost, aduenture or ieopardie. What thing is that? Certes, the surety of your owne bodies, the quiet of your wiues, and your daughters, the safe∣guard of your goods: of all which things in times past you stood euermore in doubt. For who was there of you all, that could account himselfe Lord of his owne goods, among so many snares and traps as were set therefore, among so much pil∣ling and polling; among so many taxes and talla∣ges, of which there was neuer end, and often times no need: or if any were, it rather grew of riot, and vnreasonable wast, then any necessary or honora∣ble charge: So that there was daily pilling from good men and honest, great substance of goods to be lashed out among vnthrifts, so farre forth that fifteens sufficed not, nor any vsual maner of known taxes: but vnder an easie name of beneuolence and good will, the Commissioners so much of euerie man tooke, as no man could with his good will haue giuen. As though that name of beneuo∣lence, had signified that euery man should pay not King Edwards exactions made more then they were. what himselfe of his owne good will list to grant, but what the King of his good will list to take. Who neuer asked little, but euery thing was haun∣sed aboue the measure, amercements turned in∣to fines, fines into ransomes; small trespas∣ses into misprision; misprision into treason. Whereof I thinke no man looketh that we should remember you of examples by name, as though Burdet were forgotten, who was for a worde in haste spoken, cruely beheaded, by the misconstru∣ing of the Lawes of this Realme for the Princes pleasure: with no lesse honour to Markham then chiefe Iustice, that left his office rather then hee His tyranny to∣wards his sub∣iects exemplifi∣ed by Burdet and Others. would assent to that iudgement, then to the disho∣nesty of those, that eyther for feare or flattery gaue that iudgement. What Cooke your owne worship∣full neighbour, Alderman and Maior of this noble Citie; who is of you either so negligent that hee knoweth not, or so forgetful that hee remembreth not, or so hard hearted that hee pittieth not that worshipfull mans losse? What speake we of losse? His vtter spoile and vndeserued destruction, only for that it happened those to fauour him whom the Prince fauoured not. Wee need not (I sup∣pose) to rehearse of these any mo by name, sith there be (I doubt not) many heere present, that ei∣ther in themselues, or in their nigh friends, haue knowen aswell their goods, as their persons greatly indangered, either by fained quarrels, or small mat∣ters agrieued with heinous names. And also there was no crime so great, of which there could lacke a pretext. For sith the King preuenting the time of his inheritance, attained the Crowne by battel; it sufficed in a rich man for a pretext of treason, to haue beene of kindred or aliance, neer familiaritie, or longer acquaintance, with any of those that were at any time the Kings enemies, which was at one time or other more then halfe the Realme. Thus were your goods neuer in suretie, and yet No safety of goods or life as he falsely alled∣ged. they brought your bodies in ieopardie, beside the common aduenture of open warre, which albeit, that it is euer the will and occasion of much mis∣chiefe, yet it is neuer so mischieuous, as where any people fall at distance among themselues, not in no earthly nation so deadly & so pestilent, as when it happeneth among vs: and among vs neuer so long continued distention, nor so many battels in that season, not so cruell and so deadly fought as was in that Kings dayes that dead is, God forgiue it his soule. In whose time, and by whose occasion, what about the getting of the Garland, keeping it, loosing it, and winning againe, it hath cost more English blood, then hath twice the winning of The rage of ciuil wars cost Englād more blood then twice the win∣ning of France had done. France: In which inward warre among our selues, hath beene so great effusion of the ancient noble blood of this Realme, that scarcely the halfe re∣maineth, to the great infeebling of this noble Land, beside many a good Towne ransacked, and spoiled by them that haue beene going to the held, or comming from thence. And peace long after not much surer then warre. So that no time there was, in which rich men for their money, and great men for their Lands, or som or other for som feare or some displeasure, were not out of perill; for whom trusted he that mistrusted his owne bro∣ther? whom spared he, that killed his own brother? Great dangers alledged and slenderly pro∣ued. or who could perfectly loue him, if his owne bro∣ther could not? what maner of folke hee most fa∣uoured, we shall for his honour spare to speake of; howbeit, this wot you well all, that who so was best, bare alway least rule; and more suite was in those dayes vnto Shores wife, a vile and abhomi∣nable strumpet, then to all the Lords in England; except vnto those that made her their Protector: which simple woman was well named, and ho∣nest, till the King for his wanton lust, and sinnefull affection, bereft her from her hus∣band, a right honest substantiall yong man among you. And in that point, which in good faith I am sorry to speake of, sauing that it is in vaine to keepe in counsell that thing which euery man knoweth; the Kings greedy appetite was insatiable, and eue∣ry where ouer all the Realme intollerable, for no woman there was any where, yong or olde, rich or King Edwards wantonnesse set out to the full. poore, whom hee set his eie vpon, in whom hee li∣ked any thing, either person, or fauour, speech, pace, or countenance; but without all feare of God or any respect of his owne honour, murmur, or grudge of the world, he would importunately pur∣sue his appetite, and haue her, to the great destru∣ction of many a good woman, and great dolour to their husbands and other their friends, which be∣ing honest people of themselues, so much regard the cleannesse of their ho e, the chastitie of their wiues, and their daughters, that they had rather loose all they had besides, then to haue such a vil∣lany done against them. And albeit, that with this and his other importable dealings, the Realme was in euery part annoyed: yet specially, you heere the Citizens of this noble Citie, aswell for that a∣mongst you is most plenty of all such things, as minister matters to such iniuries, as for that you were neerest at hand, seeing that neere heereabout was commonly his most abieing. And yet you bee the people whom he had a singular cause well and kindly to entreat, as any part of the Realme, not onely, for that the Prince by this noble Cittie, as his speciall Chamber, and the speciall well re∣nowned Citie of his Realme, much honourable London the kings especiall Cham∣ber. fame receiueth amongst all other nations: but also for that yee, not without your great cost, and sun∣dry perils and ieopardies in all his warres, bare e∣uen your speciall fauour to his part; which your kind mindes borne vnto the house of Yorke, sith he hath nothing worthily acquitted, there is one of that house, that now by Gods grace, better shall: which thing to shew you is the whole summe and effect of this our present errand. It shall not, I The end of the Dukes errand. not well, need that I rehearse you againe, that yee haue already heard of him that can better tell it, and of whom I am sure you will better beleeue it, and reason is it so to bee. I am not so proud to looke therefore, that you should recken my words The great mode∣sty that the Duke pretendeth. of as great authoritie, as the Preachers of the word of God; namely, a man so learned and so wi e, that no man better wotteth what he should say, and thereto so good and vertuous, as he would not say the thing which hee wist hee should not say in the Pulpit; namely, into the which no honest man commeth to lye: which honourable Preacher, you An author like the subiect. well remember, substantially declared at Paules Crosse, on Sunday last past, the right and title that the most excellent Prince, Richard Duke of Glouce∣ster, now Protector of this Realme, hath vnto the Crowne and Kingdome of the same. For as the Worshipfull Doctor substantially made knowne vnto you, the children of King Edward the fourth were neuer lawfully begotten, forasmuch as the King (leauing his very wife Dame Elizabeth Lucy) was neuer lawfully married vnto the Queen their mother, whose blood, sauing that he set his volup∣tuous pleasure before his honour, was full vnmeet to be matched with his; and the mingling of those bloods together hath bin the effusion of great part of the noble blood of this Realme. Whereby it The marriage o King Edward imputed a great mischiefe. may well seeme, the marriage was not well made, of which there is so much mischiefe growne. For lack of which lawful coupling, as also other things, which the said worshipfull D. rather signified, then fully explaned; and which things shall not be spo∣ken for mee, as the thing wherein euery man for∣beareth to say what hee knoweth, in auoyding dis∣pleasure of my noble Lord Protector; bearing, as nature requireth, a filiall reuerence to the Dut∣chesse his mother: For these causes I say, before remembred, that is, for lacke of other Issue law∣fully comming of that late noble Prince Richard Duke of Yorke, to whose royall blood, the crowne of England and France, is by the high authoritie of The Protector must be the only true heire to his father, and so to the Crowne. Parliament entailed; the right and title of the same, is by the iust course of inheritance, according to the common law of this Land, deuolued and come vnto the most excellent Prince the Lord Prote∣ctor, as to the very lawfully begotten sonne, of the fore-remembred noble Duke of Yorke. Which thing well considered, and the great knightly prowesse pondered, with manifodle vertues, which in his noble person singularly abound, the nobles and commons also of this Realme, and spe∣cially of the North part, not willing any bastard blood to haue the rule of the Land, nor the abusi∣ons before the same vsed, any longer to continue, haue condiscended, and fully determined, to make humble petition to the most puissant Prince the Lord Protector, that it may like his Grace at our humble request, to take vpon him the guiding and gouernance of this Realme, to the wealth and en∣crease of the same, according to his very right and iust title. Which thing I know well hee will be loth to take vpon him, as he whose wisedome well perceiueth, the labour and study both of minde and body, that shall come therewith, to whomsoe∣uer so will occupie the roome, as I dare say he will, if hee take it. Which roome, I warne you well, is no childs office: and that the great wiseman well perceiued, when hee sayd, Vaeregno cuius Rex Scriptures a∣bused. puer est: Woe is that Realme that hath a childe to their King. Wherefore so much the more cause wee haue to thanke God, that this noble Personage, which so righteously is intituled thereunto, is of so sad age, and so great wisedome, ioyned with so great experience: which albeit hee will be loth (as I haue sayd) to take it vpon him, yet shall hee to our petition in that behalfe, the more gratiously incline, if you the Worshipful Citizens of this the chiefe Citie of this Realme, ioyne with vs the Nobles in this our sayd request. Which for your owne weale we doubt not but you will, and naythe∣lesse, I heartily pray you so to doe, whereby yee shall doe great profit to all the Realme beside, in The Dukes pithy perswasions vnto the Citizens. choosing them so good a King, and vnto your selues speciall commoditie, to whom his Maiestie shall euer after beare so much the more tender fa∣uour, in how much he shal perceiue you the more prone and beneuolently minded towards his ele∣ction. Wherein deere friends, what minde you haue, wee require you plainely to shew vs. (57) When the Duke had sayd, & looked that the The Londoners are mute and a∣stonished at Buckinghams Oration. people whō he hoped the Maior had framed before, should after this proposition made, haue cryed, King Richard, King Richard; all was husht and mute, and not a word answered thereunto: wherewith the Duke was maruailously abashed, & taking the Maior neerer to him, with other that were about him priuie to that matter, said vnto him softly, What meaneth this, that the people bee so silent? Sir (quoth the Maior) perchance they perceiue you not well; that shall we mend (quoth hee) if that will helpe. And Buckingham goeth ouer his lesson againe. by and by somewhat lowder, hee rehearsed them the same matter againe, in other order and other words, so well and ornately, so euidently and plaine, with voice, gesture, & countenance so comely, that euery man much maruailed that heard him, and thought they neuer had in their hearing, so euill a tale so well The reward of flattery. told. But were it for wonder or feare, or that each man lookt that other speake first; not a word was there answered of all the people that stood before, but was as still as the midnight, not so much as row∣ning among themselues, by which they might seeme to commune what was best to doe. When the Lord Maior saw this, hee with the other partners of that counsell drew about the Duke, and sayd, That the people had not beene accustomed there to bee spo∣ken vnto, but by the Recorder; who is the mouth of The Recorder commanded to speake to the people the Citie, and happely to him they will answere. With that the Recorder called Fitz-William, a sad man and an honest, who was so newly come into that office, that hee neuer had spoken to the people be∣fore, and loth was with that matter to beginne; not∣withstanding, thereunto commanded by the Maior, he made rehearsal to the cōmons, of that the Duke had twice rehearsed to them himselfe. But the Re∣corder so tempered his tale, that hee shewed euery The great silence of the people. thing as the Dukes words, and no part of his owne. But all this noting, no change made in the people, which stood gazing at the bench as men altogether amased. Whereupon the Duke rowned vnto the Maior, and said, This is maruailous obstinate silence, and therewith hee turned vnto the people againe with these wordes: Deare friends, wee come to moue you to that thing which peraduenture we not The Duke spea∣keth once more. so greatly needed, but that the Lords of this Realme and the Commons of other parts might haue suf∣ficed, sauing that wee beare you such loue, and so much set by your friendship, that wee would not willingly do without you the thing which is for our honour and your wealth, which as it seemeth, either you see not, or wey not; wherefore we require you, giue vs answere, whether ye be minded as all the no∣bles of the Realme bee, to haue this noble Prince now Protector, to be your King or not. (58) At which words the people beganne to whisper among themselues secretly, that the voyce was neithe loud nor distinct, but as it were the sound of a swarme of Bees, till at the last, in the ne∣ther end of the hall, a bushment of the Dukes ser∣uants, and Nashfields, and of others belonging to the Protector, with some prentises and laddes that thrust into the hall among the presse, beganne so∣dainely Prentices and Seruingmen the first proclamets of K. Richard. at mens backes to cry out as loud as their throats would giue, King Richard, King Richard, & threw vp their caps in token of ioy. But they that stood before, cast backe their heades, maruelling thereat, yet nothing they said. And when the Duke and Mayor saw this manner, they wisely turned it to their purpose, and said it was a goodly cry, and a ioyfull, to heare euery man with one voice, no man saying nay: wherefore friends (quoth the Duke) since that wee well perceiue that it is all your whole minds to haue this noble man for your King, where∣of we shall make to his Grace so effectuall report, that we doubt not, but it shall redound vnto your great wealth, and commodity: we require that to morrow you goe with vs, and wee with you vnto his Noble Grace, to make our humble request vnto him in manner before, remembred. And therwith the Lords came downe, and the assembly dissolued for the most part sad, some with glad semblances, and yet not very merry, yea and some that came with the Duke, not able to dissemble their sorrow, The affection of the election seene by the faces of the Assembly. were faine at his backe to turne their face to the wal, while the dolour of their heart burst out of their eyes. (59) On the next morrow, the Mayor with all the Aldermen, and chiefe Commoners of the City The Nobles and Citizens assem∣ble at Baynards Castle. in their best array, assembling themselues together, resorted vnto Baynards Castle in Thames street, where the Protector lay. To which place repayred also according to their appointment, the Duke of Buc∣kingham, with diuers noble men with him, beside many Knights and other Gentlemen. And there∣upon the Duke sent word vnto the Lord Protector, of the being there of a great and honourable com∣pany, to moue a great matter vnto his Grace: wher∣upon The Protector made it strange to speake with such a multitude the Protector made difficultie to come out vn∣to them, but if hee first knew some part of their er∣rand, as though he doubted, and partly distrusted the comming of such a number vnto him so sodain∣ly, without any warning, or knowledge whether they came for good or harme; then the Duke when hee had shewed this vnto the Maior and other, that they might thereby see, how little the Protector looked for this matter; they then sent vnto him by the Messenger such louing message againe, and ther∣with so humbly besought him to vouchsafe, that they might resort to his presence, to propose their intent, which they would not impart to any other person; that at the last hee came out of his cham∣ber, and yet not down vnto them, but stood aboue in a gallery ouer them, where they might see him & speake to him, as though hee would not yet come too neere them, till he vnderstood what they meant. And thereupon the Duke of Buckingham first made humble petition vnto him on the behalfe of them all, that his Grace would pardon them, and licence them to propose vnto his Grace, the intent of their comming without his displeasure, without which Palpable dissem∣bling betwixt the Protector and Buckingham pardon obtained, they durst not be so bold to moue him in their suite. In which albeit they meant as much honour to his Grace, as wealth to all the Realm beside; yet were they not sure how his Grace would take it, whom they would in no wise offend. Then the Protector (as he was very gentle of him∣selfe, and also longed sore to know what they meant) gaue him leaue to propose what him liked, verily trusting for the good mind that he bare them all, none of them would intend any thing to him∣ward, wherewith hee ought to be grieued. (60) When the Duke had this leaue and pardon to speake, then waxed hee bold to shew him their entent and purpose, with all the causes mouing them thereunto, as you haue heard before: and fi∣nally, to beseech his Grace, that it would like him of his accustomed goodnes and zeale vnto the realm now with his, eye of pitty, to behold the long con∣tinued distresse, and decay of the same, and to set his gratious hands to redresse an amendment there∣of, by taking vpon him the Crowne and gouern∣ment The Protector intreated to ac∣cept of the Crowne. of the land; according to his right and title law∣fully descended vnto him, and to the law of God, profit of the Realme, and vnto his grace so much the more honour, and lesse paine, in that, that neuer Prince raigned ouer any people that were so glad to liue vnder his obeisance, as the people of this land vn∣der his. (61) When the Protector had heard the proposi∣tion, he looked very strangely thereat, and answered: That albeit it were, he partly knew the things by them alleaged to be true, yet such intire loue he bare vnto King Edward and his children, that so much more he regarded his honour in other Realmes a∣bout, then the Crowne of any one, of which he was neuer desirous, that he could not finde in his heart in this point to incline to their desire. For in all other Nations where the truth was not well knowne, it would peraduenture be thought, that it was his own ambitious minde and deuise, to depose the Prince, The Protector saith nay and would haue it: and to take himselfe the Crowne, with which infa∣mie he would not haue his honour stained for anie Crowne, in which he had euer perceiued much more labour and paine, then pleasure to him that would so vse it, as he that would not, were not wor∣thy to haue it. Notwithstanding he not only par∣doned them the motion that they made him, but al∣so thanked them for the loue and harty fauour they bare him, praying them for his sake to giue and beare the same to the Prince, vnder whom hee was, and would be content to liue, and with his labour and counsell, as farre as should like the King to vse him, he would doe his vttermost endeuour to set the Realme in good state, which was already in this little time of his Protectorship (the praise be giuen to God) well begun, in that the malice of such as were before, occasion of the contrary, and of new inten∣ded to be, were now partly by good pollicy, partly more by Gods speciall prouidence, then mans proui∣sion repressed. (62) Vpon this answere giuen, the Duke by the Protectors licence, a little rowned, aswell with other noble men about him, as with the Maior and Recor∣der of London. And after that, vpon like pardon de∣sired Buckingham vr∣geth and threat∣neth the refusall. and obtained, he shewed aloude vnto the Pro∣tector for a finall conclusion, that the Realme was at a point, King Edwards line should not any longer raigne ouer them, both for that they had so farre gone, as it was now no surety to retreat, as for that they thought it was for the weale vniuersall to take that way, although they had not yet begun it. Wherefore if it would like his grace to take the Crowne vpon him, they would humbly beseech him thereunto; if he would giue them a resolute an∣swere to the contrary, which they would be loth to heare, then must they needes seeke, and would not faile to finde some other noble man that would. These words much moued the Protector, which else as euery man may know, would neuer of likeli∣hood haue inclined thereunto But when he saw there was none other way, but that either he must take it, or else he, and his both goe from it, he said vnto the Lords and commons. (63) Sith wee well perceiue that all the Realme is so set, whereof we be very sorry, that they will not Th Protor fauourably ac∣cepteth the Crowne. suffer in any wise King Edwards line to gouerne them, whom no earthly man can gouerne against their wils, and well we also perceiue, that no man there is to whom the Crowne can by iust title apper∣taine, as to our selfe, as very right heire lawfully be∣gotten of the body of our most deare father Richard late Duke of Yorke, to which title is now ioined your election, the Nobles and Commons of this Realme, which we of all title possible take for the most effe∣ctuall: we be content, and agree fauourably to in∣cline to your petition and request, and according to the same, we here take vpon vs the roiall estate, pre∣heminence, and kingdome of the two noble realmes, England and France, the one from this day forward, by vs and our heires, to rule, gouerne, and defend; the other by Gods grace, and your good helpe, to get againe and subdue, and establish for euer in due obedience vnto this Realm of England, the aduance∣ment whereof we neuer aske of God longer to liue, then we intend to procure. With this there was a great shout, crying King Richard, King Richard. And then the Lords went vp to the King (for so was he from that time called) and the people departed, talking diuersely of the matter, euery man as his fan∣tasie gaue him. (64) Much was talked, and maruelled at the manner of this dealing, that the matter was made so strange vnto both parties, as though they neuer had communed either with others before, when Diuers opinions of the people. as themselues wist there was no man so dull that heard them, but perceiued well inough, that all the matter was so made betweene them. How be∣it, some excused that againe, and said all must be done in good order: And men must sometimes for man∣ners sake, not be acknown what they know: for at the consecration of a Bishop, euery man wotteth well, by the paying for his bulles, that he purposeth to be one, and though he pay for nothing else, and yet must he twice be asked, whether he will be a Bishop or no, and hee must twice say nay, and at the third time take it, as compelled thereunto by his owne will. And in a Stage-play the people know right well, that he who plaieth the Sowdaine, is percase a sowter, yet if one should know so little good, to shew out of season what acquaintance he hath with him, and call him by his owne name, while he stan∣deth in his maiesty, one of his tormentors might hap to breake his head worthily for marring of the plaie. (65) The raigne of this yong King may well be accounted an interregnum without King, aswell for his minoritie being vnder the rule of a Protector The Raigne and age of King Ed∣ward. himselfe, as for the short time wherein he continued the name of a King; which onlie was two monthes and sixteene daies, and in them also he sate vncrow∣ned without Scepter or ball, all which Richard aimed at, and perfidiously got, before they could come to his head; or into his hands. His age at the death of his father and entrance into his throne was eleuen yeeres fiue monthes and fiue daies, and within three monthes after, was with his brother sin othered to death in the Tower of London, as shall be shewed in his Raigne, of whom we are now by order of succes sion to write. RICHARD THE THIRD, KING Monarch 56 Richard III. OF ENGLAND AND FRANCE, AND LORD OF IRELAND, THE FIFTIE SIXTH MO∣NARCH OF THE ENGLISH, HIS RAIGNE, ACTS, ISSVE AND DEATH. For the most part written by Sir Thomas Moore. CHAPTER XIX. R Ichard, the third sonne of Richard Duke of Yorke, born at Fotheringhay Ca∣stle in the County of Northampton, was first ho∣noured All the Richards and Dukes of Glocester came to vntimely deathes. Richard 1. flaine with an arrow. Richard a mur∣thered at Pom∣frait. Tho. Woodstocke her d to death. Humfrey murde∣red a S. Ed∣mondsbury. Richard▪ slaine at Bosworth held with the title of Glocester, being the third Duke of that number, & consequently by vsurpati∣on crowned King of Eng∣land, the third of that name, a name indeed noted to the Kings so called, to bee euer ominous; and the title of Glocester to those Dukes euer fatall, all of them both, dying violent and vntimely deathes, which ought to haue beene the more fearefull vnto Richard, now hauing possession and interest in them both. But that not regarded, or destiny enforcing, his aspiring mind gaue him no rest, till his restlesse body found it lastly in the graue. For his brother deceased when his life was most desired, no man in shew tooke his death so heauily as himselfe, or ten∣dered Duke Richard subtilely com∣plotteth for the Crowne. the young King with a more honourable re∣spect, when as (God knowes) his mind ranne vpon deepe reaches, how to compasse the wreath for his owne head; which the better to fashion, hee with∣drew a while into the North, and at Yorke in most sad and solemne manner obserued the Funerals of the dead King: but howsoeuer the Maske couered this subtle Dukes face from the eie of the multitude; yet Buckingham well knew the ambitious desire of The Duke of Buckingham the onely raiser of the Protector. his aspiring heart, and indeed was the Dedalus that made him the wings, wherwith he mounted so neere vnto the Sun, as that the wax melting (like the high∣minded young Icarus) he caught his last fall. (2) What intendments they had before the Kings death, is vncertaine, though it may be suspe∣cted: but sure it is; he now gone, the Duke of Buc∣kingham twice sollicited Gloucester by his messengers By Persal, Buc∣kinghams secrete seruant. in the North, met him at Northampton himselfe, ac∣companied him to London, forwarded him in Coun∣sell, and was the first Actor in this following tra∣gedy. For, first making him Protector, procuring his young Nephew forth of Sanctuary, disabling The degrees by which the Prote∣ctor ascended into the throne. the young King, bastardizing them both, perswa∣ding the Citizens, working the Nobility: and all this done, to set the Crowne vpon crookt Richards head, and so moulded their minds vnto the man, as they all became humble petitioners vnto him for to accept of the same, who in the meane while had well conned his owne part, by profuse liberalitie, The Protector fitted himselfe to the peoples affections. by passing great grauity, by singular affability, by ministring of iustice, and by deepe and close deui∣ses, whereby hee wonne to himselfe the hearts of all, but the Lawyers especially, to serue best his turn, which was so affected, that in the name of all the States of the Realme, a Petition was drawne and presented him to accept the wearing of the Crown: the true copy wherof as we find it recorded in the A Petition exhi∣bited to the Protector to ac∣cept of the Crowne. Parliament Rol, we haue inserted, & is as followeth. In Rotulo Parliamenti tenti apud Westm. die Veneris Vi∣cesimo tertio die Ianuarii, An. Regni Regis Richardi 5. primo inter alia continetur vt sequitur. Memorandum quod quaedam billa exhibita fuit coram Domino Rege in Parliamento praedicto in haec verba: Where late heretofore, that is to say, before the con∣secration, coronation, and inthronization of our so∣ueraigne Lord the King, Richard the third, a roll of parchment containing in writing certaine Articles An Act of Parli∣ment passed to establish K. Ri∣chards election. of the Tenor vnderwritten on the behalfe, and in the name of the three Estates of this Realme of England, that is to witte, of the Lords Spirituall & Temporall, and of the Commons by name, and diuers Lords Spirituall and Temporall, and other Nobles and notable persons of the Commons in great multitude was presented and actually deliue∣red vnto our said Soueraigne Lord, the intent and effect expressed at large in the same roll: to the which Roll, and to the considerations, and instant petition comprised in the same, our said Soueraigne Lord for the publike weale and tranquility of this land benignely assented. Now forasmuch as nei∣ther the said three Estates, neither the said persons which in their name presented, and deliuered as it is aforesaid, the said Roll vnto our said Soueraigne Lord the King, were assembled in forme of Parlia∣ment: All doubts taken away of King Richards election by reason whereof diuers doubts, questi∣ons, and ambiguities beene moued, and engen∣dred in the minds of diuers persons, as it is said: Therefore to the perpetuall memory of the truth, and declaration of the same, be it ordained, proui∣ded, and established in this present Parliament, that the Tenor of the said roll, with all the contents of the same, presented as is abouesaid, and deliuered to our foresaid Soueraigne Lord the King, in the name and in the behalfe of the said three Estates out of Parliament, now by the same three Estates assem∣bled in this present Parliament, and by authority of the same bee ratified, enrolled, recorded, ap∣proued, and authorized into remouing the occasions of doubts and ambiguities, and to all other law∣full effects that shall now thereof ensue: So that all things said, affirmed, specified, desired and remem∣bred The petition of the kings electi∣on made lawfull, and authorised by Parliament. in the said rol, & in the tenor of the same vnder∣writtē in the name of the said 3. Estates, to the effect expressed in the same roll be of the like effect, vertue & force, as if al the same things had bin so said, affir∣med, specified, desired & remembred in a full Parlia∣ment, and by authority of the same accepted & ap∣proued. The Tenor of the said Roll of parchment, wherof aboue is made mention, followeth, & is such. To the high and Mighty Prince Richard Duke of Glocester. Please it your noble Grace to vnderstand the consi∣derations, election and petition vnderwritten of vs, the Lords Spirituall & temporalll, and Commons The forme of he exhibi∣ d vnto the Protector. of this Realme of England, and thereunto agreably to giue your assent to the common and publike weale of this land, to the comfort and gladnese of all the people of the same. First, we consider how that heretofore in time passed, this land many yeers stood in great prosperity, honour, and tranquilitie, which was caused, forsomuch as the King then raig∣ning, vsed and followed the aduise and counsell of certaine Lords spirituall and temporall, and other Faire gloses vp∣on soule prete ∣ses. persons of approued sadnesse, prudence, policy, & experience, dreading God, and hauing tender zeale and affection to indifferent ministration of iustice, and to the common and publike weale of the land: Then our Lord God was dread, loued and honou∣red, then within the land was peace and tranquili∣ty, and among neighbours concord and charity, then the malice of outward enemies was mightilie resisted and repressed, and the land honourably defended with many great and glorious victories, then the entercourse of Merchants was largely v∣sed and exercised: by which thinges aboue remem∣bred, the land was greatly enriched, so that aswell the Merchants and Artificers, as other poore people labouring for their liuings in diuers occupations, had competent gaine to the sustentation of them & their housholds, liuing without miserable and intol∣lerable pouerty: but afterward, when that such as had the rule and gouernance of this land; delighting O time how dost thou turne and art turned. in adulation and flattery, and led by sensuality and concupiscence, followed the counsell of persons in∣solent, vicious, and of inordinate auarice, despising the counsell of good, vertuous, & prudent persons, such as aboue bee remembred; The prosperity of this land dayly decreased, so that felicity was turned into misery, and prosperity into aduersity, and the order of policy, and of the law of God and Man con∣founded, whereby it is likely this Realme to fall into extreme misery and desolation (which God de∣fend) without due prouision of couenable remedy bee had in this behalfe, in all goodly hast. (3) Ouer this, among other things more speciall wee consider, how that the time of the raigne of K. Edward the fourth late deceased, after the vngraci∣ous Flattery feares not how to report. pretensed marriage (as all England hath cause so to say) made betwixt the said King Edward, and Elizabeth sometimes wife to Sir Iohn Gray knight, late naming her selfe, and many yeeres heretofore Queene of England, the order of all politicke rule was peruerted, the lawes of God, and of Gods Church, and also the lawes of nature, and of Eng∣land, and also of the laudable customes and liberties of the same, wherein euery English man is inheritor, broken, subuerted and contemned, against all rea∣son and iustice, so that the land was ruled by selfe∣will and pleasure, feare and dread, all manner of e∣quity and law laide apart and despised, whereof ensued many inconueniences and mischiefes, as mur∣thers, How can Prin∣ces rule to shu reproach when they are dead. extortions, and oppressions, namely of poore and impotent people, so that no man sure of his life, land or liuelyhood, ne of his wife, daughter nor seruant, euery good maiden and woman standing in dread to bee rauished and defloured: and besides this, what discords, inward battels, effusion of Christian mens bloud, and namely, by the destru∣ction of the Nobles bloud of this land, was had and committed within the same, it is euident and nota∣rie through all this Realme, vnto the great sorrow and heauinesse of all true Englishmen. And here also wee consider, how that the said pretended mar∣riage betwixt the aboue named King Edward and E∣lizabeth Gray was made of great presumption with∣out the knowing & assent of the Lords of this land, The Queene & her mother falsly standered. and also by sorcery and witchcraft committed by the said Elizabeth and her mother Iaquet Dutchesse of Bedford, as the common opinion of the people, and the publike voice and fame is through all this land: and hereafter if the cause shall require, shall be pro∣ued sufficiently in time and place conuenient. And here also wee consider how that the said pretensed marriage was made priuily and secretly without e∣dition of banes in a priuate Chamber, a prophane place, and not openly in the face of the Church af∣ter the law of Gods Church, but contrary there∣unto, and the laudable custome of the Church of England. And how also that at the time of con∣tract of the same pretended marriage, and before and long time after the said King Edward was and stood married, and troth-plight to one Dame Elienor K. Edward accu∣sed to haste been contracted to the Lady Elienor Butler. Butler daughter of the old Earle of Shrewsbury with whom the same Edward had made a precontract of Matrimonie long time before hee made the saide pretenced marriage with the said Elizabeth Gray, in manner and forme aforesaid: which Premisses be∣ing true, as in very truth they beene true: it appea∣reth, and followeth euidently, that the said King Edward during his life, and the said Elizabeth liued together sinfully and damnably in adultery against the law of God and of his Church: And therefore The tongue of slander is a sharp arrow. no maruell that the Soueraigne Lord, and the head of this land being of such vngodly disposition, and prouoking the ire and indignation of our Lord God; such hainous mischiefe and inconueniences as are a∣boue remembred, were vsed and committed in the Realme among the Subiects. Also it appeareth They haue taught their to gs to speake lies, Ier. 9. 5. euidently and followeth, that all the Issue and chil∣dren of the id King Edward, beene bastard and vnable to inherite, or to claime any thing by inhe∣ritance, by the law and custome of England. (4) Moreouer, we consider how that afterwards by the three Estates of this Realm assembled in Par∣liament, holden at Westminster the 17. yeere of the raigne of the said King Edward the fourth, hee then being in possession of the Crowne and royall estate, by Act made in the same Parliament, George Duke of Clarence brother to the said King Edward now George Duke of Clarence and his heires made vn∣capable of the crowne. deceased, was conuicted and attainted of high trea∣son, as in the same Act is contained more at large, by cause and reason whereof, all the Issue of the saide George, was and is disabled and barred of all right and claime that in any case they might haue or challenge by inheritance to the Crowne and dig∣nity royall of this Realme, by the ancient law and custome of this same Realme. Ouer this wee consider that ye be the vndoubted sonne and heire of Richard late Duke of Yorke, very inheritor of the sayd Crowne and dignitie royall; and as in right King of England by way of inheri∣tance: and that at this time the premisses duely con∣sidered there is none other person liuing, but ye only that by right may claime the said Crowne and dig∣nitie As bad his claim as his per on de∣formed, but both made good by flatterers in Par∣liament. royall by way of inheritance, and how that yee be borne within this land; by reason whereof, as we deeme in our mindes, yee be more naturally encli∣ned to the prosperitie and common weale of the same: and all the three estates of the Land haue and may haue more certaine knowledge of your birth and filiation aforesaid. We consider also the great wit, prudence, iustice, princely courage, and the me∣morable and laudable acts in diuers battels, which as wee by experience know you heretofore haue done, for the saluation and defence of this same Realme; and also the great noblenesse & excellencie of your birth and bloud, as of him that is descended of the three most royall houses in Christendome: that is to say, England, France and Spaine. Wherefore these Great pitie that so faire stemmes, should being forth so bad a branch. premisses by vs diligently considered, we desiring ef∣fectually the peace, traquilitie and weale-publique of this Land, and the reduction of the same to the an∣cient honourable estate and prosperitie, and hauing in your great prudence, iustice, princely courage, and excellent vertue, singular confidence, haue cho∣sen in all that in vt is, and by this our writing choose you High and Mightie Prince our King and Soue∣raigne Lord, &c. To whom we know for certaine it appertaineth of enheritance so to bee chosen. And hereupon wee humbly desire, pray, and require your most noble Grace, that according to this electiō of vs the three estates of this Land, as by your true inhe∣ritance, you will accept and take vpon you the sayd Crowne and royall dignitie, with all things there∣unto annexed and appertaining, as to you of right belonging aswell by inheritance as by lawfull ele∣ction: and in case yee so doe, we promise to serue and assist your Highnesse, as true and faithfull sub∣iects, and liege men; and to liue and die with you All promises were not kept, as afterward it pro∣ued. in this matter, and in euery other iust quarrel. For certainlie, we be determined rather to aduenture & commit vs to the perill of our liues, and ieopardie of death, then to liue in such thraldom and bondage as wee haue liued long time heretofore oppressed and iniured by extortions and newe impositions a∣gainst the Law of God and man, and the libertie, old policie and Lawes of this Realme, wherein euery Englishman is inherited. Our LORD GOD, The Lord our God is a consu∣ming fire, Deut. 4. 24. KING of all KINGS, by whose infinite goodnesse and eternall prouidence all things beene principally gouerned in this world; lighten your soule, and grant you grace to doe as well in this matter as in all other, that may bee according to his will and plea∣sure, and to the common and publike weale of this Land: so that after great clouds, trouble, stormes, and tempests, the Sun of Iustice and of Grace may shine vpon vs, to the comfort and gladnesse of all true-hearted Englishmen. Albeit, that the right, title, & estate, which our Soueraigne Lord the King, Richard the third hath to, and in the Crowne, and roiall dignitie of this Realme of England; with all things thereunto within the same Realme, and with∣out it vnited, annexed & appertaining, bin iust and lawfull as grounded vpon the lawes of God and of nature: and also vpon the ancient lawes and lauda∣ble customes of this said Realme; and so taken and reputed by all such persons as beene learned in the abouesaid lawes and customes: Yet neuerthelesse, for asmuch as it is considered, that the most part of A charitable minde in shew, but in truth a crafty intent. the people is not sufficiently learned in the abouesaid Lawes and customs, wherby the truth & right in this behalfe of likelyhood may be hid and not cleerely knowne to all the people, & thereupon put in doubt and question. And ouer this, how that the Court of Parliament is of such authoritie, and the people of this Land of such a nature and disposition, as ex∣perience teacheth that manifestation and declaration of any truth or right made by the three estates of this Realme assembled in Parliament, and by the authority of the same maketh before all other things The effect of our English Parliaments. most feith and certaine, and quieting of mens minds, remoueth the occasion of all doubts, and seditious language. Therefore at the request, and by the as∣sent of the three estates of this Realme; that is to say, the Lords spirituall and temporall, and Com∣mons of this Land assembled in this present Par∣liament, by authority of the same be it pronounced, decreed, and declared, that our said Soueraign Lord the King was, and is the very vndoubted King of this Realme of England, with all things thereunto with∣in the same Realm, and without it vnited, annexed, and appertaining aswell by right of Consanguinity, and inheritance, as by lawfull election, consecrati∣on, and coronation. And ouer this, that at the re∣quest, and by the assent and authority abouesaide, be it ordained, enacted and established, that the said Crowne and royall dignity of this Realme, and the inheritance of the same, and all other things there∣unto within the Realme or without, is vnited, an∣nexed, The Crowne entailed to king Richard and his heires. and now appertaining, rest and abide in the person of our said Soueraigne Lord the King during his life, and after his decease, in his heires of his bo∣dy begotten; and in especiall at the request, and by assent and authority abouesaid, bee it ordained, e∣nacted, established, pronounced, decreed, and decla∣red, that the high and excellent Prince Edward, son of our said Soueraigne Lord the King, bee heire ap∣parant Prince Edward made heire ap∣parant by Par∣liament. of the same our Soueraigne Lord the King to succeed to him in the abouesaid Crowne and royall dignity, with all things as is aforesaid thereunto vnited, annexed, and appertaining, to haue them after the decease of our said Soueraigne Lord the King, to him, and to his heires of his body lawfully begotten. Quae quidem Billa Communibus Regni Angl. in dicto Parliamento existent. transportata fuit. Cui qui∣dem billae ijdem Communes assensum suum praebuerunt sub hijs verbis. A Ceste bille les Communes sont assen∣tus. Quibus quidem billa, & assensis coram Domino Rege in Parliamento praedicto lectis, auditis, & plenius intellectis, de assensu Dominorum spiritualium, & tem∣poral▪ min dicto Parliamento similiter existent ac Cōmu∣nitatis praedictae, nec non authoritate einsdem Parliamen∣ti pronunciatum, decretum, & declaratum existit, om∣nia & singula in billa praedicta contenta forever a & in∣dubia. Ac idem Dominus Rex de assensu dictorum trium Statuum Regni, & authoritate praedicta, omnia & singula praemissa in billa praedicta, contenta concedit, ac ea pro vero & indubio pronunciat, decernit & declarat. (5) These things I haue laid forth more at large out of the Parliament Roll, that ye may vnderstand What cannot the Parliament ef∣fect, where all giue way to the sway of time. both what and how great matters, the power of a Prince, the outward shew of vertue, the wily fetch∣es of Lawyers, fawning hope, pensiue feare, desire of change, and goodly pretences are able to effect, in that most wise assembly of all the States of a Kingdome, euen against all law and right, so that the saying of Salomon in this State seemed most true that a liuing dogge is better then a dead Lyon. But this Eccles. 9. 4. Richard is not to be accounted worthy to haue been a Soueraigne, had he not beene a Soueraign as Galba was reputed; who, when he was a Soueraigne, de∣ceiued King Richard like vnto Galba, a had Subiect, but a good Prince. all mens expectation; but most worthy in∣deede of Soueraignty, had hee not beene transpor∣ted with ambition (which blasted all his good parts) by lewde practises, and by mischieuous means, made foule way thereunto: for that by the common con∣sent of all that are wise, he was reckoned in the ranke of bad men, but of good Princes; as indeed King Richard through his short time of raigne is accoun∣ted to haue beene. (6) The Crown and Scepter accepted as is said, King Richard vpon the twentie fifth of Iune, went in great pompe vnto Westminster hall, and there in the King Richard accepteth the Crowne and beginneth his raigne with great applause. Kings Bench Court tooke his Seat, saying, that he would take vpon him the Crowne in that place, where the King himselfe ought to sit, whose chiefest duety was to administer Iustice to his people, and with a pleasing Oration so tickled the eares of his Auditors, that hee lulled the rurall to thinke that his like had neuer raigned in England; and to be∣ginne himselfe with a pretenced clemency, he pro∣nounced pardon of all offences committed against him; for confirmation whereof, hee sent for one The new Kings clemency and affability. Fogge whom he deadly hated, who for feare of him had lately taken Sanctuary at Westminster, and there in sight of the people with semblance accordingly, tooke him by the hand saying, that hee would bee thence forth his assured in affection; whereat the Commons greatly reioyced, and with applauses extolled, though others wiser among them tooke it to bee but fained to serue his owne turne. And K. Richards dea∣lings double construed. in his way homeward, whomsoeuer hee met, hee saluted: for a mind that knoweth it selfe to bee guiltie, is in a manner deiected to a seruile flat∣tery. (7) King Richard whose guilty heart was full of suspition, had sent for fiue thousand Souldiers The Northerne sent for to the Kings Corona∣tion. out of the North to bee present in London at his Coronation; these vnder the leading of Robin of Ridsdale, came vp both euill apparrelled, and worse harnessed, in rusty Armour, neither defencible for Iohn Harding, Cont er. proofe, nor scowred for shew: who mustering in Finesburie Fields, were with disdaine gazed vpon by the beholders. But all things now ready for his Coronation (and much the sooner in that young Edwards prouision was conferred vpon his) vpon the fourth of Iuly, he with his wife by water came to the Tower, where he created Estates, ordained A. D. 1485. States by K Richard. the Knights of the Bathe, set at liberty the Archbi∣shoppe of Yorke, and the Lord Stanley, more for feare then for loue; whose sonne the Lord Strange was then said to be gathering of men in Lancashire, where those Lords haue great command. (8) But Morton Bishop of Ely a firme man vn∣to King Edward, and vnpossible to bee drawn vnto the disinheriting of his children, as was well percei∣ued by the Protector, among others, at the Coun∣cell held in the Tower, was left there prisoner, and accused of many great, but vnlikely treasons. This man borne in Dorsetshire, and brought vp in the V∣niuersity At Beere or Berry of Oxford, was from a Doctor of the Arches made a priuy Councellour vnto King Henry, and after his death allured by King Edward to serue him, was sworne likewise of his Councell, and made one of the Executors of his will: whose insight into the intended designes, the Protector much feared, and therefore hauing him fast, minded so to keepe him, when hee released others laide in the Tower for the like feare. But the reuerence of the man, or vndeser∣uednesse of his wrongs, moued so the affection of the Oxford Academians, that they directed to the King (who professed much loue to that Vniuersitie) a petitory latine Epistle, no lesse eloquent & pithy, Ex Regist. Oxon. MS. then circumspect and wary, wherein they thus plea∣ded for his liberty. (9) Though many important motiues wee haue most Christian King, earnestly to recommend A letter written for the Vniuer∣sity o O ra in the behalfe of D. Morton. to your princely clemency, the Reuerend Father in Christ, the Lord Bishoppe of Ely, as being not onely one of the most eminent Sonnes of our V∣niuersity, but also a singular Patrone and indul∣gent Father to vs all; yet could not these induce∣ments (howsoeuer very ponderous with all grate∣full mindes) perswade vs to become intercessors for his pardon, but euer with due regard both to your owne honour and safety; the greatnesse of your princely fauours hauing more obliged vs, then of any your royall Predecessors: whiles ther∣fore wee stood in some doubt, how hee stood affe∣cted towards your Highnesse, wee held it an high offence, if by tendring his safety, wee should any way hazard yours: but now vnderstanding, that his offence proceeded, not of pertinacy, but hu∣mane frailety; and that hee hath alwayes humbly sued for pardon thereof, the bowels of our mo∣ther Vniuersity, like Rachel weeping ouer her Children were moued with compassion ouer the deplored distresse of this her dearest sonne; where∣in yet (as wee hope) her affection deserues no iust reprehension. For if a pious affection be prayse∣worthie, euen in an enemy, much more is it in this our Academy, full of due obseruance towardes your Maiesty, and professing the study of all ver∣tues. These things so being, wee thought fitte, (without longer delayes) to flie vnto your cle∣mency, as humble Suppliants, that your High∣nes already hauing in part inflicted (thogh mildly) som chasticemēt on his fault would turn your roi∣al aspect towards him, & impart to him the boun∣ty of your gracious clemency; wherein, you shal not onely perform an act most acceptable to him, to vs, and the whole Church, but very honoura∣ble & aduantagious also (as we hope) to your own person. For, vpon notice of the readmittance of so great a Prelate into your grace, who is there, that will not extoll with prayses vnto the skies your so great, and euen diuine clemency? Thus gloried the Romans, to haue it marshalled amongst their prayses, that Virgil. Pa e Subiect , &c. Salust. Submissiue wights they spared, but crusht the proud; and this also they challenged as their peculiar honour, that they were readier to remit, then to reuenge wrongs. Now if you will aspire to this high honour, (as easily you may, by being gracious to this man) you shall surmount the Romanes themselues by so glorious a deed. As for the great benefite which may hereby accrue to your highnes, albeit (as we suppose) we can suffici∣ently conceiue thereof, especially if wee call to minde his singular vertues; yet had we rather leaue that point wholly to your secret considerations, then pursue it with a discourse tedious to you, and enuie-breeding to him: least happily by insisting in his praises, it may be thought, that we seeke ra∣ther by violence to extort, then by submissiuenes to beg his pardon, and or else to relie more on the greatnesse of his vertues, then of your Clemency, or lastly to appeale rather to your Iustice, then to your mercy. Wherefore (most puissant Prince) thus perswade your selfe of vs, that whatsoeuer we haue spoken in the Bishops behalfe, we doe it rather out of a sense of our dutifulnes then any dif∣fidency of your Gratiousnes: and therefore omit∣ting all things which might be alleaged, either to lessen his offence or augment his vertues: it is your sole mercy wherein we repose all our hopes; vow∣ing, how soeuer other meanes of gratitude may be wanting to vs, yet we shall neuer suffer the remem∣brance of so great a fauour conferred on vs to be Dat. Ox ij in Eccles. S. Mariae Vi g. 4. Sex . extinguished amongst vs. (10) King Richard, after this, intending some ea∣sier restraint, though not liberty vnto the Bishop, was content to release him out of the Tower, and committed him to the custody of Henry Duke of Buc∣kingham, who sent him to his Castle of Brecknocke Bishop Morton committed to the custody of the Duke of Buckin∣ghom. in Wales, there safely to be kept, vntil himselfe should come thither. (11) The next day with great pompe, state and attendance of the Nobility, the King rode through The great estate of King Richards coronation. London, so as a more royall had not beene seene at a∣ny Kings Coronation, for there attended him, three Dukes, nine Earles, two Vicounts, twenty Lords, sea∣uenty eight Knights, all of them most richly furni∣shed, whereof the Duke of Buckingham so farre ex∣ceeded, that the caparison of his horse was so char∣ged Buckingham most richly attired at the kings coro∣nation. with embroydered worke of gold, as it was born vp from the ground by certaine his footemen thereto appointed. And contrary to my owne affections, or manner of my former proceedings, I will yet con∣tinue the most honorable offices performed at his roiall enthroning with no little Admiration, how these Lords assembled to set the Crowne vpon the young Princes head, were so suddainly carried to Crowne his Protector, and that vpon such false and slanderous pretences, as euery one of them saw his title to be meerely an vniust vsurpation, but in them may be seene, that we are all the sonnes of Adam, and in times of extremities, foreslow all publike re∣gard, as ouermuch fearing our priuate and present estate. (12) Vpon the sixt of Iuly, King Richard with The order of the Kings procee∣dings to be crowned. Queene Anne his wife set forth from White-hall to∣wards Westminster, roially attended, and went into the Kings bench in the great hall, from whence him∣selfe and Queen vpon ray Cloth, both of them bare∣footed, Rich. Groston. went vnto King Edwards shrine in Saint Pe∣ters Church, all the Nobility going with him in their degree, the trumpets and Heraulds marshalling the way, the Crosse with a solemne procession fol∣lowed, the Priests in fine surplesses and gray Amysses vpon them, the Bishops and Abbots in rich Copes all of them mytred, and carrying their Crosses in their hands; next came the Earle of Huntington bea∣ring a paire of gilt spurres, signifying Knighthood; af∣ter whom came the Earle of Bedford, who bare Saint Edwards staffe for a Relique, then followed the Earle of Northumberland with a naked pointles sword in his hand betokening mercy, next whom the Lord Stan∣ley bare the Mace of the Constableship, vpon whose right hand the Earle of Kent bare a naked pointed swod, and on his left hand the Lord Louell the like naked pointed sword, the former signifying Iustice to∣wards the temporalty, & the other Iustice to the Clergy; the Duke of Suffolke then followed with the Scepter, which signified Peace: the Earle of Lincolne bare the Ball and Crosse which signified a Monarchy: Then came the Earle of Surrey bearing the fourth sword sheathed in a rich scaberd, and is called the sword of Estate, next whom followed Garter King at Armes, vpon whose right hand went the Gentleman Vsher of the Kings priuy Chamber, and on his left the Lord Maior of London, with a Mace in his hand; Next vnto whom went the Duke of Norfolke bearing the Kings Growne betwixt his hands, and then King Richard himselfe came, in a Surcote and Robe of pur∣ple veluet; hauing ouer his head a Canapie borne by the foure Barons of the fiue Ports, the Bishop of Bath on his right hand, and of Durham on his left. The Duke of Buckingham bare the Kings traine, and to signifie the office of high Steward of England, he bare a White Staffe in his hand. (13) Then followed the Queenes traine: before whom was borne the Scepter, the Iuorie Rod with the The order of the Queenes pro∣ceedings to re∣ceiue the crown: Doue, and the Crowne; her selfe apparelled in Robes like the Kings vnder a rich Canapie, at euery corner thereof a bell of gold. On her head shee ware a cir∣clet set full of precious stones, the Countesse of Rich∣mond bearing her traine; the Dutchesse of Norfolke and Suffolk in their Coronets attendants, with twen∣ty Ladies of estate most richly attired. In this order they passed the Pallace into the Abbey, and ascen∣ding to the high Altar there shifted their Robes, and hauing other Robes open in diuers places from the middle vpward, were both of them annointed The King and Queene solemn∣ly annointed and crowned. and Crowned, he with Saint Edwards Crowne, ha∣uing the Scepter deliuered into his left hand, and the Ball with the Crosse a token of Monarchie in his right, the Queene had a Scepter giuen into her right hand, and the Iuory Doue in her left; then after the Sacrament receiued (hauing the host deuided be∣twixt them) they both offered at Saint Edwards shrine, where the King left his Crowne and put on his owne; and thus done, in the same Order and State as they came, returned to Westminster hall, and there held a most Princely feast. Whereof let Hall and Grafton tell you for me. (14) But this his faire Sunne was soone ouer∣cast with many darke Cloudes and mischiefes, which fell thicke vpon the necke of each other, for as the Sir Th Mooe. thing euill gotten, is neuer well kept: through all the time of his raigne there neuer ceased death and The time of King Richards raigne full of calami∣ties. slaughter, till his owne destruction ended it. Yet as he finished his daies with the best death, and the most righteous, that is to say, his owne: so began he with the most piteous and wicked, I meane the la∣mentable murther of his innocent Nephewes, the young King and his tender brother; whose deaths and finall misfortunes haue neuerthelesse come so farre in question, that some remaine yet in doubt, whether they were in his daies destroied or no. Not for that only, that Perkin Warbecke by the malice of many, and the folly of more, so long a time abusing made of the two Princes deathes. the world, was aswel with Princes, as the other poore people, reputed and taken for the younger of these two: but for that also as all things were in late daies so couertly demeaned, one thing pretended and ano∣ther done, that there was nothing so plaine and o∣penly proued, but for the common custome and close couert dealing, men had it euer inwardly in suspect, as many well counterfeit Iewels make the true mistrusted. Howbeit concerning the opinion with the occasions mouing either party, we shall haue place more at large hereafter to intreat of: in the meane time for this present master shall be re∣hearsed the dolorous end of these young Babes, not after euerie report I haue heard, but by such men, and by such meanes, as to my seeming it were hard but it should be true saith Sir Thomas Moore. (15) K. Richard presently after his mockish Electiō King Richards progresse to∣wards Glocester. & glorious Coronation, made his progresse towards Gloucester, to shew (as was thought) in that City his new Kingly estate, which first had vouchsafed him his old honour in bearing her Title; or else, and that rather, to besequestred from other busines, the better to attend that, vpon which his thoughts most busily ranne. For albeit the Barke of his begunne aduen∣tures, had without perill well passed the straightes, and now got sea roome to spread saile at will; yet being vnder gale, and at fortunes dispose, he feared the gust of euery wind: at leastwise suspected that his young Nephewes liuing would stay the course of his deepe reaches, as doth the little fish Remora, who holdeth (as at Anchor) the biggest shippe vn∣der Remora a little fish, i reported to haue such strength, as it will stay the course of any ship vnder saile. saile. His inward study therefore still forged, howsoeuer his outward countenance was carried to cleare his passage by taking those dangerous lets away, well knowing, that his little Nephewes en∣ioying their liues, men would be medling with their downe cast cause, and account him an vsurper with∣out The feares of K. Richard. all rihgt to the Realme. To stop which streame, no other course could hee find, but to cut off the current by which it ranne, as though the killing of his Kinsmen could better his bad claime, or vn∣kindly King Richard complotteth the death of his Nephewes. murther make him a kindly King. But be∣ing resolued, he forth with sent one Iohn Greene, a ser∣uant in especiall trust vnto Sir Robert Brakenbury Constable of the Tower, with a letter of credence, King Richard his letter to Sir Robert Brakenbu∣ry. that the same Sir Robert should in any wise put the two children to death. (16) This Greene thus posted to London, deliue∣red his errand vnto Brakenbury, whom hee found kneeling at his Orizons before the Image of our La∣dy in the Tower, the businesse being of such weight as the King must bee serued before hee had ended with his Saint The Constable reading the letter, and perceiuing the bloudy intent of the King, answe∣red Sir Robert Braken∣buries answere vnto Iohn Greene plainly, he wold neuer put those innocent babes vnto death, to die therefore himselfe. With which answere Iohn Greene returning, recounted the same to King Richard being at Warwicke, yet in his way to Glocester, wherewith he was maruellously per∣plexed, and thereat tooke such displeasure, that the same night hee said to a secret Page of his: Ah whom shall a man trust? those that I haue brought vp my selfe, King Richards complaint of Ingratitude. those that I had weened would most surely serue me, euen those faile me, and at my commandement will do nothing. Sir quoth the Page, there lyeth one on your Pallet without, that I dare well say, to doe your Grace pleasure, the thing were right hard that hee would refuse; meaning this by Sir Iames Tirrell, who was a man of a goodly personage, and for Natures gifts worthy to haue serued a much better Prince, if he had well serued God, and by grace obtained as Iames Tirrell made the Instru∣ment of murther much truth and good will, as hee had strength and wit. (17) The man had an high heart, and sore lon∣ged The parts of Sir Iames Tirrel. vpward, not rising yet so fast as hee hoped, be∣ing hindred and kept vnder by the meanes of Sir Richard Ratcliffe, and Sir William Catesby, who lon∣ging for no more partners of the Princes fauour, and namely, not for him, whose pride they knew would beare no Peere, kept him by secret drifts out of all secret trust, which thing this Page had well mar∣ked and knowne: wherefore this occasion offered of very speciall friendshippe, hee tooke his time to put him forward, and by such wise to doe him good, that all the enemies he had, except the Diuell him∣selfe could neuer haue done him so much hurt. For vpon this Pages words, K. Richard arose (for thiscom∣munication King Richard consu red vpon his Nephewes murders, sitting on a homely seate. had hee sitting at the draught, a conue∣nient Corpet for such a Counsell) and came out in∣to a Pallet-Chamber, where hee found in bed, Sir Iames and Sir Thomas Tirrels, of persons much like, and brethren in bloud, but nothing of kin in con∣ditions: Then said the King merrily to them, what Sirs, bee ye in bed so soone? and calling vp Sir Iames, brake to him secretly his mind in this mischieuous matter, in which hee found him nothing strange. Wherefore on the morrow hee sent him to Braken∣bury with a letter, by which hee was commanded Sir Iames ready to fulfil the kings mind in the mur∣ther of the Princes. to deliuer Sir Iames all the keyes of the Tower for one night, to the end hee might accomplish there the Kings pleasure in such things as hee had giuen him in commandement. After which letter deli∣uered, and the keyes receiued, Sir Iames appointed the night next ensuing to destroy them, deuising be∣fore and preparing the meanes. (18) The Prince in the Tower slenderly atten∣ded; and altogether neglected by the Nobility, last∣ly, had newes that his vncle had left the name of Protector, and taken vpon him the Title of King, who with full consent of the Lords was to be crow∣ned within a few daies following, with the same Crowne, and in the like estate as had beene proui∣ded for his solemnity, whereat the deiected Innocent sighed and said; Alasse, I would my vncle would let The words of Prince Edward when he heard that his ncle should be King. mee enioy my life yet, though I loose both my Kingdome and Crowne. Which words hee pronounced with such a feeling feare, as much moued the Relater to pitty, and to perswade him with the best comforts hee could: but forthwith the Prince and his bro∣ther were both shut vp, and all attendants remoued from them, onely one called Black-will, or William The faithfull ser∣uants of the Prince remoued from him. Slaughter excepted, who was set to serue them, and see them sure. After which time the Prince neuer tied his points, nor cared for himselfe, but with that young Babe his brother lingered with thought and heauines, till their traiterous deaths deliuered them out of that wretchednesse: for the execution where∣of, Tirrell appointed Miles Forrest, one of the foure that kept them, a fellow fleshed in murther before Sir Th. Moore. time. To whom hee ioined one Iohn Dighton his horsekeeper, a bigge, broad, square knaue. (19) About midnight (al others being remoued from them,) this Miles Forrest, and Iohn Dighton, Prince Edward and his brother murthered in a featherbed. came into the Chamber, and suddenly wrapped vp the seely children in the Bed-clothes, where they lay keeping by force the feather-bed and pillowes hard vpon their mouthes that they were therein smothe∣red to death, & gaue vp to God their innocent soules into the ioies of heauen, leauing their bodies vnto the Tormentors dead in the bed: which after these monstrous wretches perceiued, first by the strugling with the paines of death, and after long lying still to be thorowly dispatched, they laid their bodies na∣ked out vpon the bed, and then fetched Sir Iames Their bodies were buried vn∣der a paire of staires. their instigator to see them, who caused these mur∣therers to bury them at the staires foot, somewhat deepe in the ground, vnder a great heape of stones. Then rode Sir Iames in haste to the King, vnto whom he shewed the maner of their death, and place of bu∣riall, which newes was so welcome to his wicked heart, as he greatly reioiced, and with great thankes dubbed (as some hold) this his merciles Instrument, knight. But the place of their buriall hee liked not, saying, that vile corner should not containe the bo∣dies of those Princes, his Nephewes, & commanded them a better place for burial, because they were the The body of the two Princes re∣moued, and bu∣ried no man knowes where. sons of a King. Whereupon the Priest of the Tower tooke vp the bodies; and secretly interred them in such place, which by the occasion of his death could neuer since come to light. (20) The continuer of Iohn Harding tels vs from the report of others, that King Richard caused Sir Hardings conti∣nuer. Robert Brakenburies Priest to close their dead corps in lead, and so to put them in a coffin full of holes, and hooked at the ends with two hookes of iron, and so to cast them into a place called the Blacke-deepes at the Thames mouth, whereby they should neuer rise vp, or be any more seene. Wheresoeuer they were buried, thus they died, and by these murtherers. For very certaine it is, and wel knowne, that at such time, as Sir Iames Tirrell was in the Tower, for Treason committed against King Henrie the seuenth, both The murtherers confesse the deed, and maner of their th. Dighton and hee were examined, and confessed the murther in manner as is said, but whether their bo∣dies were remoued they could not say. And thus as The report of Sir Tho. Moore. I haue learned of them that knew much, and little cause had to lie, were these two noble Princes, these innocent tender children, borne of most roial blood, brought vp in great wealth, likely to haue liued, to haue raigned, and ruled in the Realme, by traiterous tyranny taken, depriued of their estates, shortly shut vp in prison, and impiously murdered, and the body cast out God wot where, by the cruell ambition of their vnnaturall vncle, and his hellish Tormentors. Which things on euery part well pondered; God neuer gaue this world a more notable example, nei∣ther The vnconstant state ofmans life. in what vnsurety standeth this worldly weale, or what mischiefe worketh the proud enterprize of an high heart, or finallie, what wretched end ensueth such barbarous crueltie. (20) For first to beginne with the Ministers, Gods iustice and reuenge vpon the murtherers. Miles Forrest at S. Martins, peece-meale rotted away; Sir Iames Tyrrell died at Tower hill for treason. Digh∣ton indeed walketh on aliue in good possibility to be hanged ere he die, liuing at Callis no lesse distained and hated then pointed at of all. King Richard him∣selfe Io. Harding. as ye shall hereafter heare, was slaine in the field, hacked and hewed of his enemies hands, carried on Ruenge of mur∣der repaid. horsebacke dead, his haire in despite torne and tug∣ged like a Curre dogge: and the mischiefe that he tooke was within lesse then three yeeres of the mis∣chiefe that he did, and yet all the meane time spent in much paine and trouble outward, and much feare, anguish, and sorrow within. For I haue heard by credible report of such as were secret with his The guilty con∣science of King Richard. Chamberlaine, that after this abhominable deed done, he neuer had quiet in his minde: he neuer thought himselfe sure: but where he went abroad, his eies euer-whirled about, his body priuily fenced, his hand euer on his dagger, his countenance & man∣ner like one alwaies readie to strike againe, he tooke il rest a nights, lay long waking and musing, sore wea∣ried with care and watch, rather slumbred then slept, troubled with fearefull dreames, suddainly some∣times start vp, leapt out of his Bed, and ranne about the chamber, so was his restlesse heart continually tossed and tumbled with the tedious impression and stormy remembrance of his abhominable deed. Neither had he in his best, any time of quiet, for Outward ene∣mies arise against King Richard. immediately began the conspiracy (or rather good consideration) betweene the Duke of Buckingham, and diuers other Gentlemen against him. (21) Which Duke assoone as Gloucester vpon the The forward af∣fection of the Duke of Bckin∣gham towards the Duke of Glo∣cester. death of King Edward came to Yorke, sent thither in secret wise a trusty seruant of his, named Persall, to as∣sure him, that he would take his part in this his new world, and if need were, would waite vpon him with a thousand good-fellowes: and againe sent offers of the like vnto Nottingham, whither the Protector from Yorke, with many Gentlemen of the North Countrey was come, and on his way to London- ward in secret manner met him himselfe, but at Nor∣thampton openly with three hundred horse: and from thence still continued with him, being a partner of all his deuises, till that after his coronation they de∣parted (as it seemed) very great friends at Glocester: frō The Duke of Buckingham fals in dislike of king Richard. whence as soone as the Duke came home, he so light∣ly turned from him, and so highly conspired against him, that a man would maruell whereof the change grew. And surely the occasion of their variance is of diuers men, diuersely reported; Some haue said, that the Duke a little before the Coronation, a∣mong other things, required of the Protector, the Duke of Hertfords Lands, to the which he pretended himselfe iust inheritor. And forasmuch as the Ti∣tle The occasions of the Kings and Dukes falling a∣sunder. which he claimed by inheritance, was somewhat interlaced with the title of the Crowne, by the line of King Henry before depriued, the Protector con∣ceiued such indignation, that he reiected the Dukes request, with many spightfull and minatory wordes, which so wounded his heart with hatred and mi∣strust, that he neuer after could indure to looke a∣right on King Richard, but euer feared his owne life, so farre forth, that when the Protector rode through London towards his Coronation, he fained himselfe Buckingham fai∣ned himselfe sick not to attend K. Henry. sicke, because he would not ride with him: And the other taking it in euill part, sent him word to rise; and come ride, or he would make him to be car∣ried. Whereupon hee rode on with an euill will, and that notwithstanding on the morrow rose from the Feast, faining himselfe sick, whereat King Richard said, it was done in hatred and despite of him. And they say, that euer after continually each of them li∣ued in such hatred and distrust of other, as the Duke verily looked to haue beene murdered at Gloucester: from which neuerthelesse he in faire manner depar∣ted. But surely some right secret at this day denie The feares of the Duke of Buckin∣gham. this: and many right wise men thinke it vnlikely (the deepe dissembling nature of both those men considered, and what need in that greene world the Protector had of the Duke, and in what perill the Duke stood, if he fell once in suspition of the Ty∣rant) that either the Protector would giue the Duke occasion of displeasure, or the Duke the Protector No such suspiti∣on betwixt the King and the Duke as was said to be. occasion of mistrust. And verily men thinke, that if King Richard had any such conceiued opinion, he would neuer haue suffered the Duke to haue esca∣ped his hands. (22) The very truth is, Buckingham was an high minded man, and could euill beare the glory of an∣other; so that I haue heard of some that saw it, that Sir Thomas Mores opinion of Buc∣kingham. the Duke at such time as the Crowne was first set vp∣on the Protectors head, his eye could not abide the sight thereof, but wried his face another way. But men say, that hee was of truth not well at ease which The diuers opi∣nions of the King and Dukes falling out. to King Richard was well knowne, and nothing ill taken, not any demand of the Dukes vncourteously reiected, but he both with great gifts and high be∣hests in most louing and trustie manner, departed at Gloucester. But soone after his comming home to Brecknock, hauing there in custody by the comman∣dement of King Richard, Doctor Morton Bishop of Ely, who (yee before heard) was taken in the coun∣sell at the Tower, waxed with him familiar: whose wisedome abused his pride to his owne deliuerance, and the Dukes destruction. (23) This Bishop was a man of great naturall wit; very well learned, and honourable in behauiour, lacking no wise waies to winne fauour: he had been The story of Bishop Morton. fast vpon the part of King Henry, while that part was in wealth; and naythelesse left it not, nor forsooke it in woe, but fled the Realme with the Queen & the Prince, while King Edward had Henry in prison, and neuer came home but to the field. After which lost, and that side vtterly subdued, the other for his fast faith and wisedome not only was content to receiue him, but also wooed him to come, and had him from Morton w d vnto King Ed∣wards side. thence forth both in great secret trust, and very spe∣ciall fauour, which he nothing deceiued. For he be∣ing (as you haue heard) after King Edwards death, first taken by the Tyrant for his trueth to the King, found the meanes to set this Duke in his top, ioined Gentlemen together in aide of King Henry, deuising first the marriage betweene him and King Edwards daughter: by which his faith, he declared the good The vnion of Lancaster and Yorke first set by Bishop Mor∣ton. seruice to both his masters at once, with infinite be∣nefit to the Realme, by the coniunction of those two bloods in one; whose seuerall titles had long time disquieted the Land; hee fled the Realme, went to Rome, neuer minding more to meddle with the world, till the noble Prince King Henry the seuenth got him home againe, made him Archbishop of Canterbury and Chancellor of England, whereunto the Pope ioined the honour of a Cardinall. Thus Morton made Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Chancellor, and Cardinall. liuing many dayes in as much honour, as one man might well wish, ended them so godly, that his death with Gods mercy, well changed his life. (24) This man therefore, as I was about to tell you, by the long and often alternate proofe, aswell of prosperitie as aduerse fortunes, had gotten by great His wisedome and experience. experience (the very mother or mistresse of Wise∣dome) a deepe insight in politicke worldly drifts. Whereby perceiuing now this Duke glad to com∣mune with him, sed him with faire words, and many pleasant praises. And perceiuing by the processe of their communication, the Dukes pride now and then balke out a litle bread of enuy, towards the glo∣ry of the King, and thereby feeling him easie to fall The deepe pol∣llicy of B. Morton. out, if the matter were well handled: hee craftily sought the wayes to pricke him forward, taking al∣wayes the occasion of his comming, and keeping himselfe so close within his bounds, that hee rather seemed to follow then to leade him. For when the Duke first began to praise & boast of the King, and shew how much profite the Realme should take by his raigne; Morton answered thus: Surely my Lord, folly it were for me to lye, for if I would sweare the The communi∣cation of the Duke and D. Morton. contrary, your Lordship would not ween I beseeue, but that if the world would haue gone, as I could haue wished, King Henries son had had the Crowne, and not King Edward. But after that God had orde∣red him to lose it, and King Edward to raigne, I was neuer so mad, that I would with a dead man striue against a quicke. So was I to King Edward a faithfull Chapplaine, and glad would haue beene, that his child should haue succeeded him. Howbeit, if the secret iudgement of God haue otherwise prouided, I purpose not to spurne against the pricke, nor labor to set vp, that God putteth downe. And as for the late protector and now King, and euen there he left: saying, that hee had already medled too much with the world, and would from that day meddle with his Booke and his Beades, and no further. (25) Then longed the Duke sore to heare what he would haue said, because he ended with the king, and there so suddainly stopped, and exhorted him so familiarly betweene them twaine, to be bolde to say whatsoeuer he thought, whereof he faithful∣ly promised there should neuer come hurt, and per∣aduenture Buckingham ex∣citeth the Bishop to reueale his deepest secret. more good then he would weene, and that himselfe intended to vse his faithfull secret ad∣uise and counsell, which he said was the only cause for which he procured of the King to haue him in his custody, where he might account himselfe at home, and else had he beene put in the hands of them with whom he should not haue found the like fauour. The Bishop right humbly thanked him and said: In good faith my Lord, I loue not to talke much of Princes, as a thing not all out of perill, though the word be without fault. Forasmuch as it shall not be taken as the party meant it, but as it It is dangerous to deale in Prin∣ces affaires. pleaseth the Prince to construe it. And euer I think on Aesops tale, that when the Lyon had proclaimed vpon paine of death there should no horned beast abide in the wood, one that had in his forehead a bunch of flesh, fled away a great pace. The foxe A pretry tale p hily applied. who saw him runne so fast, asked him whether he made all that haste? and he answered, In faith, I nei∣ther wot, nor recke, so I were once hence, because of this Proclamation made against, horned beasts. What foole (quoth the Foxe) thou maist abide well enough, the Lion meant not thee, for it is no horne that is in thy head. No mary (quoth he) that wot I wellynough, but what if he call it a horne, where am I then? The Duke laughed merrily at the tale, and said, my Lord I warrant you, neither the Lion nor the Boare shall picke any matter at any thing heere spoken, for it shall neuer come to their eares. In good faith Sir, said the Bishop, if it did, the thing that I was about to say, (taken aswell as afore God I meant it) could deserue but thankes; and yet taken as I weene it would, might happely turne me to litle good, and you to lesse. Then longed the Duke yet more to wit what it was; whereupon the Bishop The desire of the Duke to know his meaning, said, in good faith my Lord, as for the late Protector, sith he is now King in possession, I purpose not to dispute his title, but for the weale of this Realme, wherof his Grace hath now the gouernance, and my selfe am a poore member, I was about to wish, that to those good abilities, whereof hee hath already right many, little needing my praise, it might yet haue pleased God for the better store, to haue gi∣uen him some of such other excellent vertues meet for the rule of a Realme as our Lord hath planted in the person of your Grace: and there left a∣gaine. (26) The Duke somewhat mariailing at his sud∣daine Edward ll. pauses, said: My Lord, I note your often brea∣things and suddaine stopping in your communica∣tion; so that to my intelligence, your wordes neither come to any direct or perfect sentence in conclu∣sion, whereby either I might haue knowledge what your intent is now towards the King, or what affe∣ction you beare towards mee. For the comparison of good qualities ascribed to vs both, maketh mee not a little to muse, thinking that you haue some other priuie imagination imprinted in your heart, which you bee abashed to disclose, and specially to me, which on my honour doe assure you to be as secret in this case as the deafe and dumbe person to The Dukes pro∣testation of se∣crecy. the singer, or the Tree to the Hunter. The Bishop being somewhat bolder, considering the Dukes pro∣mise, but most of all animated, because hee knew the Duke desirous to be magnified, and also he per∣ceiued the inward hatred which hee bare towards King Richard, hee opened his stomacke to the bot∣tome, and said: My singular good Lord, sith the time of my captiuitie, which being in your graces custo∣die, The Bishop dea∣leth plainly with the Duke. I may rather call it a libertie, then a strait impri∣sonment, in auoiding of idlenesse mother of all vi∣ces, in reading bookes and ancient pamphlets, I haue founde this sentence written, that no man is borne fie and at libertie of himselfe onely: for one part of dutie he oweth to his parents, another part to his friends and kindred; but the natiue Countrey The dutie of all men towards their natiue countreys. in the which he first tasted this pleasant & flattering world, demandeth a debt not to be forgottē. Which saying, causeth mee to consider in what case the Realme, my natiue Countrey, now standeth; and in what estate and assurance before this time it hath continued; what gouernour we now haue, and what ruler wee might haue; for I plainely perceiue (the Realme being in this case) must needes decay, and be brought to confusion: but one hope I haue, that is, when I consider your noble personage, your ju∣stice and indifferencie, your seruent zeale and ardent loue towards your naturall Countrey; and in like manner, the loue of your countrey towards you, the great learning, pregnant wit, and eloquence, which so much doth abound in your person; I must needs thinke this Realme fortunate, which hath such a Prince in store, meete and apt to bee Gouernour. But on the other side, when I call to memory the good qualities of the late Protector, and now called King, so violated by-tyranny, so altered by vsurped authoritie, and so clouded by blind ambition, I must The change of state vnder the tyranny of the vsurper. needs say, that hee is neither meet to bee King of so noble a Realme, nor so famous a Realme meet to be gouerned by such a tyrant. Was not his first enter∣prise to obtaine the Crowne, begunne by the mur∣ther of diuers personages? did hee not secondarily proceed against his owne natural mother; declaring her openly to be a woman giuen to carnall affection and dissolute liuing? declaring furthermore, his two brethren and two Nephewes to bee bastards, and to bee borne in adultery? yet not contented, after hee had obtained the Garland, he caused the two poore innocents his Nephewes, committed to him, to bee most shamefully murthered: the blood of which little babes daily cry to God from the earth for ven∣geance. Blood cryeth for bloody ven∣geance. What surety can be in this Land to any per∣son, either for life or goods, vnder such a cruell Prince, which regardeth not the destruction of his owne blood, and much lesse the losse of others. But now to conclude, what I meane towards your noble person, I say & affirme, if you loue God, your linage, or your natiue countrey, you must your selfe take vpon you the Crowne of this Realme, both for the maintenance of the honour of the same, as also The Bishop per∣swadeth the Duke to take the Crowne vnto himselfe. for the deliuerance of your naturall countreymen from the bondage of such a tyrant. And if your selfe will refuse to take vpon you the Crowne of this Realme, then I adiure you by the faith you owe vn∣to God, to deuise some wayes how this Realme may bee brought to some conuenient regiment, vnder some good Gouernour. When the Bishop hap ended his saying, the Duke sighed, and spake not of a great while, so that night they communed no more. (26) The next day the Duke sent for the Bishop, The next dayes conference. to whom hee said, My Lord of Ely, I must needs in heart thinke, and with mouth confesse, that you bee a sure friend, a trustie counsellor, and a very louer of your countrey. And sith that at our last commu∣nication, you haue disclosed the secrets of your hart touching the now vsurper of the crown, & also haue alittle touched the aduancement of the two noble families of Yorke and Lancaster, I shall likewise de∣clare The Duke dis∣closeth himselfe vnto the Bishop. vnto you my priuie intents and secret cogita∣tions. And to beginne, when King Edward was deceased, I then began to studie, and with delibera∣tion to ponder in what manner this Realme should be gouerned: I perswaded with my selfe to take part with the Duke of Gloucester, whom I thought to be as cleane without dissimulation, as tractable without iniurie, and so by my means he was made Protector both of the King and Realm; which authoritie being once gotten, he neuer ceased priuily to require mee and other Lords aswell spirituall as temporall, that he might take vpon him the Crowne, till the Prince came to the age of foure and twenty yeres, and were The Protector desired the crowne till the Prince came to the age of 24. yeeres. able to gouerne the Realme as a sufficient King: which thing, when hee saw me somewhat sticke at, hee then brought in instruments, authenticke Do∣ctors, Proctors, and Notaries of the Law, with depo∣sitions of diuers witnesses, testifying King Edwards children to bee bastards: which depositions then I thought to be as true, as now I know them to bee fained. When the said depositions were before vs read, and diligently heard, he stood vp bare headed, saying: Well my Lords, euen as I and you would that my Nephewes should haue no wrong: so I pray you doe mee The Protectors words to the Councell. nothing but right, for these witnesses and sayings of fa∣mous Doctors bee true: For I am onely the vndubitate heire to Richard Plantagenet Duke of Yorke, adiudged to be the very heire to the Crowne of this Realme by autho∣ritie of Parliament. Which things so by learned men for veritie to vs declared, caused mee and others to take him for our lawfull and vndoubted Prince and Soueraigne Lord. So againe by my ayde, hee of a Protector was made a King: but when he was once crowned King, and in full possession of the Realme, Change of State change of man∣ners. hee cast away his old conditions. For, when I my selfe sued to him for my part of the Earle of Hert∣fords Lands, which his brother Edward wrongfully deteined from me, and also required to haue the of∣fice of the high Constableship of England, as diuers of my noble ancestors before this time haue had, and in long discent continued; in this my first suite, hee did not only first delay mee, and afterwards deny me, but gaue mee such vnkinde words, as though I had neuer furthered him: all which I suffered pa∣tiently. But when I was informed of the death of the two young Innocents, O Lord, my heart inward∣ly Why Buckingham fell from the Vsurper. grudged, insomuch as I abhorred the sight of him; I took my leaue of the Court, and returned to Breck∣nocke to you, but in my iourney as I came, I had di∣uers imaginations how to depriue this vnnaturall vncle. First, I fantasied, that if I list to take vpon me the Crowne, now was the way made plaine, and occasion giuen. For I well saw hee was disdained of the Lords Temporall, and accursed of the Lordes Spirituall. After diuers cogitations of this matter, as I rode betweene Worcester and Bridgenorth, I en∣countred with the Lady Margaret Countesse of Margaret Coun∣tesse of Rich∣mund. Richmund, now wife to the Lord Stanley, who is the very daughter, and sole heire to Iohn Duke of Som∣merset my Grandfathers elder brother, so that she & her sonne Henry Earle of Richmund be both between me and the gate, to enter into the Maiestie roiall, & getting of the Crowne; and when wee had a little communed concerning her sonne, and were depar∣ted, I then beganne to dispute with my selfe, whe∣ther I were best to take it vpon me, by the election of The doubts of the Duke of Buckingham. the Nobility and Communalty, or to take it by pow∣er. Thus standing in a wauering ambiguity, I consi∣dered first, the office, duety, and paine of a King, which surely I thinke that no mortall man can iustly The great and waighty charge of a King. and truly obserue, except he be elected of God, as K. Dauid was. (27) But further I remembred, that if I once took vpon me the Gouernance of the Realme, the daugh∣ters of King Edward and their Allies, being both for his sake much beloued, and also for the great iniurie done to them much pittied, would neuer cease to barke at the one side of me. Semblably my cosin the Earle of Richmond, his aides and kinsfolkes will surely attempt either to bite, or to pierce me on the other side, so that my life and rule should euer hang vnquiet in doubt of death or deposition: And if the said two linages of Yorke and Lancaster should ioine in one against me, then were I surely matched. Wher∣fore I haue clecrelie determined, vtterly to relinquish all imaginations concerning the obtaining of the Buckinghams re∣solution concer∣ning the Crown. Crown. For as I told you, the Countesse of Richmond in my returne from the new named King, meeting me in the high way, praied me first for kindreds sake, secondly for the loue I bare to my Grandfather The communi∣cation of the Countesse of Richmond with the Duke of Buc∣kingham. Duke Humfrey, who was sworne brother to her fa∣ther, to moue the King to be good to her sonne Hen∣ry Earle of Richmond, and to licence him with his fa∣uour to returne againe into England, and if it were his pleasure so to doe, shee promised that the Earle her sonne should marry one of the Kings daughters at the appointment of the King, without any thing demanded for the said espousals, but only the Kings fauour, which request I soone ouerpassed and depar∣ted. But after in my lodging I called to memory more of that matter, and now am bent, that the Earle of Richmond heire of the house of Lancaster, shall take to wife Lady Elizabeth eldest daughter to Henry Earle of Richmond and Ladie Elizabeth must make the vnion. King Edward, by the which marriage both the houses of Yorke and Lancaster may be vnited in one. (28) When the Duke had said, Bishop Morton who euer fauoured the house of Lancaster, was won∣drous ioyfull, for all his imagination tended to this effect; and lest the Dukes courage should asswage, or his minde alter, he said to the Duke: My Lord of Buckingham, sith by Gods prouision, and your in∣comparable wisdome, this noble coniunction is first moued, it is necessary to consider what persons we shall first make priuie of this politicke conclusion. By my troth (quoth the Duke) we will begin with my Ladie of Richmond the Earles mother, which knoweth where he is in Britaine: sith you will begin that way (said the Bishop) I haue an old friend with With whom and how to begin the intended de∣sigues. the Countesse, called Reinald Bray, for whom I shall send, if it be your pleasure: so the Bishop wrote for him to come to Brechnock, who straite came backe with the messenger, where the Duke and Bishop de∣clared what they had deuised for the preferment of the Earle of Richmond, sonne to his Lady and Mi∣stresse: willing her first to compasse how to obtaine the goodwill of Queene Elizabeth, and also of her el∣dest daughter: and after secretly to send to her sonne in Britaine, to declare what high honour was prepa∣red for him, if he would sweare to marrie the Ladie Elizabeth assoone as hee was King of the Realme. With which conclusion, Reinold Bray with a glad heart returned to the Countesse his Lady. Bray thus Reinold Bray, the Instrument. departed, the Bishop told the Duke, that if he were in his Isle of Ely, he could make many friends to fur∣ther their enterprise. The Duke knew this to bee true, but yet loth to loose the society of such a Coun∣sellor, gaue him faire words, saying, he should short∣ly depart well accompanied for feare of enemies, but the Bishop ere the Dukes company were assembled, secretly disguised, in a night departed and came to E∣ly, Bishop Morton e∣scapeth from Brecknocke dis∣guised. where he found money and friends, and then sai∣led into Flaunders, where he did the Earle of Ricchmond good seruice. (29) When Reinold Bray had declared his mes∣sage to the Countesse, no meruaile if shee were glad; wherefore shee deuised a means how to breake this matter to Queen Elizabeth; being then in Sanctuary at Westminster, and hauing in her family a certaine Welshman called Lewis learned in Phisicke, now Lewis a Phi tian another Instru∣ment. hauing oportunity to breake her minde vnto him, declared that the time was come, that her sonne should be ioined in marriage with Lady Elizabeth, daughter and heire to King Edward: and that King Richard should out of all honour and estate be deie∣cted, and required him to goe to Queene Elizabeth not as a messenger, but as one that came friendlie to visite her, and as time and place should serue to make her priuy of this deuise. This Phisitian with good diligence repaired to the Queene, and when he saw time conuenient said vnto her: Madame although my imagination be very simple, yet for the entire af∣fection I beare to you and to your children, I am so Lewis breaketh the intent vnto Queene Eliza∣beth. bolde to vtter vnto you a secret conceit, which I haue compassed in my braine. When I remember the great losse which you haue sustained by the death of your louing husband, and the great sorrow that you haue suffered by the cruell murder of your inno∣cent children, I can no lesse doe, then daily study how to bring your heart to comfort, and also to re∣uenge the quarrell of you and your children, on that cruell tyrant King Richard. And first consider what battel, and what mischiefe haue risen by the dissen∣tion betweene the two houses of Yorke and Lanca∣ster, which two families if they may be ioined in one, I doubt not but that your line shall be again restored to your great ioy & comfort: you know Madam, that of the house of Lancaster, the Earle of Richmond is The meanes to raise the Queens daughter to her right. next of bloud, & to the house of York your daughters now are heirs. If you could deuise the means how to couple your eldest daughter with the Earle of Rich∣mund in matrimony, no doubt, but that the vsurper should shortly bee deposed, and your heire againe to her right restored. (30) When the Queene had heard this friendly Motion, shee instantly besought him, that as he had beene the first inuentor of so good an enterprise, Queene Eliza∣beth readily re∣ceiueth the mo∣tion. that now hee would not desist to follow the same, requiring him further, that he would resort to the Countesse of Richmund, mother to the Earle Hen∣rie, and to declare to her on the Queenes behalfe, that all the friends of King Edward her husband, The Queene sendeth to the Countesse. should assist and take part with the Earle of Rich∣mund her sonne, so that hee would take an oath, that after the Kingdome obtained, to espouse the Lady Elizabeth her daughter, &c. M. Lewis so sped his busines, that he made a finall end of this businesse, betweene the two mothers: so the Lady Margaret Countesse of Richmund, brought to a good hope of the preferment of her son, made Reinold Bray chiefe soliciter of this conspiracy, giuing him in charge se∣cretly The two mo∣thers agreede Vpon the vnion. to inueagle such persons of Nobility to ioyne with her, & take her part, as he knew to be faithfull. (31) This Reinold Bray within few dayes brought to his luer Sir Giles Daubeny, Sir Iohn Chei∣nie Knights, Richard Guilford, and Thomas Ramney Many drawne into faction a∣gainst K. Richard Esquiers, and others. In the meane while the Coun∣tesse of Richmund sent one Christopher Vrsewicke, a Priest into Britaine, to the Earle of Richmund her Vrswicke sent in∣to Britaine. sonne, to declare to him all the agreements between her and the Queene agreede: and with all to shew him that the Duke of Buckingham was one of the first Inuenters of this enterprise: shee likewise sent Hugh Conway an Esquire into Britaine with a great summe of money, giuing him in charge to declare to the Hugh Conway sent into Britaine. Earle, the great loue that the most part of the No∣bility of the Realme bare towards him, willing him not to neglect so good an occasion offered, but with all speed to setle his mind how to return into Eng∣land, and therewithall aduising him to take land in Wales. When the Earle had receiued this ioyfull mes∣sage, hee brake to the Duke of Britaine all his secrets, aduertising him thathe was entred into a sure & sted∣fast Earle Richmund breaketh with the Duke of D ine. hope to obtaine the Crown of England, desiring him of help towards the atchieuing of his enterprise, which the Duke promised, & afterwards performed: wherupon the Earle sent back again Hugh Conway; & Th. Ramney to declare his cōming shortly into Englād. (32) In the meane season the chiefe of the con∣spiracy in England beganne many enterprises, which being neuer so priuily handled, yet knowledge ther∣of came to King Richard, and because hee knew the Duke of Buckingham to be the chiefe head, and aide of this combination; he thought it most necessarie to plucke him from that part, and thereupon ad∣dressed his louing letters vnto the Duke, requesting him most earnestly to come to the Court, whose The Duke of Buckingham it sent for by the King. graue aduise for counsell hee then stood much in need of; with many words of kind complements to bee vttered from the mouth of the messenger: but the Duke mistrusting those sweet promises pro∣ceeded out of a bitter intent, and knowing K. Richard to speak most fayrest when he meant foulest play; de∣sired the king of pardon, excusing himself that he was sickly & not wel able to trauel: which excuse the king would not admit, but sent other letters with check∣ing wordes, commanding him without delay to repaire to his presence: vnto which the Duke made The Duke of Buckingham re∣fuseth to come to the Court. a determinate answere that hee would not come to his mortall enemy: and immediately prepared war against him. Whereupon Thomas Marquesse Dor∣set came out of Sanctuary, and gathered a great band of men in the County of Yorke, Sir Edward Courtney Commotions begun. and Peter his brother, Bishoppe of Excester, raised a∣nother Armie in Deuonshire and Cornwall, and in Kent, Sir Richard Guilford, and other Gentlemen rai∣sed a Company, and all this was done euen in one moment. (33) King Richard rouzed from his pleasures in progresse, sent forth commission to muster his King Richards expedition to∣wards ▪ men, and with a great preparation from London mar∣ched towardes Salisbury; thinking it not best to disparkle his power into small parts in pursuing his enemies euery way at once, and therfore omit∣ting all others with a great puissance went to set vp∣on the Duke of Buckingham, the head of the spring. The Duke hearing of the Kings approach, made out to meet him before hee came too farre, accompani∣ed The Duke pre∣pareth against the King. with a great power of wild Welshmen, whom hee had enforced to follow him, more by his Lordly commandement then by liberall wages, which thing indeed was the cause that they fell off, and forsooke him. His march was through the forrest of Deane, intending for Glocester, where hee meant to passe Se∣uerne, and so haue ioined his Army with the Court∣neys, & other Western men, which had he done, no doubt K. Richard had been in great ieopardie. But before hee could attaine the Seuerne side, by force of continuall raine the riuer rose so high, that it o∣uerflowed Great matters le ed that the complices could not . all the country adioyning, and was not againe bounded within his owne bankes for the space of ten dayes, so that the Duke could not get o∣uer, nor his complices any wise come vnto him, during which time the Welshmen lingring idle, with∣out wages, or victual, sodainelie brake vp Campe and departed; whereupon the Duke was wonde∣rously perplexed, not knowing how to recouer this vnfortunate chance, and destitute of power; to shew himselfe in field, sought to secure himselfe in secret, till destiny assigned him a better day. (34) A seruant he had in especiall fauour & trust brought vp tenderly by him, and risen to great wealth and esteeme, his name was Humfrey Ba i∣ster, The Duke of Buckingham ∣peth in s cres. and place of residence neere vnto Shrewsburie, whither the distressed Duke in disguise repaired, in∣tending there to remain secret, vntil he might either raise a new power, or else by some meanes conuay himselfe vnto Britaine to Henry Earle of Richmund: but as soone as the others which had attempted the same enterprise against the King, had knowledge that Buckingham was forsaken of his Company, and could not be found, as men strucke in sodaine feare The dispersed. shifted euery one for himselfe, many of them taking Sanctuary, but the most of the chiefest took into Bri∣taine, among whom were Peter Courtney, Bishoppe of Excester with his brother Edward Earle of De∣uonshire, Many fled into Br taine to Earle Henry. Thomas Marquesse Dorset the Queenes sonne, and his young sonne Thomas being a Childe, Edward Wooduile Knight, brother to the Queene, Iohn Lord Wells, Sir Robert Willoughby, Sir Iohn Bour∣chier, Sir Giles Daubeney, Sir Thomas Arundell, Sir Iohn Cheinie with his two brethren, Sir William Bark∣ley, Sir Richard Edgecombe, and Sir William Brandon, Edward Poinings an excellent Captain, and others. (35) Richard thus farre proceeded, and no ene∣my seene, his hopes were encreased, and feares dai∣ly A proclamation for the appre∣hension of the Duke of Bu kin∣gham. lesse; yet being a Prince politicke and vigilant, he commanded the Ports to be securely kept, & know∣ing that Buckingham was not fled with the rest, made proclamation for the apprehending of that Duke, promising a thousand pound to the man that could bring him forth, with pardon of his faults, to enioy the Kings fauour, and if hee were a bondman, pre∣sently to bee made free. Banister minding the pre∣sent, and forgetting what was past, spread his lappe first to receiue this golden shower, and in hope of this gaine, made no conscience to betray his own Lord, who had now laid his life vpon trust in his hands: hee therefore repayring to the Shiriffe of Shrewsbury, reuealed the Duke, who disguised like a poore Countriman, and digging in a groue neere Banister betraied his Lord the Duke of Buckin∣gham. vnto Banisters house, was apprehended, and with a great guard of men was brought vnto Salisbury, where King Richard then lay, and where without arraignement or iudgement, vpon the second of Nouember he lost his head: whose death was the Buckingham be∣headed. lesse lamented, for that himselfe had been the chiefe Instrument to set the Crowne wrongfully vpon Richards head: and yet the treachery of Banister was most seuerely punished, as many haue obser∣ued, not onely in the losse of his reward promised, which he neuer had, and infamy receiued, neuer af∣ter shaken off; but also in himselfe and children, as Banister looseth his reward, but findeth punish∣ments. are thus reported; his eldest sonne and heire fell mad, and dyed so distracted in a Boares Stye: his second sonne became deformed in his limmes, and fell lame; his third sonne was drowned in a small puddle of water; his eldest daughter was sodainely strucke with a foule leprosie, and himselfe being of extreame age, was arraigned and found guilty of murder, and by his Clergy saued his life. (36) An other Commotion at the same time was in Kent, where George Browne and Iohn Gilford A Commotion in Kent. Knights, Foge, Scot, Clifford, and Bonting, with fiue thousand men attempted great matters at Graues∣end, but hearing of the Duke of Buckinghams sur∣prise, dispersed themselues for that time. But when King Richard perceiued how hee was euery where beset, he sent one Thomas Hutton vnto Francis Duke King Richard sendeth to the Duke of Britain. of Britaine, with proffers of gold to circumuent and imprison Earle Henry, who as hee feared was too well friended in those forraine parts, which thing in∣deed this Hutton well perceiued, and so to the King reported, that the Duke was nothing forward to bite at this baite, whereupon, those that lately fled England, were indited of treason, and other of Hen∣ries factions beheaded, whereof Sir George Browne, and Sir Roger Clifford Knights with foure others were beheaded at London, and at Exceter for the like cause dyed Sir Thomas Sentleger, who had married The Kings bro∣ther in law be∣headed. Lady Anne Dutchesse of Excester, King Richards own sister, with others; so icalous was the King of his vsurped Crowne; and that nothing should be laide to vnprouident foresight, the coasts hee stored with Armies of men, furnished the Ports with store of Prouision, and made all things ready to withstand Earle Henries arriuall. Who now hauing gotten aide of fiue thousand Britaines, with forty vessels wel Earle Henry ship∣ped for England. furnished, set saile from thence the twelfth of Octo∣ber, but was taken with so terrible a tempest, that his Fleet was disparkled, some into Normandy, and some compelled to returne into Britaine, only the Earles ship with one other hept the Seas, being sore tossed all night, and in the morning arriued in the mouth of Poole in the County of Dorset, where hee might behold the Shore full of men shining in armour, to his great amasement, whereupon hee sent out his shippe-boat to know whether they were friends or enemies; their answere was, that they were thither A subtle traine laid for the Earl. appointed by the Duke of Buckinghm, to attend the comming of the Earle of Richmund, to conduct him in safety to the Duke, who lay encamped not far off, that so ioyning their forces, they might prosecute Richard the vsurper, who being in a maner destitute of men, was sore distracted, and desperate in his owne designes. These smooth vntruthes notwith∣standing Earle Henry auoided, and with a forward gale returned to Normandy, whence he sent Messen∣gers Earle Henry re∣turneth into Britaine. vnto young Charles King of France, whose fa∣ther King Lewis was lately departed this life, to haue his safe conduct to returne into Britaine, which easi∣ly was granted with fauourable complements retur∣ned to the Earle. Lord Henry thus crossed by sea, had present news of Buckinghams surprise and death, with the flight of the Nobles escaped from Richard: who meeting with Richmund in Britaine, fell forth∣with The Lords meet in Britaine. into Counsell: where first it was determined that Earle Henry should take his oath to espouse the Lady Elizabeth eldest daughter vnto King Edward, and the immediate heire to the Crowne, which hee solemnly did in the Church at Rhedon; and they The Lords svvear fealty vnto Henry for their parts sware vnto him fealty, doing him ho∣mage with no lesse respect then vnto their sole and crowned King. (37) Of these proceedings King Richard soone heard, which indeed greatly appaled his though , and all pensiue and sad he returned out of the West towards London, where to cut off the hopes of Rich∣munds further claime, hee caused a Parliament to be Henry & others attainted by Parliament. assembled at Westminster, and therein attainted the said Earle Henry himselfe, and all such as had fled the land in his behalfe, enacting them enemies to their naturall Country, their goods to be confisca∣ted, and all their lands and possessions to be seised vpon to the Kings vse, which was so forwarded by his lewd Counsellors, and so executed by his faw∣ning followers, that some better affected, set forth the present and oppressed estate in these scoffing rimes, to their further disgrace, diuulging their names in manner as followeth; The cat, the rat, and Louell the dogge, Rule all England vnder a hogge. Alluding to the names of Ratcliffe the Kings mis∣chieuous Minion, and of Catesby his secret traducer, and to the Kings cognizance, which was the Boare: for which William Collingborne Esquier, who had William Colling∣borne executed for the time. been Shiriffe of Wiltshire and Dorsetshire, was con∣demned, and vpon the Tower hill executed with al extremity. (38) King Richards state standing in dangers a∣broad, and not altogether free from conspiracies at ho e, hee thought it best policy to enter amitie with Scotland, which hee did for the terme of three yeeres, and the more firme to assure himselfe of K Richard ma∣keth peace with Scotland. that King, hee intreated a marriage betwixt the Duke of Rothsay the kings eldest sonne, and the La∣dy de la Pole daughter to Iohn Duke of Suffolke, and to the Dutchesse Elizabeth king Richards owne si∣ster, whom hee so much fauoured, as that after the death of his owne sonne, he proclaimed Iohn Earle of Lincolne, her sonne and his Nephew, heire appa∣rant to the Crowne of England, disinheriting King Edwards daughters, whose brothers hee had before Iob de la Pole Earle of Lincolne proclaimed heire apparant. murdered. (39) His feares nothing lessened, but rather daily increased, he attempted once more to stop the Cur∣runt which led to the spring, to which end he sent his Ambassadours loaden with gold, and many gay Offers made to the Duke of Bri∣taine. promises vnto Francis Duke of Britaine, offring to giue him all Richm nds lands, and yeerely reuenues if he would either send the said Earle into England or commit him there vnto prison. These comming to the Dukes Court, could haue no communication with him, he lying extremely sicke, and his wits too weake to entertaine discourse. Whereupon Peter Landose his Treasurer, a man pregnant in wit, and of great authority, tooke the motion into hand, vnto Peter Landose. whom the English Ambassadors promised all the Earles Reuenews if he could bring King Richards request to passe. He greedy of gaine, and being in place to doe what he would, promised to effect it, Landose promi∣sed to deliuer the Earle. conditionally that King Richard would make good his offer. Thus whilest messengers posted betwixt Pe∣ter and Richard, Iohn Bishop of Elie being then in Flaunders, was certified by Christopher Vrswicke of all the circumstances of this purpose, whereupon the Bishop Morton giueth Henry no∣tice of his dan∣ger. Bishop with all possible hast, sent the same intelli∣gence the same day, and by the same man vnto Earle Henry in Britain, willing him to shift himself and fol∣lowers into France: who forthwith sent Vrswick vnto King Charles to haue his licence that he might with King Charles granteth his safe conduct to Hen∣rie. his good liking come into his dominions which be∣ing obtained he caused the other Lords vnder pre∣tence to visite the sicke Duke to escape into Aniou, and two daies after changing his Apparrell with his seruant, waited vpon him as vpon his Master, and po∣sted thence into France: whose escape when the Earle Henry hard∣ly escaped. Treasurer heard of, he sent after to apprehend him, and that in such hast as at his entrance into the French dominions they were hard at his heeles. (40) This suddaine flight of the Earle and of the other English Lords, the Duke of Britaine (being som∣what recouered of his dangerous sicknes) tooke very greeuously, imputing it a great dishonour vnto him∣selfe, to suffer the least suspect of breach betwixt him and the Earle, and therefore sore offended at Landose The Duke of Bri taine displeased at Landose. whom he suspected to be deepe in the deed, he sent for Edward Wooduile and Edward Pownings two Eng∣lish Esquires, vnto whom he deliuered a summe of The honorable dealings of the Duke of Britaine. money which he had promised to Earle Henrie, with a conuey vnto all the rest of the English, to depart Vannes, bearing all their charges till they came to their Earle in France. Neither was King Charles backward to forward Earle Richmond against the Tyrant and Vsurper of the English Crowne. And the more to ioy Henry, Iohn Earle of Oxford impri∣soned by King Edward the fourth in the Castle of Iohn Earle of Ox∣ford commeth to Earle Henry. Hammes; with Captaine Blunt his keeper, and Sir Iohn Fortescue Porter of Callis, came vnto Earle Hen∣ry to take their fortunes in following of his. This Earle of Oxford, as we haue seene, was a continuall aider of King Henry the sixt, against his opposite K. Edward, and had done many seruices in the Lancastri∣ans cause, till destiny had cast downe the hopes of their side. Him therefore Earle Henry made his Iohn Earle of Ox∣ford in great fa∣uour with Hen∣rie. chiefe Counsellor for warre, as for experience, poli∣cy, valour, and faith in that busines, no man was more meete. Whose prowesse further appeared when Earle Henry wan the wreath at Bosworth field, where, in the Front of that Battell he lead the band of Archers, and euer after liued in great fauour with this King Henry the seuenth, and in great honour died the fourth yeere of King Henry the eight. In the Bishop Fox in great fauor with King Henry. like trust for Counsell and fauour with these Kings, was Richard Fox Doctor of Diuinitie, who being then a student in Paris, was found by Earle Richmond to be the chiefest man for imploiment in his French busines, which he so prudently and faithfully effe∣cted, as the Earle being King, acknowledging him one of his principall aduancers, made him of his Pri∣uie Councell, Lord Priuie Scale, and raised him to very great places in Church and Common-wealth, and lastly to testifie in what deere esteeme hee held him, made him Godfather to his sonne Prince Hen∣rie, The preferments of Bishop Fox. who was after King of England with whom in great reuerence he liued a long time, euen till his eye∣sight failed through age, and did many workes of piety, whereof Copus Christi Colledge in Oxford, is Corpus Christi Colledge in Ox∣ford founded by Bishop Fox. and shall be for euer a noble witnes; and his honora∣ble care of reuerend antiquity, in preseruing the bones of many Saxon Kings, and by him bestowed in faire Monuments in the Cathedrall Church of Winchester, shall neuer want due celebration amongst all that honour antiquity and glorious studies. But from these worthy Subiects, we returne againe to their soueraigne King Henry. (41) Whose beginnings thus forwarded by the Duke of Britaine and the French King, drew many English into France, and filled the heart of the Vsur∣per with an extreme feare; therefore to accomplish by pollicy, what was doubtfull by armes, he sought to baite his hooke yet another way. The title hee knew stood with the daughters of King Edward (his King Richard in∣tendeth to match with his Neece. sonnes being murdered) and among them to Ladie Elizabeth the eldest, whose marriage he well saw must bring Henry the Crowne. But that once diuerted, his streame of it selfe could beare no great floate, nor bring any inundation into the Land, and therefore Queene Elizabeth in Sanctuary must be Courted, that her daughters might come to Court, and there be regarded according to their degrees. This so cunningly was carried, by men that could carry A subtill deuice. themselues to fit womens affections, that the King was purged of the murder of her sonnes; shee made to beleeue that her selfe was respected a Dowager Queene, and sister in law to the present King, and that himselfe had a Prince and many Princely Peeres most fit matches for those Princes her daughters; Many faire pro∣mises intending foule ende . that her sonne Thomas Marquesse Dorset, whilst he followed the Runaway Henry, left his honorable pre∣ferments intended to himward; and lastly requiring a reconciliation with the Queene, forgaue all iniu∣ries vttered against him out of her womanish passi∣ons, with a most willing heart: and indeed these messengers were such Crafts-masters as they brought Queene Elizabeth into a fooles Paradise, and made her beleeue that their words were his heart. Where∣upon Queene Eliza∣beth brought into . forgetting all things passed before, as the mur∣der of her sonnes, the dishonour of her husband, the bastardy of their Children, and her owne scandall for Sorcery: nor remembring the faithfull promise shee made to Lady Margaret Earle Henries mother, King Edwards fiue daughters deliuered to the Tyrant their vn∣cle. shee deliuered her fiue daughters as lambes commit∣ted to the rauening wolfe, in which act of hers is seene the weakenes of that Sexe, and the ambition whereunto by nature they are inclined, for present∣ly vpon the deliuery of her daughters, shee sent pri∣uily for the Lord Marquesse Doset her sonne, then residing in Paris, willing him to desist from the Queene Eliza∣beth sendeth for the Marquesse her sonne. Earles Faction, and come vnto King Richard, who promised him preferment, and that her selfe and daughters were in high fauour, all iniuries on both parts forgiuen and forgotten. (42) This entrance made vnto the Tragedy in∣tended, to furnish the stage and finish the Scene of her owne life, the next Actor must be Queene Anne, Queene Anne hindreth the purpose of the King. who onely now stood in the Tyrants way, her death he meant should giue life to his intruded regencie, and adde a further Claime and strength to the pos∣session which he already had, by matching with his Neece the next heire vnto the Crowne the Lady E∣lizabeth, the let onely resting that himselfe had a wife, her death therefore must immediately bee sought, yet so as the honorable repute of his name should no waies be impeached, euer carrying him∣selfe in outward semblance for a good religious ho∣nest man, and much desirous that his people should account him so. First therefore he began to lament the barrennes of his wiues wombe, and the great King Richards fained sorrow. dangers that the Realme was like to sustaine, if himselfe should die Issulesse, complaining often thereof vnto his Nobility, but most especially vnto Of Canterbury. Archbishop Rotherham lately released out of prison, whereby the Prelate coniectured Queene Anne had not long to liue. Then refrained he her bed vnder pretext of Penancy, taking her defect as a scourge King Richard refraineth his Queenes bed. for his owne sinnes, which day and night he sought to expiate by praiers: His next pollicy was, how her death might be wrought with the least suspect of wrong, and how taken when shee was gone: There∣fore as an assay to the Peoples taste, he caused it to be giuen forth that Queene Anne was dead, which was A report giuen foorth that Queene Anne was dead. so commonly divulged, that the rumour thereof came to her owne eare, and shee hauing had suffici∣ent experience of her husbands proceedings, feared this to be one of his plots, mistrusting (and not with∣out cause) that her life was in danger, whereupon all dismaid with a lamentable countenance, shee came to the King, and with weeping teares demanded, what offence shee had done, that the sentence of Queene Anne feareth her owne death. death was giuen against her already. Richard made it strange to see her so perplext, and with lo∣uing words and smiling semblance, bad her liue to scandalize report, and to thinke that many yeeres were yet added to her life, but whether in conceit for sorrow, or of poison, I cannot say, she died short∣lie after, and was solemnely buried in the Abbey of Westminster. Her death and buriall place. (43) The King thus deliuered from the bands of Matrimony, and now a widower at liberty to choose where he would, cast glances of loue towards the Lady Elizabeth his owne brothers daughter, and King Richard courteth Lady Elizabeth. began to court her for his second Queene, but the thing was so offensiue to the law of nature, and so directly against the Law of God, as all men abhor∣red the motion, and most of all the maiden her selfe, Leuit. 18. 14. which Richard perceiuing, hee forbare ouer earnest pursuite to gaine his time and all fit occasions; but most especially, hauing no leasure to woo, his sub∣iects on al sides daily reuolting, and his Nobles more and more had in suspect; among whom one was Lord Thomas Stanley Earle of Darby who had marri∣ed Thomas Earle of Darby much sus∣pected of the King. Lady Margaret Countesse of Rich nd, Earle Henries owne mother: him therefore hee most mi∣strusted, and before he would admit his departure from Court, he commanded him to leaue his sonne and heire George Stanley the Lord Strange for his ho∣stage, which he did, though it little auailed to binde George Lord Strange deliue∣red in pledge to King . Darbies affection vnto his side. (44) In this while King Richard hearing that Oxford had escaped out of the Castle of Hammes, and that he, with the Captaine thereof Iames Blunt, were fled into France and ioined with Richmund; thought it high time to quench the sparkes in those parts, before they should rise to a higher flame; and therefore hee appointed (which was presently ac∣complished) the Garrison at Callis to strait the said Ha es be ∣ged by the Gar∣rison of Callis. Castle with a hard siege, being well assured that ma∣ny welwillers to the Earles proceedings lay there harboured, who vpon the least aduantage would be ready to play. But Henry not vnmindfull of his di∣stressed friends, nor Oxford forgetting his kinde Ho∣stesse Captaine Blunts wife, made vnto the Peece, The Earle of Oxford freeth his old friends from Ha es. and on the sudden put Thomas Brandon, with thirty approued Souldiers into the Castle, who from the walles plaied vpon the beseigers, whiles Oxford an∣noied them vpon their backes, so that presently they offered, and came to a composition, which was, that they within should safely depart, but the Castle to remaine in Subiection to the King. (45) Hammes thus restored in danger to be lost, and nothing had thence besides a woman and a few suspected persons, King Richard thought himselfe now sure of all, and fearing no inuasion at home, King Richards conceit. imagined that much harme could not bee done a∣broad: for Henry in France (as he thought) found very few friends, and was fully perswaded that the French Kings assistance stood more of words then in deedes. And indeed some occasion of such suspi∣tion was ministred, for King Charles but young, and the Princes at variance, Earle Henry was enforced to make suite vnto them man by man. Besides Tho∣mas Henry solici h the French, man by man. Marquesse Dor∣set seeketh to e∣scape frō Henry. Marquesse Dorset sent for by his mother the Queene, suddenly in the night made an escape from Paris, with purpose for England, which stroke great feare among Earle Henries part, chiefely for that all their Counsels were knowne vnto the Marquesse, which if he should reueale, their designes were made desperate. To preuent which, hee was posted after, and brought backe againe, though much against his will. These things considered, King Richard to lessen his great charges, discharged his Nauy at seas, commanding the Welsh to watch the shoare; Bea∣cons King Richard dis∣chargeth his Nauie. to be built, and armour to bee ready at euery call; then giuing his affections leaue to entertaine more security, saw not the sword that hung ouer his head. (46) But Earle Henrie deliuered from the feare of the Marquesse, thought it not best to prolong time, lest others vpon like purposes should bewray his intents; and thereupon obtaining a small aide of the French with a certaine summe of money, for which the Lord Marquesse (whom he much mistru∣sted) and Sir Iohn Bourchier were left in pledge, hee set forward to Ro n, and prepared his shipping in the mouth of Seyn: whither tidings was brought him of Earle Henry set∣teth forward his iourney. Queene Annes death, & that King Richard purposed to marry Lady Elizabeth: a feare indeed farre excee∣ding the former, shee being the Princesse by whom hee must claime, whereupon much distemperature arose, euery mans braine working vpon the newes. A sudden feare. But after much consultation, it was held the best to make ouer into England, to interpose the procee∣dings ere the match was fully made, whereupon Earle Richmund with two thousand men onely, and a small number of ships, set sayle from Harflent the fifteenth of August, and the seuenth day following Henry of Rich∣mund ariueth at Milford hauen. arriued at Milford hauen in Wales, where taking land hee came vnto Dale, and thence the next day marched to Hereford west, ten miles into the Maine, from thence he marched to Cardigan, where he had newes that the Countrey was forelaid against him, but finding that vntrue, he made still forward, bea∣ting downe such Houlds as held against him: then sending secretly to Lady Margaret his mother, to Henry sent word of ariuage to his Mother and others. the Lord Stanley, Talbot, and others, signified vnto them, he meant to passe Seuerne, at Shrewesbury, and thence to march directly towards London. In his way to Shrewesbury, there mette him Sir Rice ap Tho∣mas Sir Rice ap Tho∣mas ioineth with Henry. a man of great command in Wales, with a num∣ber of men to side in his quarrell, which Henry af∣terwards requited in making this his first aider the Gouernour of Wales. (47) The Earle more boldly from Shrewsburie, held on his march to the Towne of Newport, whi∣ther Sir Gilbert Talbot with two thousand strong Sir Gilbert Tal∣bot ioineth with Earle Henry. from the young Earle of Shrewsbury gaue him his aide. Then passed he forward to Stafford, and had conference there with Sir William Stanley, and pro∣ceeding forward was honourably receiued into the City Lichfield, where Thomas Earle of Darby with fiue thousand armed men had beene some few daies Henry commeth to Lichfield. before, but hearing of Earle Henries approach remo∣ued to Anderson to auoide suspition of the jealous King that kept his sonne Hostage for his further truth. (48) King Richard at this time helde his Court at Notingham, where being informed that Earle King Richard at Notingham. Henrie with a small company was landed in Wales, made small account of what he could doe, altogether relying vpon the Lord Walter Herbert, and Sir Rice ap Thomas two principall men, in whom hee con∣ceiued no little trust: yet lest this new risen spring might gather in more heads, he sent to Iohn Duke of Norfolk, Henry Earle of Northumberland, and Thomas Iohn Duke of Norfolke, Henry Earle of Nor∣thumberland, Th . Earle of Surrey sent for to the King. Brakenbury. . Hungerford. Earle of Surrey willing them with a selected pow∣er to represse the insolency of this head-strong Earle: moreouer he sent for Sir Robert Brakenburie Lieute∣nant of the Tower, Sir Thomas Bourchier, and Sir Wal∣ter Hungerford Knights, all of them in great iealou∣sie and mistrust, commanding them with their for∣ces to come and attend vpon his person which ac∣cordingly they set forward to doe, meane while sen∣ding his Spials to know the way Henrie went, had intelligence that hee was past Shrewsbury with∣out any impeachment; whereat storming in King Richard put incholler. choller and cursing their vntruthes whom hee had put in trust, craued vengeance from heauen, and in∣stantly intended to reuenge it himselfe; then hauing notice the Earle was at Lichfield, and his partie in∣creased by daily repaire, incontinently hee marshal∣led his followers; and like a valiant Captaine and politike leader set forward his Battailes fiue and King Richard sets forward to meet his enemy. fiue in a rancke. In the middest of his troopes he bestowed the Carriages belonging to his Army: and himselfe mounted vpon a white Courser, inui∣roned with his Guard, followed by his footmen, and the wings of Horsemen ranged on euery side, with a frowning sterne countenance, but yet in great Pompee, ntred the towne of Leicester after the Sun was set, being full of indignation and swelling in King Richard cō∣meth to Leice∣ster. anger, which somewhat he asswaged with threats of reuenge. (49) Earle Richmund from Lichfield departed for Tamworth, and in the way met Sir Thomas Bourchier and Sir Walter Hungerford going towards the King, Sir Thomas and Sir Walter Hun∣gerford, turne to Earle Henry. who vpon this vnlooked for occasion, and knowing themselues in what suspition they stood, secretly left the company of their Captaine Brakenbury the night following, and wandring in waies vnknowne, with much adoe gotte safely vnto the Earles Com∣panies. (50) In the like danger through darkenesse of night, Henry himselfe chanced to come; for albeit he was a man both valiant and forwad, and by his Henry Earle of Richmund loseth his way. owne wisdome could manage his weightiest affaires; Yet now hauing notice that King Richard with a strong army was neere, and that his father in law, the Lord Stanley stood as a Neuter, he was strucke deepe in his dumps, and with twenty light Horse-men lin∣gering behind, so seriously musing what was to bee done, as lastly, he lost the sight of his Host, and by the darkenesse of night missed his way; neither durst he for the Kings Scout-watch demand direction to Tamworth, but lay in a small village about three miles distant, to his no little griefe, and his whole Armies great amasement, the one prognosticating it to be a presage of an ill beginning, and the other doubting some detriment of their Lord, but in the dawning of the next morning cōducted by good for∣tune he came to his Host, excusing that his absence Henries excuse. was to haue conference with his secret friends; and then priuily departing to the Lord Stanley, had con∣ference with him, and was put in good comfort. (51) But contrariwise, King Richard was wrapped and perplexed with feare, not onely with the depar∣ture of Sir Iohn Sauage, Sir Brian Sanford, and Sir Si∣mond Digby, in whom he had reposed great trust, but also in the dreadfull dreames which nightly he suffe∣red, King Richard ter rified with dread∣full dreames. wherein to his seeming, terrible diuels so pul∣led and haled him, as by nomeanes he could take a∣ny rest, which fearefull imaginations strucke so deep an impression vnto his heart, that the signes there∣of appeared in his countenance, howsoeuer hee sought to put them off in shew. (52) But being determined to put himselfe to the triall of battell, or else, (and that rather) en∣forced by diuine Iustice to pull the reuenging hand of heauen against him, in the morning he mar∣ched toward the enemy, and vpon a faire plaine cal∣led Redmore neere vnto Bosworth about seuen miles Richard set down his battel vpon west from Leicester he pitched downe his Tents, and thence sent a Purseuant to the Lord Stanley, com∣manding him to aduance orward with his compa∣nie, and to come to his presence, which if hee refu∣sed to doe, he sware by Christs passion, his sonnes head should off before that he dined. The Lord Stan∣ley answered the Purseuant, that if the King did so, he Lord Stanleis an∣swere vnto the Kings message. had more sonnes aliue; but to come to the King hee was not at that time determined. This answere de∣clared, King Richard commanded the Lord Strange The Lord Str commanded to be beheaded. incontinent to be beheaded, at the very season, when the two Armies came in sight each of others, but his counsellors tolde him, that the time was now to fight, and not to execute, which might better bee done when the field was fought: whereupon the Lord Strange was deliuered prisoner to the keepers of the Kings Tents, and the Kings holy vow thus broke, the Lord Strange escaped with life, by this bad tyrants too good a death. (53) But now the time and houre of Battel be∣ing come, he drew out his Army vpon the plaine, whose order for fight he thus placed, the foreward he The order of R. Richards battell. ordered of a maruellous length, to strike the more terror in the Beholders hearts, in whose forefront he placed his Archers, as a Bulwarke to defend the rest, the leading whereof was committed to Iohn Duke of Norfolke, with whom was Thomas Earle of Surrey, his sonne, his owne Battaillion was furnished with his best approued men of warre, hauing Horsmen for wings on both sides of his battel: and being thus ordered for their further incouragement King Richard mounted in place to bee heard, thus said to his Souldiers. (54) My faithfull followers, friends, and se∣lected King Richard Oration vnto his Souldiers. Chiefetaines, I confesse by your puissant valours I first aspired to the top of this royal estate, in obtaining & wearing this Diademe of Imperiall Maiesty, and maugre the seditious attempts of all cankered aduersaries, by your prudent & politike counsels I haue so gouerned the Realm, People and Subiects, as I haue omitted nothing I hope apper∣taining to the office of a iust Prince, nor you preter∣mitted any thing belonging to the parts & duties of most prudent Counsellors. And albeit, that in the getting of the Garlād I was prouoked by sinister King Richard confefleth his fault. Counsell, and seduced by a diabolical temptation to cōmit a most wicked & detestable Act, yet with salt teares and straite pennance I haue, I trust, ex∣piated that hainous offence: which abominable crime, I desire you as clearely to forget, as I daily remember to deplore and lament. If you will now vouchsafe to call to minde in what case we al stand, and in what doubtfull perill wee are intrapped, I doubt not but that you will with me confesse, that if euer amity preuailed betwixt the raised, and the raisers, betwixt the Prince and his Subiects, this day requires as much in vs both. For if wise men say true, that there is not so much power in get∣ting, as there is pollicy in keeping; the one, meere fortunes chance, the other wisdoms deepe insight, then I with you, and you with mee this day must needs take labour and paines, to keepe that prehe∣minence & possession by force, which by your pru∣dent labour I haue obtained. The diuel, you know, a continuall enemy to humane society, a disturber of Concord, and a sower of sedition hath entred into the heart of an vnknowne Welshman (whose father I neuer knew, nor him euer personally saw) exciting him to aspire and couet our Realme and Crowne, to the disheriting of vs and of our po∣sterity: you see further how a company of Trai∣tors, Theeues, Out-lawes, and runnagtes of our owne Nation, besides a number of beggerly Britaines, and faint hearted Frenchmen, are ayder and partakers of this his wicked enterprize, ready at hand to oppresse and spoile vs, our lands, our wiues and children; which eminent mischiefes, if we then will withstand and resist, wee must liue and die together as brethren, fight together as Li∣ons, and feare not to die together like men; thus resolued, beleeue me, the fearefull Hart neuer fled faster before the greedy Grayhound, the silly Larke before the spar-hauke, or the simple sheepe before the Wolfe, then these proud bragging enemies will run out of the Field at the sight of your manly visages. For haue we not already manifest tokens of victory and triumphs? Is not the Captaine of the Rebellion Richmund a Welsh milke-sop, of no courage and lesse experience in Marshall feates of war, brought vp by my brothers means, and mine, like a bird in a cage, in the Court of the Duke of Britaine, neuer saw Army, neuer wore Armour, without practise, and therfore without knowledge, how to gouerne a field. What are his followers but a sort of fainting runagates, whose fearefull eies, as they could not behold our raies in peace, can worse abide to see our royal banner displaied against them in fight; for their owne consciences shall be∣wray their guilt; their oathes, their periury; their promise, infidelity; and the sight of vs their annoin∣ted Soueraign shall either cause them shamefully to fly, or submissiuely to yeeld thēselues to our mercy. As touching his French and Britaine aiders, their valours haue beene well knowne to our Noble Progenitors, often vanquished but neuer vanqui∣shers, onely braggers without any great deeds, drunkards without discretion, Ribaulds without reason, Cowards without resistance, and (in a word) effeminate, lasciuious, and neuer seene in the Front of a Battell, seeking ten times more meanes to flie and scape, then once to assault the face of their enemies. Therefore like valiant Cap∣taines aduance forth your Standards, and make knowne your manhood by dint of sword, and be yee sure that if euery one of you giue but one sure stroke, the day wilbe ours; for how can a handfull withstand a whole Realme? Aduance therefore forward, my Captaines; in whom I well know is wanting neither courage, pollicy, wisdome, nor puissance. I therefore desire you, for your loue to meward, the zeale of your natiue Countrey, and the safety of your Prince and selues, to shew this day your true English valour, and for my selfe I assure you I will this day either triumph in a glorious victory, or die in this quarrell with im∣mortall Fame; in whose Palace all our names shall be enrolled, if we preferre the renowne of our Countrey, before our owne liues. Now S. George for vs, and vs for victorie; hast therefore forward, and remember this, that I am he who with high aduancement will preferre the valiant and hardy, and with seuere torture will punish the dastard and cowardly Runaway. The Oration ended, as it gaue courage to some, so gaue it distast vnto others▪ The diuers opi∣nious of King Ri∣chards host. whose hearts carried gall though their mouthes dropped hony; some intended to turn to Earle Hen∣ry; some determined to take part with the strongest; and some meant to stand still and doe nothing; so vn∣sure was he of his Subiects loyaltie, that had been so trayterous to his owne Nephewes. (55) Earle Richmond then seeing King Richard thus embattelled, sent to the Lord Stanley who stood houering aloofe off, to come helpe him to order his Lord Stanley sent for to Earle Hen∣rie. fight, whose answere was, that Henry should doe it himselfe, and that he would come to him when he saw time conuenient, which strucke the Earle into a great dumpe, but now hauing no time for delay, ne∣cessity compelled him to order his men. The Fore∣ward he made single according to his small number The Earle mar∣shaleth his bat∣ alions. of souldiers, and in the Front placed his Archers, o∣uer whome Iohn Earle of Oxford was Captaine, the right wing was led by Sir Gilbert Talbot; and the The Earle of Oxford Captaine of the Archers. left assigned to Sir Iohn Sauage: Earle Henry himselfe with his vncle Iasper Earle of Pembrooke gouerned the Main-Battell, better replenished with horse, then foote, whose whole number consisted hardly of fiue thousand, the kings doubling the number and more. The Battels thus ordered, Earle Henry armed at all peeces sauing his helmet, rode from ranke to ranke, and from wing to wing, incouraging his men, and the more to encrease their hot spirits, mounted vp∣on a little banke, the better to be seene and heard, these wordes he vttered in all their hearing. (56) If euer God gaue victory to a iust quar∣rell, if euer he aided warre for the tuition of a king∣dome Henry Earle of Richmonds ora∣tion. or Countrey, or euer succoured them that fought for the reliefe of poore innocents, oppres∣sed by tyranny, then no doubt my friends and fel∣low souldiers, but that this day he will giue vs a triumphant victory. For if we consider for what, and against whom we fight, we may not doubt but that God himselfe will fight for vs. The thing which we are here ready to try by sword, is the li∣berty of the Land from vnder the vsurpation and yoake of a Tyrant, and hee, against whom we draw sword, is the Monster (for I may not call him man) which feareth neither God, Lawes, Iustice, nor Humanity, an homicide, a murderer of his owne kindred, a destroier of the Nobilitie, a Mawle to his subiects, and a firebrand to the whole King∣dome, whom iust vengeance craueth to haue quen∣ched: and consider I pray you, who be of his band, euen such as by murder and vntruth to their kin and Countrey, haue got wrongfull possession of our rightfull inheritance, letting your wiues weep, and Orphanes wander, to seeke their liuelihood where they can get it, whose teares I doubt not crie in the eares of the Lord▪ who will punish these Malefactors either with pricke of conscience cow∣ardly to flie; or deliuer themselues into our handes without Battell. Consider further, I pray you, that in yonder great Battell are men brought more for feare then for loue, by force compelled and not willinglie assembled; persons that desire more the destruction, then the life of their Captaine, and fi∣nally a multitude, whereof the most part be our friends and the least part his that leades them; and surely it stands in suspence, whether the malice of the souldiers towards their Generall, or his feare conceiued against them, be the greater, for this is a rule infallible, that as ill men daily couet to destroy the good, so God appointeth the good men to con∣found the ill, and if it be true that Clerkes preach that the one is to be hated, and the other beloued, who then can spare yonder tyrant Richard Duke of Glocester vntruly calling himselfe king, that hath broken both the Lawes of God and man, in the blood of his brother, the murder of his Nephews, the death of his wife, the slander of his owne mo∣ther, and the bastardizing of his brethren. If you haue not heard, yet I haue read that Tarquin the proud, for the rape of Lucretia, lost the Kingdome of Rome: yet was not his fact so detestable as Ne∣roes, who slew his owne mother, to behold the place of his conception: but yonder vsurper is both these persons in one; a Nero in murder of his young Nephewes, and in defaming the wombe of his owne conception: and a Tarquine intending to defile, and carnally to know his owne Neece vnder pretext of holy Matrimony, which Lady you are witnes, I haue sworne shalbe my wife. This is the quarrell for which we are here this day assembled, and for whose equity we craue God to be iudge: a good beginning of his Protection we haue alrea∣dy seene, in escaping the treasons laid for vs in Bri∣taine, the dangers of Seas, and our safe arriuage vnto this place, not hunted by anie, but rather our selues hunting after that furious Bore; who this day, and in this place, is so intangled in his owne toyle, as his crooked tuskes shall not be able to gnaw the cords of his snare asunder, nor himselfe haue power, to free himselfe from his pursuers, whose Iauelines (I doubt not) shall be died in the blood of this filthie swine, and shall well rid the world of an vglie hogd∣backed Monster: which thing to accomplish et vs remember, that victory is not gotten by multitude but by manhood, but the smaller number we bee, the greater is our glory if we vanquish, if vanqui∣shed fretting time shall neuer consume our memo∣ry, that died to free our selues, and Nation from the oppression of an vsurping Tyrant; and thus I assure you, that for so iust a cause you shall finde me this day rather a dead Carrion vpon the colde ground, then a Carpet prisoner kept aliue for re∣proch. Aduance therfore forward like true hearted Englishmen, display your Banner in defence of your Countrey, get the day and be Conquerors, loose the Battell, and be villaines; God and Saint George giue vs a happy successe. Which no sooner was said The readi of Earle Henries souldiers. but that the Souldiers buckled their Helmes, the Archers stript vp their sleeues, bent their bowes and frushed their feathers attentiuely listening when the Trumpet should giue the sound of Battell. (57) Betwixt both the Armies there lay a great marish, which Earle Henry left vpon his right hand, with purpose to haue that for a defence, as also the Sunne at his backe, and face of the enemy, which The purpose of Earle Henry. when King Richard perceiued, with found of trum∣pet and shout of his Army, hee passed the Marish, when the bow-men on both sides let freely flie their arrowes: the rest comming to encounter with strokes: but the Earle of Oxford fearing to be en∣compassed The fight begun by the enemy, commanded euery of his rankes to keepe within ten foot of his Standard, which being accomplished, and their fight a while stayed, their opposites mistrusting some fraud or de∣ceit, ceased likewise from theirs, many of them willing inough so to doe; notwithstanding, the L. Stanley at the same time ioyning with the Earle, a cruell battell was againe begunne, and manfully continued vpon either part. Till lastly, King Richard hauing intelligence that the Earle of Richmund was but slenderly accompanied with men of Armes, and them also busied in their owne guardes, meant by his incounter to finish the day, as the onely man, vp∣on whom stood all the hope of his enemies successe▪ and therefore hauing the markes of Earle Henry, made from the range of his owne battell, and vpon The strength & courage of King Richard. the spur with his Speare in his Rest, ranne violent∣ly towards him in a furious spleen; in which rage, at the first brunt, hee bare downe and ouerthrew the Earles Standard, and slew Sir William Brandon the bearer thereof; next matching with Sir Iohn Che ney a man of great might, manfully threw him to the ground, thereby making an open passage by dint of sword vnto the Earle himselfe: Richmund beholding the high valour of Richard, most lion∣like The two Chief∣taines cope to∣gether. coped with this cruell Bore, and held him mau∣gre his tuskes at his sword point, betwixt whom the fight was so desperate, that Henrses company were strucke in great despaire; at which very instant Sir William Stanley came in with three thousand tal fresh Souldiers, who entred the battell with such cou∣rage and valour, as they bare down all before them where they went, whereat the Kings side began to Sir William Stanley commeth in with new sup∣plies. faint, and to giue ouer fight, but the more resolute a while maintaining their ground, and now mistru∣sting treason among themselues, turned their backes and ran away, whereby King Richard presently per∣ceiued the downefall of his ill raised glory, and the The Kings side giue ouer fight. full period of his short raigne: and all hope of resi∣stance now past, a swift horse was brought to escape the field, with comforts that another day might set the victory on his side: but with a mind vn∣matchable The valiant courage of King Richard. in hatred against Henry, or rather to haue his death registred in fames honorable role, whose life had beene blotted with the penne of diuulged infamie, hee hastily closed his helmet, saying, that that day should make an end of all battels, or else in this now in trying he would finish his life, which last was presently performed; for thrusting into the middest of his enemies, and there valiantly figh∣ting among the thickest▪ hee obtained more honor King Richard slaine. in this his two howres fight, then he had gained by all the actions of his whole life. (58) There died that day with him Iohn Duke of Norfolke, Walter Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Sir Men slaine in the battell. Richard Ratcliffe Knight, Sir Robert Brakenbury Lieu∣tenant of the Tower, and not many Gentlemen more: Sir William Catesby one of King Richards chiefe Counsellors with two others, were taken and two daies after beheaded at Leicester, among them C tesby h hea∣ded. that escaped were Frances Vicount Louell, Humfrey, and Thomas Stafford brethren, which three tooke Sanctuary at S. Iohns in Glocester. Thomas Howard Earle of Surrey though he submitted himselfe vnto Henry, yet was hee committed to the Tower and therein a long time remained. Vpon Earle He es part onely ten men were slaine, as Sir Gilbert Tal∣bot wrote the newes from the field, whereof for note Sir William Brandon was the best, in all to the number of foure thousand men. This battell was fought the two and twentieth of August, and yere of Christ Iesus 1485. in the field Redmore, neere vnto The number slain at field. Bosworth, in the Countie of Leicester; after which Earle Henry gaue thankes vnto God, and commen∣ding his Souldiers, with sufferance for them to take Harding saith . the spoiles of the field, dubbed many of thē knights; which his doings was so acceptable to the whole Ar∣my, as with great applause th y all cryed King Hen∣ry, King Henry; whose forwardnesse to him-ward, when the Lord Stanley perceiued, hee tooke K. Ri∣chards Henry procla∣med king in the eld. Crowne, found among the spoile of the field, and set it vpon the Earle of Richmunds head, thereby confirming the election of the people, at which in∣stant beganne the raigne of this new King. (59) The slaine body of the vsurping Tyrant, all tugged, and torne, naked, and not so much as a clout Dead Richards body starke naked, was trus∣sed vp to . left to couer his shame, was trussed behind Blanch Seint Leger (or White Bore, a Purseuant at Armes,) like a hogge or Calfe, his head and Armes hanging on the one side of the horse, and his legges on the o∣ther, and all besprinckled with mire and bloud, was so brought into Leicester, and there for a miserable . spectacle the space of two dayes lay naked and vnbu∣ried, his remembrance being as odious to all, as his King Richard laid naked to be seene of all. person deformed, and lothsome to be looked vpon: for whose further despite, the white Bore his cogni∣zance was torne downe from euery Signe, that his His badge defa∣ced and torne downe. monument might perish, as did the monies of Ca∣ligula, which were all melted by the decree of the Senate: Lastly, his body without all funeral solem∣nity was buried in the Gray-Friers Church of that City. But King Henry his Successor, of a princely K Richards mo∣nument. disposition, caused afterward his Tombe to bee made with a picture of Alablaster, representing his person, and to be set vp in the same Church, which at the suppression of that Monastery was pulled downe, and vtterly defaced; since when his graue ouergrowne with nettles and weedes, is very obscure and not to be found. Onely the stone chest wherin K. Richards co n ade a drinking trough. his corpes lay, is now made a drinking trough for horses at a common Inne, and retaineth the onely memory of this Monarches greatnesse. His body al∣so (as tradition hath deliuered) was borne out of the City, and contemptuously bestowed vnder the end of Bow-Bridge, which giueth passage ouer a branch of Stowre vpon the west side of the Towne. Vpon this Bridge (the like report runneth) stood a stone A flying pro∣phecy of King Richard. of some height, against which King Richard, as hee passed toward Bosworth, by chance strucke his spur, and against the same stone as he was brought backe, hanging by the horse side, his head was dashed and broken, as a wise woman (forsooth) had foretold, who, before Richards going to battell, being asked of his successe, said, that where his spurre strucke, his head should be broken; but of these things, as is the report, so let be the credite. Dead he is, and with his death ended the factions a long time con∣tinued betwixt the Families of Lancaster and Yorke; With Richards death dieth the quarrell of Yorke and Lancaster. in whose bandings, to bring, set & keep the Crown on their heades, eight or nine bloudy set battels had beene fought, and no lesse then fourescore per∣sons of the bloud-royall slaine, as Philip C ines Phil. C . l. 1. 6. 7. the French Writer saith; many of them being wel knowne to himselfe: after which stormes, and this Tirants death, a blessed vnion ensued, by ioining those houses in Henry of Lancaster, and Elizabeth of Yorke. (60) Hee was of Stature but little, and of shape The description of K. Richard. Ioh. Hardings . deformed, the left shoulder bunching out like a Mole-hill on his backe, his haire thinne, and face short, a cruell countenance, in whose aspect might bee perceiued both malice and deceit. When hee stood musing (as hee would doe oft) his vse was, to bite and chaw the nether lip, his hand euer on his dagger, which euer hee would chop vp and down in the sheath, but neuer draw it fully out. Pregnant in wit hee was, wily to faine, apt to dissemble, and haughty of Stomacke, an expert Souldier, and a better King then a man. He founded a Colledge at Middleham beyond York, and a Collegiat Chaun∣tery Iohn Stow. in London, neere vnto the Tower, called Our Lady of Barking; he endowed the Queenes Colledge in Cam∣bridge Iohn Rows. with fiue hundred Marks of yeerely reuenew; and disforrested the great Field of Wichwood, which King Edward his brother had inclosed for his game: he raigned two yeeres, two moneths, and one day, and was buried, as we haue said. His Wife. (61) Anne the second daughter and Coheire to Richard Neuil, the stout Earle of Warwicke and Sales∣bury, was first married to Edward Prince of Wales, the sonne to King Henry the sixth, and after his death was remarried to Richard Duke of Gloucester, Anno 1472. afterwards by vsurpation King of England, with whom in great State and solemnity shee was Crowned Queene the sixth of Iuly, and yeere of Sal∣uation, 1483. She was his wife to the last yeere of his Raigne, and then leauing her husband to choose another Queene, was laid at rest in the Ab∣bey of Westminster, in this thing happy, that she saw not the death of the Tyrant. His Issue. (62) Edward the sonne of King Richard, and of Queene Anne his Wife, and the onely childe of them both, was borne in the Castle of Middleham, neere Richmund, in the Countie of Yorke Anno 1473. and Iob. Ross. Warwic. being vnder foure yeeres of age was created Earle of Salisbury by his Vncle King Edward the fourth, the Camb. Brit. seuenteenth of his Raigne; but his father King Richard in the first of his vsurpation created him Prince of Wales, the foure & twentieth of August, and yeere of Christ, 1483. he then being about ten yeeres of age, vnto whom also the Crowne was intailed by Parliament; but this Prince dying before his father, and much vpon the time of his mothers decease, saw not the reuenge that followed the Tyrants Raigne, whose bad life no doubt hath made doubtfull the place of this Princes buriall, and other Princely offi∣ces done him in his life, and at his death. HENRIE THE SEVENTH, KING Monarch 57 Henry VII. OF ENGLAND AND FRANCE, AND LORD OF IRELAND, THE FIFTIE SEVENTH MO∣NARCH OF THE ENGLISH, HIS RAIGNE, ACTS, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XX. H ENRIE of that name the seauenth, hauing by such mixt meanes of valor A. D. 1485. 22. August. The date of his raig com∣mencement. and practise as are alreadie described, obtained the possession of Englands Crown, we must now pre∣sent vnto you his actions in the person and state of a King, maintained by him with like mixture of courage and skill as it was atchie∣ued; to the verification of that rule, That things are kept by the same Arts whereby they were gained. In de∣scribing whereof, wee meane nothing lesse, then for humoring the vaine admirers of phrase and conceit, to mount vp into Panegyricall flourishes, in honor of the man, though his excellent vertues would wor∣thily beare, if not duely also exact them: yet may wee not omi to obserue, that as in his attaining to G this Pr whole . the Crowne, there was (through diuine prouidence) a concurring disposition of all important Circum∣stances, without which his attempt might haue pro∣ued disasterous; so hee, hauing now possessed the Soueraigne power, and mastered the State in the maine pointes, easily made circumstances waite vpon his wisdom, and to take their forme from his directions: Of the first kind, wherein his felici∣ty deserues to be celebrated, were these. That he by the Male- line a meere stranger to both the roi∣all houses, as descended from the Welsh and French, and by the female springing out of such a family of Lancaster (the Beanfords) as by the same law which enabled it to inherite in ordinary estates, was made Con K. H . incapable of succe n in the Regalitie, should so safely be conuaied away into forraine parts, there to continue an head of expectation and reuolt, du∣ring the intestine troubles and dangers, to him in∣euitable here at home. Secondly, that the Realme of England should bee so auerted from Richard, (though a very honorable, wise, iust and necessary Prince, after hee was somewhat setled) as for his sake, to neglect (in a sort) so many naturall heires of the house of Yorke, some of them in right prece∣ding Richard, such were the children of Edward the fourth, and George Duke of Clarence, Richards elder brethren, and all of them iust barres to the Earle of Richmund, who scarce had any thing of a legal title, or of a warrantable intention; but his purpose to remoue an Vsurper, and marry the Lady Elizabeth, the rightfull inheritrice. Thirdly, a long and fatall slacknesse of Richard in his warlike preparations, * Fabian saith, Richard fearing little, prouided ttle defence. through the meer contempt of his enemy the Earle, which was the cause, that both hee landed securely, and Richard was driuen to fight in a manner with tu∣multuary, rather then trained forces. And finally, that a principall, potent, noble, and yet a deepely su∣spected Conspirator, (as being Father in law to the Earle) should haue charge, vnder Richard, ouer a chiefe portion of his Army at the very instant of ioyning battell. (2) These considerations (among many other) had in them such an aptitude to his designe, as no humane wit could fashion, and without the which a man of equall starres and parts to Henry, or Henry himselfe, might in vaine haue beene wise, in vain, in∣dustrious and valiant. Circumstances of the other sort shall plentifully occurre in the whole carriage of his ensuing actions. In both which, are verified two contrary rules; for the state of the first obseruati∣ons teacheth vs with Plautus, that doctorum hominum consili haec vna vincit De , This one God∣desse Pl . can effect more, then the wits of an hundred learned men; speaking as an Heathen man of that famous Idole Fortune; and in the second, that which I enall excellently noteth; Nullum numen abest, si sit prudentia, sed te Nos facimus Fortuna Deam, coeloque locamus. I . No Goddesse wants, where Prudence guids, though Chance A Goddesse deemd, fond Men to Heauen aduance. (3) Now for the Character of this famous wise Prince (which with reason ought to bee set in The description of K. Henries minde and qua∣lities. front to his actions, as certaine lights of the mind, by which to discerne the fountaine of counsels and causes) a Sir Fr. Bacon. f g. MS. learned, eloquent Knight, and principal Lawyer of our time, giues vs many things, of which these selected, are very regardable. This King (saith he) attained vnto the Crowne, not onely from a priuate fortune, which might endew him with a mode∣ration, but also from the fortune of an exiled man, which had quickned in him all the seedes of obseruati∣on and industry. His wisdom (speaking thereof, as it was in his raigne) seemed rather a dexterity to deliuer himselfe from dangers when they pressed him, then any deepe foresight to preuent them a farre off. Iealous hee was ouer the Greatnesse of his Nobility, as remembring how himselfe was set vp. Great and de∣uout reuerence hee bare vnto religion, as hee that employed Ecclesiasticall men in most of his affaires. In his gouernment hee was led by none, scarsely by his lawes, and yet he was a great obseruer of formality in all his proceedings, which notwithstanding was no im∣pediment to the working of his will. In his wars (mea∣ning domesticke) he was rather confident then en∣terprising, by which also hee was commonly not the poorer. Generally, hee seemed inclinable to liue in peace, and in the quenching of the Commotions of his subiects, hee was euer ready to atchieue those wars in person, sometimes reseruing himselfe, but neuer retiring him∣selfe. Of nature he c eted to accumulate treasure: in expending whereof hee neuer spared charge that his af∣faires required, and in his foundations was magnificent enough. He chose commonly to employ cunning persons, as he that knew himselfe sufficiently to make vse of their vttermost reaches, without danger of being abused with them himselfe. (4) Ioh. Da▪ of Hert. MS. Another hauing a purpose to write in Eng∣lish the history of this Henry (an argument which for the worthy doing thereof, requires as wise a man as Henry himselfe,) hath among many extraordina∣ry praises (most what framed out of his strong affe∣ction) truly noted concerning his atchieuement of the Crowne: That the Almighty hand of God brought him ouer the toppe of the highest and most dangerous obstacles, to sway this Scepter, when neither Title, Power, nor (great) Probability could giue him so much as one sound push to set him forward. And of the man himselfe, That hee entertained that, as sodaine, as So∣ueraigne change of fortune, with such moderation, and vntransported discretion, as it well appeared hee had throughly conquered himselfe, before hee subdued the Vsurper his enemy. What could bee added greater to so true a prayse? nothing certainely; for that he (as else-where that Writer saith) was the Salomon, who brought peace to this Kingdome, long before oppres∣sed by warre and tyranny: it was onely an excellent effect of that excellent moderation. Other Authors of our times concurre in the same iudgement of him, whom they prayse Act. and . p. 909. for singular wisdome, excellent temperance, and moderate frugality; for Io. Stow. i Hen. 7. policy, iustice, and rauity: which princely vertues caused him to bee highly reuerenced of forraine Princes. These honourable Eulogies after so many yeeres from his death, iustly countenance their relations, who Ber. Andr. MS. Fabian Polyd. Verg. &c. wri∣ting, in or about his owne dayes auerre no lesse; a∣mong whom, Bernard Andreas of Tholouz is most flowing and abundant. This Andreas (as himselfe writes) was afterward entrusted with the instructi∣on of Prince Arthur (eldest sonne to King Henry) in good letters, though hee was blind; and hauing as∣well the title of Poet Laureat, as of the Kings Histori∣ographer, (how hardlie soeuer those two faculties meet with honour in the same person) meant to haue historified and poetized the Acts of this king, but (for want of competent and attended instructi∣ons in many places of chiefe importance) left his la∣bour full of wilde breaches, and vnfinished; yet in such points as he hath professed to know, not vn∣worthy to bee vouched: for there is in him a great deale of cleare elocution, and defaecated conceit a∣boue the ordinary of that age. Hee, among other verses in honour of this our Henry (whom he ensty∣leth the most sapient King) hath these not hyperbo∣licall, but proper, wherein hee salutes him. Princeps ingenio nitente praestans, , relligione, comitate, Sensu, sanguine, gratiâ, decore. A peerelesse Prince for wisdome rare, Fame, piety, courtesie, debonaire, Knowledge, birth, grace, and feature faire. Whereby also, after these pourtracts of his inward faculties, and gifts, may be guessed that a body they had for their mortall mansion, no way vnsutable; and it seemes by that Maiesty (so they call the Ima∣ges of our Kings, which are carried for representa∣tion in their funerall Chariots) which at this day is Mo . at st. extant, that hee was of stature tall and slender, som∣what round visaged, and though in Bernard. . his childhood sickly, yet of aspect in all his outward lineaments, so noble and gracious, as well presaged, and after∣ward fitted the most fortunate height to which he was now ascended. But notwithstanding these great praises, there want not some who think him to haue been an heauy Father to the common wealth, which by sundry courses he greatly laboured to bring vn∣der, as a seeming ground-worke of his owne, and his posterities security. And in his last dayes Auarice, (the naturall maladie of age) tooke him strongly, the enuy whereof he partly diuerted from himselfe by the splendor of some few publik buildings, which as they gaue the people cause to talke of their braue∣rie, so they also insensibly wrought in their light minds a mittigation of their burthen. (5) Let vs now behold his vertues as they are shi∣ningly deduced into action. After the Battell he ha∣uing Henries first acti∣ons after his vi∣ctorie. truly first ascribed the whole good of his suc∣cesse to God, commanded, that to the body of Bern. Andr. his enemy King Richard, an honourable interrement should be giuen in the Friers at Leicester, where notwith∣standing Fabian. hee was with little reuerence buried. From thence the King made speed to London, as to the chiefe seat and Epitome of the English Monarchie, whithout which no Prince found himselfe heere se∣cure enough * he entred the Citie vpon a Bern. Andr. MS. and vpon the 28. of Aug. saith Fabian. Satur∣day, as vpon a Saturday he obtained his triumphall and Crowning victory. The Mayor of London and his fellowship, Fab. receiued him in violet at Harn∣sey Parke, but his entrance (which was at Stow. Shor∣dich) was honoured with a very great troope of the Peeres, and Nobles in his traine, at which our Poe∣ticall His entrance in∣to London. Historian Andreas was present, and saluted the victorious Prince with certaine Latine Sapphicks, which he sung vnto him as himselfe writeth. But Henry staied not in Ceremonious greetings and po∣pular acclamations, which (it seemes) hee did pur∣posely eschue, for that (Andreas saith) hee entred Latenter. couertly, meaning belike, in an Horse-litter of close Chariot. His lodging was in the Bishoppe of Londons Pallace, where (after publike offertories and solemne thankes giuen to God in the Cathedrall Church of S. Paul) the businesse of his Coronation was seriouslie consulted of; which was afterward (vpon his remoue to the Tower, where hee See Camb. Mills. &c. crea∣ted his vncle Iasper Earle of Pembroke, Duke of Bed∣ford, and other Estates) with due pompe and rituall magnificence 30. October M r . Stow. His Coronation. accomplished at Westminster. (6) But the naturall solder and indissoluble ce∣ment, which must make this Kingdome stand, was His Marriage with the Lady Elizabeth debated. his marriage with the Lady Elizabeth, eldest daugh∣ter of the late Edward the fourth. This as a point of most importance was with great maturity and iudgement againe thought vpon, when Henry was now already crowned. The remoter danger, suppo∣sed to reside in the person of Edward Earle of War∣wick (only sonne and heire, euen in his infelicities, to that vnfortunate Prince George Duke of Clarence) was preuented; for he had beene, by King Henries direction, brought vp prisoner from the Manour of Holinsh. Edward Earle of Warwicke impri∣soned. Sherif-hutton in Yorkshire, (where aswell he, as the Lady Elizabeth were kept by King Richard vnder guard) and immediatly shut vp within the Tower of London. (7) Frances Bern. Andr. MS. Duke of Britaine had offered Hen∣rie before his departure to match him with the La∣die Anne his eldest daughter and sole heire, but hée was otherwise affected, as placing his loue where it might afford him greatest & presentest strengths. An∣dreas addeth, that King Edward himselfe destinated his eldest daughter vnto Henry then Earle of Rich∣mund, and sought in his life time to haue effected it; but his meaning being (belike) suspected, as but a drift to get Henry into his hands, the motion tooke no hold as reserued till God had cleared the way of all such impediments, as might hinder the consoli∣dationof both the Royall families, Yorke and Lanca∣ster, (after their so mortall and confustue massacres) in the person of one Soueraigne. (8) The Lady her selfe, besides youth and beau∣tie (precious Ornaments of that Sexe) had in her Lady Elizabeth described. from her Bern. Andr. MS. infancy a wonderfull feare, and care to please God, and a like dutieous and humble carriage toward her parents: her brothers and sisters shee did exceedinglie loue, and as well toward the poore, as all the Seruants of Christ, shee bare a singular affection. Sir Tho. Moore. Her Vncle (the late vsurper) in contempt of God and man (whose Lawes he was so long accustomed to violate, till the iust reward thereof did at the length ouertake him) incestuously meant to haue defiled her, vnder the a∣bused name of Matrimonie. When therefore the newes of his death came to her eare, the ioy of her heart brake foorth into these words. Bern. Andr. MS. Het. Christian S chaste meditati∣on about marri∣age. So yet at the last thou hast, ô God, regarded the humble, and not despised their praiers. I well remember, neither shall I at any time be weary to remember, that my most noble Father of fa∣mous memory meant to haue bestowed me in mariage vp∣on this most comely Prince. O that I were now worthy of him; but my Father being dead, I want such good friends as should motion so great a matter: and perhaps hee will take a wife from forraigne parts, whose beauty, age, for∣tune, and dignity shall bee more then mine. What shall I say? I am all alone, and dare not open my minde to How then did Andreas know i ? either hee doth poetize heere, or else had it from her after-relati . any. What if I acquainted my mother therewith? Bashfulnesse forbids: What if some of the Lords? Audacity wanteth. O then that I might but confer with him! perhaps in dis∣course I might let slippe such a word as might discouer my intention. What will bee I know not: this I know, that Almighty God cannot tell how to absent himselfe from them who trust in him. Therefore I make an end of think∣ing, and repose my whole hope vpon thee, ô my God, doe with mee according to thy mercy. Sh e secretly thus re∣uoluing all matters, and resoluing of them in her minde, was heard from aboue; for King Henry ha∣uing vnderstood the honour, chastity, and singular vertues of the maiden Princesse, the rather inclined to make her the Soueraigne of his affections: assig∣ning therefore Iohn D of He∣reford MS. Holinshed. a day, wherein (for the vtter abolish∣ment of all Hostilities betweene the two Roiall hou∣ses of Yorke and Lancaster) to establish an vnion of Families by coniunction of their two persons in marriage. (9) The meane while he wisely goes on to secure the maine, which consisting in setling the generall state, and securing his owne person, he, for the one, P. Nouemb. holds a Parliament at Westminster, and for the o∣ther, institutes a certaine number of choise Hollinsh. Ar∣chers, with allotment of fees and maintenance, * The Kings Guard first in∣stituted. which vnder a peculiar Captaine, and the name of Yeoman of the Guard, he assigned to that seruice, for him and his successors, Kings and Queenes of Eng∣land. In the Parliament was attainted Richard late Duke of Glocester, stiling himselfe by vsurpation, King King Richard and others ed. Richard the third; and with him by name many other of the Nobility and Gentry. And yet withall to lay a foundation for his green Gouernment in loue and clemencie, hee, during the Parliament proclaimed free pardon and entire restitution of their fortunes, to all such as submitted themselues to his mercy, and made oath of Fidelity. A seasonbale and necessa∣rie Act; Whereby hee greatly weakened ma∣licious humors, and wanne to himselfe no small accession of friendship and seruices; for many for∣sooke Sanctuaries, and tooke vp their refuges in his goodnesse and most gracious fauour. And to re∣moue all scandall and danger from his friends, he re∣uersed and reuoked all former Acts, hurtfull either to himselfe, or to them for his cause, the whole house of Parliament, Holinshed. The Crowne en∣tailed vpon King Henry and his heires. concurring finally in establishing by a solemne Act, the Crowne vpon him, and his heires for euer. (10) After dissolution of which Parliament, the King redeemes such pledges, as he had left in France for money borrowed, and assumes into his Coun∣cel those two renowned agents in aduancing his for∣tunes, Iohn Morton and Richard Foxe, as the most ne∣cessarie parts and supports of his State; the former of which, not long after (Thomas Bourchier dying) was elected and enthronized Archbishop of Canter∣bury; the latter, was foorthwith aduanced to be Lord Keeper of his Priuy Seale, & successiuely preferred to the Bishoprickes of Exeter, Bath and Welles, Dur∣ham, and Winchester. (11) The most wished and most welcome 18. Ianuary. 1486. day The King mari∣eth the Lady E∣lizabeth. of marriage betweene King Henry and the Princesse Elizabeth being now come, was celebrated by them with all religious and glorious magnificence, and by the people, with Bern. Andr. MS. fires of ioy, dancings songs and bankets through London, all sorts and sexes besee∣ching Almightie God to send the King and Queene most prosperous successe, and an infinite encrease of the common ioy, by bestowing vpon them a young Prince, and other Issue at his good pleasure: Which prayers (saith Andreas) our Lord Iesus Christ vouchsafed to heare; the Queene within a while after, prouing with Child, of whom shee was happily deliuered in the moneth of September following at Winchester, which to the most fortunate King was a new happinesse, to the Prince Arthur borne. Queene a great reioycement, to the Church a soueraigne delight: to the Court an exceeding pleasure; and in briefe to the whole kingdome an incredible contentment. Nor that without reason, as it afterward appeared; for (if God had beene pleased to haue granted lon∣ger life) not England onely, but the whole world should in such a pledge haue had cause of eternall reioycement. * Ber. Andr. M. S. But God who gouernes all thinges, and in whose hand are aswell the Scepters of Princes, as dates of their liues, disposed otherwise. (12) Meanewhile there were not a few who did en∣uie to King Henry this vnexpected height of felici∣tie; The attempts of the Kings malig∣nats. but they who first discouered themselues, were certaine remaines of the late ouerthrow at Bosworth, whose diffidence, or euill will, was greater then to relie vpon King Henries clemencie, o to behold the dazeling brightnes of his new atchieued glorie; and for that cause refused to forsake the Sanctuarie, which they had taken at Colchester. These were the Lord Louell, Sir Humfrey Stafford, and Thomas Staf∣ford his brother. Who, while the King, secure of dangers behind him, was in his Progresse at Yorke, meaning by affability, bountie and other his wisest courses, to gaine the good wils of the Northern peo∣ple, (with whom the memory of King Richard was very deare) and so to weaken the strengths and hopes of all future conspiracies, forsooke their refuge, and secretly in seuerall places gathered forces, therewith to surprize and dethrone the King. The Lord Lo∣uell raised his forces with such speed, that the King who at Lincolne first heard of his escape, and lightly regarded the same, was no sooner setled in Yorke, but certaine intelligence came that he approched fast with an Armie; and withall, that the Staffords had assembled forces in Worcestershire, meaning to The Lord Louell, and the Staffords rebell. Hardings conti∣nuer saith they had taken Gloce∣ster. assault the City of * Worcester. The extremity of the King (who neuer dreamt of such a darling) was not small, for neither had he any sufficient numbers about him of his sure friends, nor could iustly repose confidence in the Northern men, whose loue to King Richard their late slaine Lord, made them still suspe∣cted. But danger quickeneth noble courages, and therefore vpon due recollection of himselfe, hee armes about three thousand men, (if tanned leather, whereof the most of their breast-pieces, for want of Polyd. Verg. in Henry 7. Holinsh. other stuffe, were framed, may be called armour) and sends them vnder the leading of Iasper Duke of Bedford, with commission to pardon, or to fight. The Duke offering pardon, the Lord Louell fled by night to Polyd. Verg. Sir Thomas Broughton into Lancashire, where hee lurked certaine monthes; the headlesse multitude yeeld without stroake, and the felicity of King Henry preuailes in euery place; for the Staffords hearing what had hapned to their Confederates, disperse their Cloude of rebels, and speedily take refuge at Colnham a village about two miles from Abingdon in Oxfordshire. But the priuiledges of that place Yeere-booke of Henry 7. Anno 2. * being iuridically scand in the Kings Bench, they were found vnable to afford protection to open trai∣tors, Traitors taken from Sanctuary and punished. whereupon they were forceably taken thence, and conueighed to the Tower of London, from whence Sir Humfrey Stafford was drawne and execu∣ted at Tiburne, but his brother Thomas by the Kings He is called Lord Stafford by Hardings conti∣ er. mercy had his pardon. These short dangers and troubles, by reason of their suddainty did worthily make the King wakefull euen ouer smaller accidents; this blaze being kindled from so neglected sparkles. But there followed deuises, which in their owne na∣ture were so strangely impudent, and in their vent so strongly Bolstered, that if Louels enterprise made him suspitious, these other might iustly fill him with innumerable iealousies. (13) The records are immortall, which testifie, that the erection of Idols and Counterfeits, to de∣throne Corn. Tacit. Histor. Suet. in Ner. cap. 57. Counter feit Princes erected to defeate the true. them who are in possession, is a verie olde Stratagem. What troubles a Pseudo-Nero wrought, by support of the Parthians (who wonderfully fa∣uoured Nero liuing,) the Romane writers teach vs. Neither hath the Diuell (Father of Impostures) any so solemne practise, as Personation and Resemblan∣ces of true, whether men or things. Insomuch that some Diuines haue thought, that as he can, and often doth trans-shape himselfe into the forme of a Cele∣stiall Angell, so that he also deceiued our first mother vnder that resplendent but assumed habit. And what mischiefs he wrought, in this very kind of thru∣sting out into the world false pretenders, the speech of wise Act 5. Gamaliel testifieth, who rehearseth the names of Theudas and Iudas Galilaus; but the world hath since had more woefull experience hereof, in that execrable Impostor Mahomet, pretending to bee the Messiah. In England it selfe (before the time of this Henry) what strange practises and conspira∣cies Mantell execu∣ted in Queene Elizabeths daies for assuming the person of King Edward 6. were set on foote vnder the title of a Pseudo-Ri∣chard in the raigne of Henry the fourth, the former Histories haue sufficiently opened, so that this Prince encountred nothing new in the Generall, howsoeuer pestilent and extraordinarie in the particular. Indeed his raigne (more perhaps then any other of his pre∣decessors) afforded plentifull matter for such deuises to worke vpon, there being many then, who hauing beene Io. D . M. . conceaned (as it were) in the bowels of Sedition, and nourished with the bitter and pernicious milke of dis∣sention, were not onely apt to embrace, but also, where they were not offered, euen there to beget oc∣casions of confounding all. Men, Polyd. Verg. i Henry 7. who could nei∣ther endure warre, nor peace long, nor any lowes in either, as desirous to enioy the licentious violences of ciuill warre; a Io. D . M. S. misery, which all wordes (how wide soeuer) want com∣passe to expresse. The strange attempts of which kind of men (or rather Monsters) wee shall see ex∣emplified in the subsequent tragedies. Richard Si∣mon, an ambitious and imposterous wretch, and The first Idole e∣rected against King Henry. withall a Priest, neither vnlearned, (the sacred sha∣dow of which name the rather countenanced his practises) in hope to make himselfe the principall Bishop of England, plotted the aduancement of Lambert Symnell (being his pupill in the Vniuersitie of Oxford) to the Crown of England; instigated there∣to * Polyd. Verg. i Henry. 7. by the diuell, and suborned by such as fauoured the White-rose faction, vpon this occasion. There went a rumour, that Edward Earle of Warwicke, sonne and heire to George the late vnfortunate Duke of Cla∣rence, A false Edward in the forge. second brother of King Edward, Polyd. Verg. l. 26. was either al∣ready murthered, or should shortly be. This Architect of guile, Simon hauing this Symnel in tuition, (the * sonne of a Baker, or Shoomaker, but a wel-faced and Princely-shaped youth, of no * very euill nature, Bern. Andr. M. S. Polyd. Verg. H. 7. but as it was corrupted by his Tutor,) meanes out of this rumors aerie substance, to produce an appari∣tion and prodigie, which in Title, behauiour, and ar∣tificiall answers (infused by his Tutors practises) should resemble Polyd. Ver. ibid. one of King Edwards children. Here we must confesse that our authors leade vs into a perplexitie: Some * affirming, that this counter∣fet Holinsh. Iohn Stow. was exhibited to the world vnder the name of Edward Earle of Warwick, sonne of the Duke of Cla∣rence, by the most turbulent and fatall Earle of War∣wicke slaine at Barnet-field. But hereunto reason Lambert Sim ls Historie recti∣fied and vindica∣ted. seemes repugnant. For what ground of claime could that Gentleman haue, not onely for that his Father was attainted, but much more for that the Queene of England then in being, was the indubitate eldest daughter and heire of King Edward the fourth, and sister and next heire to Edward the fifth? Nei∣ther wants there ancienter authority then any of the others, affirming, that this Idoll did vsurpe the name Bern. Andr. MS. of one of King Edwards sonnes; many arguments concurring to buttresse this affirmation. For, if at the same time (as Polydor writeth) it was bruted, that the sonnes of King Edward the fourth had not Iob. Stow was often heard to maintaine this opinion in see∣ming earnest. been mur∣thered vnder their vsurping Vncle Richard, but were e∣scaped, and liued in obscurity beyond the Sea; how can that be true, which Stow and the rest (who follow Polydore therein) affirm, that Lambert was crowned King of England at Dublin in Ireland, as heire to George Duke of Clarence? For with what iniurie to the roiall brethren (fained to be aliue) was that? Ve∣rily there seemes no coherence in the circumstances, nor apparence of truth in the substance. And how much stronger to the purpose of the Conspira∣tors was the fiction of an Edward, the Kings sonne, and himselfe once proclaimed King, then of an Ed∣ward, who was but an Earle, and a Duke of Claren∣ces heire? But you will aske, what was the poore Earles part in this tragedie? what other? then that by rumoring his murther, they might bring the per∣son of King Henry into common detestation for his crueltie; for clearing whereof the King publikelie afterward shewed the Earle to the view of all. And albeit the vulgar fame is, that Lambert was called Edward, yet Ber. Andr. M. S. one who then liued, saith directly, that this Cypher was dubbed & mounted from his owne meane ranke to the title of a King, vnder the name of the second brother, who for certaine was called Richard: but what Record there is to the contrary, is to vs as yet vnknowne; for our vulgar Bookes extant can hardly passe with a Iury of ordi∣nary Criticks, and Censors for vnchallengeable eui∣dence. (14) This aery Typhon (which grasped at the em∣bracement of the two Kingdomes of England and Ireland) thus throughly schooled and instructed, is secretly conueighed by his Sinonian Tutor to Du∣blin, the chiefe City of the Irish, where he was con∣fident Lambert con∣uaied into Ire∣land and recei∣ued. of partakers, as amongst the hereditary Cli∣ents, and adherents of the house of Yorke; which af∣fection was first breathed into them by the cunning popularities of the Lord Richard Duke of Yorke, the first of that line, who publikely claimed the English Crowne. His hopes deceiued him not, for the Lord Polyd. Verg. Stow cals him Earle of Kildare, and Lord Depu∣ty of Ireland. Chancellor of Ireland, Thomas Fitz-Gerald (of the noble Familie of the Geraldi s) presently professed himselfe for the plot, and by his authority and perswasions drew the generality of the Irish after him into it. Messengers are hereupon dispatched, vpon all hands both into England, to such as they had hope of, and into low Germany to the Lady Margaret, sister of King Edward the fourth, Dut∣chesse Dowager of Burgundy, a most mortall enemy of the Lancastrian family. In both places the ligh∣ted matches of sedition found powdry spirits, and wonderfull correspondence. There is flocking from all parts to support the quarrell, and the Irish (to haue the glory of giuing England a King) proclaim & reuerence this painted puffe, & flying bubble with Lambert procla∣med King of England. royall Style and honors. (15) Henrie seeing the fire so strangely kindled round about the wals of his best hopes & strengths, fals seriously to counsell at the Monastery of Carthu∣sian Monkes neere Richmond, where after exact deli∣beration it was decreed, 1. That general pardon (to stay the minds of as many as it was possible) should with∣out Conclusions in the Councell of England vpon the fame of this conspiracy. any exception bee proclaimed to such as from thence∣forth should continue dutifull. Which was principal∣ly done to temper, and assure some priuate persons, as Sir Thomas Broughton and others, whose forces, willes, and wealth were held most in suspition. 2. That Elizabeth late wife to Edward the fourth, and mother in law to Henry now King of England, should forfeit all her lands and goods, for that (contrary to her faith giuen to them, who were in the plot for bring∣ing in King Henry) she had yeelded vp her daughters to the hands of the Tyrant Richard. 3. That Edward Earle of Warwicke then Prisoner in the Tower, should bee openly shewed aline in London. All which was ac∣cordingly executed, but without any great fruit, for still he plot went on. (16) The condemnation of Elizabeth Queene Dowager, rather moued enuy towards Henry, then relieued his cause; for to many the iustice of that sentence was doubtful, the circumstance of a mother in law inferred a breach of pietie, and the iudge∣ment it selfe did also want example. The iustice was doubtfull both in regard of the cause, and of the proceeding. Of the cause, for how could shee haue defended her daughters by the priuiledge of sanctu∣ary from such a Wolfe and Tyger, as would haue infringed it for her sons, had they not been quietly deliuered to his bloudie hands? The same Tyrant doth now demand her daughters as to honour, not to slaughter; but if it had beene to slaughter, what helpe? she, terrified with the motion, after much deliberation yeelds them to him, when shee neither could, nor durst detain them. But you say she vi∣olated her faith, and hazarded thereby the liues and hopes of all that were in the plot for her cause. A great crime certainely. But Richard was in title; and power a King, and hung ouer her head with ineuitable terrors; when Henry of Richmund was but an Earle, and he farre off, and in banishment, and without any apparence of preuailing, and her selfe a friendlesse widdow. The manner or procee∣ding was no lesse strange; for by what law or triall was shee condemned in a Praemunire? Shee neuer∣thelesse is put out of all, and confined to the Mona∣stery Queene Eliza∣beth depriued of her estate, and condemned to a Monastery. of Bermondsey in Southwarke, where finally she ended her dayes, borne to bee an example of both fortunes, hauing from a forlorne widdowes estate beene raised to the bed of a Bachelour Monarcke; and in his life time beene reduced to the seeming of a priuate fortune, when her Lord was driuen to flie the land; and afterward saw those turnes and vari∣eties as few Queenes euer felt, or saw so many, or more contrarie; whether we regard the heighth of worldly felicity, when shee did behold her sonne a King, or the depth of misery, when the Tyrant in∣uaded his Crowne and life, or now her daughter being Queene, and her selfe a miserable prisoner. The con ideration whereof, as it may worthily mortifie ambitious affections; so the strangenesse of the sentence verifies that collection among others, which Sir Fr. Bacon. frog. MS. that learned Gentleman makes of this Kings raigne in these words. Hee had (saith hee) a very strange kind of interchanging very large and vnexpe∣cted pardons with seuere executions. Neuerthelesse, (his wisdome considered) it could not be imputed to any ine∣quality, but to a discretion, or at least to a principle, that hee had apprehended, that it was not good, obstinately to pursue one course, but to trie both wayes. Howsoeuer that was; certainely, shee being so iust an obiect of his commiseration, who had married that daugh∣ter, by which hee enioyed a Kingdome, and gotten that verie power, wherewith he ruined her; it can∣not bee reasonably thought, but that there were o∣ther most important motiues, perswading such a sharpe course, or otherwise, that it must bee recko∣ned among the chiefe of his errors. But as in the times of her flourishing estate, she founded and en∣dowed a faire Colledge for Students in Cambridge, which of her is called the Queens; so we will leaue to those her Beneficiaries the farther search of this Argument, and deploration of her fortune, which seemes such to vs, as if King Henry affected to leaue somewhat in this example, wherewith to oppose & amase the world Vnlesse perhaps it were, that hauing proclaimed a generall pardon for all offen∣ces without exception to such as in future should re∣maine A probable cause why King Henry dealt so rigorously with his ther in law. Ioyall, and foreseeing that some, who might be willing to lay hold of that benefite, might also bee cunningly practised with to fall away, vpon di∣strust of his word, when once hee had serued his present vses, hee therefore meant (by so cleare a de∣monstration, as the vtter vndoing, and perpetuall emprisonment of his wiues owne mother,) to giue them assurance, that hee, who vpon her person had beene so seuere a punisher of faith-breach, would neuer violate it in his own, and thereby secure them in that point, and secure himselfe of them. (17) Yet neither could this deuise take so good effect, but that Iohn Earle of Lincolne (sonne of Iohn Iohn de la Pole Earle of Lincolne and others, flie to the Dutchesse of Burgundy. de la Pole Duke of Suffolke, and Elizabeth King Ed∣ward the fourths sister) secretly fled into Flanders to the Dutchesse of Burgundy, whither Francis Lord Lo∣uell was likewise not long before escaped. Sir Tho∣mas Broughton (another principal Confederate) tem∣porized in England, there to remaine▪ a stay to the businesse, aswell for mutuall intelligence, as receit of an Army when it should arriue. This Earle of Lin∣colne, besides that he could not with any patience behold a Lancastrian weilding the English Scepter; was also of a Polyd. Verg. sharpe wit, and high reach, and there∣fore not without an ambitious sensibility, that in countenancing King Henry, hee wronged that ex∣pectancie, and relation to the Crowne, which hee had in right of his mother, sister to King Edward the fourth▪ and to King Richard the third, who had Cambd. in Not∣ting. designed him for heire apparant, & contracted his sister the . Los e. Lady Anne de la Pole, to Iames Prince of Scotland: was also the rather animated by Ber. Andr. letters re∣ceiued from his aunt the Dutchesse of Burgundy, ear∣nestly calling vpon him for his presence. This Dut∣chesse was the second wife of Charles Duke of Bur∣gundie, Phil. de Com. slaine by the Switz at the battell of Nan è; by whom thogh he had no issue, yet by reason of her great dower, & wise behauiour among the Dutch, shee was strong in money and friends; all which shee was willing to conuert to the vtter subuersion howsoeuer of the Lancastrian line. Though there∣fore, shee well knew that this Lambert was but an Idoll, Iohn Da. MS. hammered out of the hote braine of that Bo tefew Richard Simon, yet she embraceth the occa∣sion, countenanceth the Imposture, and leaues no∣thing vnsaid or vndone, which might giue life and successe to the enterprise. The Earle, the L. Louell, and others shee furnished abundantly, and ioyneth vnto them a renowmed Coronell Martin Swart, a Gentleman of Polyd. Vergil saith he was . honorable birth, exemplary valour, and singular experience, and certain selected com∣panies, to the number of about two thousand Al∣maines, which soone after arriue at Dublin. Lambert, who before was but proclaimed, is now in Christs Church there solemnly by them crowned King of England, * feasting and triumphing, rearing mighty showtes and cries, carrying him thence to the kings Lambert crow∣ned King of England Du∣blin. Stow. Castell vpon tall mens shoulders, that he might be seene and noted; as hee was surely (saith Stow) an honourable boy to look vpon; though nothing lesse was meant, then that hee should enioy that honour if they preuailed; as meaning then to erect Edward Earle of Warwicke. Posterity might worthily doubt of the truth of these so desperate impudencies, and ridiculous Pageants, practised in the highest affaires of mankind, but that the thing is so vniuersally te∣stified, and also that the highest affairs of the world (when once they are passed) are little better then such like Pageants. (18) K. Henry (on the other side) though he had by most diligent espials endeuoured to know the truth of Lamberts quality, to diuert the streame of affections, which he saw inclined that way, for that the practise was carried with such wonderfull art, as that very many (otherwise discreet and sober Bern. Andr. men) were induced to beleeue that hee was indeed King Edwards sonne; and although the generall pardon proclaimed by King Henry, did vndoubted∣ly stay very many from open reuolt, but much more the carefull watch which was kept at the Ports, to hinder the escape of Malecontents or fac∣tious Fugitiues: yet he manifestly saw, that it wold in the end come to a field: for which cause he takes order for the leuie of an Armie, resoluing to giue King Henry pro∣uides for battell. his enemies battell with the first opportunity, it be∣ing the ancient and manfull fashion of the English, (who are naturally most impatient of lingring mis∣chiefes) to put their publike quarrels to the trial of the sword. Lambert attended with Iohn Earle of Lincolne, Francis Lord Camb. in Oxf. Vicount Louell, Thomas Fitz-Gerald, or rather Maurice Fitz-Thomas (belike his sonne) and Coronel Swart, with an Army of de∣sperate Lambert lands in Lancashire. and pickt souldiers, aswell English, Dutch, as Irish (all fired with infinite hopes and promises to bee enioyed vpon the ouerthrow of King Henry) come on shore in Lancashire at a place called the pile of Fowdray, where they Ioine with their assured confederate Sir Thomas Broughton, and his sequele; and after some short refreshment in those partes, march with erected courages against King Henry, ta∣king their way through Yorkeshire (the hoped nurse∣ry of their surest friendshippes) and gloriously▪ pub∣lishing their new King euery where, though without any increase of force by concourse, (for King Henries wisdome had marred their errand,) their iourney was directed toward Newarke vpon Trent. (19) The King then at Couentree, being by such scowtes as hee had appointed for that seruice, pre∣sently aduertised of Lamberts arriuall, and hauing his forces ready vnder the conduct of Iasper Duke of Bedford, and the Earle of Oxford, because delay Nottingham the Rendeuow of K. Henries ar y. in this case was on all hands reputed mischieuous, sets forward to Nottingham, and by a wood side called Bowrs, encampeth his people; in whom there appeared a gallant forwardnesse to reuenge them∣selues by the sword of that indignity, which was offered to the English name by strangers and rebels, who durst hope to giue them a ruler. Thither re∣paired George Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury, George L. Strange his son, Sir Iohn Cheinie, and other noble and valiant Gentlemen with their numbers, which ad∣ded no small sinewes to K. Henries musters. Polydor hath diligently set downe the names of such prin∣cipall * Hist. Ang. l. 26. men in those parts as repaired thither, partly voluntary, partly sent for to the common defence of the King and Kingdome; but without due additi∣ons of each mans degree and place of precedency; Great repaire of the noble and people to his . yet their names doe well deserue to be remembred, both for the honour of their Families, and examples of loyalty. He recounteth sixty fiue Captaines which assembled from places thereabout, vnder whome Polyd. Uerg. there cannot probably be thought fewer Souldiers then eight or ten thousand, the English vsually, till of late, hauing commonly an hundreth and fifty in a Company. Their surnames (besides Edward Lord Polydor eals him Regulus, m ∣ning a Baron. Hastings) are in him as followeth; Longford, Mont∣gomerie, Vernon of the Peke, Shurley, Folgehan, Gris∣ley, Sutton, Stanley, and Stanley, Houghton, Meryng, Stanhop, Clifton, Stapleton, Willoughby, Perpoinct, Ba∣bington, Bedyll, * Brudenel, Markham, Merbury, Bo∣rough, Tyrwit, Husey, Shefeild, Newport, Ormeston, , Polydor errone∣ously Cals him. Tempest, Knyuett, Willoughby, Dygby, and Dygby, Harrington, Sache erel, Vyllers, pylding, Poult ey, Vau , Gryne, Gryfin, Lucy, Belknap, Throgmorton, Gray of Ruthin, Wolston, Fynder, Philips, Cheney, Cotton, S. Iohn, Mordant, Terell, Rainsford, Paynton, Daniel, Marney, Armidel. From the vttermost bounds of the North, there repaired also other chiefe persons and leaders (saith he) as These three seeme Barons as them whom he meanes by principes viri. Ogle, * Ne yle, * Latimer, Bulmer, Langford, Norres, Ne yle of Thortinbrig and Williams. The Earle of Lincolne neuerthelesse comes forward with his Counter-king, nothing perhappes adding greater courage to that side, then the exam∣ple of Henry himselfe, who with lesse numbers (but much more secret Art) preuailed in a pight field at Bosworth: his meaning was to get into Newarke. The King wakefull vpon all aduantages, and perfectly instructed of his enemies courses (whom despera∣tion did thrust forward to a daring hope) dislodgeth with his Army, & passeth through Newarke, leauing it behind him about 3. miles, to intercept the Lam∣bertines; and there sits downe againe. The Earle of Lincolne encamps with great brauerie and shew of courage in the face of the Kings forces. (20) The next day both the Armies are brought forth to fight, neere to a little village called Stoke. The Earle of Lincolne marshalled his people by the aduise of Coronell Swart and others, to the best aduantage, vpon the Bern. Andr. Brow or hanging of an hill expecting the charge. The Almaines were all of them hardie and approued men, and throughly well-appointed, and so in likelihood were such English as stood for that side; but the Irish, besides multitudes and fierce∣nesse, had small prouision, saue (after the rude man∣ner of their Nation) darts, skeins, or the like. The maine of the Battell rested wholly vpon the English and Almains. King Henry on the other side, (as hee that thirsted for an end of this bloody daies worke,) speedily disposed his whole numbers into three Battailions: the Voward whereof was best repleni∣shed with store of choice and picked men, well armed and appointed, and fortified with wings. The ar∣mie being thus ordered, Andreas saith that King Hen∣ry vseth this speech. (21) Most faithfull Lords, and you most valiant Companions in Armes, who haue (together with King Henries O∣ration before the battell at Stoke. vs) endured so great perils by Land and Sea; lo, we are againe against our wils, drawne to trie our fortunes in another Field. For the Earle of Lin∣coln (a periured man) without any occasion mini∣stred by vs, defends an vniust quarrell against vs: neither doth he it dissemblingly, but most openly impudent, without any feare of God; not so much onely to endammage vs, as to fulfill the humor of a giddie, and intemperate-tongued woman, who is not ignorant that her blood was extinguished by her brother Richard; but because that line did al∣waies maintaine a most deadly fewd against ours, shee (without any great regard to her Neece, my dearest Consort) assaies to destroy aswell vs as our posteritie. Yee see therefore how often wee are prouoked by them, but they shall not carrie it a∣way vnreuenged. God therefore and his holy An∣gels we first call to witnes, that we are prouident both night and day for your safetie, and for the Common quiet; though thus the ancient enemy repugneth. But God, a iust, strong, and patient Iudge, will also bring a remedy to this euill. In the meane time we exhort and admonish you, that the consideration of our iust inheritance be at this pre∣sent more forceable with you, then their wicked∣nes; neither doubt, but that the same God, who in the former warre made vs victorious, will enable vs to triumph now also ouer these enemies. Let vs therefore set vpon them courageously; for God is vpon our side to assist vs. (22) The Earle of Oxford (on the behalfe of the whole Army) was prepared to make answere, but the Bernard. Andr. King hastening to the proofe, brake off all Ceremo∣nies; and the signe of Battell giuen, they thunder for∣ward The battell of Stoke or Stoke. field. with showts of people, and sound of martiall musicke, and like a blacke tempest, powre them∣selues vpon the Front of the Enemies Battels; who rushed forward with equall violence and furie, as men that at once encountred against feare and for∣tune. The fight continued doubtfull aboue Polyd. Verg. l. 26. three houres. A long space for men of courage to be em∣ploied in killing one the other, and fit to glut the hunger of furie. The Earles English wanted nothing but a good cause, and the Almains gaue not place to the Kings people in any point worthy of gallant Souldiers, but sold their liues dearely, and their Coro∣nell Swart had scarce any before him in personall performance. Neither were the Irish behind for their parts, if their skinnes had beene sword-proofe, for the contempt of death was alike in them as the rest. Briefly, the wonder of that daies worke was, that Christian men, in no sounder a quarrell, could dare to die so boldly, such chiefly, as the Earle of Lin∣colne and some others, who knew the secret of that desperate enterprize. But God, the Lord of reuenges; punishing their vniust malice, with a suddaine whirle∣winderising in the heat of the Battell, ( as when Con∣stantine Bern. Andr. fought against the enemies of the Church) our souldiers, who seemed vanquished, became victorious For the Kings vantgard Io. Str . reenforced it selfe, and gaue so furious a recharge, (in likelihood vpon this encouragement sent as it were from Heau that it The King pr ∣ . vtterly brake the Enemies squadrons, and giuing in among them with full randon, slew Polyd. V . first such Cap∣taines as resisted, and put the residue which yeelded not, either to the sword flight. Herewith the whole Armie Bern. Andr. shouted, the trumpets sound victorie, and the generall crie runnes King Henry, King Henry. When the battell and chase were ended, so that there was time and leasure to view the field, it then appea∣red what mindes the slaine bodies carried; for all the chiefe Captaines, the Earle of Lincolne himselfe (though the King would gladly haue had him sa∣ued, The Earle of Lincolne and all the chiefe lea∣ders of that side slaine in the field. to come thereby to a greater light of his dan∣gers) the Lord Louell, Sir Thomas Broughton, Coronell Swart and Polyd. Verg. Maurice Fitz-Thomas, Generall of the Irish, were (like Ed . Compian Hist. of Ireland. Catiline and his Complices) found to couer those places dead, which they defended li∣uing, * Cr. Salust. is . Catil. among foure thousand other souldiers which were slaine vpon that side. The King at this battell lost Polyd. Verg. But Bernard Andr. saith that very fe were flaine. almost halfe the People in his Vantgard, and Surgeons had store of worke among the Suruiuers, so that the Garland gained at this iourney was not vndipt in blood; Howbeit there is no mention that any man of honor or speciall note, fell vpon the Kings side. (23) Among the Prisoners was the Counterfelt himselfe, and the lewd contriuer of this wicked Stra∣tagem, Richard Sinon, who with little change may most truly be called another Sinon. The King (who reserued himselfe in this battell, (as in others, but Fr . MS. neuer retired) made both their persons examples of his clemency. For Lambert being questioned, how such a Vapul . Bern. Andr. MS. breec ing-boy as he was, durst attempt so great a wickednes, dinied not, that hee was compelled thereunto, by certaine bad persons, who were of th conspiracie; and as for his parents quality, hee confest them to bee such as indeed they were; altogether of base and despica∣ble calling. Io. Da. MS. Si subtil, or Sir Richard Sinon the Priest, whether for discouery of some great secrets, or the extraordinary reuerence borne to his functi∣on (extraordinary say we, for otherwise Thomas . in H. 4 & . Priests had beene openly put to death) was not executed, but Polyd. Verg. . who also followes Polydor. condemned to a dungeon, and perpetuall shackles. Lambert (whom the glittering periwig of regall style did but lately so adorne) was condemned to Polyd. Verg. the Kings kitchen, there to manage spits at the fire; who Io. Da. of Her. MS. if his wit and spirit had answered his late Titles, would haue chosen much rather to haue beene turned from the Ladder by an hangman. But Polyd. Verg. Lamberts for∣tunes. hauing in this abiect condition giuen sufficient proofe that he was but a Puppet, or a property in the late tragicall motion, Io. Da. MS. he was at length (promoted wee cannot say) made one of the Kings Falconers, in which estate it seemes he liued and died inglorious. This battell was fought vp∣on a 16. . A. D. 1487. A. Reg. . Satterday, a day of the weeke which is Bern. And. Ms. obser∣ued to haue been fauourable and luckie to this Hen∣rie. His first care after the victory setled, was that which most became a religious Prince, the humble and ioyous acknowledgement of thankes to God, in the very place. From thence passeth to Polyd. Verg. Lincoln, where he spent three daies in supplications, processions, and thanksgiuings, and his Standard to our Ladies Church at Walsingham in Norfolke, there to remaine as a Monument of orie and grati∣tude. Such as were taken in ell or chase, are then executed. From Lincoln progresse into Yorkeshire, where hee tooke aswell by execution, as ransome, for purging from such as were culpable, or pro t Newcastle about A. Reg. . Ambassadors in∣to Scatland. the middle of ; h his experienced and Agent Bishop of Excester, and Sir Richard into Scotland, there to peacee King the third, to emppeach the and protection, which his enemias and found therein. Him∣selfe hauing spent a great part of in this progresse, or rather itinerary I cing, returnes by Leicester toward London. Those prudent Ambas∣sadors in the meane time negociating with the Scot∣tish King, wrought L st Iocob. 3. him to bee more inclinable to a per uall peace; then it stood with his safetie to let his Subiects vnderstand, who fauoured him not. Seuen yeeres truce is consented vnto, with a secret promise of King Iames to renew that terme, as it be∣gan to expire; with which assurance the Ambassa∣dours returning, gladded their wise Soueraignes heart; who thereby found that the Bishop of Exce∣ster, Bishop F xe, first a great furthe∣rer, and now a chiefe preseruer of King Henries Regality. was no lesse industrious in preseruing his Regall state, then he had beene prudent in furthering Him vnto it. The firebrands and readiest fuell of Re∣bellion thus seemed to be quenched, and the King beholds himselfe in the Grace and fauour of his peo∣ple, nor lesse of forreigne Princes; Margaret Dulchesse of Burgundy (his implacable Bern. Andr. MS. The Dulchesse of Burgundies im∣mortall malice. Iuno) excepted; whom the newes of her Nephewes the Earle of Lincolnes death, and the bloody blowing vp of all her late hopefull and costly contriuements, did gall and wound extreamely; but added fresh appetites of re∣uenge to her former immortall malice, which Polydor. Uirg. ne∣uer gaue ouer working, till shee had vented another no lesse prodigy then Lambert was. But the King being honoured and sought vnto, aswell by a Nun∣cio Bern. Andr. from the Romane See, who obtained leaue to publish a Croisado heere against the Turkes, as also from the French; after his many labours, aswell Martiall as Ciuill, susteined on behalfe of himselfe and the Common-weale, makes a triumphall 3. mber. Anno D. 1 87. en∣trie into London, which was adorned in the best ma∣ner. And in the same moneth vpon Add. to Fab. Elizabeth Crow∣ned Queene of England. Saint Kathe∣rines day, his wife Elizabeth was Crowned Queene of England, as if that then first hee had held himselfe assured of Roiall estate: for he saw not what dange∣rous lifts would yet bee giuen by that vnquiet La∣dies practises, to heaue him out of authority. (24) The next maine action which sifted the iudgement, and tride the sinnewes of King Henry, A difficult case, whether King Henry should aide the Britaines or no. was a forraigne case of more difficulty and Ar , then of intestine danger, as in which the high and para∣mount respects of Common-weale were intangled, or encountred with offices most neerely concerning the honour of a Princes minde, which neuer is more blemished then with the note of ingratitude. A dis∣pute and combate betweene wisdome and blood, publike and priuate, (if any quality, or action of a King may be said to be priuate) which seemed wor∣thy of so excellent, cleare, and considerate a dis∣course, as that of Henries. You heard what nota∣ble fauours and humanities, when he liued a banisht Earle in the Continent, he had receiued, first of the Duke of Britaine, then of Charles K. of France; so that he stood equally (as it were) obliged to them both, & could acknowledge no lesse. Charles (more ambiti∣tiously then iustly) desired exceedingly to annex Britaine to the Crowne of France, taking occasion Charles King of France practiseth to Britaine to his Empire. of the time, and other circumstances, which all see∣med to conspire with his affections. The Duke old, and the father of one onely daughter suruiuing till marriage; Maximilian King of Romans, and riuall of King Charles in the same desires, (aswell for the Dutchy, as the daughter,) feeble in meanes; and King Henry aswell obnoxious to the French for be∣nefits, as busied in his particular at home: and the Duke of Britane, by succouring Lewis Duke of Or∣leance, and other French Lords, whom King Charles reputed his aduersaries, ministred to the French an occasion (or colour at least) of warring vpon Britaine, and so by the apt concurrence of circum∣stances, to annexe it by conquest, if by treaty hee could not. Henrie of England, now knowne to bee victoriously setled, seemes worth the Courting. Ambassadors come from the French, who lay open the wrong offered by the Britaines, in succouring the ene∣mies Ambassadors out of France to King Henrie. of France, put Henrie in minde of passed benefits; and pray his assistance, or at the least a neutrality; but altogether concealing the mystery of this warre, which was to annexe Britaine to the Crowne of France. Howsoeuer, Henry, though he well enough knew, that a King must euer bee the best part of his Councell, (for what are others opinions, if himselfe want the happinesse, or iudgement, to choose the best?) propounds the points to his priuy Councell, whereupon he Christianly offers himselfe a Mediatour betweene the French and Britaine; an office, in which it was apparant he might best satisfie all obligati∣ons and duties both to God and them. The French pretend liking, but in the meane time follow their designe hard. Henry sends his Chaplen, Master Christopher Vrswicke a man * whom he very often imploied. The Iohn Norde s Middlsex. lit. H. French maske on. Things come to some extremi∣ties. It becomes manifest that King Charles abused the King of Englands credulity; for the City of Nant's in Britaine was brought by siedge to point of yeel∣ding, while messengers, and packets, outwardly os∣led with the name of peace, slide to and fro, and the French doubt nothing so much, as lest the English should stirre, before their victorie had made Britain irrecouerable. The Lord Wooduile (as without the Kings will, or priuity) slips ouer into Britaine with three or foure hūdred choise men to assist the Duke, The Lord Wood∣uile slaine in Britaine. and came time enough to bee slaine with almost all his Souldiers, at the battel of Saint Albin, where the French wanne the day; notwithstanding that the Britains, the rather to appall their enemies, had ap∣parelled Paulus Ac yl. in Carol. 8. seuenteene hundred of their owne Soul∣diers in white Coates with redde Crosses, after the English manner, and made thereby a shew of two Regiments of English. The Britaines had a great losse The Battel of S. Albine, wherein the French pre∣uaile. in that battel, wherein they were made fewer by sixe thousand. The Duke of Orleance and Prince of O∣range, who then were British in faction, were taken Prisoners in the same fight. The French lost about twelue hundreth, and their Generall an Italian. So that the state of Britaine seemed ripe for a fall. (25) But King Henry, hauing long since sus∣pected, and foreseene, what the vttermost marke of King Henrie o∣pens the cause in Parliament. the French might be, and seeming to haue enough suffered the interest, which they might expect in him as a man, to be abused by their practises to the preiu∣dice of his other friend, the Duke of Britaine, (who forgate not to sollicit and vrge that point,) had made the quality of this affaire known to the body of State in open Parliament, for that purpose assembleb; as meaning by authority thereof to purge himselfe from all imputation, if, as a King, he did that which the reason of Gouernment required, which would not assent, that Britaine should be made French, lest by that accession their Neighbourhood might grow intolle∣rable, Britaine hauing so many Sea-townes and Out∣lets to mischiefe the English trafficke. Himselfe was o∣therwise also sufficiently resolued, that the general good ought to predominate the particular, and that his priuate obligations ought not to entangle, or preiudice the publike seruice. The Parliament therefore, considering that which stood for the Common-weale, decrees aide The Parliament grants aide of money to sup∣port the warre of Britaine. of men and money, on behalfe of the Duke of Bri∣taine; it being (besides all other respects) a perillous example, to suffer the great to deuoure the lesser Neighbour States, vpon pretences of iustice, or re∣uenge. Forces are leuied; but (for respect of King Charles, and in hope that the shew of preparations would stoope him to equall conditions,) not yet so roundlie, as the Britons necessities expected. Meane while that no formality or Princely Ceremo∣ny should be vnaccomplished, King Henry by his Ambassadours certifies King Charles of his Parlia∣ments decree; praies him to desist from farther Hostili∣tie; Polyd. Uirg. otherwise that he must assist the Duke, but yet (for the French Kings sake) with this reseruation, of pursu∣ing his subiects no where but in Britaine. Charles made small account of these ouertures, because hee truly perswaded himselfe that the English aides would not arriue in season; which fell out accordingly; for be∣fore that time, the French had gotten that victorie, (whereof euen now wee spake) at the Battell of Saint Albin. Vpon newes whereof, the English Regi∣ments were immediatly sent ouer vnder Robert Lord Broke Generall, Sir Iohn Cheiney, Sir Iohn Midleton, Sir Ralfe Hilton, Sir Richard Corbet, Sir Thomas Leigh∣ton, Eight thousand English sent tar∣die into Britaine. Iob. Stow Annal. Sir Richard Lacon, and Sir Edmund Cornewall Knights, and Coronels. The whole Army contai∣ned eight thousand men. These march toward the enemy; who, acquainted with the temper of the English, whiles they are fresh, as Polyd. Verg. l. 26. being then almost in∣uincible, containe themselues within their Campe; but yet Polyd. Verg. molest the English with continuall skir∣mishes on horsebacke in seueral places at once; smal∣ly to the profit of the French, who Hollinsh. Iob. Da MS. were alwaies put to the worse, the Archers receiued them with such perpetuall stormes. In the meane space, Fran∣cis Duke of Britaine dies, leauing in effect, one only daughter, the Lady Anne, (for the other, Polyd. Verg. being the younger) deceased not long after. This altered the whole state of the case. The British Nobility The Duke of Britain dies, and the English re∣turne. (vnder their young Mistresse) immediatly fall at va∣riance among themselues, and the English thereby were on euery hand in danger: so that God (as it appeared by the sequele) had destined Britain to bee annexed to the Crowne of France; for the English (after fiue moneths stay) were in wisdome compel∣led to returne; the rather, for that Winter now was come vpon them, and Britaine, destitute of compe∣tent defence, (her Rulers disagreeing among them∣selues) was finally by the marriage of King Charles with the Lady Anne, made a parcell of the French Monarchy, as heereafter will appeare. (26) King Henry the while was againe in danger The beginning of new stirres in Yorkeshire. to haue had present vse of Souldiers at home. Wee shewed, what care was heeretofore taken by him to weede the North, and free it from lurking enemies. That notwithstanding, when the Earle of Northum∣berland, (Lieutenant of the North) signified at an assemblie (according as the truth was) that the King Iob. Stow ex Iob. Skelton. (though the Northern people had besought it) would not remitte one penny of such Subsidy, as was granted in Par∣liament for supportation of the warres in Britaine Polyd. Verg l. 26 Iob. Stow. Annal. left the Acts of State should bee reuersed at the rude peoples pleasure; but that on the contrary Commission and war∣rant was sent downe for him to see the same leuied by di∣stresse, or otherwise: the desperate multitude, falsely The Earle of Northumberland slaine by the people in a tu∣mult. supposing that the Earle was the occasion of such an answere, did suddenly set vpon him at the incitement of one Iohn à Chamber, and furiously murdered him, with certaine of his seruants in a place called Cock∣legge by Thrusk, eighteene miles from Yorke. They to carry their wicked attempt through, make head vnder Sir Iohn Egremond, a discontented Knight of those parts, openly declaring where they came, that their meaning was to fight with the King in defence of their liberties, as if the causelesse killing of a most noble Lord had beene one of them. Thomas Howard Earle of Surrey sent from Court with some forces to represse their increase, skirmisheth with a route of these Rebels, beats them away, and takes Iohn a Chamber prisoner. The whole swarme flockes to Yorke, where they roosted about three or foure The King in per∣son in Yorkeshire. daies, when hearing of the Kings approach (who was euer one of the first in the necke of such occasi∣ons) they scattered themselues, but the ring-leaders were hanged and quartered, and Iohn a Chamber, with Iob. Stow Annal. some others, were executed at Yorke after an extraor∣dinarie manner. Sir Iohn Egremond escaping, fled to the common Center of all King Henries dangers Sir Iob. Egremond Captaine of the Rebels escapes to the Dutchesse of Burgundy. and enmities, Margaret Dutchesse of Burgundy; so that though the colour of rising was about money, yet Egremond at lest had reference, it seemes, to the generall perturbation of the Kingdome, vp∣on the old ground of quarrell (hatred of the Lanca∣strian Familie) and this to bee but a sparke or flash of that great and troubleous fire, which after∣ward brake foorth and blased so prodigiously. The Earle of Surrey is left by the King (hauing Bern. Andr. MS. se∣uerely punished the murtherers) Lieutenant of the North, and Sir Robert Tonstall Knight, as chiefe Commissioner for leuying the taxe or subsidie. (27) The vnworthy death of the Earle of Ner∣thumberland was seconded by a more vnworthy, of Iames the third King of Scotland, so as King Henrie lost at home a most honourable stay of his Northerne affaires, and a sure Ally abroade. This vnfortunate Prince, hauing . in . . by some irregularity of life, and partialities, and errors of gouernment (amplified perhaps by the constructions and reports of his ma∣lignant Subiects) incurred extreme hatred with many of the Nobility and people, laboured with Polydor. Uirg. King Henry, as also with the Pope, and King of France, to make an accord betweene him and his Mu∣tinadoes, for that they had compelled Prince Iames, his sonne, to be the titular and vnnaturall Head of those armes, which traiterously (as pretending to King Henry n vaine seekes to reconcile the Scot to their King. haue a right on behalfe of the Common-weale to de∣pose an euill King) they assumed against him. The Kings accordingly interposed their mediations by earnest Ambassadors, but could obtaine no other then this outragious answer: That there was no tal∣king of peace vnlesse he would resigne his Crowne. King Henry and King Charles vehemently protested a∣gainst these their whole proceedings, declaring by their Ambassador, that they thought the same to be as a common iniury done vnto themselues; & the example to be Io. Lest. Bish. of Rosse. very wicked and pernicious, and not sufferable by Princes, that Subiects should be permitted to put hands vnto their Soueraigne. Hereupon it came to a Battell at Banocks∣born by Striuelin, whereat K. Iames (rashly fighting be∣fore his whole numbers were come) was (notwith∣standing the contrarie commandement of the Prince his sonne) slaine in the Mill of that Field, Iames the third King of Scotland slaine in battell by his Subiects. whither he fled after the battel ended. By reason of this infortunate precipitation of the Scotish King, Hadrian de Castello an Italian Legate, whom Pope In∣nocentius the eight had sent to take vp the cruell quar∣rell, came too late, (for he arriued not in England till the battell at Banocksborne was passed,) but not too late to receiue honour at the hands of King Henry, who respecting his wisdome and excellent learning, (vpon the speciall commendations first Io. Stow. Annal. of Iohn Morton Archbishop of Canterburie, but afterward vpon his owne experience of the man in sundry em∣ploiments to the Roman Sea,) bestowed vpon him the Bishoprike of Hereford, and (after resignation K. Henries boun∣tie to a stranger for Learnings cause. thereof) the Bishopricke of Bath and Welles; who was also at the length created Cardinall by Pope A∣lexander the sixth. Polyd. Verg. l. 26 But who is hee among many thou∣sands (saith Polyd.) that vseth not to admire these out∣ward honours which may alike be giuen to the vnworthy aswell as to the wel-deseruing, and may alike be taken a∣way from either? But the praise of this Hadrian is of an∣other The first reuiuer in this age of pure La ne and choise learning. farre more noble kinde and eternall: for he was the man who first reuiued the glory of the ancient Latine elo∣quence, and of all other sorts of abstruse and exquisit lear∣nings, as in which himselfe excelled. Thus doth Polydor (himselfe an Italian,) celebrate the learning of his Country-man, of whose other qualities, yet others write more harshly; as that out of meere ambition to be Pope (without any other grudge) hee conspi∣red, with Alphonso Petruccio, and other sacred Car∣dinals, Godwins Caral. of P. . in Bath, &c. pag. 309. Paul. . to murther Pope Leo the tenth: induced thereto by suggestion of a Witch, who foretold him that one Hadrian, an old man, of meane parentage, of great Learning and wisdome, should succeed in the Papacy. The man thought it must needs be him∣selfe, as being, though of very base Parentage, yet of some noble qualities: but another Hadri . 6. Ha∣drian, the sonne of a Dutch Brewer, and instructer of Charles the fifth the Emperour, prooued to be the man; and this our Hadrian lost by depri∣uation all his promotions whatsoeuer, for his ne∣sarious attempt. Into quch extreeme folly is learning and wisdome metamorphosed, where it is tainted with Ambition, or wants a Religious discretion to manage it aright. (28) And albeit the King himselfe could verie gladly haue spent his time in the studies of peace, as those which were farre more apt for the seruice of God, and for attaining of knowledge, then in marti∣all Warre with France and the causes. tumults; yet the quality of his supereminent place enuied vnto him that felicitie; for he was necessarily drawne into a warre with France vpon lesse occasi∣ons. Anne the young Dutchesse of Britaine, (by their aduise, who affected to preserue the liberty of that Dukedome, which by vnion with France, would be absorpt & extinguished,) had so farre entangled and engaged her selfe with the Procurators of Maximili∣an King of Romans, that shee was not only publikely cōtracted, but cōtented (for vttermost performāce of those rites whereof marriage by proxie was honora∣bly capable) to take vpon her the Bride, and being solemnly bedded, to permit Maximilians Deputie, in The yong Dut∣chesse married by proxie. the presence of sundry Noble witnesses aswell men as women, to put in his legge, stript naked to the knee, betweene the spousall sheetes, that ceremony seeming to amount to a Consummation. Charles King of France, notwithstanding these solemnities, and his owne particular engagement with the Lady Margaret daughter of Maximilian, (whom for the purpose of marriage he had already entertained in∣to France,) did so ambitiously and vehemently co∣uet to gaine Britaine, that vpon confidence of his force, hee resolued to breake through all respects, and not only to offend all his forreine friends, but to make them his iust enemies, rather then to faile in effectuation. Instruments are therefore very se∣cretly set on worke, and batterie is placed with bags of gold at all the opportunities which might let in his purpose. Ambassadors also (the Stowes Annal. Lord Frances of Lutzenburg, Charles Marinian, and Robert Gagwine Bern. And. MS. Generall of the Order of the holy Trinitie, are dispat∣ched to Henrie, praying that with his good will he might dispose of the body of the Lady Anne in mar∣riage according to the right which he had thereunto, as the chiefe Lord of whom shee held the Dukedome Henry denied the request, but yeelded notwithstanding to send Ambassadors into France there to Capitulate about a peace. The French carried this affaire with The French car∣ried the practise of marriage with the inheretirex of Brita most ar∣tificially. notable Art, for to diuert the world for looking in∣to the depth of their drift, King Charles still detained the young Lady Margaret, Maximilians daughter; so as at most it could be but suspected, that Charles meant to match her with some of his blood, and all the entercourse of Orators and Ambassadors vsed in the meane time, tended but to hold the English bu∣sied vpon other obiects, till they had wrought their feate in the Court of Britaine. For Maximilian, (to let the world see what iniuries shall be offered euen to Kings, that are not strong) him they altogether neglected; King Henry they plaied with, and Ferdi∣nando King of Castile (who was ready to ioine with Maximilian and Henrie Polyd. Uerg. against the French) they re∣solue to appease, with rendring vp vnto him the Counties of Ruscinoon, and Perpinian; as accordingly they Iob. T l. C n. did, without Lu Marin. lib. 20. de reb. Hispan. reembursement of one penny of those 300000. Crownes, for which Iohn King of Arragon (father to Ferdinando) had morgaged them. The young Ladies doubts, rising either out of religion, or point of honor, his cunning Agents, and Emissaries wipe away with these solutions. That Maximilian daughter was not of yeeres to consent, and therefore the contract betweene King Charles and her, did not binde either in law, or conscience: That her owne contract with Maximilian was void, for that it was done without the consent of her Soueraigne Lord, King Charles, whose ward or Client shee was. The Ladie vanquished in her iudgement with these reasons, at∣tracted with the present greatnes of King Charles, and loath by refusall to make her Countrey the seat of a long and miserable warre, secretly yeelded to ac∣cept of another husband. Thomas Goldstone Abbot of S. Augustines in Canterbury, and Thomas Earle of Or∣mond in Ireland, King Henries Ambassadors into France, hauing beene dandled by the French during these illusiue practises, returned without other fruite of their labors. (29) What could now the most patient doe lesse then take sword in hand vpon so palpable and vnworthy illusion? But Maximilians wrongs were too impudent and intollerable; for Charles sent home the Lady Margaret, and married the Inhere∣trix of Britaine, annexing it to his owne Realme: whereas King Henrie found himselfe rather mockt, then otherwise empaired. Iames Contibald hereup∣on Britaine annexed to France. comes Ambassador from Maximilian, and obtai∣ned his request, which was, that they with ioynt forces should by a certaine day prefixed, inuade the French, in full reuenge of these their bold prouocations; Maxi∣milian for his part, promising to support that warre with at least ten thousand men for two yeeres. King Henry hauing formerly in abundant manner proui∣ded himselfe of treasure, was ready before the day with a roiall army: but Maximilian (whose will to worke the vttermost mischiefe to France was not Maximilian vn∣prouided to with Henry. doubted,) being sent vnto by King Henry, signifying his forwardnes, was found vtterly vnfurnished. Causes of Maximilians weakenesse in state, were the rebellions and dislikes of his Flemish Subiects che∣rished by the French, the Iealousie of Princes neigh∣bourhood making them vniustly glad either of o∣thers molestations. For subduing whereof though King Henry had heretofore giuen him good and suc∣cessefull assistance vnder the conduct of Giles Lord Dawbeney Gouernour of Callis, the Lord Morley and others, whereby he the rather ouercame; yet was hee the feebler, as then, by reason of so fresh exhaustures. King Henry with good cause was not a little trou∣bled at these newes, secretly signified by his trustie Almner M r . Christopher Vrswick, and Sir Richard Ris∣ley knight, his Ambassadors to Maximilian; For hee was very loath to vndergoe so great an Action vpon his particular strengths, though he doubted not to finde a potent party among the Britaines, (whose affections were as yet but loosely setled toward King Charles,) and yet farre more loath to deceiue the ex∣pectation of his owne people, who had so largely contributed; Chiefly the City of London, out of which, euen in those daies he receiued for his furni∣ture in that voiage almost Addit: to ten thousand pounds from the Commoners, and (as it seemes by our Au∣thor) Fab. Chron. The Londoners large contribu∣tions to the king. two hundreth pounds besides from euery Al∣derman, where the same King could not, but with some difficulty, leuie in the third yere of his Reigne a loane of foure thousand pounds, whereof three of the best Companies are noted (as for hauing done and deserued extraordinarily) to haue lent aboue nine hundred. And verily this wise King (knowing how great a strength that rich City was vnto him) humored that people with all forces of populari∣ties, for himselfe did not onely come among them, King Henries po∣pularities in Lon∣don. and cause himselfe to be entred a brother, in The Merchant Taylors. one of their Companies, but ware the habite at a pub∣like feast, and sate as Maister, as is verie credibly re∣ported out of the Records of their Hall. His wis∣dome therefore saw, that in giuing ouer the inuasion of France; he should sloathfully abandon a goodly occasion of making himselfe vniuersally acceptable to his people. His resolutions therefore are by him at leastwise pretended to continue, and for that cause he sufficiently encreaseth his numbers, that he might seeme able to goe through with that enterprize a∣lone; and though the time of yeere were too farre spent (for he landed not at Caleis, till the sixth day of October) yet marcheth he with his whole forces to∣ward A. D. 1492. An. reg. 8. Boloigne, being wel assured that with this trow∣ell he should at once plaister two wals, that is, humor his English subiects, and for a peace draw to himselfe store of Crownes from the French. (30) He had with him besides the flower of his Nobility, and Captaines, answerable numbers of The chief Lords names who ser∣ued in thi voi∣age. People fit for the seruice. The most named persons were these, Iasper Duke of Bedford Lieutenant Gene∣rall of the Army, Tho as Marquesse Dorset, the Earles of Arundell, Oxford, Suffolk, Shrewsburie, Derby, Kent, Deuonshire, and Ormond, sundry Barons, as Dawbe∣ney, Abergenny, Delaware, South, Hastings, Cobham, &c. But it is needlesse to weary our selues with Boloigne besieged by K. Henry. long relations of a short voyage; for King Henry, be∣fore hee set forth out of England, was secretly dealt with by the Lord Cordes Gouernour of Henault, accor∣ding to instructions on the French Kings behalfe, to accept of conditions, which till Boloigne was be∣sieged (as now by him it was) was not knowne. The ignorance of this mystery made many forward Gen∣tlemen to morgage their lands, and runne into much debt for their fuller and brauer furniture, in hope to get great matters in this warre, whereof to their griefe they found themselues deceiued. In the mean time the L. Polydor cals him Desquerdo. Cordes hauing met at Caleis with Richard Fox Lord Bishoppe of Excester, and Bern. Andr. MS. Giles Lord Dawbeney, the Kings Commissioners; after iust and long debatement, concluded vpon Articles of peace betweene the two Kings. (31) Boloigne was brought to some distresse, when by interuention of this agreement it remained safe and quiet: King Charles was chiefly moued to buy his peace at a deare rate, both for that the state of Britaine was as yet vnsetled, and for that hee meant Reasons mouing the Kings to a peace. forth with to march into Italy for the Phil. de Com. conquest of the Kingdome of Naples; and K. Henry on the o∣ther side was not vnwilling, because Maximilian had failed, and Britaine seemed clearely past possibi∣lity of euiction. To which may be added, a natu∣rall, noble, and religious inclination in King Hen∣ry, to liue in amity with his neighbours; the inck∣ling of new Arnol. Ferron. Hist. ad A. D. 1492. Polyd. Vergil in Hen 7. dangers, then in brewing against him by the turbulent, and vnappeaseable Dutchesse of Burgundy, and Stow. Annal. cherished by King Charles; and last∣ly, the enrichment of himselfe by reembursing the charges both of this, and the British warre out of the French elsewhere, whereby he should farre the bet∣ter bee able to withstand all forrain practises, or do∣mesticke outrages. As for the preseruing of him∣selfe, and his honour with his Subiects, hee wan∣ted not both true and honourable glosses: Such as were the care to auoid vnnecessary effusion of Chri∣stian bloud: the vses of his presence at home, be∣sides many other: but his wisdome in the carri∣age of this right weighty action was chiefly emi∣nent in this, That hee would not enter into Treaty, till he was in the field; and that with such a puissance, as The high points of wisdome pra∣ctised by King Henry in atchie∣uing his ends. was likely enough to force his owne conditions; nor suf∣fer the least signe of his secret willingnesse to peace, or inward doubt of troubles at home, to creepe out at any crany or chinke of his discourse or carriage, whereby he as farre outwent the French fairely, as they former∣ly seemed to haue ouerwrought him subtlely. Had they truly beene informed in those points, it is pro∣bable they might haue gone a cheaper way to work: for, besides what other Articles soeuer, it was con∣cluded, That Henry should Bern. Andr. MS. not quit his claime to France; but that for a Peace, which by the contract was only to continue during the two Kings liues, Charles of France should pay in present to Henry for his charges in that warre, One hundreth eighty six thou∣sand, two hun∣dreth and fifty pounds English. I. Da. of Her. MS seuen hundred, forty and fiue Holinshed. thousand Polyd. Verg. Duckets, and twenty fiue thousand Crownes yeerely toward the expenses, which hee had heretofore been at in aiding the Britons. Which (by the English called Tribute) was duly paid du∣ring all this Kings raigne, and also to Henry his son, till the whole debt was run out, thereby to preserue amity with England. There were moreouer (by Hen∣ries consent, who was thus content to gratifie his Peeres at anothers cost) not onely present rewards, but also certaine annuall pensions allotted to the Forraine pen∣sions of what vse or hazard. chiefe Lords of his priuie Councell. A course of bounty which might otherwise haue proued preiu∣dicious to the seruice of the King of England, by en∣gaging his Counsellors affections to the French: The siege of Boleine lasted till the eighth day of No∣uember, & Henry (whom his Queens most Ber. Andr. Henry returnes. tender, frequent and louing lines, did the rather inuite to speediest returne,) hauing setled all his transmarine affaires, 17. Decemb. arriued at Douer, from whence hee iour∣nied I. Sto Annal. to Westminster, there to celebrate the Feast of Christmas. This voyage into France, affording no . Henry retur∣ned. greater exploites then wee haue heard, was celebra∣ted by blind Andr. Thol. MS Bernard with hyperbolicall and well∣borne verses not ordinary, in which directing his speech in honour of Henry, to the Howres he con∣cludes. Effugite igniuomos celeres coniungere Solis, Quadrupedes: Horae protinus ecce parant; Non opus est vobis; quia si priuatus Apollo, Pauerit Admeti rursus & ipse boues, Principis hic nostri vultus Iouialis, abundè Lumina, crede mihi, Phoebe recede, dabit. (32) The famous counterfeisance of Perkin War∣becke, with which the braine of the Lady Margaret Dutchesse Dowager of Burgundie had long trauelled, doth now beginne to disclose it selfe, and make new businesses for King Henry. The inglorious glorie of the first inuention in his raigne of this kind of vexation, Lambert Simnels person had giuen to his Master the wily Simon, so that our Dutchesse was but an imitatrix, and yet perhaps shee gaue not place in any point to the first example, or Archtype, neuer∣thelesse the fortune of the first deuise, being no more successefull then it was, might reasonably haue de∣terred her from the edition of a second: but whe∣ther it were an immortall enuie toward the Lanca∣strian race, or a burning zeale of aduancing one that might at leastwise beare the name of a Plantagenet, though by any sinister practises; as if it had beene lawfull to attaine her ends (admit them iust) by a∣ny iniurious courses, shee resolues to erect another Idoll, as perceiuing by the first, how notable an en∣gine imposture was, to trouble Henry; being well assured, that England was ful of corrupt humors, and ill-affections to worke vpon, not so much through the desert of her present King, as for that the dregges which naturally reside in the bottom of mens hearts, where most bloudy and barbarous factions haue for a long time weltered, and wurried one the other with various euent, were not clensed and auoided. The Diuell therefore ready to furnish all attempts which may raise troub and mischiefe, easily fitted her. There was come therfore to her hands a youth The Dutchesse of Burgundy ad∣dresseth a Pseudo Rochard against Henry. adorned with such a shape, as might easily perswade the beholders was worthy of a noble fortune: he had thereunto a naturall fine wit, and (by reason of his abode in England in K. Edwards dayes) could speake our language, as also some other, which hee had by a kind of wandring trauell obtained. This youth was borne (they say) in the City of Torney, and called Polyd. Verg. Peter Warbecke, the Bern. Andr. MS. son of a conuerted Iew, whose Godfather at Baptisme King Edward himselfe was. The English in Polyd. Verg. contempt (and for a note perhaps of his forraine birth) did afterward call him by a di∣minutiue of his name, Peterkin or Perkin. Him the Dutchesse (as a fitte peece of timber, out of which to carue a new Idoll) moulds by degrees, & makes him take shape according to that Idaa, which shee had prefigured in her working imagination, before the which the late honours of her house conspicu∣ous in three Princes (which altogether made not twenty and fiue yeeres of raigne) did so perpetually houer, as her soule could neuer take contentment, but in the hope that the house of Yorke should againe be the dwelling place of Maiesty. (33) Her offence against Henry wanted not ma∣ny seeming reasons, but none so great, as that hee Causes mouing the Dutchesse to beare K. Henry so mortal hatred. had slaine her own brother King Richard, who albe∣it he was there reputed murtherer of her Nephewes, yet were they a degree more remoued from her, and so lesse deere in likelihood then a brother; and how∣soeuer shee might secretly detest, or belieue the com∣mitmēt of that parricide, yet could she neuer brooke (seeing they were gone) that the reward of her bro∣thers death, and that euen to him who slew him, should bee the Crowne of England, whereby not onely her brother, but the whole male-line of her family was for euer to bee excluded; much lesse could shee (a Plantagenet) abide that Henry, who brought to the Crowne the surname of a newly rai∣sed Familie. These and other considerations in the breast of a Lady, bred vp in a dominating Family, her selfe a Dowager, in such a fortune, as in which shee was Paramount for the time, and absolute with∣out controlment, being carelesse withall of sauing for posterity, because shee was without a child, and in that regard the more abundantly stored with trea∣sure; all which made her spirits ouer-boile with impatience and virulency; so farre forth, that ha∣uing infused al her principles into Peter her creature vnder the Title of Richard Plantagenet, second son of King Edward the fourth; she most couertly sends him into Portugall, from thence to take his Icarean flight, as Infra. prox. & sequent. elsewhere is related. Neuerthelesse, there will not (perhaps) want some, who in defence of the Dutchesse, had rather referre it to Magnanimi∣ty, and Noblenesse of Spirit, in seeking the honour of her house; which, if it might passe for such a∣mong the heathen, yet can it not among Christians; much the lesse, for that her duty to England, & the royall flourishing estate of her own Neece, the right heire, exacted at her hands a greater tendernesse. (34) That Peter Warbecke should bee inflamed by her fauours, and encouragements, to dare in earnest the personation of a Kings sonne, seemes not a thing to bee admired; for there is in humane na∣ture (which ties not her self to Pedigrees, nor Paren∣tages) a kind of light matter, which will easily kin∣dle, being toucht with the blazing hopes of ambi∣tious propositions. He therefore vpon the first dis∣close of Videinfia § prox. himselfe, did put on so excellent a seeming as might iustly moue King Henry to bee iealous, Perkin Warbecke fits the Dutch∣chesses turne, by exact represen∣tation of a Ri∣chard Plantagenet whereunto the pernitious practise might come at last; for there wanted nothing in the whole forme of the young vpstart, but onely the conscience of a truth, and truth it selfe: which makes me call to mind Pancerollus. what one hath written of a goodly white Saphyr in Venice, made by art so neerely to resem∣ble a true Diamond, that with much difficulty, and but by one onely lapidary, it was discouered; which if it had beene graced with some great Princes, wea∣ring, what could want to haue made it passable for a very Diamond of greatest value? Perkin came such from out of the Burgundian forge; and (if his pa∣rentage bee respected) assumed the image and re∣semblance of a king, being otherwise not so much as a meane Gentleman. Neither can it be maruel∣led at, if such a Phantasme as this, did abuse, and trouble the common people of that time; for euen to such as do write thereof, it begets a kind of doubt (which without some little collection of their spi∣rits doth not easily vanish,) it seeming almost in∣credible, that such a bloudy play should meerly be disguised and fained; the discouery therefore was worthy such a wit as King Henries, and the push it gaue to his soueraignty did throughly try his sitting, being of force enough to haue cast an ordinarie rider out of sadle. (35) Therfore, it was the Dutchesses misfortune, that her inuentions (if they were hers) had to en∣counter so politicke and constant a man as King Henry; whose prudence searcht into the abstrusest secrets, and whose diligence ouercame all difficul∣ties. Yet the Lady Margarets course to vent her Creature at the first was exquisite; for she (as in a Magicke practise) hauing kept him secret till shee saw her time, causeth him to bee closely conuayed into Holinsh. 10. Da. MS. Portugall; from whence (attended with fitte associates and Priuadoes) hee sailes into Ireland (the Foster-place and nursery of immortall good will to the house of Yorke) where (notwithstanding their late calamities,) he so strongly enchanted that rude peo∣ple with the charmes of false hopes, and mists of seemings, as he was sure of partakers in great plen∣ty. Charles the eight, King of France, hearing (and perhaps beleeuing) that the Duke of Yorke was aliue, A summarie re∣lation of Perkins first fortune af∣ter he was pub∣lished. and glad to haue so probable an occasion of doing mischiefe to Henry of England, in regard of these flagrāt enmities which as then remained vnquencht betweene them, inuites Duke Richard most offici∣ously to Paris, and besides all other honours, assig∣ned him (at his comming) a guard for his person, whereof the Lord Congreshall was Captaine. After∣ward there repaired to this new Duke, Sir George Neuill Knight, (a Stow Annal. bastard of the noble house of the Neuils,) Sir Iohn Taylor, Rowland Robinson, and a∣bout an hundreth English, to whom (as a principal) wee may adde Ber. Andr. M. S. Stephen Frion, French Secretary to King Henry himselfe; all which, together with the whole Strategeme, was smoakt out of France with the first graine of incense sacrificed vpon the Altars of Peace at Boloign, after the same was once made and ratified (as you haue heard) between the French and vs. The Dutchesse then seeing her artificiall creature thus turned againe vpon her hands, pretends an extreame ignorance that euer shee had seene him before that present, and an excessiue ioy for his miraculous escape, and preseruation, which seemed such to her (as shee pretended) as if hee had beene reuiued from death to life, and that the fable might want no quickning, which her personall countenancing, or her Court could afford, shee openly salutes him by the deli∣cate Perkin in Flan∣ders with the Dutchesse. Title of the Stow Annal. White Rose of England, and questi∣ons him of the manner of his escape, with such like, to beget a firme beliefe in the hearers, that she neuer had seene him before that time, and that he was in∣deed her Nephew Richard Duke of Yorke. The No∣bility of Flanders accordingly, doe vnto him all ho∣nour, and shee enuirons his person with a guard of thirty men in murrey and blew. Neither was hee in any point wanting to his part; but fitted such likely answeres to all questions, and such princely behauiours to all occasions, as made fame bold to publish him with the fullest blast of her Trumpet, for no other then a true Richard Plantagenet; and as it is so obserued of some, that by long vsing to re∣port an vntruth, at last forgetting themselues to bee the Authors thereof, beleeue it in earnest; so these honors making our Peter to bury in vtter obliuion his birthes obscurity, he seemed to bee perswaded; that hee was indeed the selfe partie, whom hee did so exactly personate. Nouelty, and impudency were scarce euer knowne to haue found more ap∣plause, or beliefe, euen among many verie wise, and (otherwise) worthy men; who moued in conscience, and not onely vpon discontent, inclined to partake with this new Plantagenet, as the onely right heire of the English Diadem, as if, whether he had beene the true one, it was past dispute. This intoxication, & abusion of the world, was wonderfully encreased by the secret reuolt of Sir Robert Clifford Knight, whom (as one that had seene, and knowne the true Richard) the cunning conspirators in England had sent ouer, to informe himselfe, and them, whether he was indeed as hee seemed. Sir Robert (whose presence and errand were to the Dutchesse most welcome,) Sir Rob. Clifford signifies to his friends in Eng∣land that Perkin was the true▪ Duke. being brought to his sight, did forthwith giue cre∣dite, and constantly signifie, that this was indeed Ri∣chard Plantagenet, the true Duke of Yorke, and that he well knew him for such. Money and encourage∣ments, were hereupon sent out of England, from such as fauoured him; among whom was Bern. Andr. MS. Sir William Stanley Lord Chamberlain to King Henry (by whose punctual reuolt from K. Richard, he had principally atchieued the Crowne of England) Stow Annal. Iohn Ratcliffe, L. Fitzwalter, Polyd. Verg. Sir Simon Montfort, Sir Thomas Thwates Knights, and others; but the maine coun∣tenance of the cause in forraine parts was Sir Ro∣bert Clifford (a knight of an honourable fame and fa∣mily) which moued the secret friends of the new Duke to set the rumor so cunningly on foot among the English, that Iohn Da. of Her. M. S. sooner might a cloud, which causeth thunder, bee caught or knowne, then the Author thereof; and multitudes beeing weakened therewith, store of humor, dangerously prepared to mutation, did e∣uery where discouer it selfe. (36) For preuention therfore of all those effects, which might issue out of these causes, (being in their King Henries countermines and courses a∣gainst this Pseudo Richard. proper nature most generatiue of sedition, and of all sorts of ciuill furies) King Henrie diligently causeth the coasts of England to be well and strongly watcht, aswell to empeach the landing of enemies, as the es∣cape of fugitiues: but aboue all, he writes letters to his best friends in forraine parts; & also emploies nimble wits with seueral instructions; some to assaile the constancy of Sir Robert Clifford, (the maine stay and credite of Perkins cause) with promise of immu∣nity and fauour if hee would returne into England in quiet; others, to find out the truth of Perkins quality, being furnished with treasure to draw and requite intelsigences; and all of them (as occasion should serue) to pretend themselues vehement fa∣uorers of the new Duke. These necessary hypocrites and double faced Ambidexters, called Spies, (whose seruices, howsoeuer conducible to such as sets thē on worke, yet their perfidious quality cōmonly par∣takes with that of Iudas Iscariot, and often meetes with like reward,) doe plie their charge so roundly that S. Robert Clifford wun away from the Dutchesse. Sir Robert Clifford is secretly drawne off, the new Duke is discouered aswell by them, as by Proclam. of Perkin, as a King Rich. MS. penes Sir Rob. Cotton. sun∣dry letters from friends abroad, to bee but Perkin Warbecke, and many other mysteries are reuealed. This gaue to the wise King great satisfaction, who to weaken the enemies practise the more, not onely * Polyd. Uirg∣in Hen. 7. diuulgeth the fraud, but sends ouer sea Sir William Poinings Knight, and Sir William Warham his Am∣bassadors to the Arch-Duke Philip, Duke of Bur∣gundy (then gouerned by others by reason of his ten∣der age) who promised not to assist the said Perkin, but if the Dutchesse Dowager would doe any such thing to the preiudice of King Henry, it was not in him to hinder her, for that she might dispose of her owne. A maine argument vsed by these Ambassa∣dors before the Archdukes Counsell to conuince, that Richard the very Duke of Yorke was murdered as well as King Edward his brother German, as Poly∣dor (who seemes to haue had good means to vnder∣stand these times) rehearseth it, was, That their vncle Richard should in vaine haue made away the elder bro∣ther, if the younger had beene suffered to suruiue, for The maine ar∣gument prouing that King Ed∣wards sons were both of them murdered. that the right of the elder, was immediately vpon his death in the younger, and that consequently during his life, King Richard could haue no more assurance, then if the elder were still aliue: which Argument notwith∣standing doth at most proue nothing but this: That their vncle the Vsurper might intend, that both his Nephewes should bee murdered, and that hee knew nothing perhaps to the contrary. Whereas facts are to bee proued by confessions of parties, by witnesses, or vehement presumptions, (though vehement presumptions are said to constitute but an half proof) al which are Sir Tho. More. o∣therwhere so supplied, as leaus smal cause to doubt of both their deathes. But Warham (a learned Priest and Doctor in the lawes) the mouth of that Am∣bassage sent to the Arch-Duke, in the end of his o∣ration vsed this bitter scoffe, and Sarcasme against the Lady Margaret: That shee in her old age brought forth two Monsters within the space of a few yeeres, and The Dutchesse of Burgundies tvvo monstrous birthes. both of them not in the eight, or ninth moneth after their conception, as naturall mothers, but in the one Lambert and Perkin were a∣bout fifteen yeeres old (saith Polydor) at the time of their appearance. hundred and eightieth moneth; and whereas other women brought forth Infants vtterly vnable to helpe themselues, these birthes of hers were tall striplings, and as soone as they were borne, offered battell vnto mighty Kings. And al∣beit the Arch-Dukes answere seemed reasonable, yet was not King Henry so satisfied, but that within a while after, for Bern. Andr. MS. that the Arch-Duke had secretly furnisht Perkin with leaders, hee tooke occasion to banish all Flemings, and Flemish wares out of his Dominions, and inhibited his Subiects to trade in any Countries within the obedience of Maximili∣an King of Romans, or of the Archduke Philip his sonne, who by way of talio and requitall did the like against the English. (37) Let vs come now from the addresses of things, to their doing. The high prudence and in∣dustry of Henry hauing thus discouered the foun∣dations of Perkins hopes in England, and the hu∣mors which were most vnsound, made it his first worke to raze those groundworks, and purge the veines of his Realme from that corruption by needfull Phlebotomie. The Stow Annal. Po ydor cals him but a knight. Lord Fitzwalter, a principall conspirator, being condemned, and sent to Caleis, liued there in hope of pardon; but for practising with his Keepers to escape, hee finally payed his head for satisfaction. Sir Simon Mont∣fort, Robert Ratcliffe, and William Dawbeney (Gentle∣men of noble houses) as Captaines and Authors of the conspiracy were beheaded, but all the rest aswel Clerkes as Lay-men had their pardons. Not long K. Henry expects Sir Rob. in the Tower of London. after these executions and pardons, the King vpon sure intelligence, that Sir Robert Clifford (in whose bosome the secret of all Perkins plot lay) was arriued, entred the Tower of London, and there continued; that so, if Clifford should accuse any of the great, (and whom hee then would accuse, it is probable King Henry knew) they might without suspition, or tumult bee attached; the Court, and publike prison for crimes of highest nature, being then with∣in the cincture of one, and the same wall. Sir Robert Clifford at his comming into the Kings presence, (though hee was secretly before assured of his life) most humbly praying and obtaining pardon, ap∣peached (among many others) Sir William Stanley Sir William Stanley Lord Chamberlaine accused. Lord Chamberlaine. The King would not at first giue credite (or at leastwise pretended, not to giue credite) to the accusation of a Peere so great, and so neere vnto him: but vpon farther search, find∣ing the same confirmed with circumstances, and par∣ticularly, for that he said to Clifford, Polydor. Uirg. l Hee would ne∣uer beare Armes against the young man, if he knew him for certaine to be the sonne of King Edward, hee resol∣ueth to vse seuerity against the delinquent. (38) But Bernard Andreas directly saith, That (besides bare words and purposes) Sir William had supported Perkins cause with treasure, wherein hee is recorded so to haue abounded, as that in his Castle of Ioh. Stow. Annal. Holt he had in coine and plate to the value of for∣ty thousand Markes, besides lands of inheritance in sundry places about, to the yeerely value of three thousand pounds (a prety stocke in treasure at those times, to vphold the first brunt of a warre, and a large extent of land to furnish the wing of a power∣full battell with able souldiers out of Tenancies) with all which the same Author in plaine wordes saith, That hee promised to defend the said Pretender, * Illum tutari & in regnum addu cere premiseras. and bring him into the Kingdome. And if we haue a∣ny insight into King Henries disposition, it seemes to vs, that before he entred into the Tower, he not on∣ly knew the Lord Chamberlaine vnsound, but also that for his quiet apprehension hee chiefly repaired thither. Stanley being hereupon attached and refer∣red to farther examination, is said Polyd. Verg. To haue denied nothing of all that wherewith hee was charged, which he perhaps the more confidently did, in hope that king Henry would pardon him in respect of passed serui∣ces, they (in their effects considered) being the grea∣test whereof mortality is capable, preseruation of life, and gaining of a Kingdome. But the poore gentleman found himselfe farre deceiued in his politicke Lord and Master, who (to teach mankind thereby, how dangerous it is to make a King) was not vnwiling to cut him off, as perswading himselfe, that those seruices proceeded of ambition, not of affection, or if of affection, the cause now ceasing, the contrary effects might proue as pernicious, as the other had been aduantageous and auaileable. The King was vnwilling to displease his Father in Law, Thomas Earle of Derby (brother german to Sir William Stan∣ley) and did therefore for a while suspend his iudge∣ment; but rigour finally preuailed, and hee was at Westminster openly arraigned, conuicted, and after∣ward at the block on Tower-hil beheaded. In whose Stanley Lord Chamberlaine beheaded. office Giles Lord Dawbeney a most faithfull and mo∣derate man succeeded. This sharpe iustice exercised vpon so eminent a person, was of great vse in the stay of peoples minds through the Realme of England. But in Ireland they were not so setled, or reduced, but that for the better and fuller purging thereof, Henry Deney (a Monke of Langton Abbey) was sent Lord Chancellour thither, with orders and directions, and Sir Edward Poinings Knight, with souldiers; whose greatest diligence and cares were not wanting, to punish such as heretofore had aided Perkin, or might hereafter. The Earle of Kildare Lord Deputy, falling into suspition with Poynings, was by him apprehended, and sent pri∣soner into England; where the King did not onely graciously heare and admit his defences, but also returned him with honour, and continuation of au∣thority. In the meanetime (the errour, or weaknesse of the Burgundian Dutchesse and her Perkin, suffe∣ring their enemy in this sort, to puruey for his own security, and their depulsion) hee yet for farther assu∣rance of himselfe makes a progresse into Lancashire, there to recreate with his Father in law the Earle, and the Countesse his mother, where among all o∣ther his secret purposes, he throughly satisfied the Earle, both for the iustice and necessity of Sir William Stanleyes death. (39) These certainely, were perillous times to liue in, and vndoubtedly full of infinite iealousies, and hypocrisies, nor vnlike to those lately passed, Sir Tho. Moore in Rich. 3. wherein there was nothing so plaine, and openly proued, but that yet for the common custome of close and couert dealing, men had it euer inwardly suspect, as many well∣counterfeited iewels make the true suspected: these ge∣nerall distrusts being among the strange gradations, by which the incomprehensible prouidence doth vse to chastise insolent Nations and to make regular Princes, meer and absolute. But the Dutchesse and her Perkin knowing al things as they passed in England, Perkin vpon the Kentish Seas. resolue notwithstanding to proceede; and there∣fore taking aduantage of the Kings absence in the North, he with a force of broken and discontented persons, sets saile for England, and approcheth the coasts of Kent about Sandwich and Deale, there to beginne his enterprize for obtaining the Crowne of England, vnder the borrowed name and title of Ri∣chard Duke of Yorke, if he found the Commons for∣ward. Polyd. Verg. Stowes Annal. But they, though doubtfull at first what to doe, yet at the last considering that his Souldiers were for the most part of desperate fortunes, and felonious qualitie, (though hardy otherwise, and approoued men of warre,) remembring withall the mischiefes of part-takings, would not adhere, but training them within danger vpon promise of succour, assaile, and driue them to their shippes, take fiue of the Captaines, Mountford, Corbet, Whitebolt, Quintin, and Genin, and Bernard. Andr. saith about 400. one hundreth, sixty and foure others, which were all of them afterward exe∣cuted. Perkin himselfe who would not trust his per∣son on shore, being worthily troubled at the inau∣spicious fortune of his followers, presently hoised sailes, and returned to his Lady Patronesse and Crea∣trix, into Flanders. (40) These newes being brought to the King, where he was then in the North, he is Bern. Andr. MS. said to haue giuen God thanks, and declared his ioy in these words. I am not ignorant (most mercifull Iesu) how great victories thou hast giuen mee, vpon the Saturday The Kings prai∣er and speech to God. at the praiers of thy most gracious Mother, all which I a∣scribe not to my deserts, but to the bounty of thy celestiall grace. Thou seest, ô most benigne Iesu, how many snares, how many deceits, how many weapons, that terrible Iuno hath prepared, notwithstanding that after my marriage shee faining herselfe ioyfull., hath faithfully promised to beare toward vs all fauour and good will, but shee, more changeable then the winde peruerting all things aswell diuine as humane, feares not God, but in her fury seekes the vtter ruine of her owne blood. Thou, ô God, who knowest all, deliuer vs also (if we seeme worthy) from these euils, but if our sinnes haue deserued to suffer, doe thou, ô Lord, thy good pleasure. Neuerthelesse wee owe to thy Grace immortal thanks, which though with our tongue we cannot vtter worthily enough, yet must they bee rendred. We are alwaies of good courage, and so minded for certain, that no prosperity, no aduersity, no chaunce, no distance of places, or times, shall once make vs of thee vnmindefull. The most modest King hauing ended his speech, doth foorthwith (saith our Author) seriously deli∣berate with his Councell what was to bee done heereafter. It may probably seeme, that he had with∣drawne into the North, to inuite Perkin (by occasion of his absence) the rather to take Land, that so hee might draw all his dangers into one place, and de∣cide them in a Battell, if his Subiects should reuolt to Perkin in any numbers, or if they did not, then might he fall into his hands, by landing vnwarily vpon trust of the peoples fauour, and so by a more com∣pendious, and easie way settle his Estate; of which he failed but little, by the said counterpolicy of the Kentishmen. In regard whereof, in the first Act of Councell, praise and thankes were decreed to them, with which Sir Richard Gylford Knight was presently Io. Stow Annal. sent away, and order taken for the erection and wat∣ching of Beacons vpon the Coasts. (41) The Dutchesse on the other side, seeing the South of England proue so drie, and barren to her driftes, conueighes againe her Idoll into Ireland, Perkin sailes into Ireland. where shee well knew there could not want parta∣kers; and Perkin himselfe daring to entertaine the hope of a Crowne, (for by so long personation of a Kings sonne, and heire, ambition had throughlie kindled his youthfull blood) was now no little cause of bringing things to an issue by his owne forward∣nesse. Bern. And. MS. Maximilian King of Romans, whither as one willing to keepe the English busied ( Stowes Annal. His great for∣raigne friends. Henry ha∣uing forbidden his Subiects all traffike with the Flemmings, and all other of his sonne the Arch∣dukes Subiects,) or as crediting the fiction, and therefore led thereunto in honour and conscience; Io. Lesl. Epis. Ross. Charles also King of France, but specially the Dut∣chesse of Burgundy, (by whom this bubble was first blowne vp, and put abroad) did concurre to the molestation of King Henry; Maximilian, and the French King, more secretly, but the Dutchesse with all her Oares and Sailes plied it in open view. Borne vp by these supporters he the rather easily drew the Irish to assent to his pretext; but his counsell weigh∣ing with themselues that the Irish-mens friendship, how firme so euer, was insufficient in respect of their nakednesse and pouerty to worke their wishes, hee according to such aduises as were taken before his departure from his Creatrix, crosseth into Scotland, for feare of punishment, saith Bern. Andr. Andreas; if perhaps Perkin sailes in∣to Scotland. by the Kings true Subiects within Ireland hee should chaunce to bee apprehended; but the euent shewes, that it was not onely for his more security, but prin∣cipally to strengthen his enterprize with the Scotish aide, whereof in those daies hee had small reason to bee doubtfull; and his case was such, that no third course was left vnto him, but either to fight and conquer, or liue branded with immortall infamy both of Co∣wardize and imposture. Henry hearing these things was not slacke to prouide for his iust defence, greatly carefull vpon what coast this wandring clowd would at length dissolue it selfe, in what effects soeuer; and therefore obserued all his waies with as much curio∣sity as was possible. (42) Iames the fourth, a yong Prince of great hope was at that time King of Scots, to whom this bold counterfeit (being specially recommended, for the true Richard Duke of Yorke, by the Bern. Andr. King of France, and vndoubtedly much more by the Dutchesse of Burgundy,) repaires; and had most courteous enter∣tainement, and audience, the effect whereof An∣dreas thus coucheth: That the King was finally decei∣ued Perkins successe in Scotland. by errour, as most of other, though most prudent Prin∣ces, had beene before. But the rare impudency of the Lad, & that connexion which his darings had with so many great Princes, deserue not to bee so slender∣lie ouerpassed. Hee therefore being in honourable manner accompanied, and brought to the presence 1. L a. Epis. Ross. of King Iames, had words to this effect. That Ed∣ward the fourth late King of England, leauing two sons The effect of Perkins speech to Iames the fourth King of Scotland. Edward and Richard Duke of Yorke, both very young, Edward the eldest succeded their Father in the Crowne by the name of King Edward the fifth: that their vncle Richard Duke of Glocester to obtaine the Kingdome, purposed to murder both, but the instrument emploied by him to execute the execrable Tragedy, hauing cruelly slaine King Edward the eldest of the two, was mooued to saue Richard his brother, whom neuerthelesse the world sup∣posed to haue beene alike barbarously made away; though falsely supposed; for that himselfe there present, was that very Richard Duke of Yorke, brother of that vnfortunate Prince, King Edward the fifth, now the most rightfull, and lineall suruiuing heire Male to that victorious and most noble Edward of that name the fourth, late King of England. * That hee in his tender age thus escaping MS. Perkini pro∣clam. penes D. R. C. Baronet. by Gods mercy out of the County of London, was secretly conueied ouer the Sea, Polyd. Verg. l. 26. whither when hee was brought, the party who had the conueiance of him in charge, sud∣denly forsooke him, and thereby forced him to wander in∣to MS. Perkini Proclamati. diuerse Countries, where he remained certain yeeres as vnknown, Polydor lib. 26. til at length he came to the true vnderstanding of himselfe. MS. Per. Procl. In which seasonit hapned one Henry, son to Edmund Tydder Earle of Richmund, to come from France, and enter into the Realme, and by subtill and fowle meanes, to obtaine the Crowne of the same, which to him the said Richard rightfullie appertained. That Henry as his extreame and mortall enemie, so soone as he had knowledge of his being aliue, imagined, and wrought all the subtill waies, and meanes he could, to de∣uise his finall destruction. That the said mortall ene∣mie hath not only falsely surmised him to be a fained per∣son, giuing him nicknames, so abusing the world, but that also, to deferre, and put him from entrie into England, hee hath offered large summes of money to corrupt the Princes, with whom he had beene retained, and made importune labour to certaine seruants about his (the saide Kichards) person, to murder or poison him, and others, to for∣sake and leaue his righteous quarrell, and to depart from his seruice, as Sir Robert Clifford, and others. That euery man of reason may well vnderstand, that the said Henry needed not to haue moued the foresaid Costs, and importune labour, if he had beene such a fained per∣son. That the truth of his cause so manifest Epis. Ross. moued the most Christian King Charles, and the Ladie, Dutchesse Dowager of Burgundie, his most deare Aunt not onely to acknowledge the said truth, but louingly also to assist him. That now because the Kings of Scotland (Predecessors of the said King Iames) had oftentimes supported them, who were reft and spoiled of the said Kingdome of England, (as in freshest memory King Henrie the sixth,) and for that he (the said King Iames) had giuen cleare signes, that he was in no noble quality, vnlike to his royall Auncestors, he so di∣stressed a Prince was therefore moued to come, and put himselfe into his hands, desiring his assistance to recouer the Realme of England, promising faithfully, to beare him∣selfe towardes the said Scottish King, no otherwise then as if he had beene his owne naturall brother, and would (vpon recouery of his inheritance) gratefully doe to him all the pleasure which lay in his vtmost power. (43) Perkins speech ended, and his amiable per∣son being fitted with so many countenancing cir∣cumstances of state, and seemings, (by the recom∣mendations of great Princes, aide from the Irish, as∣sured hope of aide in England, and his owne wel-ap∣pointed company,) made so strong an impression in the young Kings conceit, that, albeit there wanted not some, who with Polyd. Verg. l. 26. many arguments aduised the King to repute all but for a meere dreame and illusion, his person was honorably receiued, as it became the per∣son of Richard Duke of Yorke, and his quarrell enter∣tained; which the more to grace in the Worldes eye, Perkin credited and aided mat∣rics into the blood roiall of Scotland. he gaue his consent, that the said Duke of Yorke should take to wife the Lady Katherine Gorden, daughter to the Earle of Hantley, being neere cosen to the King himselfe, a young maide of excellent beautie and vertue. By which marriage as the gen∣tle King abundantly declared that he tooke him for the very Duke of Yorke, so Perkin, Pern. . (distrustfull of the Scots, . . and desirous to gaine the loue and fauour of the Nobles of the Realme) cunningly serued his owne ends for the present, passing current for a Prince of high blood, and roiall hope. Vpon this ground a warre was presently vndertaken against Henrie, and en∣tred The Scots inua Northumberland in Perkins quar∣rell and retaine. into; the King of Scots in person, and Perkin, fol∣lowed with great numbers, specially of Borderers, fell vpon sundry parts of Northumberland, which they most grieuously afflicted, burnt and spoiled, publishing neuerthelesse by Proclamation made in the name of Richard Duke of Yorke much fauour and immunitie to all such as would adhere to his rust quarrell, and a Procl. Per. MS thousand poundes in money, and one hundreth markes by yeere, of land of inheritance to the meanest person, that could either take or distresse his great enemy, who (he said) was flying the land. But King Henry by his diligence, and wisdome had so set∣led the mindes of his people in those parts, that there is no mention made of any one person which offe∣red his seruice. This vnexpected auersion so blankt and dampt the Scottish enterprize on Perkins be∣halfe, that the King offended therewith, retired with his armie (laden with booty) into his Realme, and from thenceforth esteemed of his new Cosen the lesse. But King Henry not minding to forgiue so vn∣iust and causelesse outrages, cals a Parliament, opens King Henry pre∣pares for reuēge. his griefes, and praies aide for an inuasiue warre a∣gainst Scotland, which was generally assented vnto, there being scarce anie more gratefull propolitions to the English in those swording times, then warre with French or Scots: an humour, vpon which this King did practise to enrich himselfe. For the pub∣like monies by these occasions came into his Exchec∣quer, with a small part whereof he flourished out a show of hostile prouisions, and the Remainder there∣upon (if peace ensued, which he alwaies knew how to bring about with honour) was cleerely his owne without account. The summe assented to be gathe∣red was Add. to Fab. sixescore thousand pounds, and for collecti∣on thereof were granted two dismes, and an halfe, and two fifteenes. But the leuie of this money so granted in this Parliament, kindled a dangerous blaze in England; in so much, that the Lord Dawbney be∣ing sent Generall of the Forces against the Scots, and vpon his way thither, was recalled by occasion of in∣testine troubles. (44) Which troubles had their Originall from the leuie of such payments among the Cornish, as The Cornish re∣bellion. were assessed for the Scottish warres. When there∣fore the Collectors came among them, the People (being a stout, bigge, and hardy race of men,) tumul∣tuously assembled; whom one Thomas Polyd. Verg. . Stowes Annal. Holinshed. Flammock a lawyer, and Michaell Ioseph, a blacke-smith or horse-farrier of Boduim, like firebrands of rebellion infla∣med, and were followed as Captaines, not without secret and silent relation (as it may be suspected) to Perkins pretences, and that hope of redresse (if he were King,) which, by his Proclamations he had co∣lourably giuen to the people, at the time of the Scot∣tish Inuasion; where, among manie other things, (tending to humour such as were maleuolent, by making the person and gouernment of King Henrie odious,) this we find. (45) Our great enemie (saith the Proclamation) to fortifie his false quarrell, hath caused diuers Nobles of Perkins Procla∣mation. this our Realme, whom he held suspect, and stood in dread of, to bee cruelly murdered: as our cosen Sir William Stanley Lord Chamberlaine, Sir Simond Mont∣ford, Sir Robert Ratliffe, William Dawbeney, Humfrey Stafford, and many other, besides such as have deerelie bought their liues, some of which Nobles are now in the Sanctuary. Also he hath long kept, and yet keepeth in The Earle of Warwicks empri∣sonment obie∣cted. prison our right intirely wel-beloued Cosen, Edward, Saint and heire to our Vncle Duke of Clarence, and other, with∣holding frō them their rightfull inheritance, to the intent they should neuer be of might & power, to aid and assist vs at our need after the dutie of their leageances. He hath also married by compulsion certaine of our Sisters, and also the Sister of our foresaid Cosen the Earle of Warwicke, and diuers other Ladies of the blood roiall, vnto certaine his kinsemen and friends of simple and low degree; and putting apart all wel-disposed Nobles, he hath none in fauour, and trust about his person, but Bishop Fox, Smith, Bray, Louel, Oliuer King, Sir Charles Sommerset, Dauie Owen, Rysley, Sir Iohn Trobutuile, Tyler, Chamley, Iames Hobert, Iohn Cut, Garth, Henry Wyot, and such other Caitiues, and villaines of birth: which by subtile inuentions, and pilling of the people, haue been the principall finders, occasioners, and counsailers of the misrule, and mischiefe now raig∣ning in England, &c. We remembring these premises, with the great, and execrable offences daily committed and done by our foresaid great enemie, and his Adherents, in breaking the liberties, and franchises of our mother, the holy Church; to the high displeasure of Almighty God: besides the manifold treasons, abhominable murders, man∣slaughters, robberies, extortions, the daily pilling of the Popular insinua∣tions by Perkin. people by dismes, taskes, tallages, beneuolences, and other vnlawfull impositions, and greeuous exactions, with ma∣ny other hainous effects, to the likely destruction and deso∣lation of the whole Realme, &c. shall by Gods grace, and the helpe, and assistance of the great Lords of our blood, with the Counsell of other sad persons, &c. see that the commodities of our Realme bee emploied to the most ad∣uantage of the same, the entercourse of Merchandize be∣twixt Realme and Realme, to be ministred and handled, as shall more be to the Common weale, and prosperitie of our subiects: and all such dismes, taskes, tallages, bene∣nolences, vnlawfull impositions, and grecuous exacti∣ons as be aboue rehearsed, to be foredone, and laid apart, and neuer from henceforth to be called vpon, but in such causes as our Noble Progenitors, Kings of England haue of old time beene accustomed to haue the aide, succour, and helpe of their subiects, and true liegemen. (46) The tide of people being thus vp: Flammock and the blacke Smyth (hauing firme promise of the Lord Audleys personall helpe) lead them forth toward Kent, where they doubted not greatly to encrease their numbers; and had in likelihood so done, but that the singular diligence and wisdome of the King, frustrated their hopes by sundry Princely Arts. Yet they flow on; and to shew what they durst doe, they slew in their way at Tauntford the Prouost of Perin, one of the Commissioners for the Subsidie; and marching forward without offering other violence, Iames Tuichet Lord Audley ioines himselfe at the City of Wels vnto them, according to secret agreement, and becomes their Generall. From Wels they pro∣ceed to Salisburie, thence to Winchester, and so toward Kent, where the Countrey was setled and prouided. But the King farther doubting that the Scots would take fresh occasion, by these seditious vproares, to in∣uade the borders of his Realme, dispatched Thomas Howard Earle of Surrey ( Polyd. Verg. Principe virtu∣te preditum. a Peere of excellent vertue) to defend those parts, with the helpe of the Bishop∣ricke of Durham, and the Marches, till these home∣commotions were appeased; that then the Lord Dawbeney might with a iust and full Army prose∣cute the warre against the Scots. But Iames their King, perceiuing the end of the English intestine warres, would be the beginning of his troubles, thought it best by way of anticipation to weaken his enemy before hand as much as hee could, and thereupon fiercely inuaded Northumberland againe, and Episc. Rosse. Polyd. Verg. besieged Norham Castell belonging to Richard Fox, whom the King for his noble seruices and de∣serts, The Scots inuade and retire. had now aduanced from Exceter, and Bath and Wels, vnto the Bishopricke of Durham. But the Scotish King, hopelesse to winne the Castell, though hauing done much hurt both to it and to the coun∣try, withdrew his people before the Earle of Surrey could approach with his Army, wherein was the Earle of Westmorland, the Lords Dacres, Strange, Neuill, Latimer, Lumley, Scrope, Clifford, Conyers, Darcy, the Baron of Hilton, and many Knights, as Percie, Bulmer, Gascoigne, Penington, Bigot, Bowes, Elarker, Parr, Wharton, Strangwith, Constable, Rat∣cliffe, Sauile, Gower, Musgraue, Mallerie, Loder, E∣ueringham, Stapleton, Wortley, Pickering, Heron, Gray, Ridley, Griffith, Fenwicke, Ward, Strycland, Bellin∣gham, Curwen, Warcop, Tempest, Metcalfe, and o∣thers; who missing the enemy, marched after into Scotland, and tooke such reuenge as the shortnesse of their so daine prouisions would enable. (47) The Rebels on the other side, (whom king Henry thought not good to encounter in their first heates; but suffered them to tire their fury, and surbate themselues with a long march, the countries as they past being forelaide from ioyning with them) comming neere to Kent, found few, or no parta∣kers there; but the Country strongly defended a∣gainst them by the Earle thereof, the Lords Abur∣genie and Cobham, with other principall men and their followers; which made diuers of the Rebels secretly shrinke and abandon the enterprise. But the Lord Audley, Flammocke, Michael Ioseph, and the rest, kept on their way, and encamped vpon Blacke∣heath, between Greenewich and Eltham, from the top whereof they might behold the Citie of London, & the whole brauery of that Horizon. Here they re∣solue to abide the King, or to assaile London. The King on the other side, by the diligence of the Lord Maior, and other the Magistrates, secured the City, which was full of feare and businesse; himselfe enui∣roned with his Nobles, & the choice of the South, hearing where the Rebell was encamped, resolued by dint of sword to deliuer his people from tiring expectations, and for that purpose marcheth out of London, and encamps in S. Georges field, where he I. Stow Annal. A. D. 1497. Iun. An. Reg. 12. lay that night. The next day when he vnderstood that the Enemie had drawne forth his People, and The King moued against the Re∣bels. set them in Battell-ray, he sends out Henry Bourchier Earle of Essex, Edmond de la Pole Earle of Suffolk, Sir Rice ap Thomas, and others, with certaine Cornets of horse, and Companies of Archers, to beset the hill, and the descents thereof, while Giles Lord Dawbeney with the strength of his Armie, chargeth the Enemy in Front, whom with some slaughter they draue from the Bridge at Deepford strand; and then moun∣ting the hill, he and the Earles charge the maine Blackeheath field. squadrons on all sides, and without much labour breake and defeate them. The number of the Re∣bels slaine is vncertainely reported, the ods being be∣tweene Polyd. Verg. Hall. two thousand and Io. Stow. Annal. three hundreth. The Kings armie returned fewer by three hundreth. Fif∣teen hundred rebels were taken Prisoners, & the ta∣kers had their Prisoners goods granted them. Iames Lord Audley, Flammocke, and the Smith were taken and executed. To all the rest mercy was seasonably extended. The Lord Audley led from Newgate to Towerhill in a coate of his owne Armories painted on a paper, reuerst and torne, there paid his head, for being a Head to that heady Route: Flammocke and the Smith were quartered. Memorably Polyd. Verg. strange was the comfort, with which this Blacksmith is said to haue cheered vp himselfe at his being drawne to execution, saying, That yet he hoped thereby, that his name and memorie should bee euerlasting. Who The Blacke∣smithes com∣fort at his death. could beleeue, that the desire of a long-lasting name howsoeuer should take the affections of so meane a person? Such therefore was the end of this insur∣rection; but the times being queasy, the King wise∣lie forbare to take any seuere reuenge vpon more then onely vpon the chiefe Leaders, for he was tru∣lie informed that this calamitie had not broken the willes of the Cornishmen, who remained ready for any desperate sudden occasion, and therefore he ab∣stained from needlesse exasperations, insomuch as that the quarters of Flammocke, and the Smith being once appointed to haue beene set vp in Cornwall for terror, were onely fixed about London, the King thinking good to temper his iustice euen in such a circumstance. (48) His next care was so to order the warre a∣gainst Scotland, that the Peace whose foundations he had laid a far off, might bee made to his more ho∣nor: & because the iniuries sustained by the youthful errour of King Iames, were too publike to bee alto∣gether forgotten; hee sent the Earle of Surrey, the Lord Neuill, and others, to inuade the Scotish bor∣ders Holinsse. Stowes Annal. with an Army, who pursued the reuenge with great vehemency. Meane-while there arriueth in Scotland Peter Hyalus an Ambassador from Ferdinan∣do and Elizabeth, King and Queene of Spaine, as from friends equally well affected to both parties, to mediate a peace between the two Kings of Eng∣land and Scotland, which perhaps in their owne per∣sons would not easily haue beene brought about, the point of honour might thereunto haue giuen such empeachment. But this was the way to a peace which King Henry foresaw, there being not onely a strict bond of loue betweene him and Fer∣dinando, but an ouerture, if not a Addit. to Fab. A Spanish Am∣bassador pro∣cures a truce be∣tweene England and Scotland. secret conclusi∣on, to match his eldest sonne Prince Arthur with the young Lady Katherine daughter of Spaine, who for her excellent vertues was well worthy to be the happy wife of any Prince then breathing. Hyalus so handled the point of his emploiment, that an ho∣nourable truce followed. This Ambassador was a practicke man of much experience, and knew the better how to deale on the behalfe of King Henry a∣gainst Perkin Warbecke, ( Cambd. in De∣uonshire, Imagina∣rius & Scenicus princeps. The Queene of Spaine troubled by a counterfeit. an imaginary and Stage-play Prince) for that his Soueraigne Queene had also beene exceedingly molested by a Counterfeit. For Henry the fourth, King of Castile, and brother to Elizabeth, being vnable to begette children, Ioan (daughter of Edward king of Portugall) his wife found meanes notwithstanding to beare one, by occasion whereof, after King Henries death, for that it was borne in marriage, a dangerous warre was vndertaken by Franc. Tarapha. in Hen. 4. Luc. Merinaus Sicul. Alfonso King of Portugall, on behalfe of Isabel the supposed inheretrix; but Truth, partly by force, and partly by mediation, was in the end victorious; and Elizabeth, or Isabella sister of Henry succeeded to her brother, and brought the inheritance of the Kingdomes of Castile and Leon, with her to Ferdinando King of Arragon. The chiefe point of this truce with Scotland was, That Perkin Warbecke should leaue that Kingdome, seeing king Iames, standing vpon his honour, would not deli∣uer him vp to King Henry. Perkin hauing now no remedie, did accordingly, taking with him his wife, the Lady Katherine Gordon; and with such Perkin Warbecke practised out of Scotland. few as remained to him, past into Ireland, where hee had not continued long; but the Cornish-men offer to rise at his arriuall, and to aduenture their The Cornish call in Perkin Warbeck fortunes, and liues in his quarrell: Which moti∣on Perkin gladly entertained, as perceiuing yet some little hope left to maintaine himselfe, by the troubles, and hazards of others: but the policie and fortune of King Henry were growne so venerable with the Princes his Neighbours, that Ambassadors came from France, and from the Arch-Duke of Burgundy; the one to ratifie amity, the other to re∣quest the restitution thereof; both which K. Henrle (who reposed his whole trust next vnder God, vp∣on King Henry set∣leth peace with neighbour Princes. the amity of his neighbours) granted, and the English Merchants (who had been somewhat long forbidden by their Soueraigne to trade in the Arch-Dukes dominions) Id . M l. returning to Antwerpe were receiued into the same with Procession: so that Per∣kin could scarce cast his eye vpon any place, not onely where to raise aides, but not where to rest his head, vnlesse perhappes in the Court of the Dutchesse of Burgundie; neither in all his fortunes did any thing seeme miserable or vnworthy, but the great infelicity of his wife, whose beauty, birth, and honourable qualities ought not to haue beene so be∣trayed by her friends temerity. Perkin hereupon landing at Whitsand Bay in Cornwall in September, Perkin stirres the Cornishmen. found meanes afterward at Bodmin to raise some thousands of people, whom with most lauish pro∣mises, inuectiue proclamations, and strong impu∣dency, he held together vnder the Title of Richard the fourth King of England, whose fate was none of the happiest, while the maiesty of her name might so bee played with by impostors. Perkin thus ac∣companied, marcheth toward the City of Exceter, purposing if hee could winne it by force, to enrich his Souldiers with the spoiles thereof, and to inuite all other loose or lost people to his seruice by the hope of like booties, and by taking into his possession such places of strength as lay in his way to secure his retreat, if (according to the or∣dinary fortune of warre) any thing should happen to him vnluckily. (50) But the King (hearing that the varlet was landed, and againe made head against him in Armes vpon trust of the Cornishmens assistance) is said to haue smiled, vsing these words; Bern. Andr. MS. Loe, wee are again prouoked by this Prince of Rakehelles, but lest my peo∣ple should through ignorance bee drawne into destructi∣on, let vs seeke to take this Perkin by the easiest wayes we can. Reason hee had to smile, for now he seemed to see the bottome of his perill, and as it were to hold his enemy empounded within the English Ocean, it being a perpetuall and noble with of his, that he might looke his dangers in the face, and deale with them hand to hand, as the neerest cut ouer to a full conclusion. Hee therefore prouides accordingly, assembling his forces, and his wits (no lesse to bee dreaded then his forces) sending forth his espials in∣to all parts to obserue the tracke, and hopes of this empty cloud, which is now seene before Excester, a principall strength and ornament of the Western parts of the Kingdome. Parlea, and the allure∣ments of wordes vnder the guilt title of King Ed∣wards sonne, prouing vnauaileable with those re∣solute and faithfull Citizens; Perkin forth with be∣takes The City of Excester assaulted by Perkin. himselfe to violence, sets fire on the gates, mounts his scaling ladders against the wals, and with his vtmost fury labours to force a suddaine entrance, for that as hee suspected, succours could not long bee wanting. The Citizens on the other side, and such of the Country, as came , prepare and make a very valiant defence against the Rebell, and in stead of quenching the fires kindled by the enemy at the gates, to open a passage (for they had not Canon or any other Ordinance) the Citizens threw on great store of fagots and fuell, and so with The Exce rians policy, in defen∣ting fire by site. flame did shut vp the way, when the gates them∣selues were now consumed; and in the mean while they cast vp trenches, and man their walles, from whence, with the slaughter of about two hundred Rebels at this assault they valiantly draue them. Such messengers as by cords slipt downe the walles, to signifie their perill, sped toward the King; but the loyall diligence of Polyd. Verg. Edward Courtney Earle of Deuonshire, the Lord William his sonne, with many principall Gentlemen of those parts, as Trencherd, Carew, Fulford, Halewell, Croker, Edgecomb, Semar, fol∣lowed with great store of Souldiers, saued him the labour of a personall rescue by timely approch. (51) Perkin hearing thereof; riseth from before Excester, and marcheth to Taunton (a goodly town not far off) there to take the musters of his Armie, Perkin at Taunton. and to prouide for encounter, where he found very many blanks in the list of his numbers, for that they had secretly shrunke away, as misdoubting the se∣quell, the Earle of Deuonshire being so neere at hand with the power of the Country, and the King vpon his way against them, with the maiesty and terrour of a roiall name and Armie, none of the Nobilitie (which was chiefly hoped) comming to their aide. Perkin neuerthelesse makes shew of standing, with such as were left vnto him. The Earle of Deuonshire marching towards Taunton, in the way there came vnto him Edward Duke of Buckingham, a Polyd. Virg. young Lord full of great honour and courage, followed by a goodly troupe of Knights, and others excellentlie well appointed, both for their owne persons, and their peoples. These wee finde named as principall; Bridges, Bainham, Barkley, Tame, Wise, Poyntz, Vernon, Mortimer, Tremail, Sutton, Paulet, Bricknell, Sapcott, The King and his people match toward him. Lutterell, Wadham, Speck, Beauchamp, Cheney, Tokett, Long, Latimer, Turberuile, Stourton, Newbrough, Mar∣tin, Lynde, Rogers, Hungerford, Semar, Darrell, Ba∣row, Norres, Langford, Corbet, Blunt, Lacon, Cornwal; and many other prime and valiant men of Armes. The King last of all (to permit as little to fortune as was possible) sent Robert Lord Brooke, Giles Lord Dawbeney, and that renowned and trusty Welshman Sir Rice ap Thomas, with the marrow and strength of his Army before, himselfe following in person with such as hec thought good. Neither was his care causelesse, for the Cornishmen were come to that height of desperate obstinacy and malice, Polyd. Verg. as not one of them but resolued to conquer, or to leaue his carcase in the place. But God loued him and them better then to suffer it to come so farre; for Perkin, whether fea∣ring Perkin flies from his hoast. treason in his owne Army, or otherwise toucht with the conscience of his quality, and damnable estate of the quarrell, wherein it was horrible to die, hauing in his troupe but threescore horse, secretly fled from the seduced Commons. Which when the King heard, hee presently sets out fiue hundreth horse to pursue and apprehend him, before hee should get to the sea, and so escape. Perkin and his remaines thus streightned, tooke Sanctuary at Beau∣lieu, a religious house within New Forrest, (not farre from Hampton) where the Kings Cornets of horse found them already registred; but according to in∣structions they beset the place, and maintain a strong watch about it day and night. The other Rebels the while without stroke stricken, humbled them∣selues to their Soueraignes mercy, and found it in vndeserued measure. Other strong troupes of horse are at the same instant dispatched to S. Mi∣chaels Mount in Cornwall, where the beautifull Lady Perkins wile take and honourably vsed by the king. Katherine Gorden had beene left by her lewde hus∣band. Her without resistance they brought safely to the King, whose beauty the whole Court prai∣sed, and pittied; but the King most gratiously com∣fotting sent her away well attended to the Queene his wife, and for her birthes sake allowed her Epis. Ross. maintenance, which in honourable manner supported her during the Kings life & many yeeres after. Her fairenesse was such, and her presence so amiable, that shee deserued to be commonly cal∣led The White Rose; whose fortunes (being so far vn∣worthy either of her birth, her singular modestie, or wiuely faith, notwithstanding the so abiect con∣dition of her husband) as they moued iust commi∣seration toward her, so they doubled the lustre of her praises. (52) In the meane while the King makes a reioice∣full entrance into Excester, to testifie his princely loue The King at excester. to the Citizens, whom he highly commended and graced, both for their courage and loyalty; com∣manding some of the Cornish Rebels to be execu∣ted there, which did the better set-off the others contrary condition. There also hee gaue directi∣ons, to offer life, and obliuion of all crimes to Per∣kin, if he would voluntarily quit the Sanctuary, and submit himselfe. Perkin. being now without hope, without abode, without estate, most gladly came forth, Polyd Verg. sine sp , sede, sine fortune. and did put himselfe into the Kings hands. Reasons leading that wise Prince to extend this fauour, were drawne out of the depth of true iudgement, cleared Perkin yealde himselfe to the King. from vulgar perturbations: first; it was not altoge∣ther impossible, but that Perkin might escape him, (though by offering selfe-violence) and so the world should leese the light of satisfaction in so profound and perhaps a matchlesse imposture; then againe his youth might merite some compassion; but the infinite desire which Henry had, from the mouth of the party himselfe, to learne all the secrets of the plot; and who they were that lay vndiscouered, and yet had finger in the mystical practise, moued him to affect the possession of his person allue; which now hee had. Thus was this so dreaded a blaze of re∣bellion suddainly and finally quenched; but not without the teares of many in Deuon and Somerset∣shire, whose estates the Kings officers scruzed and drained, in reuenge of their partaking, and suppor∣ting the Cornish Rebels, either in the field, or flight. Henrie hauing Perkin in his power, gaue way to all such scornes and scoffes, which his Courtiers or others were pleased to passe vpon him, the more to make his person contemptible, who well watch∣ed followed the King to London, whither as he pro∣gressed, multitudes flockt about to behold the Cai∣tife, Polyd. Verg. who being a stranger, nor any way (whatsoeuer hee The king returne to London with Perkin. boasted to the contrary) descended of Nobles, had dared to trouble so great a Kingdome, and by his crafty conueian∣ces had induced so many Princes and Nations (not with∣out mischiefe and ruine vnto diuers) to beleeue of him, that which hee neuer was. And that he might in no part bee vnknowne, hee is leasurely conueied on horse-backe from the furthest part of Ioh.. Stow Annal. 28. Nouemb. London, through Cheapside and Cornhill to the Tower, & backe from thence through Canwicke-streete to Westminster, as the subiect of wonderment, and of all reproach and infa∣mies. The King hauing in this sort taken reuenge of his so strange an enemy, and by curious and often examination comming to the full knowledge of that his soule desired, did set such to attend, as ne∣uer went an inch from Perkins fight, (though hee seemed to goe at liberty) left through the slipperie Arts of his tempting speech and behauiour, hee might vanish into forrain parts, and raise fresh storms in England, & bring new comfort to the Lady Mar∣garet Dutchesse of Burgundie, the sinnefull counte∣nance of all this cursed Stratageme, whose heart was now almost riuen in sunder with the newes of her Perkins most hideous shame and misery; the whole blushing tenour whereof might easily come to her handes at once; for Henry caused so much of the principall matter, as Perkin had confessed, to bee Bern. And. MS. committed to the Printing Presse; (an Art then first appearing among vs,) and published. None can iust∣ly wonder, that wee haue dwelt so long in this won∣derfull Storie, but rather perhaps wish that more particularities (though with more prolixity) had bin vsed. And though some other Actions as English voyage by Ricb. Hackl. Sebasti∣an Cabots discouery, and ouertures of marriages with Spaine and Scotland, came betweene this apprehen∣sion, & the execution of Perkin, yet haue we thought it best, (the sooner & at once to rid our handes of a Bern. And. MS. knaue, as K. Henry iustly called him) to couch al that which concernes him, here together, not fearing to incurre among the learned, the taxation of commit∣ting therein contradiction, and confusion of times. (53) Perkin being thus guarded, doth notwith∣standing attempt to escape. And, if it were lawfull to insert particular coniectures, drawn out of the con∣siderations of circumstances, we should perhaps not spare to say, that his attempt for escape, was not with∣out the Kings priuity; vsing such instrumentes to perswade, or furnish his flight, as might withall be∣tray him, that so by degrees (occasion taken to cutte him off) the Realme might be ridde from such per∣petuall matter of trouble. For the depraued witte and will of man might find or faine reasons to abuse the world still, if Perkin were at liberty; as that the confessions were extorted by feare, or forged by Henry to serue his turne, and the like. Therfore Perkins inten∣tion and escape (for hee was escaped) being discoue∣red to the King, all the wayes were beset, and hee so close pursued, that in the end betaking himselfe to a religious house of Carthusian Monkes, hee declared who hee was, and besought their Prior in the humblest manner he could, for Gods sake to begge his life, which at the Priors suite was granted; but the Kings wrath being kindled, or the passage of his suppressed wrath opened thereby, he banisht all former respects, com∣manding him to be settered, and set (for an whole day) in a paire of Stockes, mounted on a Scaffold before the Gate of Westminster Hall; and the next day to be alike exposed in Engl. Heroick. Epist. Golden Cheape, to the ba∣sest of all contempt and scorne, so fettered, stockt; & Scaffolded as before, to the great wonderment (saith Io. Stows Annal. Stow) of many, as either insinuating that all were not perswaded of the imposture, or that it seemed strange that one lately of so great Prowesse, should vndergoe so despicable a punishment. But for a seale and total summe of all ignominy and shame (such as no face did euer beare greater) he read his owne confession, Perkin set openly in the Stocks, &c written with his owne hand Hollinsh. as followeth. (54) It is first to be knowne, that I was borne in the Towne of Turney in Flanders, and my fathers Perkin maketh an anatom e of his descent or lineage. name is Iohn Osbecke, which said Iohn Osbecke was controller of the said Towne of Turney, and my mo∣thers name is Katherine de Faro. And one of my Grandsires vpon my fathers side was named Diricke Osbecke which died. After whose death my grand∣mother was married vnto Peter Flamin, that was re∣ceiuer of the forenamed Towne of Turney, & Dean of the Botemen, that row vpon the water, or riuer called Le Scheld. And my Grandsire vpon my mothers side was Peter de Faro, which had in his kee∣ping the keyes of the gate of Saint Iohns within the same Towne of Turney. Also I had an vncle cal∣led M. Iohn Stalin, dwelling in the Parish of S. Pias, within the same Towne, which had married my fa∣thers sister, whose name was Ione or Iane, with whom I dwelt a certaine season. (55) And after I was led by my mother to Ant∣werpe for to learne Flemish, in a house of a cosin of Perkins educati∣on o bringing vp. mine, an officer of the said towne, called Iohn Stien∣becke, with whom I was the space of halfe a yeere; and after that I returned againe to Turney, by reason of warres that were in Flanders: and within a yeere following, I was sent with a Merchant of the saide Towne of Turney named Berlo, to the Mart of Ant∣werpe, where I fell sicke, which sicknesse continued vpon mee fiue moneths. And the said Berlo set mee to boord in a Skinners house, that dwelled beside the house of the English Nation. And by him I was from thence carried to Barow Mart, and I lod∣ged at the figne of the old man, where I abode for the space of two moneths. (56) After this, the said Berlo set mee with a Merchant of Middleborow to seruice, for to learne the language, whose name was Iohn Strew, with whom I dwelt from Christmas to Easter, and then I went into Portingall in company of Sir Edward Bramptons wife, in a shippe was called the Queenes shippe. And when I was come thither, then was I put in seruice to a Knight that dwelled in Lushborne, which was called Peter Vacz de Cogna, with whom I dwelled an whole yeere, which said Knight had but one eye. And because I desired to see other coun∣tries, I tooke licence of him, and then I put my selfe Perkin a notable land-loper. in seruice with a Britaine, called Pregent Men , which brought mee with him into Ireland. Now when we were there arriued in the towne of Corke, they of the Towne (because I was arrayed with some clothes of silke of my said Masters) came vnto me, and threat∣ned vpon me, that I should bee the Duke of Cla∣rences sonne, that was before time at Dublin. (57) But forsomuch as I denied it, there was The Irish would haue Perkin take vpon him to bee the Duke of Clarences sonne. brought vnto mee the holy Euangelists, and the Crosse, by the Maior of the town, which was called Iohn Lewelin, and there in the presence of him and others, I tooke mine oath (as the truth was) that I was not the foresaide Dukes sonne, nor none of his bloud. And after this came vnto me an English-man, whose name was Stephen Poitron; and one Iohn They beare Per∣kin downe vvith oathes, that hee is King Richards bastard. Water, and laid to me in swearing great oathes, that they knew well that I was King▪ Richards ba∣stard sonne; to whom I answered with like oathes, that I was not. Then they aduised me not to be a∣feard, but that I should take it vpon me boldly; and if I would so doe, they would aide and affist me with all their power against the King of England; and not onely they, but they were well assured, that the Earle of Desmond and Kildare should doe the same. (58) For they forced not what part they tooke, so that they might bee reuenged on the King of England: and so against my will made mee to learne English, and taught mee what I should doe and say: And after this they called me Duke of Yorke, second They call him Duke of Yorke. sonne to King Edward the fourth, because King Ri∣chards bastard sonne was in the hands of the King of England. And vpon this the said Water, Stephen Poitron, Iohn Tiler, Hughbert Burgh, with many o∣thers, as the foresaid Earles, entred into this false quarrell, and within short time others. The French King sent an Ambassador into Ireland, whose name was L t Lucas, and M. Stephen Friham, to aduertise me to come into France: and thence I went into France, and from thence into Flanders, and from Flanders into Ireland, and from Ireland into Scotland, and so into England. (59) From hauing thus beene made a publike spectacle, till all eyes were wearied with the view, and imaginations tired with thinking; hee is con∣uaied A. D. 1498. An. Reg. 14. Perkin in the Tower, and th Tragicall effects. to the Tower of London: where it had beene happy, if hee had onely wrought his owne destru∣ction; but the bloudy fate (so to speake of his disa∣sterous birth) would not suffer him to perish single. In the same Tower was prisoner Edward the young Earle of Warwicke, hauing so beene from the first yeare of Henry to this present, for no fault of his, but for that, as a neere Titler to the Crowne, he carried in his liuing person inseparable matter of danger & sedition. Of his simplicity, by reason of his educa∣tion in prison from his in fancy, there is a report, that as one who liued out of the view of the world, hee knew not an Polyd. Verg. henne from a goose, or one fowle or Creature from an other. To hasten the ruine of so innocent a daunger, behold there breakes foorth a counterfeit Earle of Warwicke, as if all that which the world saw horrible in Perkins darings, had been but a document to instruct others in the like, and that nothing were to be taxed therein, but want onely of successe, which whosoeuer could propound to him∣selfe A counterfeit Earle of Warwick executed. all things else, were full of encouragement and reason. This counterfeit was a Addit. to Fab. Cordwainers son of London, aged about twenty yeeres, and called Holinshed. Ralfe Wilford, who for falsly assuming the name & title of the said Earle, being thereunto taught and suborned (a practise which well declared that the malitious Dutchesse of Burgundie did still liue) was hanged at S. Thomas Waterings by Southwarke vpon Shrouetuesday. (60) This new deuise to vncrowne King Henry, so wakened his owne feares, and the eies of the Casti∣lians, (who had secretly agreed to marry their Prin∣cesse Katherine to our Prince Arthur) that there see∣med The true Earle of Warwicke de∣signed to die. no sure ground of succession, if that the Earle of Warwicke were not made away. A fearefull case, where the false reason of State shall faine to it selfe an impossibility of well doing, without shedding innocent blood, and shall therefore resolue to found vpon so crying a sinne, the hope of perpetuity in succession; sith nothing is truer, th that sinne was uer an vnsure basis to settle las ing workes vpon. But ô the narrow capacities of the most seeing men; the confidence whereof did vndoub∣tedly lead this King (heerein not iustifiable, howso∣euer excusable in respect of humane frailty, which might propound to it selfe many feares, and respects both publike and priuate) to conniue at the plot∣ted death, or rather formall murder of this harme∣lesse Gentleman, whose wrong may yet moue the hardest to compassion, as it afterwarde stirred God in iustice to reuenge, prospering no part of that great worke which was thereupon thus corruptly sought to be perpetuated. That noble Lady Kathe∣rine herselfe was hereof so sensible, that when the diuorce was afterward prosecuted against her by King Henry the eight, her second husband, shee is reported to haue said, That it was the hand of God, for that to cleere the way to her marriage that inno∣cent Earle of Warwicke was put to vnworthy death. Neither let licentious Practises vouch the singu∣lar Act of Salomon in taking away the life of his el∣der brother Adonias to colour this homicide: for he that will argue from particular facts in Scrip∣ture, shall not onely leaue no Adonias liuing, but per∣haps no Salomon. To worke this young Warwickes ruine, the mischeiuous and dismall wretch Perkin becomes an occasion, if not an instrument, for he by his supple insinuations and flowing promises had corrupted his keepers, the seruants of Sir Iohn Dig∣bie Knight Lieutenant of the Tower; who (as Stowes Annal. was affirmed) meant to haue murdered their master, and then to haue set Perkin, and the Earle at large, to which practise of escape the poore Earle is said to haue consented. Perkin for this conspiracie had his Perkin condem∣ned & executed. triall at Westminster, and hee together with one Iohn à Waters, who had beene sometime Maior of Corke in Ireland, were condemned, and being drawne to Ti∣borne, had the sentence of death executed vpon them. Perkin at the Gallowes did reade his former confession, A. D. 1499. An. Reg. 15. taking on his death that the same was true, and vnder-went his punishment with patience. Wal∣ter Blewet, and Thomas Astwood (being two of the conspirators, for the other two, Strangewates and Long Roger, being the Lieutenants men also, were not executed, nor for so much as wee haue read, ar∣raigned) not long after receiued the reward of their offence at the same place. (61) Iustice thus tooke hold at last of Perkin Warbecke, on whom, the Prouerbe which saith, that Pride is the Vsher of shame, was worthily verified. Nei∣ther could the world accuse King Henrie for his death, vnlesse it were, for that he had not hanged him sooner, but suffered him to liue till hee had drawne after him a greater ruine in Warwicks person, then in all the former tragedies. For this Earle being a chiefe Prince of the blood, and next heire Male of The Earle of Warwicks ruined by Perkins con∣spiracie. his house to the Crowne of England, (a crime of which his birth onely made him guilty and not any fact of his) being thus charged to haue giuen assent to Perkins plot of escape, he was publikely arraigned before the Earle of Oxford (then High Steward of England) by the name of Edward Plantaginet Earle of Warwicke, and indited for minding to haue escaped (as they said) out of the Tower, and consequently Io. Sotw Annal. according to the dreadfull licence of inferences a∣mong our English pleaders in cases of death) to de∣priue King Henry of his royall Crowne and dignity, and to vsurpe the Title and soueraigne office, pro∣secuting their bloody Poetry with the like sanguina∣ry syllogismes, though vtterly without measure, or fashion. The Earle doubly betraied, first by the set∣ters of the snare, and then by their silly or deceitfull The Earle con∣fesseth the en∣ditement. perswasions who were put about him, confesseth the enditement, and submitteth himselfe to the Kings mercie; that is; offered vp his head to be a slipperie foundation of King Henries farther pur∣poses; for sentence of death was thereupon pro∣nounced as against a Traitour. This one practise seemes sufficient, if not to cast vpon Henry the Ti∣tle of a shrewd and perillous man, yet to raise a doubt, whether ( Sir F. B. MS. as one writes) hee was more sincere and en∣tire then Ferdinando King of Spaine, vpon whom (saith that Authour) he did handsomely bestow the enuie of the death of Edward Plantagenet Earle of Warwicke. The life therefore of this Prince (according to rigour of Edward Earle of Warwicke last Male Plausage∣ beheaded. lawe) being thus in his power, the King gently par∣doned all the paines, but the losse of his head, which was cut off vpon a scaffold at Tower-hill, and then (a∣nother gratious fauour) his body was not buried in the Chappel of the Tower, or in any other common place, but at Ioh. Stow. Annal. Bisham by his Ancestors. Iealous (saith Sir Fr. B. MS. one) the King was ouer the greatnes of his Nobilitie, as remembring how himselfe was set vp; and much more did this humour encrease in him after he had conflicted with such Idols and Coun∣terfeits as Lambert Simenel and Perkin Warbeck. The strangenes of which dangers made him thinke no∣thing safe. This Earle was the last heire male of the blood, and surname of Plantagenet; whose race as it was a long time glorious for giuing Kings to Eng∣land, (euen from King Henry the second) so in the end (chiefly for the house of Yorke) it became hate∣full (as it seemes) to God and man, for the most hor∣rible and inextinguible deadly fewdes, murder, per∣iuries, and other horrors committed within it selfe, which (as then not fully expiated) lay heauily vpon the head of this Earle, and finally threw open all those fences, which the possession of Maiestie and numerositie of issue had for sundry ages cast about it, letting in thereby the surname of Tydder being but two descents English, and which now after three des∣cents and fiue Princes is also vanished. Now, a∣mong those few great workes of peace which ensu∣ed their firebrands of warre, we must remember the marriage of Prince Arthur, with the Princesse of Spaine Lady Katherine. The interim from Warwicks death till then, brought forth a verie great plague, whereof in London there are said to haue died about thirtie thousand. The King and Queene remoue to Callais in May and returned in Iune. The maine Polyd. Verg. busines was to reuiew and ratifie the state of amity, and negociations, betweene the English and the Duke of Burgundies subiects. Shine also was burnt, and being new builded, called Richmund, for which and the like, it will be fittest to haue recourse to vulgar Annals. (62) The Coast of State now seeming clearefrom A. D. 1501. An. Reg. 17. al thickning weather, Ferdinando and Isabella King & Queen of Spain, according to the points of agreemēt betweene them and King Henry, concerning their fourth daughter the Lady Katherine (borne at Alcala The Lady Ka∣therine of Spaine landed in Eng∣land. de Finari or Complutum) sent her royally appointed in a goodly Flete to England, there to fulfill in per∣son, what hitherto had beene onely treated of, who Polyd. Verg. in Henirc. 7. after many difficulties tooke land at Add. to Feb. Plimouth in October. Ferdinando her father was the sonne of Iohn King of Arragon and Sicilia, and although he was vn∣learned, as being brought vp among armes and souldiers, yet by vsing the familiarity of wisemen he also became very wise, and proued that great Prince which first in these latter times recalled the old glorie of Spaine, and reared it to such an enuious magnitude, as that the iealousie thereof hath bred no small quar∣rels in Christendome. For by his marriage with I∣sabella, (sole sister and heire to Henry the fourth King of Castile and Leon,) he raigned in right of his wife, and iointly with her, oner those two Kingdomes and their appurtenances, who together (saith Res edmirabiles & opera . Marineus of Sicilia) did admirable things and workes most holy. They Franc. Tarapha. de Reg. Hisp. recouered the huge City and Kingdome of Granada, and part of Andaluzia from the Moores, af∣ter they had beene in violent possession thereof se∣uen hundreth and fourescore yeeres, and hauing The briefe of and bellas greatest actions. purged those places from the filth of Mahomets su∣perstitions, built Churches to the honour of Iesus Christ, by occasion whereof Ferdinando was surna∣med the Catholike King. The walles of the Citie of Granada at the time of the surrender, which (after about tenne yeeres warres) was by V bdelis King thereof made to Ferdinando and Isabella, had Luc. Marin. Sic. Lib. 10. twelue miles in compasse, and in the same twelue Gates, and a thousand towres enclosing seuen Hilles coue∣red with building, innumerable people, and inesti∣mable riches, & the Spanish forces at this conquest were about 12000. Horse, & one hundred thousand foot. The said King and Queene, besides many o∣ther their mighty actions, did also first discouer A∣merica, by Christopher Columbus, & thereby brought a whole new world to the notice of Christendom. Isa∣bella Isabella Queene of Spaine descen∣ded from our Edward the 3. King of England her self, descended of the blood roial of England, being daughter of Iohn the second King of Castile & Leon, son of Henrie the third King of Castile and Leon, and of Katherine his wife (daughter of Auton. Hebri . Decad I. lib. 1. Iohn Duke of Lancaster, third sonne of our Edward the third of triumphall and neuer-dying memorie) was a La∣die, whose Polyd. Verg. Hen. 7. like the Christian world had seldom a∣ny of that wisdome, grauity, chastity, and of: so la∣borious a deuotion, that Luc. Marin. Sic. she did not onely day by day performe the Canonicall and howerly taske of prayers v∣sed by Priests, but many other, and brought vp her children accordingly. (63) The Lady Katherine being about eighteene yeeres old, and borne of so great, so noble, so victo∣rious Prince Arthur married. and vertuous parents, is with iust maiesty and solemnity openly Addit. to Fab. saith on a Sun∣day the feast of S. Erkenwald. married in Paules Church to Arthur Prince of Wales, aged about fifteene yeeres, and eldest sonne to Henry the seuenth, King of Eng∣land, and of Elizabeth his wife. The Archbishop of Canterbury assisted with nineteene Bishops and Ab∣bots, mitred, ioyned their hands, and performed all the other Church rites vpon that great day. The vulgar Annals can tell you the splendor and glorie thereof, in apparrell, iewels, Pageants, banquets, guests, and other princely complements, the onely weighty businesse of many weaker braines. A graue Lady (as som haue written) was laid in bed between the Bride and Bridegrome, to hinder actuall con∣summation, in regard of the Princes greene estate of body; but others alleadge many arguments to proue that matrimoniall performance was between thē, howsoeuer her self, (when that afterward came in question) 10. Stows Annal. appealed to the conscience of K. Henry the eight (her second husband) if hee found her not a maide. But Prince Arthur enioyed his marriage a very short while, for in Aprill following hee died at Ludlow, being vnder sixteene yeeres of age: being Prince Arthur dieth. a Prince, in whose youth the lights of all noble ver∣tues did cleerely beginne to shine. His aptnesse to learn was almost incredible, for (by the report of his Bern. Andr. MS. Master) hee had either learned without booke, or otherwise studiously turned and reuolued with his own hands & eies these authors following. In Gram∣mar, Garin, Perot, Sulpicius, Gellius and Valla: In Po∣etrie, Homer, Virgil, Luc n, Ouid, Silius, Plautus, Prince Arthurs bookes and lear∣ning. and Terence: In Oratorie: Tullies Offices, Epistles, Paradoxes and Quintilian. In Historie, Thucydides, Liuie, Caesars Commentaries, Suetonius, Tacitus, Pli∣nius, Valerius Maximus, Salust, Eusebius. Wherein wee haue beene particular, to signifie what Au∣thors were then thought fitte to bee elementary and rudimentall vnto Princes; and by their example, to all of Noble or gentle birth, whose superficiall bold∣nesse in books in these frothy dayes, is become most scandalous and iniurious to the honour, and vse of learning. (64) But before the vntimely expiration of this great hope of England, King Henry weary of warres and tumults, and desirous to lay the beginnings of A. D. 1501. An. Reg. 17. a long peace by most inward friendship with all his great neighbours, had concluded a match betweene Margaret his eldest daughter, and Iames the fourth King of Scotland, the The cōtract be∣tweene Iames King of Scots and Lady Margaret published. assurance whereof was pub∣lished in the February next before Prince Arthurs death at Paules Crosse; in reioycement whereof, Te Deum was sung▪ and other signes of publike ioy declared. The Ioh. Stow Annal. in Iac. 4. Bishoppe of Rosse saith, that the Earle of Bothwell did openly handfast, or espouse the said faire Lady, in the name of King Iames at Pauls Crosse, being Saint Paules day. This contract was brought about in manner following. After that the storme of warre had (by mediation as before said) beene throughly laid betweene the two sister Nations, it chanced certaine of the Scots by their suspitious behauiour, and rough Phrases to prouoke the Garrison of Norham Castle to issue, who in the bickering slew and hurt some of them, and droue the rest away. King Polyd. virg. Episc. Ross. Iames expostulates this violence very sharply by letters with King Henry, who retur∣ned most satisfactory answeres. Richard Fox Bishop of Durham (whose the men and Castell were) wrote also many deprecatory letters, humbly praying the Scotish King to accept amends, wherunto hee in the end inclined, and hauing some matters of farre grea∣ter moment to impart, desired the Bishops presence in Scotland (knowing his deepe wisdome and great grace with his Soueraigne) which King Henry glad∣ly assented vnto. The meeting was at Melrose, an Abbey of Cistertian Monkes, where the King abode, who hauing roundly vttered to the Bishoppe his Bishop Fox his presence desired by the Scotish King. offence conceiued for the breach of good termes at Norham Castell, and yet being finally pleased to re∣ceiue satisfaction, hee then secretly discouered his whole mind, the summe whereof was, That the king of England would be pleased to giue to him in mariage the Lady Margaret his eldest daughter, as a pledge of indisso∣luble amitie. The Bishoppe promised his best dili∣gence, and accordingly after his returne, laboured therein with King Henry, who most gladly hearke∣ned thereunto. Whereupon the Scotish King sent the Archbishoppe of Glasco, the Earle of Bothwell, and others to demand the Lady in marriage. Their entertainement was hearty and princely. But when the proposition came to scanning at the Councell ta∣ble, it had not currant passage at first: for there were who obiected as an inconuenience; That by this mar∣riage the Crowne of England might come to the Scotish line, by the issue of Lady Margaret. Whereunto it is said, King Henry made this answere Episc. Ross. ex Polyd. verg. What if it should? King Henries an∣swere to an ob∣iection against the match with Scotland. for if any such thing should happen, (which Omen God for∣bid) I see it will come to passe, that our Kingdome shall leese nothing thereby, because there will not bee an acces∣sion of England to Scotland, but contrarily of Scotland vnto England, as to that which is farre away the most no∣ble head of the whole Iland, seeing that which is lesse v∣seth to accrue to the ornament and honour of that which is much the greater, as Normandy heretofore carue to be vnder the dominion and power of the English our forefa∣thers. When this was said, the whole boord of coun∣cell receiued it as an Oracle, & it went cleare about, That Margaret should be married to the King of Scot∣land. With this answere and other instructions the Scottish Ambassadors were sent home, who afterward returned into England with full authori∣ty & satisfaction to all Henries propositions, where∣upon ensued the before said publishment of assu∣rances at Paules Crosse. It was a principall Article in this agreement: That no Englishman should enter Scotland, nor Scot into England without commendatory letters from their Soueraigne. Which Article was re∣puted a speciall meane to preserue the peace inuio∣lable. (65) But ere the young Lady her selfe was con∣uaied into Scotland, her brother Prince Arthur died, A. D. 1502 An. Reg. 18. King Henry a Widdower, and Henry his sonne created Prince of Wales. and in * February next ensuing, their mother also Queene Elizabeth, as shee lay in Child-bed within the Tower of London. The King to repaire his mind with fresh consolations, in aduancing his onely re∣maining sonne, Henry Duke of Yorke, created him suddainely Prince of Wales, Earle of Chester & Flint, within few dayes after his mothers decease. Thus was Arthurs losse supplied, howsoeuer. Henry made Prince, espoused soone after ( See in the life of Henry the 8 though with much reluctation) the Lady Katherine his elder brothers widdow, . Stow Ananl. vpon the fiue and twentieth of Iune, at the Bishoppe of Salisburies house in Fleetstreet. And in this wise, by prouiding so worthy a wife for him, (though to say truth, her great Dowet was the chiefe motiue) the king thought, that the estate of England was sufficiently setled; wherfore conuerting his cares to the accomplishment of affinity with Scotland, hee most sūptuously furnished his deerest eldest daugh∣ter K. Henry brings his daughte the Lady Margares on the way to Scotland. for her iourney, & himself in person trauelled frō Richmund as farre with her as C leweston beside Nor∣thampton, where his mother the Countesse lay: Epis. Ross. after certaine dayes spent in solace, the King gaue her his blessing, with fatherly counsell and exhortation, and committed the guard and conduct of her person principally to the Earles of Surrey and Northumber∣land, and to such Ladies and Gentlewomen as were appointed to that seruice; a great company of Lords The Earle of Northumberl deliuers her to King Iames with∣in Scotland. Knights, Esquiers, & men of Marke attending them as farre as Berwicke. At S. Lamberts Church in Lamer Moore within Scotland, the King attended by the principall of his Nobles, receiued her from the hands of the Earle of Northumberland, and the next yeere after, married her at Edenborough, in the pre∣sence of all his Nobility. The King gaue great en∣tertainement to the English, and shewed them iu∣sting and other pastimes after the Scotish fashion. The Scotishmen (saith I Iac. 4. the Bishoppe of Rosse) were not behind, but farre aboue the Englishmen, both in apparrell, rich Iewels, and massie chaines, many Ladies hauing their habiliments set with Gold∣smith worke, garnisht with Pearle and Stone of price, with gallant and wel trapped horses. Diuerse Ladies also and young Gentlewomen of England, attending Queene Margaret, remained there, and were well married to certaine Noblemen of Scot∣land, whose progenie liues honourably there euen at these dayes. The effect of this marriage is grauely described by the same Bishop in these words. There was perfect peace and sincere amity betweene the two The immediate happy effect of this marriage. Realmes of England and Scotland a long time after. And verily, during the life of King Henry the seuenth, no cause of breach was ministred by either of the Princes, but they continued in great loue and friendshippe, and mutuall societie, contracting of marriages, continuall en∣terchange of Merchandize betwixt the Subiects of both the Realmes, as they had beene AL vnder the obedi∣ence of ONE PRINCE; where through, Iustice, Policy and Riches did flourish and abound throughout the whole Isle of Albion. And of this marriage is Iames the sixth descended, being that ONE PRINCE vnder whose obedience AL are now gouerned, as vnder the sole and lawfull lineall Monarch of great Britaine: for this Iames the fourth had Issue Iames the fifth, hee had Issue Queene Mary, shee had issue our present Soueraigne, the great grandchild of the said Queene Margaret eldest daughter of K. Henrie the seuenth. (66) Which effects of peace and riches, as they could not but bee comfortable to so wise a King as Henry, they being the fruit as it were of his owne iust labours; so let vs now obserue the last worldly cares of his raigne, and vpon what obiects hee fixed his mind, freede from the awe of open challenges of the Crowne, and from throwes at his maine, which with what art, valour and felicity, hee at first atchieued, and with how great hazards, trou∣bles, and bloudie businesses, he brought it to such passe, that neighbour Kinges reputed it safe to entermarry with his family, wee haue already heard: Two principall points tooke vp the last Scenes of his life; for the rest of his time hee wholy em∣ployed, either in the seruice of Almighty God (wher∣in hee was so diligent, that euery day he was present, after the deuotions of those times, at two or three Masses, oftentimes hearing godly Sermons,) or in building, wherewith hee kept his senses busied. The one of the two chiefe points, was to watch ouer the waies of his wiues kindred (the remaining branches of the turbulent and vnfortunate house of Yorke) whose growth and greatnesse hee supposed might at some time or other ouertoppe his owne; the other was, vnder opinion of iustice, to encrease his trea∣sure out of the common purses, wherby he seemed onerous to many, & somwhat obscured the bright∣nes of his former glory, at leastwise diminished his o∣pinion with the generality. Concerning his cour∣ses holden with his wiues kindred, (the laterall issu∣es and staddles of the Plantagenets) it fell out thus; which (by * occasion of the accidentall landing of Philip King of Spain at this time, wherby the A. D. 1506 A. R. 21. Earle of Suffolkes taking was procured) we thought it best to handle here together. Edmund de la Pole Addit. to Fab. cals him Duke. Earle of Suffolke (sonne to Iohn Duke of Suffolke, and of Elizabeth sister to King Edward the fourth) in the sixteenth yeere of King Henries raigne, wilfully slew a common person in his furie. Henry not sor∣ry to haue occasion of encreasing his popularity, by A Prince of the bloud roiall ar∣raigned for mur∣ther of a priuate person. presenting so great a person to exemplary iustice, and in the same act to blemish the honour of a man, whose quality was to him suspected, caused him for the same to be arraigned. The fact hee was per∣swaded to confesse, and therupon had pardon. The Earle neuerthelesse, as a Prince of the bloud, hol∣ding The Earle of Suffolke causeth troubles. himselfe disgraced, by hauing been seen a Pri∣soner at the Kings Bench Barre, fled the land discon∣tented, and went to his Aunt the Dutchesse Dowa∣ger of Burgundie; but within a while after, being fairely reconciled, hee returned. After which, not∣withstanding, Polyd. Verg. Edw. Hal. Hollinsh▪ whether it were by reason of debt (the certaine attendant of vaine-spirited, and base-braue∣minded * Io. Stow. Annal. Courtiers) wherinto he had deeply thrown himself for his furniture, at the celebration of his co∣sen Prince Arthurs marriage, or for that the restlesse spirit of enuie in the Dutchesse had preuailed, hee taking his brother with him, fledde againe the next yeere after. The King who had pardoned his life, seemed now to repent his clemency, Polyd. Verg. though it is plaine, hee spared him of purpose, till hee might dis∣couer more of a conspiracy which hee knew was in hammering; but his flight troubled him not a little, knowing the violent humor of that Lord, and re∣mēbring to what a dangerous & bloudy issue his bro∣ther the Earle of Lincolne had once already brought things at the battell of Stoke in the beginning of his raigne. (67) For remedy, hee betakes himselfe to his won∣ted arts, and therefore to learne the secrets of the enemy, Sir Robert Curson Knight (Captaine of the Castell of Hammes by Caleis) faines himselfe a friend to the Earle, and flies from his charge vnto him. An office vnworthy of Knighthood; neither can any good spirit in the world stoope it selfe to such dou∣ble faced emploiment, which besides the treache∣rous dissimulations thereof, cannot but bee accom∣panied with wilfull impieties. For who is admit∣ted into trust vpon a contrary side, without inuoca∣tions of Gods holy name, protestations, adiurati∣ons, oathes, the vtmost assurances which man can giue to man, to beget a conuenient affiance in his sincerity? but by this stratagem the king ransackes the bosomes and cabinets of his aduersaries, disco∣uering their designes and hopes. Whereupon, Wil∣liam Courtney Earle of Deuonshire (being most nobly descended, and hauing to his wife the Lady Kathe∣rine, one of the daughters of K. Edward the fourth, and sister to Queene Elizabeth wife of King Henry) Apprehensions of persons for the Earle of Suffolkes cause. William de la Pole brother to the said Edmund Earle of Suffolke, Sir Iames Tirrel, Sir Iohn Windham Knights, with other, were attached, and committed to custo∣die, and afterward also Polyd. Verg. George Neuil Lord Aberge∣nie, and Sir Thomas Greene Knight, were likewise ap∣prehended, but were soone deliuered. The Earle of Deuonshire, though innocent (for it is the misery of such great men, that their owne innocency cannot alwayes procure their owne safety; but their birth∣right many times, and often other mens designati∣ons without their least priuity, is enough to hazard them, yea it is in the power of any conspirator by The misery of great subiect and a lesson for thē. bare nomination, to doe as much, so that it con∣cernes them to haue an eye not to their owne onely, but to the behauiour also of their whole Alliances and depen∣dancies) this Earle (I say) though innocent, remai∣ned Prisoner during this Kings life, and some yeeres of his sonnes raigne, who set him at liberty. The o∣ther, William the Earle of Suffolkes brother, had not Executions for the Earle of Suffolkes cause. so strict an hand holden ouer him. But Sir Iames Tyrrell, Lieutenant of Guines Castell, and Sir Iohn Wyndham, Welbourn, seruant to Sir Iames Tyrrel, Cur∣son a Purseuant, Mathew Iones yeoman, and a Ship∣man were condemned of treason for aiding the Earle of Suffolke. The Stowes Annal. two Knights were beheaded at Tower hill. The Shipman quartered at Tiburne: Add. to Fab. Curson and Iones suffered death at Guines. (68) This so round and quicke dealing with the Earles complices and fauourers, startled his shallow and raw inuentions, and made their whole bulke to swarue and splinter; but the King rested not so; for vpon the Sunday before the feast of SS. Simon and Iude, in the same yeere, of the said executions, there was published at Pauls Crosse, by the Kings procure∣ment from Pope Alexander the sixth, a Bull of Addit. to Fab. The Earle or Duke of Suffolke, and Sir Robert Curson & others accursed. Ex∣communication and curse against the said Earle of Suffolke, Sir Robert Curson, and fiue other persons by speciall name, and generally all other which aided the Earle against the King to the disturbance of the Kingdome. Thus did the most prudent Henrie pursue his enemies, not onely with secret coun∣termines and open weapons of Law, before they could assemble to make any shew, but also with spirituall lightening; which doubtlesse, had they beene vpon iust cause, and by lawfull authoritie ful∣minated, ought infinitely to bee dreaded of good Christians, because (as Saint Paul saith) they deliuer ouer to Satan. Sir Robert Curson was named, of pur∣pose, to make the Earle secure of him; which may well be called a perillous, if not a prophane deuise, though his Holinesse were made the instrument thereof. Neither did the King leaue heere, for by his letters and messengers he so preuailed with Pope Antiquit. Britan. in Mortons life names Innocen∣tius, and not Alexander. Alexander, as hee decreed by his Bull, That no per∣son should afterward haue priuiledge of Sanctuary, who had once taken the same, and come foorth againe: and that, Polyd. Uerg. Antiquis. Brit. in vita Morton. if any Sanctuarie-man should afterward commit any murther, robbery, sacriledge, treasons, &c. he should by lay force bee drawne thence to suffer due punishment. This was of great vse to the King, and preserued ma∣ny subiects from precipitation, for the abuse of Sanctuaries had beene an efficient of many trou∣bles. But the same Pope (hauing sent Iohn Giglis his Receiuer, to gather mony in England) shewed him∣selfe much more fauourable to such as perpetrated those said hainous offences, as also, Vsury, simony, rapines, adulteries, or whatsoeuer offences (excepting certaine offences against the Pope and Clergy, &c.) when he sent a * Bull of pardons (for money) to all Antiquit. Britan. Ibidem. such offendors in England; dispensing also thereby, with such, as kept away, or by any fraud bad gotten the goods of other men, which they should now retaine still without scruple of conscience, so as they paid a ratable portion thereof, vnto his Holinesse Receiuers. Sir Robert Curson (though before accursed by the Pope) re∣turnes, when he saw fit time, into England, and with∣all into wonted fauour with his Soueraigne. The Earle, seeing himselfe thus stript of all hope to doe much harme, wandred about Germany and France to finde repose, but in the end quite tyred, he put himselfe into the grace and protection of Philip then Philip the first, King of Spaine and his Queene driuen by tem∣pests into En∣gland. in Flanders who by the death of Isabella was King of Spaine, in right of Ioan his wife, eldest daughter of Ferdinando and Isabella; where hee remained in ba∣nishment, till King Phillip was driuen by tempest in the moneth of Ianuary into England, as hee meant to haue passed through the sleeue, or English Ocean, into Spaine, there to take possession of that King∣dome and other the appertinances. A. D. 1506. An. Reg. 21. (69) The chiefe Ship of the Nauie Roiall, where∣in the King was, and two other (all the rest being scattered by the fury of the weather into seueral pla∣ces and other Ports of England) thrust into ar∣bour at Ioh. Stow. Annal. Polydor saith Way outh. Falmouth. Himselfe weary and sicke with the violent tossings of the Sea (whereunto hee had neuer as it seemes, beene vse would needes come on shore, and refresh his spirits, though the princi∣pall men about him disswaded that course, as fore∣seeing it would procure a longer stay, then the nature of their occasions would perhaps well beare. And so indeed it fel out, for being now in another Princes (though his friends) dominions, where he had no po∣wer ouer himself, nor others, & the rumor of arriuall stirring the men in authority thereabout, Sir Thomas Trenchard Knight with the suddē forces of the Coū∣trey, not knowing what the matter might bee, came thither, and vnderstanding the royall quality of the person, inuited him with all humble humanity to his house, and foorthwith dispatched postes to Court; not long after Sir Iohn Car Knight (with a great troupe of armed men) repaired also, pursuing the like humble entreaties; which the King, fearing con∣straint, because they were but subiects and durst not let him passe without their Lord and Masters leaue necessarilie yeelded vnto. Vpon notice of this migh∣tie Princes casuall arriual, King Henry presently commanded the Earle of Arundel to entertaine him till himselfe could come, who very mag∣nificently did so, with Io. Sotw Annal. three hundred Horses by Torch-light; and in the meane while King Henry himselfe prepares. Philip perceiuing, that whatsoe∣uer speed his affaires required, yet now there was no remedy but to stay, thought not good to expect his approach, but to preuent it, and came vpon the The Kings of England and Spaine at Wind∣sore. spurre to Windsore, that he might be gone againe the sooner, after whom Queene Ioan his wife came lea∣sureably. The rest of this entertainement, because it hath matter of weight, and is well set downe by Po∣lidor Vergil, it shall suffice vs to follow his footsteps At Windsore, the two Kings, after long and seuerall Polyd. Verg. discourses, beganne to conferre about renewing their league. Henry required that Edmund Earle of Suffolke might be deliuered vp into his power, which Philip de∣nied to be a thing that he could doe, as holding it most vnreasonable to be the author of his death, whom he had taken into Protection: but when at the last he found, that no excuse nor reason, could satisfie, for that, Henrie voluntarily offered to saue the Earles life, he promised to doe therein what he desi∣red, and presently tooke order for his sending ouer. According whereunto, King Henry (to draw out the time, till he had the wished prey) conueied King Phi∣lip to London, to shew him the head City of his king∣dome, out of which after a little stay hee recondu∣cted him. The Earle in the meane time, who conceiued horror at the first newes of King Philips landing in England, as fatall to him, and resolued that no hope was longer to be reposed in the faith of forraine Princes, came ouer not vnwillingly, presuming that after pardon of life, hee might also in time re∣gaine his liberty; or if that hope failed, yet should he at lestwise obtaine to die, and bee buried in his Countrey. But King Philip and his Queene, ha∣uing feasted with her sister the Princesse of Walles, de∣parted England. The Earle was brought through Flanders to Calleis vpon the sixeteenth of March, and landed at Douer vpon the foure and twentieth of the same, conueighed thither by Sir Henrie Wiat, and Sir Iohn Wiltshire, with threescore men in ar∣mour The Earle of Suffolke deliue∣red vp and sent to the Tower. of the Garrison of Calleis; and at Douer Sir Iohn Louel and others receiuing him, guarded him safe to the Tower of London. King Philipp, not long after his landing in Spaine deceased, being not thir∣tie yeeres old. That tempest which draue him into England was holden by the people as prodigious; for it blew down the golden Eagle from the famous Spire of Pauls Steeple (being of Copper richly ouerguilt, of fourty pounds weight, in length foure foote, and in breadth three,) which also in the fall thereof, brake The ominous fall of the wea∣ther cocke of Pauls. and battered the signe of the Blacke Eagle, in Pauls Church-yard, in the place where now the Schoole-house stands. This accident euen then made some coniecture, that the Emperour Maximilian (whose Imperiall Ensigne the Eagle is) should suffer some losse accordingly (saith Polydore) as indeed he did by the death of King Philippe his sonne. Which (if any superstici∣ously delight in Calculations of that blind nature) we may well parallell with that Suet. in Ang. cap. 97. lightning which stroke the letter C. out of Caesar in the inscription of Caesar Augustus his statue; wherupon it was gathered, that Augustus should liue but one hundreth daies after, and then bee called a God, (Aesar the remaining syl∣lables so signifying in the old Hetruscan tongue,) which accordingly hapned. (70) Thus was the Earle of Suffolke brought backe, and the King anchored his quiet at the safe King Henries ga∣thering of trea∣sure. custody of his person within the Tower. The other wordly point wherein he chiefely bestowed his ages care, was to gather money, though by courses seem∣ing very grieuous and full of bitternesse; the too griping greedinesse, and too-profuse lauishnesse of mo∣ney in Princes, being both alike offensiue to a well setled estate. Some excuse his doings herein (amongst whom Polydor is chiefe) as not proceeding from a∣ny deprauation or vncorrected affection of his na∣ture; but from an opinion and forecast of generall profite: because a Princes humor of gathering, ten∣deth, though with distast of particular men, to the good publike, whereas his profusenes, though with some particular mens profite, endeth in the empo∣uerishment of the whole. And Henry himselfe pro∣tested (saith Polydor) hee did it not for loue of money, but with a purpose to bridle the fierce minds of a nation bred vp among factions: though they (saith the same author) who felt the smart, and were wounded by his Instruments, N n tam seueri∣tatis, quam anari∣tia tela esse cla∣mabant. cried out they were not so much the darts of seuerity, which did hit them, as of anarice. Yet Polydors Apologie may be current: for it is not to bee doubted, but that such vse the King might propound himselfe; and yet withall, we can hard∣ly find any commendable root thereof, the wayes being so importune and harsh, by which hee raised money. Let vs heare in this point the obseruatiue Sir F. B. MS Knight. Of nature (saith hee) Henry coueted to ac∣cumulate treasure, which the people (into whome there is infused, for the preseruation of Monarchies, a naturall King Henry giues way to the need∣lesse molestation of his people. desire to discharge their Princes, though it bee with the vniust charge of their Counsellors and Ministers) did impute vnto Cardinall Morton, and Sir Rcinald Bray, who (as it afterward appeared) as Counsellors of ancient authority with him, did so sound his humor, as neuerthe∣lesse they tempered it. Where it is truly said, it afterward appeared: for till they were gone to account to God, and his feare for the maine quite banished, the king did not let loose the reines to his immoderate desire of hauing, which yet was not more sinnefull, then the meanes vnder him practised, were odious. For Sir Fr. B. MS Empson and Dudley that followed, being persons that had no reputation with him, otherwise then the seruile following of his owne humors, gaue him way, and shaped him meanes to those extremities, whereby himselfe was touched with remorse at his death, and which his succes∣sor disauowed. And this we take to be a true iudge∣ment. To bee particular in the recitall of thinges worthy to die in forgetfulnesse, is not onely to re∣cite, but in a sort to teach them also, as some, who by broad inuectiues, haue as it were read a lecture of those vices, against which they haue pretended to inueigh. But publike and shamefull Arts may more safely be deliuered. The instruments whome the King set on worke (or who p aps set the King on worke) were * two Lawyers, Richard Empson (after∣ward knighted) and Edmund Dudley Esquier; their Addit. to Hard. The foule pra∣ctises vsed to empouerish the subiect. emploiment was to cal the richer subiect into que∣on for breach of old penall lawes, long before dis∣continued and forgotten, whereby they brake in vp∣on the people, as it were at vnaware, like a kind of authorized robbers, masked vnder the pretext of seruice for the King, and the names of Delators or Promoters, a Cor. Tacit. familiar sicknesse in the times of an∣cient Tyrannies. But the courses to execute their employment, were voide of all conscience and co∣lour. For one of them was to Polyd. Verg. outlaw persons secret∣ly, and then to seise their estates, driuing them to charge∣full compositions with the King, and heauy bribes to the Authors of their trouble. More detestable was another practise of theirs. For there 10. Stow Annals. were false Iurors and ring leaders of false Iurors, who would neuer giue any verdict against the will of their patrons, the said Empson and Dudley; so that if any durst stand out vpon triall, the destiny of their causes was squared forth by the leaden rule of those fellowes conscien∣ces; which to bee a truth, the expiatory punish∣ment which K. Henry the eight tooke of them in the first yeare of his raigne, doth clearely conuince. By these meanes many honest and worthy subiects were rigorously fined, imprisoned, or otherwise af∣flicted, which filled the land with sorrow and repi∣nings. Among very many others thus abused Sir William Capell Alderman of London was eminent, as from whom, in the tenth yeer of the kings raign, A. D. 1508. A. R. 23. had beene scruzed, vnder the colour of moth-eaten and vnreuiued Lawes, aboue sixteene hundreth pounds sterling, and was now againe plaide at a∣fresh, and another hand drawne vpon him for two thousand pounds, which because he would not pay, hee was by Dudley commaunded prisoner to the Tower; but by the death of the King which ensu∣ed, all such prisoners were released. If any perhaps will slight the hard vsage extended to Citizens, and to the like, they are vnwise therein, neither thinke as Patriots ought. For though it may so fall out that the personall vexation of some few, merits no great pitty; yet the example is pestilent; and it is a part of the cunning, to choose out at first such for patternes, as vpon whose persons least compas on may fall, which examples may afterward bee extended to whomsoeuer. These reuels and rages against the wealthier sort continued, till it pleased God to sting the Kings heart with iust compunction, toward the horror of his death; who had the fauour from heauen, as to lie sicke of a consuming disease, which The King falleth sicke. wasted him by such insensible degrees, as gaue him the vse of his whole selfe (as it were) till the last gaspe, whereby hee had meanes to recollect himselfe, after those many soule-wounding assaults which attend regall greatnesse, and to submit his thoughts to such ghostly admonishments (touching another life) whereunto in dayes of health, the hearts or eares of great Princes are seldome attentiue. (71) About the yeere of his death, hauing vn∣derstood that Lewis King of France, despairing of is∣sue Pol. Verg. male, had annulled the Contracts made be∣tweene Charles King of Spaine (sonne of the late King Philip, and afterward elected Emperour by the name of Charles the fifth) and the Lady Claudia his eldest daughter, whom he newly betrothed to Fran∣cis of Valois Dolphin of France, and Duke of Ango∣lesme; King Henry (whose care for preseruation of King Henry seeks to assure his daughter Mary to Charles King of Castile. the common quiet, and good of his Country, by forrain alliances, was euer holy in him and awake) thought it a faire occasion for him to match his younger daughter the Lady Marie. The French King to haue the aduise of Iames the fourth King of Scots, in the bestowing the said Madam Claudia The French King sends for aduise to the King of Scots. his eldest daughter, had before sent Bernard Stew∣ard Lord Dobignie, and the President of Tholouz, Ambassadors for that purpose; who finally in effect receiued this answere: Epis. Ross. That the said King Iames thought it best that his eldest daughter should be married within his owne Realme of France, for if she were mar∣ried vpon any forraine Prince, it might giue colour to claime title to the said Realme afterward. And if he did marrie her at home, rather to him the said Francis, whom he had appointed to succeed then any other. Which reso∣lution was very acceptable to K. Lewis, because it iumped with his owne purpose, and it was followed accordingly. King Henry therefore hearing that King Charles might bee obtained, so pursued the po Polyd. Verg. by the prudent managing of Richard Fox (now Bishoppe of Winchester) his Ambassadour, that King Charles his Ambassadors comming out of Flanders, where h was educated, and meeting The Lade Mary promised to King Charles. him at Caleis, the aff was opened, disputed, con∣cluded, and the Lady Mary then about ten yeeres of age (as King Charles himselfe) was by solemne con∣tract assured to him for wife. (72) Now therefore his sonne Henrie Prince of Wales, being heire of the Crowne, and married; his A. D. 1508. A. Reg. 24. eldest daughter, the Lady Magaret, Queene of Scot∣land; the Lady Mary his youngest, prouided for so highly (though in the end it came to nothing) all likelihood of perill by competitors, or busie Factio∣nists, buried in the Tower, by the emprisonment of Edmund Earle of Suffolke; his people tractable and calme; his coffers full, and the state of things K. Henry the 7. dies. ripe for a successour: death (the executioner of the Almighties sentence,) was ready to discharge him of the prison of his flesh. Before he departed, Iohn Stowe well disposed persons tendering the health of his soule, did both in sermons, and otherwise, informe him of the exclama∣tions against informers; Wherefore he of his blessed disposition, granted to all men generall pardons, cer∣taine Generall par∣dons granted by the King. onely excepted. In his life time hee founded the goodly Hospitall of the Saudy, built sixe religi∣ous Houses for Franciscan Friers, three of them for Obseruants, and the other three for Conuentuals. Of his building also was Richmund Pallace, and that most beautifull peece, the Chappell at Westminster, the one the place of his death, and the other of his buriall: which formes of more curious and exqui∣site building, he and Bishoppe Foxe, first (as is re∣ported) learned in France, and thence brought with them into England. He died about the age of fiftie two yeeres, vpon the two and twentieth of Sir Fr. B. MS. Io. Stow. Annal. The yeere of his age, and raigne. April hauing raigned twenty three yeeres and eight moneths. A right noble, wise, victorious and re∣nowed King, and one whose piety would haue beene farre more eminent, then all his other ver∣tues, if from the beginning the malignant quality of the times, would haue permitted him to liue in quiet. He specially honoured the remembrance of that Saint-like Man, Henry the sixth, the founder of his Family, and Propheticall fore-teller of that fortune which now hee died seised of, whom also A Saint lost for want of pay. he laboured to haue Cambden. in Surrey. See more Supra in Edward 4. §. 79. & 80. Canonized for a Saint, but that Pope Iulio held that honour at two high a rate. It is reckoned by some writers Addit. to Fab. King Henry salu∣ted Defensor of Christs Church by three Popes. of that age among his principall glories, that three Popes, Alexander the sixth, Pius the third, and Iulius the second, did in their seuerall times, with authority and consent of the Cardinals, elect and chose him for chiefe de∣fensor of Christs Church, before all other Christian Princes. In his last will and Testament, after the disposition of his soule and body, hee deuised and willed Restitution should bee made of all such moneis, as had vniustly beene leuied by his Officers. A most pi∣ous and truly Christian care, wherby also appeareth, that hee hoped the wrongs done vnder him were not so enormous nor innumerable, but that they might fall within the possibility of redresse. The description of his whole man, is had in the begin∣ning of his life, and the course thereof described in his Actions. There remaine of his wisdome many effects, and those as his fame likely to continue for euer. His Wife. (71) Elizabeth the first Childe Legitimate, and eldest daughter of King Edward the fourth, was at the age of nineteene vpon the eighteenth of Ianua∣rie and yeere of Christ Iesus, 1485. married vn∣to King Henry the seuenth, whereby was vnited the long contending Families of Lancaster and Yorke, and the Roses red and White ioined into one, to the great ioy of the English Subiects. Shee was crow∣ned at Westminster vpon the fiue-and twentieth of Nouember, the third of her husbands Raigne, and of Grace 1487. Shee was his wife eighteene yeeres and twenty foure daies, and died in childe∣bed in the Tower of London, the eleuenth of Fe∣bruary, euen the day of her owne Natiuity, the eighteenth of her husbands Raigne, and yeere of our Saluation, 1503. and is buried at Westmin∣ster in the most magnificent Chappell and rich Mo∣nument of Copper and gilt where shee with her husband lie entombed. His Issue. (72) Arthur the eldest sonne of King Henrie the seauenth and of Queene Elizabeth his wife was borne at Winchester the twentith day of Septem∣ber, the yeere of Grace, one thousand foure hun∣dred eighty sixe, and the second of his Fathers raigne. In whose fifth yeere he was created Prince of Wales; Duke of Cornewall and Earle of Chester, and at the age of fifteene yeeres, one month and twenty fiue daies, vpon the foureteenth of No∣uember, in the yeere of our Lord, one thousand fiue hundred and one, espoused the Lady Katherine daughter to Ferdinando King of Spaine, shee being then about eighteene yeeres of age, in the Cathe∣drall Church of Saint Paul, London; and present∣ly sent into Wales the better to gouerne that princi∣pality by his owne Presence, enioyed his marriage bed onely foure moneths and ninteene daies, de∣parting this life at Ludlow the second of Aprill, the yeere of our Lord, one thousand fiue hundred and two, of his Fathers raigne seuenteene, and of his owne age fifteene yeeres, sixe moneths and thir∣teene daies. His body with all due funerall so∣lemnities, was buried in the Cathedrall Church of Saint Maries in Worcester, where, in the South side of the Quire he remaineth entombed in Touch, or Iette, without any remembrance of him by picture. (73) Henrie the second sonne of King Henrie the seuenth and of Queene Elizabeth was borne at Greenwich in the Countie of Kent, the two and twentieth of Iune, in the yeere of Grace, one thou∣sand foure hundred ninety and one, being the se∣uenth of his Fathers raigne. In his Infancy he was created Duke of Yorke and Marshall of England, and so trained vp in his youth to literature as hee was rightly accounted the best learned Prince in Europe, and by the death of his brother succee∣ded his Father in all his Dominions; whose Raigne and Acts are presently to be related. (74) Edmund the third sonne of King Henry and of Queene Elizabeth, was borne in the yeere of Christ, one thousand foure hundred ninetie fiue, and in his young yeeres was created Duke of Sommerset, which Title hee no long time enioyed, being taken away by death at Bishops Hatfield be∣fore hee attained fully to fiue yeeres of age, the yeere of Grace, one thousand foure hundred nine∣tie and fiue, and fifteenth of his Fathers Raigne, and his body lieth interred at Saint Peters in West∣minster. (75) Margaret the eldest daughter of King Henrie and of Lady Elizabeth his Queene, was born the nine and twentieth day of Nouember the yeere of Christ 1489. and fifth of her fathers raigne; shee at the age of foureteene was married vnto Iames the fourth King of Scotland, the yeere of our Lord one thousand fiue hundred and three, vnto whom shee bare Iames the fifth, Arthur and Alexander and a Daughter: which last three, died all of them young; and after the death of King Iames (being slaine at Flodden Field in fight against the Eng∣glish,) shee was remarried vnto Archibald Douglas Earle of Anguisse, in the yeere of our Lord, one thousand fiue hundred and foureteene, vnto whom shee bare Margaret, afterward espoused vnto Ma∣thew Earle of Lennox, Father by her of the Lord Henrie, who died at the age of nine moneths, and lyeth interred in the vpper ende of the Chancell in the Parish Church of Stepney neere London, vpon whose Graue is engrauen in brasse, as followeth: Heere lieth Henry Steward Lord Darle of the age of three quarters of a yeere, late Sonne and Heire of Mathew Steward Earle of Lennoux and Lady Margaret his wife, which Henrie deceased the XXV III. day of Nouember in the yeere of our Lord God. 1545. Whose Soule Iesus perdon. Her second sonne was Henrie Lord Dernley a Noble Prince; and reputed for person one of the goodliest Gentlemen of Europe, who married Marie Queene of Scotland, the royall Parents of the most roiall Mo∣narch Iames the first King of great Britaine, and of the Britaine World. And her third sonne was Char∣les Earle of Lennox father vnto Lady Arbella. (76) Elizabeth the second daughter of King Henry and Lady Elizabeth his Queene was borne the second day of Iuly, one thousand foure hundred ninety two, and died the foureteenth of September and yeere of Christ, one thousand foure hundred ninetie fiue, and is interred at Westminster. (77) Mary the third blossome of the Imperiall Rose-tree of England, was first wife to Lewis King of France, who liued not long after, and died with∣out issue by her. Her second husband was that Martiall and pompous Gentleman, Charles Bran∣don Duke of Suffolke. (78) Katharine fourth daughter of this seuenth Henry and of Elizabeth his Queene, was borne vpon Candlemas day, in the yeere of our Lord, one thou∣sand fiue hundred and three, and in the eighteenth yeere of her fathers raigne, who was called to her part in a far better Kingdome within a short while after. HENRIE THE EIGHT OF THAT Monarch 58 Henry VIII. NAME, KING OF ENGLAND, FRANCE, AND IRELAND, DEFENDER OF THE FAITH, &c. THE FIFTIE EIGHT MONARCH OF THE ENGLISH, HIS RAIGNE, ACTS, WIVES, AND ISSVE. CHAPTER XXI. T He rich and wise King (Henry the seuenth) gone (as is said) the way of all A. D. 1509. flesh, his sonne bearing the same name, a most magnanimous & heroi∣cal Prince, succeded in his Throne ouer al his domi∣nions, as the only true heir vnto the Crowne, by both the houses of Lancaster and Yorke. His birth was at Greenwich in the yeere of Grace, 1491. the twentieth King Henry his birth place. Polydor. two of Iune: and his youth so trained vp in litera∣ture, that he was accounted the most learned Prince of all Christendome, indued with parts most befit∣ting a King, both in lineaments of body, and libera∣lity of minde, besides his ripe knowledge in poli∣ticke The most lear∣ned King of Christendom affaires, and was made the more agreeable to the affections of men, by the consideration of his flourishing age, as hauing not attained vnto nineteen at his fathers death. In his infancy hee was created Duke of Yorke; at twelue yeeres (his brother decea∣sed) Prince of Wales, and at eighteene became sole Monarch of the land, when at Westminster vpon Sunday the twenty fift of Iune, euen the festiuall of King Henry and Queene Kathe∣ crowned Edw. Hall. Saint Iohn Baptist, and yeere of Christ Iesus, 1509. hee with his beauteous Queene Katherine receiued their Crowns at the hands of William Warham Arch∣bishoppe of Canterbury, no Prince giuing better hopes vnto iustice, or seeking the wealth of his sub∣iects more then himselfe. (2) His Counsellors he chose of the grauest di∣uines, and the wisest Nobility, with whom hee not King Henry vsed to sit often in Councell him selfe in person. onely often sate, to the great encrease of his politicke experience; but would also yeeld his authority to their graue and farre inseeing wisdomes: Of whom the plaints of Petitioners were so mouingly regar∣ded, that Proclamations went forth, with promise of restitution, to them that had beene wronged by Dudley or Empson, two persons that had abused the authority of K. Henrie his Father, by enriching their Dudley, Empson. owne coffers, with the vrter vndoing of many better subiects. These men, King Henry the seuenth had Ioh. Stow. made his Instruments for the finding out of offen∣ders in his penall Statutes, themselues being learned in the lawes, and apt inough to execute their Com∣missions to the full: for, by their daily informations and recouering of fines, they digged and brought a filuer Mine into the Kings Exchequer, some veines Hollinsh. pag. 791. whereof by the way, ranne also into their owne coffers, to the great vexation of all, and vtter vndo∣ing of many; whereat the Noblemen grudged, the Gentility repined, the Commons lamented, and all of them felt the teeth of these rauening Wolues: Edw. Hall. But the father King departed, and his sonneset on his throne; the complaintes of the oppressed so oppressed the King and his Councell, that Dudley and Empson were sent prisoners to the Tower, and both of them by Parliament attainted of Trea∣son. (3) Edmund Dudley by descent was a Gentleman, and by profession a Lawyer, hauing both wit and wordes at will, had hee not abused both to his own destruction. Richard Empson his inferiour by birth, was the sonne of a poore Sieue-maker, but yet had In Yocester Northamptonshire hee stepped before him to the degree of a Knight: These night-sprung Mushrumps that sucked the earthes fatnesse, from far better plants then them∣selues, saw not the many hands ready to plucke vp them by the rootes, when the season should serue to cleare the land of such weedes: for albeit they had their discharge vnder the Kings owne hand to doe what they did, and their seruice knowne Crowne seruice, a matter impugnable, yet no sooner were they left to stand vpon their owne basis, but that they felt the weight of their done wrongs too im∣portunable for them any longer to beare; for so importune were all degrees against them, that Dud∣ley forthwith in Guild-hall London was arraigned and condemned to die: and King Henry in progresse, Edmund Dudley condemned. (through the cry of the people) could take no plea∣sure, til he had sent for Empson into Northamptonshire, Io. Sotw Annal. where among them hee was arraigned, and receiued sentence of death, which was so desired and follow∣ed, as to satisfie his Subiects, the King sent a speci∣all writ for their executions, which with great ioy of all was performed vpon Tower hill, by taking from them their heades; when they left their riches to be spent by others, and their names to remaine vpon Record for the Caterpillers of those times: whose like if any such liue, shall leaue their hatefull remembrance to the like staines of reprochfull infa∣my, how pleasing soeuer the promotion so gotten in their owne eyes shall seeme, or the employments in their selfe conceites accounted profitable to the State. (4) This iustice of King Henry wanne him great praise of his people, and his charity extended to∣wards London, when that City was sore distressed K. He ies iustice and charity com∣mended. with famine, by sending sixe hundred quarters of corne, great loue; so that neuer any King entred his raigne with better hopes then himselfe. That his person was tall, is not to bee doubted, though not like vnto Soules, as some haue alleadged, whose Holinsh. report is, that at the siege of Bulloigne, he was higher by the head then any in his Campe, and euery ioint Henry a goodly man of shape and stature. proportionable to so royall a stature: but that hee was strong, his many Iusts and Tilts, and fights at Turnay (most dangerously performed) was manife∣sted vpon them that vnderwent his heauy hand: for at Tilt hee bare downe a man at Armes both horse and all, and threw Sir William Kingston a Knight of K. Henries great strength. great strength to the ground at Barryers; with bat∣tell-axe he combated against one Giot a Germane ve∣ry strong and tall, and lent him better blowes then he could againe repay. (5) His glorie thus mounted the Trophie of fame, and young Henry the onely morning starre in this Westerne Orbe, Pope Iulius the second, fea∣ring the further incroch of the French, who then had entred into some part of Italy, thought this Prince the strongest pillar whereunto to trust, and the fittest Carde to trumpe the French King, well knowing the Title that the English Kings had vnto France, and the readinesse of his Subiects to forward that way: wher∣upon writing his letters vnto King Henry, complai∣ned against Lewis the French king, and twelfth of that name, who neither (as hee alleadged) esteeming of God, good fame, nor conscience, detained the reuenewes The Popes let∣ters vnto King Henry. of the Clergy, supported the Cardinall William to aspire the Papacy, aided in the siege of Bonen, Alfonso of Fer∣rara, and the Benteuoly, both traitors to the Papal Sea, where hee intended to lay the foundation of his Empire, to vsurpe all Italy, besought him for the pitty of our Saui∣our, and by the vertue of his famous ancestors, (for I vse the words of the Popes briefe) that neuer forsooke the Church of God in distresse, and by the filiall obedience, the strongest bond, to enter into the holy league, they hauing elected him against Lewis, Caput faederis Ita∣lici. (6) And indeed to speake as it was, Lewis much emulated King Henries greatnesse, fearing that for∣tune would giue him occasions to make his claime by sword vnto the Kingdome of France; which the sooner hee did by this holy fathers instigations, and by his Herauld Clarentius roughly demanded, the K. Henry deman∣ded France. Dutchies of Normandy, Guyen, Anion and Maine, and with them also the Crowne that king Lewis Iohn Lesly Bishop of Rosse. ware. The Scotish king likewise, in case of Andrew Barton slaine in his Piracies (as the English allead∣ged) by the Admirall of England, accounted the A. D. 1510. truce broken, and sought the reuenge vpon the Borders adioining. Against these two nations yong Henry at once prepared, and happily obtained faire victories against both: but the successe of the one, (though not following precisely the time) we meane to relate before wee enter discourse of the other. (7) The enterprise great which K. Henry meant to vndergoe, hee thought it good wisdome to ioyne amity with Maximilian the Emperour, Fardinando K. Henry maketh league with ma∣ny Princes. Guiccardin. King of Spaine, and many other Princes, holding also correspondency with Pope Iulius the second, that busie Pontificall Prelate of Rome: then pro∣pounding his purposes in Parliament, sent ouer certaine Nobles before him into France, and after∣ward followed them himselfe, pitching downe his King Henry entreth France. Tents before the Towne of Terwin, where he raised his royall Standard of the Red-dragon, and begirt An. Reg. 1. Edw. Hal. the Citie with a strait siege. (8) To this place Maximilian the Emperour re∣paired, and to the great honour of Henry entred into his pay, wearing the Crosse of Saint George, with a Sleidans Com. The Emperour serueth K. Henry. rose (the Kings badge) as his faithfull Souldier, and receiued wages by day for euery of his, according to their degree: The French seeing the Towne in Anglorum praelia. distresse, sought the reliefe with victuals, and men, but were so encountred by the king and his com∣pany, as that many of their chiefest Captaines were Paulus Iouius. taken, and sixe of their Standards wonne, the rest for safeguard of life so posted away, that this con∣flict was called the battell of Spurres. (9) Then was the battery broght so neer their wals, Battell of Spurs. that many breaches were therein made, and the Towne by composition yeelded vnto the King; A. D. 1513 August. 24 whereupon the Earle of Shrewsbury was sent to see all things safe, who stucke vpon the highest Turret the Banner of Saint George, and tooke the oath of al∣leagiance of all the French Citizens, to acknowledge Terwin wonne and the Cit zens sworne vnto Henry. King Henry their supreme Lord: This done, the King as a Conquerour entreth Terwine, sent thence their Ordinance, dismounted the Turrets, cast downe the walles, filled vp the ditches, and fired the Towne, excepting onely the Cathedrall Church and Bishops Pallace. (10) Then was the siege remoued vnto Turnay: about which City King Henry commanded diuers Edw. Hall. Turnay befieged by K. Henry. Trenches to bee cast, and placed his Ordinance to such aduantage, that none might enter in, or come out of the same. Into this Towne a great number of the French from the Countries adioining had lately fled, relying much vpon the strength and safety of the place, which indeed had euer beene accounted so inuincible, that this sentence was en∣graued ouer one of the gates. Iannes ton me a perden The strength of Turnay. ton pucellage, thou hast neuer lost thy maiden-head: Notwithstanding, it was yeelded vp vnto Henry with ten thousand pounds sterling for the Citizens redemption, who to the number of fourescore thou∣sand, then tooke their oathes to become his true Subiects, and foure of their principall bare vp the Canopie vnder which the King in triumph-wise en∣tred, hauing born before him his sword, axe, speare, A. D. 1513. Octob. 2. King Henry in triumph entred Turnay. and other abiliments of warre, euery Citizen hol∣ding a staffe-Torch for his light. The safe keeping of this City, the King committed to Sir Edward Poi∣nings Knight of the Order of the Garter, whom hee there made his Lieutenant, and ordained Thomas Wolsey his Almoner the Bishoppe of Turnay. The yeere now spent, and season vnfit for the fielde, a surcease from warre was determined vntill the next spring; whereupon all were shipped for England with full payment, and praise, but Terwin and Turnay stucke heauily vpon the French mens hearts. (11) King Lewis thus endammaged in his owne Dominions, thought it best policy to pay like for like, to which end at the first attempts against Ter∣wine Ioh. Lesly. hee solicited Iames the fourth of that name, King of Scotland (though brother by marriage vn∣to King Henry of England) to disturbe the peace of his Subiects, that so hee might bee drawne out of France; which Iames for his part put presently in practise: for writing his letters to Henry in the French K. Iames of Scot∣land incited by the French King. Edw. Hal. Holinsh. See the contents of this letter in Ioh. Leslie Bishop of Rosse, dated at Edenbrough the twenty sixt of Iuly in A. D. 1513. Kings behalfe, charged him with breach of Truce, both in the case of his Scots slaine at the sea, as also against his Confederates the Duke of Gelder, and King of France, against which last he desired him to desist, otherwise hee should bee forced to reuenge the Frenches wrongs vpon his English: and to giue letters of Mart to recouer the losses of his Sub∣iectes. (12) King Henry a Prince of a Maiesticall spirite, most highly offended at these his brothers requests, and threates, was so farre ouergone with fury and rage, that Lions King at Armes the bringer, was Lions terrified at K. Henries answeres. thereby somewhat daunted at his present answere, which he desired might be sent in writing, refusing to carry in words his reply to his Soueraigne. This See the contents of this letter in Holinshed, dated from the Campe at the fiege of Terwin the 12. of August. A. D. 1513. Heralds wise and weighty request, was forthwith granted, and letters framed to King Iames demands, answering those imputations with rough and round words, which notwithstanding hee neuer read or saw, being slaine in the battell of Flodden, before that Lions could come to deliuer the same. (13) For Iames King of Scots preparing for war, had in the meane while entred the borders, and with his Ordinance battered and wonne the Castell of Iames King of Scotland enters England. Norham; making still forward vpon the English. A∣gainst whom Thomas Howard Earle of Surrey made the Kings Lieutenant of the North, at his going in∣to France, assembled an Army of twenty sixe thou∣sand strong, vnto whom came his sonne the Lord Admirall of England, with a great supply of good Thomas Earle of Surrey King, Henries Lieute∣nant maketh to∣wards the Scots. souldiers well appointed for warre. The Earle from Newcastell came vnto the water of Till, and pitched his battell besides a little Towne called Brankeston, vnder Flodden hill, a mountaine lying in the North of Northumberland, betwixt the riuers of Till and Tweed, where vpon a rising banke, the Scottish hoast had taken the aduantage of the ground: vnto King Iames, Thomas Earle of Surrey sent Rouge Crosse a Purseuant at Armes, with proffer of bat∣tell to bee done vpon Friday the ninth of Septem∣ber, if so it pleased his Highnesse, who withall Lord Howard profereth battel vnto K. Iames. carryed this message from the L. Admirall, that he was come in person to iustifie his Act against Andrew Barton, and would abide the last drop of his bloud in the Vant-gard of the field. (14) King Iames most readily accepted the offer, and by his Herauld Hay sent the Earle word, that if King Iames ac∣cepteth of battel he were as then in Edenbrough, yet would hee most gladly come to fulfill his desire; and withall sent his letters for the iust occasions giuen him to inuade England as hee did The day approached, and the Iohn Lesly. Scots keeping the higher ground, the Earle mar∣ched vpward along the riuer, and by two Bridges passed ouer with his hoast, making still forward, as thogh he ment either to haue taken into Scotland, or else to circumuent K. Iames his returne, which hee perceiuing, hasted downe the hill, putting from him his horse, raised his roiall Standard, and as a most valiant Chiefetaine encouraged his Souldiers to the fight. (15) The Scotish Ordinance discharged from a∣boue, ouershot the English with very small dam∣mage, The fight begun. and the ground of no difficult ascent, gaue them the easier accesse, so that Sir Edmund Howard, who lead a wing to the Vant-gard (whereof his bro∣ther the Admirall was Captain) got almost to the Paulin . height; against whom the Earles of Lennox and Ar∣gile, with their Battels of Speares on foot so vio∣lently encountred, that they beat down, and brake the wing of the English, wherein many were slaine, The Scots at the first encounter be at the English backe. and the horsemen disbanded, and put to flight; but presently recalled, ioyned themselues againe to the great battell, which by this time had attained to the toppe of the hill. King Iames that saw this first brunt performed, made full account that the day was his owne, supposing verily the English had fled, and therefore most valiantly he aduanced for∣ward, not staying for the reregard to second his battel, and encountring the Earles Battalion, a bloo∣dy The battels ioin. fight was performed, with the losse and life of many a man: but strength neere spent, and the Scotish somewhat disioyned, through force of a great shore of arrowes falling among them; Sir Edward Stanley hauing three bands reserued for the like purpose, with a fresh onset inuaded the open sides of the enemy, whose force was so violent, that the Scots no longer were able to stand, but tooke downe the hill vnto flight, which the Earles of Len∣nox The Scots put to flight. and Argile perceiuing, did their best to stay them, and fighting most valiantly, themselues were slain in the same place. (16) King Iames then perceiuing the wings of his Battell distressed and gone, and that the enemy began to enclose him about; with a stout resolution incouraged his men, willing thē to regard the per∣son The valiant cou∣rage of K. Iames. of their King, their own honor, their valiant An∣cestors, and now their present imploiments; that their blood might bee bought deare to the English, and the Scotish valours recorded for euer in the vo∣lumes of fame for this their one daies work; & there∣upon rushing among the thickest began a most eager & bloody battel, and piercing through with a strong hand went so far, that he had almost ouerthrown the Earles Standard: thus busied in doubtfull chance, the Lord Howard and Sir Edward Stanley hauing dis∣comfited the enemy in either wing, returned in the face of the maine battell, and the Lord Dacres with his Horse-men came vpon their backes, so that the Stotish were forced to fight in a round compasse, but being ouer-laid, the Kings Standard was strucken downe, and himselfe most valiantly fighting slaine in the middest of his enemies: with whom died king of Scots slaine with 12. Earles, and 17. Lords. three Bishops, whereof one was Alexander Archbi∣shop of Saint Andrewes the Kings base sonne, two Abbots, twelue Earles, and seuenteene Lords, Kent vnto Black-heath neere vnto Greenewich, was there mette and receiued by the Duke of Norfolke, The Honourable receiuing of Car∣dinall Campiut. many Knights, but many more Prelates, where in a Tent of Cloth of Gold, he shifted himselfe into his Cardinall Roabes, which was edged about with most rich Ermine, and thence rode to London, in more pompe and estate then Christ did to Ierusalem when Hosanna was sung. Matth. 21 9. (32) Eight Mules hee had laden with necessa∣ries belonging, but those made no shew in proud Wolseis eies, therefore twelue more hee sent him to furnish his Pageants through the streets of London, these either wanton, or ashamed to bee wondred at, plaied the skittish Iades indeed: For in Cheape-side, as this Triumph foorth passed, these beasts by breaking their Collers and esca∣ping their Leaders, cast their Carriages and Cof∣fers vpon the cold ground; whose lids flying open The Cardinals rich treasures shewed in Cheap side. laid most of their riches to the sight of the people. For, from some of them fell olde Breeches, Bootes and broken shooes, from others torne stockings tot∣tered ragges, olde Iron and horse shooes, and for fainting by the way therein was bestowed, and now cast abroad, broken meate, mary-bones, rosted egges, and crusts of bread, ywiffe worth the keeping: this Shipwrack made vpon the Shelues of Cheape-side, no need it was to bid the muliters to bestirre them, who like good thrifty marriners saued from spoile as much as they could, and trussing vp their trinkets, laded againe these wantons, with the wealth of the Cardinal, who (good man) was iogging on afore with his Crosses, Pillars, Gilt-axe and Mace, vnto Pauls Church, where hee was mette with many mitred Bishops, and attended vpon to Bath place, where we will leaue him, and returne to the place where wee left. (33) The vnity agreed vpon betwixt England and France, a meeting was motioned for the two Kings, and to that ende great preparation made as∣well of the one as of the other. But in the heate of this businesse, King Henry had word that Charles, his Queenes Nephew, and new made Emperour, would Charles the Em∣perour com∣eth into England. visit him in England, which accordingly hee did, ac∣companied with the Queene of Arragon, and a most Royall Traine, and was as Roiallie entertained by King Henry: the cause of his comming was to hin∣der the peace concluded with France, for although, Iohn Stow. this Emperour were young, and but newly establi∣shed; yet was hee wise and well foresawe the hurt that this amity with France, would bring him, and therefore came in person of purpose to disswade the Kings mind and to stay his entrance with the French if he could, but finding Henry so forward in those proceeds, he baited his hooks with golden gifts to the Cardinall, and wanne him wholly to his deuotion. (34) King Henry passing the Seas vnto Callis, met with King Frances at a place appointed, and for that Rich. Turpin. purpose newly built betwixt the Townes of Guisnes, and Arde: where to describe the Iusts, Banquets, King Henrie go∣eth into France. and Maskes were to fill vp (with Hall, Grafton and Holinshed) whole sides of excessiue great Cost. At Callis also the same time the Emperor, with his Aunt Rich. Grafton. the Lady Margaret Dutchesse of Sauoy landed, whi∣ther King Henry and his Queene repaired, to the no little grudge of the French King, though he kept it to Edw. Hall. himselfe, and consented vnto the ancient league tri∣pertite betwixt these three Monarches, which done the Kings returned into their owne Realmes. (35) Displeasures shortly arising betwixt the Em∣perour and the French King, King Henry assaied to A. D. 1521. An. Reg. 13. bring thē to peace, but that failing, fell himselfe from the French, imputing the fault vnto Frances for sub∣orning the Scots against him, and King Frances againe Variance be∣twixt England and France. laid all the blame in the Cardinall, accusing him of dissimulation, abhorted practises and what not: but wheresoeuer lay the defect, the Duke of Albany Iohn Stow. was sent into Scotland; the French followed a Spa∣nish ship fraught with the goods of English-Mer∣chants R. Grafton. vnto Margate, and tooke her euen in the Kings streams, in both which King Frances excusing himselfe with ignorance, alleaged no breach of truce broken by him. (35) Then was it thought best by the Cardinals Taken out of the Cardinals owne letters dated Ia∣nuary 16. Anno. 1524. aduice to repay like with like, and therefore coun∣selled his King, to reare Charles Duke of Burbon a∣gainst France and to perswade him to inuade the ve∣ry heart thereof, incouraging him with sufficient pay, and making him his Champion generall of the Field; whilest the Emperor likewise held him play Duke Burbon made King Hen∣ries Captaine General. Instructions of King Henry dated in Anno 1524. Rich. Pace Secre∣tarie. against Millan. And to that end was sent in way of loane to the Emperour a great summe of money, and forreine Princes sollicited to take armes against France, for effecting which, King Henry sent his Am∣bassadors to the States of Venice and Swissers with these instructions as followeth. (36) That whereas in a treatie of peace it was concluded betwixt the Emperor, King Henry, and Frances the French King, that if any Controuersies should arise betwixt any two, the Prince not in∣uading should giue aide and assistance against the in∣uader: but now the Emperour being inuaded by The English Em∣bassages into forraine States. the French Kings Captaines in the Realme of Na∣uarre, and in his owne Countrey by Robert de la March, and others by his procurement, and our king (said they) being often called vpon by the Emperor, hath often entreated the French King to surcease, but hath nothing obtained besides faire words and detraction of promises. Complaining likewise that in the intercourse of these businesses, the French The wrongs done by the French vnto the English. King contrary to his Oath had sent the D of Al∣bany into Scotland (in contempt of King Henry) and to the great danger of the yong Kings death or deposition, he being the next in blood to succeed, and to the dishonour of the Queene mother, had caused a separation betwixt her and her lawfull hus∣band the Earle of Angus. That the French King had deteined the payment compounded for the de∣liuery Iohn Lest. of Turnay; and kept backe the dowry of his sister Queene Dowager of France, that he had enter∣tained the rebellious Subiects of King Henry, and The Queenes Dowry vapaid. spoiled his Merchants both by Land and Sea. Nei∣ther was vnremembred the danger that the Venetians stood in, if the Realmes of Naples, and Sicilie, the Seig∣niories of Ieans, and Millane were lost from the Em∣pire. These therefore seemed faire proiects vnto King Henry for him to warre against France, and to that end, a generall Muster by Commission was ta∣ken A. D. 1522. A generall mu∣ster. of all able men from sixteene yeers and vpward, of euery Hamlet, Village, Burrough, Citie, Hundred, and Shire, throughout England, which seemed to many Io. Stow. another Domesday Booke: and yet was there nei∣ther peace nor warre against France. (37) In this great and hasty preparation, Charles the Emperour, as he passed toward Spaine, landed at Charles the Em∣perour commeth againe into Eng∣land. Douer, where King Henrie mette him, and in great e∣state brought him to London; which was so prepa∣red with Ornaments and Pageants, as if it had been the Kings Coronation, and in the Blacke-friers the Emperour was lodged in a most Princely Palace new built by the King; then was he feasted at Winsor, where he sate in his state, in his Mantle and Garter, and by receiuing the Sacrament these two Potent Monarches tooke their Corporal Oathes to obserue the Couenants concluded betwixt them: whereof one was, that the Emperour Charles agreed to stay Holinsh. in Anno 18. Henrie. 8. for, and take to wife the young Princesse Lady Ma∣rie, King Henries then onely daughter; and in such golden bands of loue, Charles and Henrie, seemed to The Emperour affianceth Lady Mary. be linked, as in London this sentence was set vp in the Guild-hall ouer the doore of the Counsell Cham∣ber, where it still remaineth. Carolus, Henricus, viuant, defensor vterque Henricus fidei, Carolus Ecclesiae. (38) Why the Titles defender of Church and Faith, were attributed vnto these two Princes is no maruell; for Charles chosen Emperour, was scarsly confirmed, but to purchase the Popes fauor, he directed forth a solemne Writ of Out-lawry a∣gainst Martin Luther, who then had giuen a great blow to the Papall Crowne. And King Henry like∣wise Iohn Sleidan. Com. was renowned in Rome, for writing a booke a∣gainst the said Luther: vnderpropping the tottering or downe-cast countenance of the Popes pardons; which Luther shrewdly had shaken; the Pope there∣fore K. Henry wrote against Martin Luther. to shew himselfe a kind father vnto those his sonnes, gaue them these Titles; which in truth were none other, then the same which they sware vnto, when the Crownes of their Empires were first set vpon their heades. But with what accep∣tance his Holinesse receiued King Henries booke, his owne Oration solemnely made at the deliuery thereof vnto M. Iohn Clarke the presenter and Kings Ambassador, in his Consistory, and in presence of his Cardinals sufficiently doth shew, the translation whereof we haue inserted as we finde it in the Origi∣nall it selfe. Wee doe receiue this booke with all alacrity: it is The Popes Ora∣tion at the deli∣uery of K. Hen∣ries booke. Ex Original. indeed such as there could not bee any thing sent vs, and our venerable brethren, more acceptable then it is. For the King himselfe, a most mighty, most prudent, and most truely Christian Prince, wee know not whether wee may more prayse or admire, being the first that by warre with happy successe hath subdued the enemies of the Church of Christ, that seeke to rend Christs coat, and at last ouercomming the enemies, hath restored peace to the Church of God, and to this holy See. But now against so soule a Monster, both to vnder∣stand, to bee able, and willing to write this book, hee hath shewed himselfe no more admirable to the whole world for his elegant style, then for his wit. We humbly giue thanks to our Creator for giuing such a Prince to defend his Church, and this holy See, desiring the same God to grant to this his King a happy life, and all his desires, and after this life in his heauenly Kingdome, to keepe for him an euerlasting Crowne. And we so farre as wee are able to entreat of God, will neuer bee wanting to the said most wise King in the faculties granted to vs of God. (40) To manifest which his readinesse, himselfe among his Cardinals decreed an augmentation vn∣to King Henries royall Stile to bee annexed vnto his others; confirming the same by his Bull which that it perish not by the deuouring teeth of Time, wee haue here published from the originall Parchment, and leaden seale it selfe, as followeth. (41) Leo Episcopus seruus seruorū Dei, &c. Leo Bishop seruant of the seruants of God; to our most dearely be∣loued Sonne in Christ, Henry King of England defendor of the Faith, health and Apostolicall Benediction. Wee by diuine permission, the chiefe ouerseer for the gouern∣ment of the vniuersall Church, though vnsufficient for so great a worke, doe powre forth the cogitations of our heart, that the Catholike faith without which no man can attaine to saluation, may receiue continuall increase, and that those good lawes and constitutions decreed by the wisdome and learning of such as are in authority, especi∣ally the faithfull in Christ, for restraining the attempts of all that labour to oppresse the same, or by wicked lyes & fictions seeke to peruert and obscure it, may prosper with perpetuall increase, doe bestow our paines and vt∣most endeuour in our office and Ministery. And like as the Romane Bishops our Predecessors, were wont to shew especiall fauour to Catholike Princes (according as the quality of matters and timesrequired) especially to them that in troublesome times, when the madnesse and perfi∣dious dealing of Schismatikes and heretikes most of all a∣bound, did abide constant and vnmoueable, not onely in soundnesse of faith and pure denotion to the holy Romane Church, but also as the most legitimate sonnes and va∣liant Champions of the same, opposed themselues both with mind and body against the furious madnes of Schis∣matikes and heretikes: so likewise also doe wee desire to extoll your Maiesty with worthy and immortall prai∣ses, for your high and immortall deserts and labours to∣wards vs, and this holy See, wherein by Gods permission wee sit, to grant vnto it those things for which it ought to watch, and driue away the Wolues from the Lords flocke, and to cut off with the materiall sword rotten members, which infect the mysticall body of Christ, and to confirme the hearts of the faithfull in soundnesse of beliefe. Now where of late our beloued sonne Iohn Clarke your Maiesties Orator with vs, being in our Consistory before our venerable brethren of the holy Ro∣mane Church, the Cardinals and many other Prelates of the same, exhibited a booke vnto vs to bee examined and allowed of vs, which booke your Maiesties selfe (who doth all things with diligence and nothing amisse) en∣flamed with charity and zeale to the Catholike faith, and with ardent deuotion toward vs and this holy See, hath composed, as a most worthy and soueraigne Anti∣dote against the errors of diuers heretikes, often con∣demned by this holy See, and of late stirred vp and brought in by Martin Luther: And your said Orator hath also largely declared vnto vs, that your Maiesty is ready, and purposeth, like as you haue confuted the notori∣ous errors of the said Martin, by true reason and inuin∣cible authorities of sacred Scripture, and Ancient fathers, so you will punish to the vttermost of your power, all those of your whole Kingdome, that shall presume to follow, or defend them: and we haue diligently and exactly perused and viewed the admirable doctrine of your said booke, wa∣tered with the dew of heauenly Grace, and doe heartily thanke Almighty God, from whom euery good and perfect gift doth come, who hath vouchsafed to inspire your No∣ble mind, inclined to euery good thing, and to endue you with so great Grace from heauen, as to write those things; whereby you are able to defend his holy faith, against such a new Innouator of damned errors; and also incite by your example all other Christian Kings and Princes, to be willing to fauour and further with all their best aides the Orthodoxall faith, and Euangelicall truth, whensoe∣uer it bee brought into danger or doubt. And wee thinke it also meete, that they who haue vndertaken such godly labours for the defence of the faith of Christ, should haue all prayse and honour of vs; and wee are desirous, that not onely the things themselues which your Maiesty hath written, being both of most sound doctrine, and no lesse e∣loquence, should bee extolled and magnified with condigne commendations, and allowed and confirmed by our autho∣rity; but also that your Maiesty should bee graced with such an honour, and such a Title, as that both for our time and euer hereafter all men might perceiue how gratefull and acceptable this gift of your Maiesties hath been vnto vs, especially offered vnto vs now at this time. Wee, who be the true successors of Peter, whom Christ at his ascen∣sion into heauen left his Vicar on earth, and to whom hee committed the care of his flocke: We I say, who sit in this holy seate, from which all dignities and titles doe flow, vp∣on mature deliberation had with our said brethren about these things, haue by the generall agreement, and consent of them decreed, to bestow vpon your Maiestie this title, namely, THE DEFENDER OF THE FAITH. And accordingly by these Presents doe instile you with such a title, commaunding all faithfull Christians, that they name your Maiesty with this Title, and when they write to you, that after the Word KING, they adioine DEFENDER OF THE FAITH. And truely wee diligently considering and weighing your singular merits, were not able to bethinke vs of a name more worthy and conueni∣ent for your Maiesty, then the excellency and dignity of this Title, which so often as you shal heare and reade so of∣ten you may call to mind this your singular vertue and great desert, nor may you by this Title puffe vp your self in pride, but according to your wonted prudence become more humble, and bee more valiant and constant in the faith of Christ, and in denotion to this holy See, by which you haue beene exalted, reioycing in the Lord the giuer of all good things, leauing this as a perpetuall and immor∣tal monument of your glory to your children, shewing them the way vnto the like, that if they shall desire to be graced (55) Whilest these things were in working at Rome, arose great troubles in Ireland, the Kerns ca∣sting Troubles in Ire∣land. off all obedience, and killing the Kings subiects where they found them: against whom. Thomas Ho∣ward, Earle of Surrey, Lord Lieutenant of that kingdome, made foorth his power, and followed them himselfe with such danger of life, that the vi∣sor of his Helmet was shot off, as hee pursued the e∣nemy through the desert woods: but these Rebels cut off by his high valour, and warres proclaimed at one time against Scotland and France, the Lord Lieutenant was recalled into England; and Piers Butler Earle of Osorie made Deputie of Ireland in his stead; betwixt whom, and Girald Fitz-Girald, Earle of Kildare, whose sister hee had married, arose no Holinsh pag. 84. little strife and debate, which grew to that height as King Henry sent Commissioners to trie and exa∣mine Discention be∣twixt the Lord Deputies of Ireland. the differences, which was so cleered on Kil∣dares behalfe, that Osorie was discharged of his Of∣fice, and the Lord Fitz-girald sworne deputy in his place; whereat Cardinal Wolsey (whose hand chiefly steered all states affaires, a deadly enemy to the Earle of Kildare) was highly offended, and to vndermine the foundations of this his new Gouernment, gaue eare vnto Osorie, who accused the new deputie of many misdemeanors, among which these were the Kildare accused to the Cardinall. principall; that he winked at Desmonds escape whom he should haue attached by order from the King: that he grew ouer familiar with the natiue I∣rish; and that he put to death the Kings best sub∣iects: for these the Lord Deputie was commanded into England, in whose absence Osory his enemie was againe chosen Lord Deputie by the Kings Coun∣sell, but himselfe none of the wisest for polliticke Gouernment, was altogether therein ruled by his wife, and shee made it no courtesie to abuse her hus∣bands honour against her natural brothers folly: who now in England must answer his demeanour before the Lords of the Counsell, and to their Ta∣ble was hee brought, where the Cardinall Lord Chauncellor made his faults nothing lesse, and thus addressed himselfe against the Earle of Kildare. (56) I wot well (my Lord) that I am not the meetest at this boord to charge you with these The Cardinals speech at the Counsell Table against Kildare. treasons, because it hath pleased some of your Pew-fellowes to report, that I am a professed ene∣my to all Nobilitie, and namely to the Giraldines: but seeing euery shrewd boy can say as much when he is controuled, and these points so weighty, that they should not be dissembled of vs; and so appa∣rant, that they cannot be denied of you: I must haue leaue (notwithstanding your stale slander) to be the mouth of these honourable Lords at this present, and to trumpe your treasons in your way, howsoeuer you take me. First you remember, how the lewde Earle of Desmund your kinseman (who passeth not whom he serueth might he change his Master) sent his Confederates with letters of cre∣dence vnto Francis the French King: and hauing but cold comfort there, went Charles the Em∣perour proffering the helpe of Mounster, and Co∣naught, towards the Conquest of Ireland, if either of them would helpe to win it from our King. How many letters, what precepts, what messages, what threats, haue beene sent you to apprehend him and yet not done? Why so? Forsooth I could not catch him? Nay, nay Earle, forsooth you would not watch him: If hee bee iustly suspected, why are you partiall in so great a charge? If not, why are you fearefull to haue him tried? Yea, for it will bee sworne and deposed to your face, that for feare of meeting him, you haue winked wilfully, shunned his sight, altered your course, warned your friends, stopped both eares and eies, against his detectors, and whensoeuer you took vpon you to hunt him out, then was he sure afore hand to be out of your walke. Surely, this iugling and false play, little became either an honest man called to such houour, or a Noble man put in so great trust: had you lost but a Cow or a Horse of your own, two hundred of your retainers would haue come at your Whistle to rescue the prey from the vtter∣most edge of Vlster: all the Irish in Ireland must haue giuen you the way. But in pursuing so need∣full a matter as this was; mercifull God, how nice, how dangerous, how wayward haue you beene? One while hee is from home, and ano∣ther while hee keepeth home, sometimes fled, sometimes in the Borders, where you dare not venture. Ywisse, my Lord, there bee shrewd bugges in the borders, for the Earle of Kildare to feare; the Earle, nay the King of Kildare: for when you are disposed, you raigne more like then rule in the land: where you are pleased the Irish foe standeth for a iust Subiect: hearts and hands, liues and lands are all at your courtesie: who faw∣neth not thereon, cannot rest within your smel, and your smell so rancke, that you tracke them out at pleasure. Whilest the Cardinall was speaking, the Earle chafed and changed colour & at last brake out, and interrupted him thus. (57) My Lord Chauncellor I beseech you Kildare inter∣rupteth the Car∣dinals tale. pardon me, I am short witted, and you I perceiue intend a long tale: if you proceed in this order, half my purgation wil be lost for lack of carriage: I haue no Schoole trickes, nor art of memory: except you heare me while I remember your words, your se∣cond processe will hammer out the former. The Lords associate, who for the most part tenderly lo∣ued The Lords ten∣der Kildare. Kildare, and knew the Cardinall his manner of taunts so ready being inured there with many yeeres together▪ humblie besought his grace to charge him directlie with particulars, and to dwell in some one matter vntill it were examined throughly. (58) That granted: It is good reason (quoth the Earle) that your Grace beare the mouth of this He answereth the Cardinals obiection. boord: but my Lord, those mouthes that put these things into your mouth, are very wide mouthes: such indeed as haue gaped long for my wracke: and now at length for want of better stuffe, are faine to fill their mouthes with smoake: what my Cosen Desmond hath compassed, as I know not, so I beshrew his naked heart for holding out so long. If he can be taken by mine agents that presentlie wait for him, then haue mine aduersaries bewrai∣ed their malice: and this heape of heinous wordes shall resemble a scarre-Crow, or a man of straw that seemeth at a blush to carry some proportion, but when it is felt and peized, discouereth a vanity seruing onely to feare Crowes: and I verily trust your honours shall see the proofe by the thing it selfe, within these few daies. But goe to: suppose he neuer be had? What is Kildare to blame for it mo e then my good brother of Osorie, who, not∣withstanding his high promises, hauing also the Kings power, is yet content to bring him in at lea∣sure? Cannot the Earle of Desmond shift but I must be of Counsell? Cannot he hide him except I winke? If he be close am I his mate? If he be frien∣ded am I a traitor? This is a doubtie kind of accu∣sation which they vrge against me, wherein they are stabelled and mired at my first deniall. You would not see him (say they): who made them so familiar with mine eie-sight? Or when was the Earle within my view? Or who stood by when I let him slip? Or where are the tokens of my wilfull hudwinke? But you sent him word to beware of you: who was the messenger? Where are the letters? Conuince my negatiu , see how loose this idle geare hangeth together. Desmond is not taken: well, you are in fault: why? Because you are: who proueth it? No body: What Conie∣ctures? So it seemeth: To whom? to your ene∣mies. Who told it them? They will sweare it. What other ground? None: Wil they it my Lord? why then of like they know it, either they haue mine hand to shew, or can being forth the messenger, or were present at a Conference, or pri∣uie to Desmond, or some body bewraied it to them, or they themselues were my Carriers or vicege∣rents therein: which of these parts wil they choose, for I know them too well: To reckon my selfe conuict by their bare wordes, or headlesse sayings, or franticke oathes, were but meere mockerie. My letters were soone read, were any such writing ex∣tant; my seruants, and friends are ready to be sif∣ted: of my Cosen of Desmond they may lie loudly, since no man here can well contrary them. Touching my selfe I neuer noted in them much wit, or so fast faith, that I would haue gaged on their silence the life of a good hound, much lesse mine owne: I doubt not, may it please your honors to appose them, how they came to the knowledge of those matters which they are so ready to depose: but you shall find their tongues chained to another mans trencher, and as it were Knights of the Post, suborned to say, sweare and stare the vttermost they can, as those that passe not what they say, not with what face they say it, so they say no truth: but on the other side, it grieueth mee, that your good Grace, whom I take to bee wise and sharpe, and who of your blessed disposi∣tion wisheth mee well, should bee so farre gone in crediting these corrupt Informers that abuse the ignorance of your state and Country to my peril. Little know you (my Lord) how necessary it is, not onely for the Gouernour, but also for euery Nobleman in Ireland, to hamper the vnciuill neighbours at discretion, wherein if they waited for processe of law, & had not those liues and lands you speak of within their reach, they might hap to loose their own liues & lands without law. You hear of a case, as it were in a dream, & feele not the smart that vexeth vs. In England there is not a mean Subiect that dare extend his hand to fillip a Peere In what ease stand the Noble∣men of Ireland with Rebels. of arealm: In Ireland except the Lord haue cunning to his strength, and strength to saue his Crowne, and sufficient authority to take theeues and variets when they stir, he shall find them swarme so fast that it will bee too late to call for iustice. If you will haue our seruice take effect, you must not tie vs alwayes to these iudiciall proceedings wher∣with your Realme (thanked be God) is inured. Touching my kingdome, I know not what your Lordshippe should mean thereby; If your Grace imagine that a Kingdome consisteth in seruing God, in obeying the Prince, in gouerning with loue the common wealth, in supporting subiects, in suppressing rebels, in executing iustice, in bride∣ling blind affections, I would bee willing to bee inuested with so vertuous and roial a name: but if therfore you tearm me a King, in that you are per∣swaded that I repine at the gouernmēt of my soue∣raign, or winke at malefactors, or oppresse ciuil li∣uers: I vtterlydisclaim that odious term, maruelling greatly that one of your Graces profound wisdom would seeme to appropriate so sacred a name to so wicked a thing: but howsoeuer it bee (my Lord) I would you and I had changed Kingdomes, but for one moneth, I would trust to gather vppe more crummes in that space, then twice the reue∣newes of my poore Earledome: but you are well and warme, and so hold you, and vpbraide not mee with such an odious terme. I slumber in a hard Cabine, when you sleepe in a soft bedde of Downe: I serue vnder the Kings Cope of hea∣uen, when you are serued vnder a Canopie: I drinke water out of my skull when you drinke wine out of golden cups: my Courser is trained to the field, when your Gennet is taught to am∣ble: when you are graced & belorded, & crouched and kneeled vnto, then find I small grace with our Irish borderers, except I cut them off by the knees. At these girds the Lord Chancellor much fretted, and finding Kildare to bee no babe, deferred the hea∣ring of his cause, till more proofes were produced from Ireland; then in a great fume hee arose from the Councell board, and committed the Earle vn∣to prison, against the minds of most at the Table, who knew well, that this his accusation was more of hatred borne by the Cardinall, then any occasi∣on Kildare commit∣ted to prison. giuen by the accused late Deputy. Whereupon Thomas Duke of Norfolke stept to the King, and cra∣ued that Kildare might bee his prisoner, offering to bee bound in goods and body for his forth com∣ming, whom hee obtained, though with no great liking of the L. Chancellor, who daily entertaind new plaints against him, till at last hee pressed him sore with letters sent to Oneale and Oconor, to encourage Kildare accused for suborning of Traitors their rebellions against Osorie the Lord Deputy; which letters were brought them by his own daugh∣ter and their sisters, the Lady Elice Fitzgirald wife to the Baron of Slane. (59) This presumption being vehement, the King suspitious, the Cardinall eager, and his friends faint, Kildare was sent to the Tower, where he com∣mitted himselfe to God, and expected dayly his Kildar commit∣ted to the Tower. death, but with such couragious resolution, as hee being in play with the Lieutenant at slide-groat, when the mandate was brought for his execution on the next morning, and seeing the Lieutenant strucke into a suddaine sadnesse; by Saint Bride, Lieutenant (quoth the Earle) there is some madde game in that scrowll; but fall how it will, this throw is for a huddle: and when the worst was told him, Kildares noble courage. Holinshed. Hist. of Ireland. now I pray thee (quoth he) doe no more but learne assuredly from the Kings owne mouth, whether his Highnesse be witting thereto or no; the Lieute∣nant louing his prisoner well, repaired to the King, and shewed him the Cardinals warrant, who then controuled the sawcines of the Priest (for those were his tearmes) and gaue the Lieutenant his Signet for a countermand, whereat the Cardinall stormed, but Kildare deliuered from his eminent death, and not long after from his imprisonment also, was sent in∣to Ireland, where at his entrance into Dublin, he was Kildar receiued into Dublin with procession. met with a solemne procession, and so brought into the City; so welbeloued was this Earle abroad, and at home. (60) But the French Kings fortunes were nothing so good, who was straitly imprisoned at Madrill in The French king imprisoned at Madril. G ard. Spaine, and great suite made for his deliuerance, which notwithstanding would not be heard. The Queene mother then Regent of France, wise of her selfe, and forwarded by others, saw no better means to free her sonne the King, then to enter amity with England, which to accomplish, she solicited King Queene mother soliciteth King Henry. Henry; working vpon the occasions then ministred, which was some vnkindnesse growne betwixt the English King, and the Emperour, the one of them more strange by the greatnesse of his fortunes, and the other in iealousie of lessening renowne. The sparkes of which Cinders were steared to flame, by Dislikes the Emperour and K. Henry. Wolsey that euer was in the eare of the King: allead∣ging his potency, so much esteemed of all Christian Princes (a sound very tunable in Henries wide eare) would bee lesse regarded by the Emperours late vi∣ctory; who now beganne to carry himselfe with another respect, and neuer after that victory got∣ten subscribed his letters to King Henry, according to his accustomed manner, your Sunne and Cosen; but to the draught of his Secretaries, in fixed his hand with the word Charles and no more. (61) These dislikes and other intercourses of State, drew Henry shortly to a peace with France. Peace betwixt England and France. In the exemplification of which league the Veneti∣ans, and other Princes were left to their choise, whereof himselfe notwithstanding would bee stiled the Protector. And to his leaguer Ambassadors sent these instructions to moue the States to consi∣der Signed with ovvne , in Ann. 1526. the Emperours aspired greatnesse, who now commanded the Kingdomes of Naples, and Sicilie; the Dutchie of Millan, the Seigniorie of Ioan, the Countie of Ast, and other possessions in Italie, the whole Country of Germany, being the greatest The great Do∣minions of the Emperour. part of Christendome, already either totally in his Enacted in the Church of Saint Peter in Anion. May 7, Anno 1530. The Determination of the Vniuersity of Burges. We the Deane and facultie of Diuinity, in the Vniuersi∣ty of Burges, after the example of Saint Paul the Doctor of the Gentiles, begin with praier to the quieting of the conscience, to whom this our writing shall come; the Que∣stion moued is whether the brother taking the wife of his dead brother, the marriage consummated, and perfect, be a thing lawfull or no. We by much labour and turning of Bookes, euery one of vs a part by himselfe, free from corruption, the better to obey the truth, finde it forbidden by the Leuiticall law which is Gods, and that such marri∣age is an abhominable discouering of his brothers shame, which cannot be allowed by the authority of any man: which our determination we haue caused to be signed with the seale of our faculty, the tenth day of Iune, and yeere of our Lord. 1530. The opinions of the Diuines in the Vniuersity of Bonony. All wee Doctors of Diuinity in this Vniuersity, vnto whom this Question was propounded, whether it was for∣bidden only by the Ordinance of the Church, or else by the Law of God, that a man might not marry the left wife of his brother departed without children, and hauing exami∣ned the matter euery one of vs alone, lastly came altoge∣ther, and as it were line by line, and rule by rule, brought forth the reasons for the contrary part, with those of the most Reuerend Father Cardinall Caietaine, yea and of the dispensation for raising vp seed to his brother, spoken of in Deuteronomie; thus we determine, giue iudgement, and say, and confidently doe hold and witnes that such marri∣age is horrible, accursed, and to be cried out vppon, and vt∣terly abhominable, not only for a Christian man, but for an Infidel vnfaithfull or heathen: and that it is prohibited vn∣der greeuous paines and punishments by the Law of God, of Nature, and of man, and that the Pope, though he may doe much, vnto whom Christ gaue the keies of the King∣dome of Heauen, hath no power to a dispensation to anie man to contract such marriage: In witnes whereof we con∣firme this our iudgement, both vnder the Seale of our V∣niuersity, as also with the Seale of our Colledge of Do∣ctors of Diuinity, and haue substribed it in the Cathedrall Church of Bonony this tenth of Iune, the yeere of our Lord. 1530. The determination of the Vniuersity of Padua. Seeing that certaine great Orators and Ambassadors did humbly require of vs, that wee would vouchasafe to search out with all diligence this question following, whe∣ther to marry the wife of our brother departed without children is forbidden onely by the Law of the Church, or by the Law of God also: and if forbid by both the Lawes, whether the Pope may dispence with any man for such Matrimony or no? which Question we haue discussed and as farre as we can, haue made it cleere, both priuate euery man by himselfe and after al together openly, we say, iudge, decree, witnesse, and for truth affirme, that such marriage is no marriage: yea and that it is abhorred and cursed of euery Christian man, and to be abominate as a greeuous sinne, and that it is cleerely forbidden vnder cru∣ell penalty by the Lawes of nature, of God, and of man, and that the Pope vnto whom the keies of the Kingdome of Heauen are committed by Christ the Sonne of God hath no power to dispense by the right of Law for any cause, suggestion, or excuse, that any such Matr ny should be contracted. In witnesse whereof wee made this writing, and haue authorized it, with the accustomed Seale of our Vniuersity, dated at Padua in the Church of the Heremites of Saint Augustine the first of Iuly, and yeere of our Lord. 1530. The determination of the Vniuersity of Tholouze. It was treated in our Vniuersity of Tholouze: whe∣ther it were lawfull for a brother to marry her which had beene wife to his brother now departed, and without chil∣dren: as also whether the Pope which hath the cure of Christs flocke allowing it by his dispensation, it be lawful: to resolue which, the best Doctors of Diuinity, and the Laws, did sweare that they would obey the sacred Coun∣sels, and would follow the holy Decrees of the Fathers, and falling to conclusion stucke fast vpon this point, that it is lawfull for no man, neither by the Law of God, nor by the Law of nature, to take her to wife that his brother hath left: neither can the Pope dispence with this law of God: as touching the commandement in Deuteronomy that the brother should marry his wife to raise vp seede vnto him, that his name should not perish among the Tribes of Isra∣el, we answere that that Law was but a shadow and figure of things to come, which vanished away as soon as the sub∣stance of the Gospell appeared. Thus haue we giuen our sentence, which wee haue signed with our Authenticall Seale of this Vniuersity. Yeouen at Tholouze, the Calends or first day of October, the yeere of our Lord, 1530. These and many more were read by the Lord Chauncellor vnto the lower house of Parliament that they might report in their countries, the Kings iust cause of diuorse. To forward which (as was thought) Cardinall Wolsey the said Lord Chancellor was sent Ambassadour into France, laden with Guicchard. Rich. Turpin. G. C . Crownes, as Guicchardine saith, and with surpassing Pompe as London behelde, who with 900. Horse passed the Bridge toward Douer, and so into France. But rumors in England still spreading of the good Queens diuorse, about a yeere after, K. Henry to satis∣fie A. D. 1528. all, sent for his Nobles, his Councellers, Iudges, The Kings Ora∣tion to his No∣bility. and many wise Commoners vnto whom he made a most pithy Oration, shewing them with what care he had ruled almost twenty yeeres with ho∣nour and victory, which as he said, would shortly be clouded, if he should die and leaue them a liti∣gious Edward Hall. Heire, examples he shewed of the wofull ex∣perience of Lancaster and Yorke, in whose dissenti∣ons the Realme was like to haue beene vtterly de∣stroied: and although (saith he) we haue a daugh∣ter to the great comfort of her mother and me, yet it is told vs by great Clearkes, our marriage is not lawful, but that she stands in case of illegitima∣tion; The Kings com∣plaint. and we both, are said to liue in abomina∣ble Adultery; thinke you (my Lords) that these words doe not touch my very soule, the perill whereof we venture, as you doe also your inheri∣tance, for which cause I haue asked counsell of the greatest Clearkes in Christendome, and haue like∣wise heard the opinion of mine owne. But as tou∣ching the Queene, if it bee iudged by the Law of God that she is my lawfull wife, there shall be no∣thing more acceptable vnto mee, whose noble The commen∣dation of Queen Katherine. conditions, I assure you, (besides her great Parentage) is most gentle, louing and obedient, whereof I haue had a true experience almost these twenty yeeres: and were I to choose a wife (if the marriage might stand with Gods Law) my Choise should be of her, before any other woman in the world, and if it shall otherwise be prooued, I shall not onely be most sorrowfull for parting with so louing a companion, but much more haue occasi∣on to lament my chaunce, and life in so foule a sin; these then are the sores that torments my minde, for the sauing of my soule, and for which cause I haue heere assembled you, that you may declare to our louing Subiects this our true meaning, and to stay if it may be the rumors of vnstaied reports: and this being said, he let them to depart, each man bewraying in countenance the affection of his mind, some pittying the King to see him so perplexed, some fauouring the Queene sorrowed her case, and some sighed deepely at this strange speech and sudden al∣teration. (68) But the Cardinall of Yorke fearefull to wade too farre alone in these troubled waters, desired the George Couen. Learned men assembled to decide the Kings marriage. assistance of the learned in the Realme, and thereto got the Kings licence, which with his Legatine au∣thority, commanded many learned men both Di∣uines & Lawyers, from Oxford and Cambridge, with the presence of many Bishoppes besides. These assembled at London, were shewed the Instruments and Seales of many forraine vniuersities, all of them disabling the marriage, and holding the dispensati∣on (allowing it) vnlawfull: but because that string The testimonies of many Vniuer∣sities sent vnto Rome. Iohn Stow. pag 9 1. could not bee touched without sound of reproch to the Pope, as also to cleare the King from calumni∣ous reports; it was thought fittest to send the saide instruments to Rome, whereunto these so appoin∣ted set their owne seales, with an humble request to his Holinesse, that an indifferent Iudge might be sent them, to determine this great and strange cause of the King; which was so followed by his Ambas∣sadors in the Popes Court, that Lawrence Campeius a Cardinall of great credite and wisdome, from their Cardinall Cam∣peiu commeth into England. Consistory was sent into England, vnto whom, wise Wolsey Cardinall of Yorke was ioined in commission, with power to erect a Court, to heare the cause pleaded, & to giue sentence definitiue, as they found the equity of law. (69) To that end therefore a place was ordained at the Blacke-fryers in London, and the King with the Queene remoued themselues vnto his palace of The King and Queene summo∣ned to appeare personally in the Court at Blacke Fryers. Bridewell neere adioining, whence ere long they were summoned by Processe personally to appeare in Court, which accordingly they did, hauing seueral seates ordained vnder clothes of estate, mounted somewhat higher then the two Cardinals, the Pre∣sidents, vnder whose feet sate the Scribes and other Officers; the Court being framed Consistory∣wise, was furnished with Bishoppes, Doctors, Law∣yers, and learned Counsellors, in most solemne wise: the Doctors for the King, were Simpson and Bell, and his Proctors Peter and Tregonell: for the Queene were Fisher, Standish, and Ridley, a very little man but a great Diuine, the Court thus set, and Commission read, the Cryer called the King, by the name of King Henry to come into the Court, who forthwith answered and said, Here. Then was the Queene called by the name of Queene Katherine to come into the Court, who made no answere at all, but presently rose vp, and going about the Court to the King, fell down on her knees, before his feet, and in the hearing of the people spake thus in effect. Sir, I desire you to take some pitty vpon mee, Queene Kathe∣rines speech to the King. and doe mee Iustice and Right: I am a poore wo∣man, a stranger borne out of your Dominions, hauing here no indifferent Councell, and lesse as∣surance of friendshippe. Alasse, wherein haue I offended, or what cause of displeasure haue I gi∣uen, that you intend thus to put mee away? I take God to my Iudge, I haue beene to you a true and humble wife, euer conformable to your will and pleasure, neuer gaine-saying any thing wherein you tooke delight, without all grudge or discon∣tented countenance; I haue loued all them that lo∣ued you, howsoeuer their affections haue beene to mee ward, I haue borne you children, and bin your wife now this twenty yeers, of my virginity and marriage bed, I make God and your own conscience the Iudge, and if it otherwise bee pro∣ued, I am content to bee put from you with shame. The King your Father in his time for wis∣dome was knowne to bee a second Salomon, and Ferdinando of Spaine my Father, accounted the wisest among their Kings; could they in this match bee so farre ouerseene, or are there now wiser and more learned men, then at that time were? surely, it seemeth wonderfull to mee that my marriage after twenty yeeres should bee thus called in question with new inuention against me who neuer intended but honesty. Alasse Sir, I see I am wronged, hauing no Counsell to speake for me, but such as are your Subiects, and cannot bee indifferent vpon my part. Therefore I most humbly beseech you, euen in Charity to stay this course, vntill I may haue aduise and counsel from Spaine; if not, your Graces pleasure be done. And Queene Kathe∣rine departed the Court. therewithall rising, and making lowly obeysance to the King, departed thence, leaning vpon the Arme of her receiuer, each man expecting shee had re∣turned to her seat, when as shee tooke directlie out of the place; which being perceiued, the Cryer a∣gaine called her by the name of Queene Katherine to come into the Court; Madam quoth her guid, you are againe called; on, on, said shee, it maketh no mat∣ter, this is no indifferent Court for me; therfore goe forward. (70) The King perceiuing that she was departed, presently spake thus vnto the assembly. I will The Kings re∣port of his Queene. (quoth hee) in her absence declare before you all, that shee hath beene to mee a most true, obedient and comfortable wife, endued with all vertuous qualities and conditions, according to her birth; and in lowlinesse equals any of baser estate. With that Cardinall Wolsey made vnto the King an hum∣ble request, that his Maiesty would bee pleased to declare before that honourable audience, whether hee had beene the causer of this his intended di∣uorce, wherewith hee was charged in the opinions of the people. My Lord Cardinall quoth the King, I can well excuse you in this, and rather affirme that you The King excu∣seth the Cardi∣nall. haue beene against mee, in attempting it thus far: but the chiefest motiue for this matter, was the scruple of conscience, conceiued vpon certaine words spoken by the Bishop of Bayon, the French Ambassador, sent from the King to conclude a marriage betwixt Prince Henry his second sonne, Duke of Orleance, and our onely daughter Lady Mary, which Bishoppe made doubt, and desired respite to bee satisfied for the legitimation of our said daughter, in respect of our marriage with this woman, being my owne brothers wife, which pre∣sently engendred such scruples and doubts in me, that my conscience hath beene continually vexed, lest by continuing in that sinne after knowledge, I King Henries conscience and care. draw Gods indignation against me, which I feare wee haue already done in that hee hath sent vs no Issue male, and them that were begot in this nup∣tiall bed, no sooner came into the world, but were taken againe thence, and hopelesse now of more issue by her, it behoueth me to consider the state of this Realme, and the danger that may follow for lacke of a lawfull Prince to succeed. This bur∣den too weighty for my weake conscience (not in any dislike of the Queenes age, or person, with whom I desire onely to continue, if our marriage may stand with the law of God) I haue in this place assembled you our graue Prelates, and lear∣ned Diuines, to determine of, and will God wil∣ling submit my selfe to your iudgements. My doubts in this case I moued in confession to you my Lord of Lincolne, and ghostly father, whereof your selfe being somwhat trobled, said you would aske counsell of you all my Lords. Then of you my Lord of Canterbury being Metropolitane, I got licence to put the matter in question, to which gra you all put your seales, as here in this Court the same is to bee seene. True it is, said the Lord of Canterbury, and I doubt not but that all my bre∣thren here present will acknowledge the same. Not so my Lord said the Bishoppe of Rochester, you ne∣uer had my hand to that Instrument, nor neuer shal. Indeed said Canterbury you did it not your selfe, but admitted m e to subscribe your name, and allowed The Bishoppe of Rochester contra∣dicteth the Archbishop of Canterbury. mee your Seale; vnder your correction said Roche∣ster that is not so; Well, well, (quoth the King) you are but one man, against whom at this time we will not dispute, and so rose vp, and the Court adiourned ned to England; but he tooke his way towards the Emperour (to whom the cause somewhat apper∣tained) being then at Vienna in his expedition against the Turke, vnto whose learned men he offered dis∣putation, and in priuate conference so satisfied Corne∣lius Cornelius Agrip∣pa yeeldeth to the proposition. Agrippa, the most respected for learning in the Emperours Court, as he held the Proposition most true. Whereupon others learned were discouraged to dispute, and suffered Cranmer to depart without a∣ny further proceedings. (80) The matter thus manifested in most parts of Christendome, this Gordians knot was lastly vnloo∣sed by King Henrie himselfe, who now besides this his marriage, beganne to call in question, what au∣thority the Pope had in his dominions; which being afterwards debated in Parliament, an Act passed a∣gainst The Popes vsur∣pation forbid by Parliament. his vsurped Hierarchy, and all persons forbid∣den to appeale, or to make any paiments vnto Rome. The Kings marriage with Lady Katherine, was x Parl. 24 H. . K. Henries mar∣riage dissolued by Parliament. by the same Parliament dissolued, and his separati∣on from her, made by the Archbishop of Canter∣burie to stand good, and effectuall by Law, and that Queene Katherine from thenceforth should be cal∣led Fox Mart. 1197. Princesse Dowager, which doings shee tooke so to hart, as shee procured the Popes curse against King Katherine Dowa∣ger. Henrie, and his Realme, which curse was set vp at Dunkirke in Flaunders, for that the bringer thereof durst come no neerer. And the Pope in reuenge of himselfe, being set in his Consistory accompanied Holinsh. pag 93 . with his Cardinals, proceeded to the Censure of these great Princes marriage, which he then adiudged Pope Clement 7. adiudgeth the marriage law∣full. to stand most firme and Canonicall, and enioyned King Henry to hold matrimoniall society with the said Katherine his lawfull wife and Queene, and in that estate to account and maintaine her as it became a King and louing husband to doe, and if he refused to accomplish these premisses, then to be compelled thereunto, and neuer after to be heard in any Court as touching the inualiditie of the said marriage, and The thunde∣rings of Pope Clement 7. to pay the expences of the said trauerse, as he the ho∣ly father should limit and thinke meete. This was done a yeere after that the King had married Queen Anne, and bare date from Rome, the 23. of March and yeere of Christ 1534. For in the meane while King Henry had set his affection vpon the Lady Anne Sleidan. com. li. 9. Bullen, a Phenix indeed in his Princely eye,, and ano∣ther Hester for Englands saluation, both in her selfe and roiall Bud succeeding, as the heauens and world doe witnes to this day. Shee was the daughter of Sir Thomas Bullen Viscount Rochford, Earle of Wilt∣shire, The discent of Anne Bullen. and of Ladie Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolke. This Earle Thomas her father was the sonne of Sir William Bullen, whose wife was Lady Margaret, the second daugh∣ter and Coheire of Thomas Butler Earle of Ormond, and the said Sir William was the sonne of Sir Godfrey Bullen Lord Maior of London, who lieth buried in Sir Godfrey Bul∣len Lord Maior of London. Anne 1457. Saint Laurence Church in the Iewrie, pictured in his winding sheete vpon a Plate of Brasse, and about his Graue-stone vpon a border of brasse in many places these words are written, Now thus, Now thus, Now thus, whose Charity was extended vpon the poore housholders of that Citie, in distributing a∣mong them a thousand pounds. His Lady was Anne, eldest daughter and Coheire vnto Thomas Lord H and Hasting, and his discent out of the house of the Bullens, an ancient Family in the Coun∣tie of Norfolke; accursed therefore be the pen, that Sanders in Schis. Angl. slanderously bringeth this rose from a defiled Bed, whose Serpents mouth to vphold his God the Pope, hath spewed out his poison of vntruthes, and made his tongue a sharpe sword against the Lords annoin∣ted; let him therefore receiue his portion with the Serpent of deceit, and his reward with Satan the fa∣ther of Lies. (81) This Ladies religion was different from all Papall indulgences, imbracing the Gospell that then Anne Bullen re∣ligion. began in our vulgar language to bee read, for which cause saith Sleidan she was accounted a Lutheran, cause Sleid. com. lib. 9. enough to bee enuied at, by the Bishops of that time. (82) Her, the King inuested Marchionesse of Pembroke with Mantle and Coronet, both in regarde Anne Bullen Cre∣ated Marchio∣nesse of Pem∣brooke. of her Nobilitie and many vertues (for so runne the wordes of her Patent) which done, he tooke the seas, for France, accompanied with such a traine of his Nobles, as the like had not been seen, and among A. D. 1532. Octob. 11. many Ladies Anne Bullen was one, where hee com∣plained to the French King of the great wrongs offe∣red him by the dull Pope as hee called him; who K. Henrie com∣plaineth of the dull Pope. would haue Kings in person to attend his leasure at Rome, and contrary to their Kingly dignities, to ex∣pose themselues and affaires at his will there, to bon∣dage and great danger; and therefore he earnestly requested that the Pope might bee summoned to a Councell, to answere the many abuses that hee had offered vnto most of the Princes in Christendome, and vnto himselfe not the least; who for his part had King Henrie al∣lowed the Pope 60000. Angels monethly. allowed him threescore thousand Angels monethly to maintaine an Army for his deliuerance out of the Castle of Angell; where the Emperials vnder the Prince of Orenge kept him. Which his businesse be∣ing ended in France, and the King againe returned Iohn Stow pa. 946 Anne Dom. 1533. Nou mb. 14. Vpon S. Erken∣walds day, saith Hollinshd and Groston. King Henry ma∣ried Anne Bul∣len. into England, he presently (though priuily) married the said Lady Marchionesse in his Closet at White-hall, in the presence of many; the Lady Anne Sauage bearing her Traine, * and Doctor Lee doing the rites of their coniunction, who was afterwards con∣secrated Bishop of Chester, Couentree and Lichfield, and President of Wales. (83) The Romanists much fearing that Babel would downe, if Queene Anne might bee heard a∣gainst wicked The Pope. Haman, sought to vnderproppethe foundations thereof, with certaine deuises of their owne; and that the same might passe without note of suspition, they laid their forgery euen vpon Heauen it selfe; whose pretended Oracle Eliza∣beth Barton (commonly called, the holy maide of Elizabeth Barton the false Oracle or the Roma∣nists. Kent) was made to bee; and the pillers of this god∣lesse Fabricke were Edward Bocking, a Moncke by profession, and doctor of Diuinity, Richard Masters, Parson of Aldington, the Town wherein she dwelt, The assisters of this false Pro∣phe esse. Richard Deering a Monke, Hugh Rich a Frier, Iohn Adestone, and Thomas Abell, Priests, put to their hel∣ping handes, and Henrie Gould Bachelour of Diuini∣ty, with Iohn Fisher the Reuerend father of Rochester, imploied their paines to daube these downe-falling Read Statue. in Anne 25. of King H. . walles, with their vntempered Morter. The Scribes that set their pens for her Miracles, were Edward Thwaites Gentleman, and Thomas Lawrence Register, besides Hankherst a Monke who writte a letter that was forged to bee sent her from Heauen; and Ri∣chard Risby and Thomas Gould, were the men which dispersed her Miracles abroad to the world. This holy maide Elizabeth made a Votarisse in Canterbury, was taught by Bocking her Ghostly Father, and sus∣pected Paramour, to counterfeit many fayned tran∣ces, The counterfe∣tings of Eliza∣beth Barton. and in the same to vtter many vertuous words for the rebuke of sinne, vnder which, more freely shee was heard against Luthers Doctrine, and the Scriptures translation, then desired of many: nei∣ther so onely, but that shee gaue foorth from God, and his Saints, by sundry suggestiue Reuelations, Edward Hall. Ioh. Stow. Holinsh. that if the King proceeded in his diuorce, and second marriage, he should not raigne in his Realme one moneth after, nor rest in Gods fauour the space of an houre. But the truth discouered by Gods true Ministers, this Oracle gaue place as all other such Cranmer. Cromwell. Latimer. did, when Christ by his death stopped their lying mouthes: for her selfe and Elizab. Barton. Edward Bocking. Richard Deering. Richard Risby. Richard Maister. Henry Gould. Two Monkes. seuen of her Disciples were executed for Treason at Tiborne, and the o∣ther sixe put to their fines and imprisonment. With the like counterfeit reuelations and fained predicti∣ons this Generation of Hypocrites had brought Edward Lord Stafford, Duke of Buckingham vnto his vnhappy ende, when as by the working of Iohn de la Court, his own Confessor, together with Nicolas Hop∣kins a Monke of the Carthusian Order, in the Priorie Iohn Stow. of Henton in Somersetshire, who by his visions from heauen forsooth, heartned him for the Crown; but Edward Duke of Buckingham beheaded. before his owne Coronet could aspire to that toppe, hee worthily lost both head and all vpon Tower-hill for his treason, Ann. Dom. 1521. Vnto such sinnes the world was then subiect, and into such conceites their reputed holines had brought them, Holinshed. not onely among the simple and vnlettered, but e∣uen with them that seemed to bee learned indeed: for by certaine predictions foreshewing a great de∣luge, Prior Bolton of Saint Bartholmewes in London The vaine feare of Prior Bolton. was so fearefull, that hee built him a house vpon the height of Harrow hill, storing it with prouisions necessary, to keepe himselfe from drowning, in A. D. 1524. (84) But the Popes Holinesse fearing the euent of the game, if euery man might set and cast at his The Pope inci∣teth Iames King of Scotland a∣gainst England. Crowne, thought it high time to lay hand on his own State, and to keepe what was left, lestal would bee gone; to which end he sollicited many Christian Princes to stand on his part, and among them sent his Brief vnto Iames the fift king of Scotland, desiring his assistance against King Henry of England, whom in Iohn Lesly. his Consistory hee had pronounced to bee an Here∣tike, a Schismatike, a manifest Adulterer, a publike murtherer, a committer of Sacrilege, a Rebell, and High treason conuict of Laesae Maiestatis, for that hee had risen a∣gainst him who was his Lord. And therefore he had iustly depriued him of his said Kingdom, and would dispose the same to him and other Princes: so as The Pope giues England to him that could get it. they would assist to recouer the same, a very good prouision, and very well foreseene; for notwith∣standing these boisterous blasts from Rome, the King kept his Crowne, and was rather feared of the Popes best Abetters, then did feare any potent power that the world could afford, whose thoughts were now busied for the Coronation of his Queen. (85) For Queene Anne conceiued, and perceiued with Child, her royall Coronation was forthwith Queene Anne crowned. prepared, which with all royall obseruances vpon the first of Iune, being Whitsunday was performed; and the seuenth of September following, shee bare into the world that excellent Princesse, which af∣terwardes Lady Elizabeths birth. A. D. 1533. proued the mirrour of the world, euen Lady ELIZABETH, our late and most famous Queene. (86) True it is, that the zealous conuersation of this godly Queene gaue great encouragements vnto many, more publikely with boldnes to professe the Gospell; so that the Ministers formerly fled in case Fox Martyr. 1366. of Religion, returned againe into England, where the new Testament (translated by Tyndall) was read, but with such dislikes to the Bishoppes, that they got it to be burnt. Notwithstanding, to tickle the Kings eare, they preached against the Popes supre∣macy, and tooke the oath for the King themselues; abolished his authority by Act of Parliament, and Statut. Parl. H. 28. cap. 10. suppressed many Monasteries; leauing their reue∣newes to the Kings will; faire introductions indeed for what they intended, as the sequell of the sixe Articles by them procured, doth manifestly shew: and those purposely made against the maintainers of the Gospell, whereof Queen Anne was the chiefe, Queene Anne a great louer of the Gospell. who first was most fauourable to those learned Di∣uines, that laide mans saluation vpon the Rocke Christ, next in procuring a tolleration from the king for them, whose doctrine did daily vndermine the Papall foundation: & lastly, she by no means would consent to marry the King, vntill a lawfull diuorce was had for his separation from Lady Katherine; his brother Arthurs wife, which thing this Pope greatly withstood: these were causes sufficient to moue his Holinesse to bend his brow, and by his Instruments in Court to cutte off the principal mo∣uer, who foreslowing no time tooke the Ball before his rebound. (87) For the Queene deliuered of a dead Child, A. D. 1536. Ian. 29. and the Kings affection wandring elsewhere, gaue them occasion to worke on that Subiect, which God in his wisdome would haue downe, lest his deliue∣rance from the bondage of darkenesse should be at∣tributed Queene Anne deliuered of a dea Child. to any fleshly arme, or that shee who then sate in the throne of the worlds full felicity, should fixe her senses on so fickle a Center, who hauing had experience what it was to bee a Prince, must henceforth practise the patience of a poore prisoner, which in the third yeere of her marriage, and se∣cond of May, to act the wofull Scene of her Tra∣gedy, shee came vpon the Stage, being sent to the Tower of London, and charged with high Treason against the King: at whose first entrance shee fell on her knees before Thomas Audley Lord Chancellor, Queene sent to the Tower. the Duke of Norfolke; and Thomas Cromwell Secre∣tary her bringers, desiring God so to helpe her as sne was guiltlesse of those things whereof shee was ac∣cused, beseeching those Lords to bee Petitioners vnto his Maiesty in her behalfe, who lamenting her case, left her Prisoner with Sir William Kingston Con∣stable of the place. (88) I will in no wise excuse her guilt, hauing had iudgement and death by law, though others, and that vpon iust occasions before mee haue done, but will speake from them what they haue said; and namely one, that wrote thereof vnto a worthy and reuerent person; in whose defence his wordes are these: I seemeth very plaine, that the crimes supposed M ch. Sandt. The of Queene Anne. against this Christian Queène Anne, were matters contriued by the deuise of the Pope, and his Instruments her enemies. None of them all that were accused in the same Treason, confessing the Act euen vnto death, but haue left direct Testimonies in writing to the contrary; one meane Groome excepted, namely Marke Smeton, made confession vpon some promise of life belike, but had his head cut off before hee was aware, or had time to re∣call what he had said. The like did Cromwell the Se∣cretary Cromwels letter to the King vn∣der his own hand signifie to the King, after the prisoners had beene throughly examined in the Tower by the Councell, who wrote thus in his letter on the same day; many things haue been obiected, but nothing confessed, onely some circumstances haue been ac∣knowledged by Marke. And so doth Cranmer Arch∣bishoppe of Canterbury in his letter of comfort vnto Archbishop Cranmers let to the King. the King, who sore lamented that such a starre was fallen, if her gilt could bee proued, and willed his Highnesse to stand in defence of the Gospell as shee had done, without any report of confessing or ac∣knowledging any such Acts as were obiected, which as Sleidon writeth, were Adultery, and incest, but vn∣iustly (saith he) as it is supposed and proued since: With Sleidans Com. l. 10 her were executed certaine Gentlemen of the Kings Pri∣uie Chamber, namely, Norris, Weston, Brewton, and one Marks, which contrary to his conscience (as it is reported) for hope of preferment subscribed to a bill, whereby hee L. Rochford. No is. West. & Marks beheaded. condemned both himselfe and all the rest. (89) For vpon the seuenth of May, her brother George Bullen Lord Rochford, for his supposed offence with these foure before named, were all of them be∣headed vpon the Tower hill, but none of them confessing the Action; I haue heard it reported that Rochford the Queenes brother comming to her bed side to solicite a suite, leaned thereupon to whisper her in the eare; which the Spials gaue forth that hee did so, to kisse the Queen, howsoeuer, they are dead, and the Queene must die, who two dayes before May 15. had beene arraigned in the Tower, the Duke of Norfolke being her Iudge; to her inditement shee answered so effectually, that shee seemed to cleare Queene Anne condemned and beheaded. all matters laid to her charge; yet was shee found guilty, and vpon the nineteenth day of May; was brought to a Scaffold erected on the Greene within the saide Tower, where, in presence of many no∣ble men, the Lord Mayor of London, the Shiriffes, and some principall commoners, shee is said to haue spoken these words in their presence. (90) Good Christian people, I am come hither Robert Greene. to die; for according to the Law, and by the Law Queene Annes speech at her death. I am iudged to death, and therefore I will speake nothing against it; I come hither to accuse no yee shall be iudged heereafter to be shedars of some of Cry∣styn blood, and destroiers of your euyn Crysten. From Robart Aske chiefe Captaine of the Comynalty assem∣bled in pilgrimage, For the Barony and Cominalty of the same. By mee Robert Aske yn the name of all the Comynalty and Ba∣rony. Of such terrour and haughty spirit was this Cap∣taine Ex MS. Aske, that when Lancaster an Herald at Armes, was sent to declare the Kings message in Pomfret Castle (which the Rebels had got by surrender from the Lord Darcy) hee so blustred out his answers, that the daunted man excusing himselfe to bee but a messenger, fell before him on his knees; till the Archbishop of Yorke tooke him vp, saying, it was not beseeming the Coate hee wore, to prostrate to any, but onely to his Soueraigne. Reade likewise if The audacious dealings of the Rebels. you please this strange Mandate from some meane man among them; the false suggestion that they pos∣sessed the ignorant with, and the Oath whereunto these holy Pilgrimes were sworne, as I finde them recorded by themselues in these very words. To the Commyns of Hawkeside parish Bailiffs, or Constables, with all the Hamlets of the same. Welbeloued we greet you well, and whereas our brother Pouerty, and our brother Rogers, goith forward, is openly for the aide & asistance of your faith, and holy Church, and for the reformation of such Abbeys and Monasteries, now dissolued and subpressed without any Iust cause. Where∣fore gudde brethers, For asmuch as our sayd brederyn hath send to vs for ayde and helpe, wee doe not onely effectualy desire you, but also vnder the paine of deadly sinne wee comaunde you and euery of you, to bee at the stoke Greene beside Hawkeside-kirke, the Saturday next being the xxviij. day of October by xi. of the Clokke, in your best array: as you will make aunswer before the heigh Iudge at the dreadfull day of Dome, and in the payne of pulling downe your Houses, and leasing of your gudds, and your bodies to be at the Capteyns will: For at the place afore∣said, then and there, yee and we, shall take further directi∣on concerning our faith, so farre decayed, And for gudde and laudable Customes of the Country, And such naughty inuentions and strange Articles now accepted and admitted, so that our said brother bee subdued, they are lyke to goe furthwards to vtter vndoing of the Com∣myn welth. (97) And the more to drawe forward the rude multitude which were forward enough of them∣selues, Slanderous vn∣truths against the King. they set forth in writing these slanderous vn∣truths against the King. 1 The first is that no infant shall receyue the blessed Sacrament of Baptisme, bott onlesse an try∣bett to bee payd to the King. 2 The second is that no man vnder xx 1 . Landes shall eyte no brede made of Wheate, ner Capon, chekyn, gois, ner pigge, bott onlesse to pay a trybett to the King. 3 The third is that for euery ploghe land the King will haue en trybett, with other diuerse ex∣treme vrgent causes, and hertely fareye well. The Oath of the holy Pilgrimes. Ye shall nat enter into this our Pilgrimage of Grace for the Commyn welth, but only for the loue that you doe The oath of the Pilgrims. bere vnto Almyghty Godde, his faith, and to holy Churche militant, the maintenance thereof, to the preseruation of the Kings person, his issew, to the purifying of Nobilitie, and to expulse all vilayne blode, and euill Councellers a∣gaynst the Commyn welthe, from his Grace and the priuie Counsel of the same, and that ye shall nat enter into oure said Pilgramege, for no particuler proffite to your selfe, nor to doe no displeasure to no pri ey person, but by Coun∣cell for the Commyn welthe, ner slee, ner murder for no enuye, but in youre hertts put away all feare and dread, and take afore you the Crosse of Criste, and in your herts his faith, the restitution of the Churche, the subpression of these Herytyks, and their opynyons, by all the holle contents of this Booke. And for the obseruation of this Oath, heare ano∣ther commande of the Commissioners, as we find it recorded. To the Bayliffes and Communes of the Towne of Skarboro. Welbelouyd, we Francys By god Knyghte, and Iohn Ha∣lom yoman, in the name of all the Communes, commande anacharde you, that ye assemble your selues together medi∣ately vpon recepete hereof, and so take thys othe wychys we here send vnto yow, and then after in all haste possible to assist and hayde theis ower brethern, wome wee sende to you to keepe, and make sure the Castell, Towne, and Port of Skarboro, that no man enter into the same Castell, that belongys vnto Rafe Euers the yonger Knyghte, nor a∣ny outher whiches did not take full parte with the Com∣munes, at ower first and last assemblynge in whoys name, aethority, or attorney soeuer they cume, vnlesse they haue licence of all the communes, in like manner, yee shall truely keepe all sichys ordinance, and shippe to the vse of the Com∣munes, wythe wyches wee charde you at our late being here, and thys not to faile, vpon payne of yower lyues, yee shall refer credence vnto thys messyngeres, thus in hast: Fare yee well, from Settrynton this Mondaye Sancte Mawris daye. Francis Bigott Knight in the name, and by Commandement of al the Communes. Against these rout of Rebels, George Earle of Shrewsbury, not staying for the Kings commission The Earle of Shrewsbury ma∣keth against the Rebels. mustred his men, misdeemed of many, that he meant to be a Pilgrime himselfe, vnto which suspectors hee made a loyall Oration, disclaiming all intention a∣gainst their attempts, how colourable so euer they laid their pretence; which done he caused his Chap∣len to minister him an Oath of his loyaltie, before them in the Field. It was likewise reported that the Earle of Darby was set forward towards them, whome the Pilgrimes well hoped would haue sided Ex MS. R. Coe. with them, as by their mandate sent to the Brethren appeares, where is forbid that none of them should aide him, vnlesse he tooke the Oath: which he neuer meant to assay or sweare to. (98) But true it is the King sent Thomas Duke of Norfolke, Lord Generall against them, accompanied Thomas Duke of Norfolke Lord Lieutenant of the North. with the Marquesse of Excester, the Earles of Hun∣tingdon and Rutland; who ioining their powers made towards Doncaster, where the Rebels then lay in their Randiuou; in whose sight immediately they set vp their Tents, and determined battell vpon the next day; but on the night betwixt, such fluds of water fell, that the riuer Dun ouerflowed his bancke, and admitted no passage ouer the Bridge, which thing was taken as a token from God; and thereupon the Lord Generall offered them Conference, allea∣ging that the King was tender of his Subiects liues, Pardon and peace offered to the Rebels. and very vnwilling to shed Christian blood: that their cause should be fauourably heard, and iust com∣plaints redressed, if with submission and duty of Subiects, they would yeeld themselues & affaires to the Kings mercy; that this their rebellious procee∣dings, was not onely the forerunning messenger of destruction to themselues and partakers, but gaue also a great aduantage vnto the Scots, the dangerous enemie vnto the Land, and them all: with these and the like perswasions the matter was so forwarded, that a conference was appointed at Doncaster, and foure pledges were sent from the Lord General vnto the Commons, for the safe returnes of their assigned Commissioners, which were these by name. Lord Neuill. Lord Darcy. Lord Stressre. Lord Lumley. Lord Latimer. Sir Thomas Percy. Sir George Darcy. Robert Aske Captaine. Sir Raufe Clayer, Seni. Sir Raufe Clayer Iun. Sir Raufe Euers. Sir William Constable. Sir Raufe Constable. Sir Rich: Tempest. Sir Raufe Romemer. Sir William Eustan. Sir George Lawton. Sir Thomas Hylton. M. Robert Constable. M. Richard Banner. M. Wiseroppe. Whose Articles and demands were these, as fol∣loweth. Ex Original MS. The instruction for Sir Thomas Hilton and other Companyons. 1 First to declare to the Duke of Norfolke, and other the Lordys, that thentent of our meeting of our par∣tie, The demands of the Commons surely is meant and thought of assured troth, without any manner of disceyte, or male engyne. 2 The second is to receiue the Kinges s ecundyth, vnder the Brode Seale of Englonde, and to deliuer our s ecundyth, and promise, vndre owre hands, for the Lordys there. 3 The thirde to entreate of owre generall perdon, for all causys, and all persons, which be within the Realme, wyche in herte, word, or deed assentyd, edyter procured, the furtherance in this our quarrell, may be pardoned life, lands, goods; and that in the sayd perdon, nor other the Kings records, we be not witon reputed; ne taken, as Re∣bylleous or tretors, nor rehersyd in the same. 4 The fourth that Thomas Cromwell, nor any of his bande or serte, bee not at owre metyng at Doncastre, but abcente themselfe from the Councell. 5 The fift, to receiue the Kings answere by the decla∣rations of the Lords, and to certifie the vere ete t thereof to vs there. Also to know what authority the Lords haue to etrete, in promes with vs ther, as well of owre promes of other things. Also to know what plege the wyll deliuer for owr Ca∣pitans. Also yf thys pertyculars be concluded, then for to con∣dyscend of other perticulars. 1 The first touching our faith, to haue the heresyes of Lu∣ther, The whole drift was to down with the Gospel. Wyclyf, Hussee, Melancton, Ecolampadius, Bu∣syrs, the Confession Germane, the Applege of Melanq∣ton, the werke of Tyndale; of Bernys, Fryth, of Mar∣shall, Rastell, the Bookes of Sent Germane, and such other of any manner Heresie, without the Realme, not to be kept, but vtterly to be dystryed. 2 The secund to haue the supreme of the Chyrch t ching cure of sowlle to be reseruyd to the See of Rome, as byfore hyt whas accustomyd for to be; and to haue the consecra∣tion of Byshoppys fr e hym without any first fr ts, or pencyons to him to be paid out of thys Realme, or ellys a pencion reasonable for the outwarde defence of our fayth. Also we beseke humble our most drade Soueraign Lord that the Lady Mary may be legetymate, and the estatutes contrary to the same to bee a lyd for the dome of the tytle that might incur to the Crown by Scotland, and that to be by Parliament. Also to haue the Abbeys that bee suppressed to be resto∣ryd to their Lands, Howsys, and Goods. Also to haue the Tents and first fr ts clearely dis∣chargyd, onles the Clergy wyll of their selfys gr a Rent or Charge to the augmentation of the Crown. Also to haue the Freres obser s restoryd to their hou∣ses againe. Also to haue the Heretiks Bishoppys, and temporal men of their seete, to haue condigne ponysment by fire, or such An vncharitable and vnchristian motion. other; or ells to trie ther quarrell with vs and our parta∣ker sin batell. Also to haue the Lord Cr mwell, the Lord Chance∣ler, and Sir Ryc. Rych Knight to haue condigne ponys∣ment, as subuerters of the gudlawes of the Rea me; and onetemers of the stese sect of this false heretykes fyrst in∣uenter and brengers of them. Also that the Landys in Westmorland, Comberland, Kendale, Dentsyd, Furnes, and the Abbeis lands in Yorke, Worsaidyshire, Kerbyshire, Neuerdale, mayne bee Ten∣nant Right, and the lord to haue at euery change two yeeres rent, in the name of a agarsumme, and no more, according to a grant now made by the Lords to the Com∣mens vnder their Seales, and this to be done by Act of Parlement. Also the hand-gunnys and Crosse-boys, with the penal∣tie of the same to be repelled, onles hyt be in the Kings for∣rests and Parkes to kyllers of Deere. Also that Doctor Lee, and Doctor Leyton, may haue condigne ponyshment for their extortions in time of visita∣tion, in brybes, of some religyous houses, x. l. xx. l. and for other summes, besyde horsys, vowsens, leases, vnder co∣uent seallys, by them taken, and other abominable Acts by them committed and done. Also to see reformation for the election of Knightes of shire, and the B rgys; and for the vse among the Lords in the Perlament after the ancient custome. Also the Statute for inclosyng Intackes to bee put in execution, that all Intacks, Inclosys syth Anno quarto Henrici eptimi be pullyd downe exceding Forests, and Parkys to be dystrud of their qūition, and tax now granted by Parlament. Also to haue the Parlyament in a conuenient place as Nottingham or Yorke, and the same to bee so moued shortly. Also that it may be enacted by authority of Parliament, that all recognisans, stat tys, penaltyes, newly forfeyted during the tyme of the Commission may bee pardoned & discharged, aswell against the King as stranger. Also the Priuilege of the Ryght of the Church to be con∣firmed by Act of Parlament, and Prysts not to suffer onles they be degraded; a man to bee saued by his Booke; San∣ctuary to saue a man in all causes in extreme need, and the Church to saue a man for forty dayes; and further ac∣cording to the wes as they were vsed in the beginning of the Kyngys dayes. Also the libertyes of the Church to haue their old Cu∣stomes, as the County Palatine of Durham, Beuerley, Rep∣pon, S. Peter of Yorke, and such other by Act of Par∣liament. Also to haue the Statute that no man shall declare his will on his land to be repelled. Also the Statute of treason for W ys, made sith Anno xxi. of our Soueraigne that now is to bee in like wise re∣pelled. Also that the common Law may haue place aswell as was vsed in the beginning of your gracious raign, and that all Iniunctions be cleerely denied, and not granted, vnlesse the matter be heard in the Cha cery, and there determi∣ned. Also that no man vpon sub poena, or Priuy Seale from Trent Northward, appeare but at Yo rke, or by Atturney vnlesse it be directed vpon pene of allegyance, or for like matter concerning the King. Also a rem dy against Exchequer for f ing of false Offices, and extortions in taking of Fees, for that which is not held of the King, and against the Pr ters there∣of. These were the Instructions giuen to their Co ssi∣oners to be c ferred vpon, all which as it should seeme, were drawne into foure Articles or heads, as by the my∣nute of the Kings answere thereunto doth appeare: which Originall in many places with his owne hand is interli∣ned with so wise and learned additions, as doe confirme his Kingly care, both for the Church and common weale: the true copy whereof to his great f e is as followeth: his corrections and additions is varied from the rest by a seue∣rall Character. [Petitions] An Answere to the [demaunds] of the Rebels in Yorkeshire, by the Kings Highnesse. for the premisses, or anie of them, by his heires, or by anie his Officiaries, Ministers, or Subiects, by anie manner of meanes or in anie manner of wise. Prouided alwaies, that you and euerie of you in token of a perfect declaration and knowledge, that ye doe hartilie lame nd be sorrie for your said offencies, shall make your humbly submission vnto his Highnes, in the presence of his right trustie and right intirely beloued Cosens and Concellairs: the Duke of Norforlke, and the Earle of Shrewsburie his Lieute∣nants Generall, or any of them, or to their Deputy or De∣puties of them, or any of them, or such other person, or persons as the Kings Highnes shall appoint for the same: Furthermore the Kings most roiall Magesty, streitely chargeth and commandeth, that you and euery of you, shall from henceforth, like trew and faithfull Subiects vse your selues, in Gods peace, and his, according to the dueties of alleagance, and that you shall in no wise hereafter, attempt to make or procure, any such rebellion, intent, vnlawfull Assemblies, Riots, Rowts, and Conspirations, nor at the Commandement, nor by the Authority of any person, of what estate or degree, or for what cause soeuer it be, shall arise in any forcible manner, and array, vnles it be at the speciall commandement of the Kings Highnes, or his Lieu∣tenant sufficiently auctorised for the same. In witnes whereof the Kings most royall Magesty, hath caused this his Proclamation to be made Patent, and sealed with his great sayle at Richemounte the IX. day of December in the XXVIII. yeere of his Reigne. 1536. Pexsall. Notwithstanding this Generall pardon and merci∣full dealings of the King a new Insurrection was raised in the North, wherin many of the former were now againe Actors, as by name Robert Aske whom Holinsh. pag. 944. the King had not onely pardoned, but also highly rewarded, the Lord Dacres, Sir Robert Constable, Sir Francis ygod, Pulmer, Percy, Hamilt n, Tempest and Lumley, all of them put to death, as they well de∣serued. Aske executed. (99) In which Commotions those men whose profession was onely the Booke and their eades, mistaking Christs meaning, who bad his Disciples to sell their coate, and to buy a sword, came armed a∣mong Luk. 2. 36. Spirituall men Commotioners. the Rebels into the Field, and with them were taken as Traitours against the Crowne: for which offence many of them suffered death: namely, Iohn Paslew Abbot of Whaley in Lincolneshire, Iohn Caste∣gate and William Haydocke Monks of the same house, Monkes hanged for rebellion. Robert Hobs Abbot of Woborne in Bedfordshire, Adam Sudbury Abbot of Gernaux with Astbeed a Monke of that house; the Abbot of Sawley in Lancashire and the Prior of the same place, William Wold Prior of Birlington, the Parson of Pudington, fiue Priests of Lincolnshire, and with them their chiefetaine, Cap∣taine Cobler, and Iohn Allen Priest. (100) These stirres thus quieted and the States∣men at leasure to preuent the like, a Commission Idols and Mona∣steries suppres∣sed by Parlia∣ment. came foorth to purge the Churches of Idols; and to suppresse the Monasteries to the Kings vse, gran∣ted vnto him by Parliament: the one of them, the onely working cause, through the gaine that was got by ignorant deuotion, and gadding on pilgrimage, and the other, the Nest and very receptacle of all traiterous attempters, against the peace of the Land and Supremacy of the Crowne. The abuse of the first was solemnly shewed at Pauls Crosse in London, A. D. 1538. vpon Sunday the twenty foure of February, by Do∣ctor Iohn Fisher Bishop of Rochester, where the Roode The Roode of Grace broken at Pauls Crosse. of Boxley in Kent, commonly called the Rood of Grace, made with diuers vices to bow downe and to lift vp it selfe, to shake, and to stirre both Heads, Lamb. Peram. in Boxeley. hands, and feet, to rowle the eies, mooue the lippes and to bend the browes; was then broken and pul∣led in peeces. So likewise the Images of our Lady of Walsingham and Ipswich, set and besprinkled with Ie∣wels, Our Lady of Wal∣singham and o∣ther Images burnt. and Gemmes, with diuers others both of Eng∣land and Wales; were brought to London and burnt at Chelsey before the Lord Crumwell. Then the Axes of the hewers began to cast downe the walles of all Monasteries, whose number (as Cambden doth ac∣count Cambd. Brit. 645. Monaste∣ries in England, 90. Colledges. 110. Religious Hospitals. 2374. Chaunte∣ries and free Chappels. them) were sixe hundred fourty fiue, besides fourscore and tenne Colledges, them of Oxford and Cambridge not accounted: of Hospitals one hun∣dred and tenne, and of Chaunteries and free Chap∣pels two thousand, three hundred, seuenty foure, all of them almost were then borne downe with the sudden deluge of those tempestuous times, whilst the world stood amazed, King Henrie proceeded, and the Clergy men groaned vnder their owne destru∣ctions; among these the Shrine of Thomas Becket was defaced, which did abound with more then Princely riches: whose meanest part was pure gold, garni∣shed with many precious stones, as Erasmus that saw Eras. Dialogue. it, hath written, whereof the chiefest was a rich Gemme of France, offered by King Lewis, who as∣ked W. Lamb. Peram. and obtained (you may be sure, he buying it so deare) that no passenger betwixt Douer and White-sand should perish by shipwracke; his bones by Stephen Langton had beene laide in a golden Shrine, The state and o∣pinion of Tho. Beckets Shrine. his name canonized, and the day of his death made annually holy, such concurse of Pilgrime, such pressing to touch him, and such creeping and knee∣ling to his Tombe, that the prints of their deuotion in the Marble stones, remaines to this day; euery Pillar resounding the miracles of this reputed Mar∣tyre, and the Church it selfe dedicated to Christ, forced to giue place to the name of Saint Thomas. The Timber worke of this Shrine was couered with Iohn Stow. plates of gold, damasked and embossed with wires of gold, garnished with broches, images, angels, pre∣cious The great riches of Beckets Shrine. stones, and great Orient Pearles: all these de∣faced filled two Chests and were for price of an vn∣estimable value. But in steede of these Dagons, the Bible in English was commanded to bee read in all Churches, and Register Bookes of weddings, Chri∣stenings and Burials in euery of them to be kept. (101) The yeerely reuenewes of these, as they were valewed by the Commissioners, at their sub∣uersions The great reue∣newes of the Mo∣nasteries. amounted to an vnestimable summe, as ap∣peareth by the Original Booke itselfe presented to the King, whereof more shall be spoken in the end of this chapter, and yet most of them rated at Robin∣hoods penny-worthes, what their rents were, a libell Supplication of Beggars. scattered abroad, and read to the king, by demonstra∣tion did proue, wherein was accounted, that vnto the fiue Orders of Friers, (euery housholder paying them fiue pence the Quarter) the summe of fourty three thousand, three hundred, thirty three pound, The great reue∣newes of the Friers. sixe shillings and eight pence sterling, was paid them by yeere, besides the reuenewes of their owne lands, which was not a little, so that not without cause ma∣ny entred into a Monasticall life, rather to liue at ful, and without cares of this world, then to feede the flocke of Christ, or to winne them, and not theirs, after the example of the Apostle. For the Testa∣ment 2. Cor. 12. 14. of Christ, was vnto most of these, as a booke sealed with seauen seales, and their mouthes vnmuz∣led they did deuoure, but not tread out the Corne, D ut. 25. 4. so that the Sunne by their doctrine seemed to be darkened, as with smoke, and themselues to be the Apoca. 9. Locustes that ouerspread the superficies of the Earth, whose faces were like men, pretending huma∣nity, their haire like women in shew of modesty, their Crownes of counterfeited gould, signifying their v∣surped authoritie, their teeth like Lyons shewing their Tyrannie, their force like horses prepared for battell, their habergions of Iron betokening their strength, the sound of their wings, the thundering out their mandates like to the rumbling of Chariots in warre, their Tailes ( Prophets) hauing stings like vnto Scorpions, a heir King the bad A∣baddon, euen the Angell of the Bottomelesse pit. All those allusions most aptly sitting these Cloistered Friers, who now grown to the height of their sinnes, their skirts were discouered, that their shame might Iere. 13 26. appeare; being the only men then laid open to the world. (102) Against whose doctrine, (besides many o∣thers in other forreine parts) two in the daies of K. Henry the fourth, the first English King that put anie Many suffered death for the Gospell before that Martin Lu∣ther wrote. to death for the doctrine of Rome; (omitting Sir Iohn Oldcastle and others, that died for the Gospels defence, in the daies of King Henry the fift) foure in the raigne of innocent Henrie the sixt. One in the daies of King Edward the fourth; and tenne in the time of King Henry the seauenth, sealed the doctrine a∣gainst the papall religion with their bloud; all of them being martyred before that Martin Luther wrote. And in the raigne of this King twenty sixe suffered the fire, before the flames thereof could be quenched, which a while was done by the meanes of good Queene Anne, till afterwards they moun∣ted Queene Anne Bullen a fauourer of the Gospell, staied the rage a∣gainst the Pro∣fessours. higher, when the sixe Articles were made: but because this Ecclesiasticke text is handled elsewhere, and seemeth vnsociable to our begunne Subiect, we will referre the Reader for these matters vnto the in∣dustrious paines of that worthy and euer venera∣ble man M. Fox, taken in his Acts & Monuments of Ecclesiasticall history. (103) The Monasteries thus dissolued, and the Reuenewes thereof conuerted to temporall vses, King doings displea∣sed many Chri∣ Princes. King Henry ranne in great obloquie of many for∣raine Potentates, but most especially of the Pope; who with Cardinall Poole instigated diuers Princes in Christendom to inuade England thus fallen from his faith: Yea, & home-borne Subiects disliking the course for Papisticall subuersion, by secret working sought to depriue King Henry, and to raise vp Rey∣nold Poole vnto the Regall dignity, as by their in∣ditements appeareth. The persons conuicted, were Lord Henry Courtney Marquesse of Excester, & Earle of Deuonshire, the sonne of Lady Katherine, the se∣uenth daughter of King Edward the fourth. Henrie Poole Lord Montacute, with Sir Geffrey his brother, and Sir Edward Neuill brother to the Lord of Aber∣gauenny. These Pooles were the sonnes of Lady Mar∣garet Countesse of Salisbury, the onely daughter of George Duke of Clarence: and of these Poole once Deane of Excester, and now Cardinal at was accounted the onely man. (104) And this foresaid Lord Marquesse had formerly beene in such fauour with King Henry, that at his going into France he ordained him his Heire apparant, though at his returne vpon graue delibera∣tion, hee saw it better policy to plucke him down Camb. Brit. then was vsed in setting him vp, lest in acting his part vpon that infectiue stage, hee put the land to as much trouble as the arreared Duke Richard of Yorke had done, after hee was ordained heire ap∣parant, which Title produced the Tragedy of his raiser King Henry the sixt, and now hauing him and his Abetters vpon the aduantage, the better to se∣cure Lord Marquesse and others be∣headed. A. D. 1539. Ian. 9. his owne Estate, hee caused the heades of this Lord Marquesse with the Lord Montacute, and Sir Edward Neuill to bee cut off vpon Tower-hill. (105) The King then a Widdower, since the death of Queene Iane, who departed this life two yeeres before, meant to wh hee had done, maugre all better o ef∣fect, by the Counsell▪ ▪ sought and obtained the the Princes of , and heard the motion for marriage with the La∣dy Anne sister to William Duke of , whose other Ioh. . sister Fredericke Duke of had espoused, a great fauourer of the Gospell, and of Martin Luther the zealous Preacher thereof. But whether for the death of , or that hee would haue his wiues sister bestowed neerer at home (which thing hee pretended) a great hind ∣er hee was of that match. But the Lady sent into England, and married vnto King , no∣thing King Henry mar∣ried Anne of . . 6. An. 1540. pleasing in his eye; which then Bishoppe of Winchester perc ing▪ thought it a fitte subiect for him to worke vpo , Lord Cromwell the maker of the m ch▪ hee there∣fore instigated iealousies dayly into the Kings , ▪ Mart. 1296. first exasperating the hatred of the Princes of ∣ny to him-wards, and especially of Duke Fredericke his compulsiue brother in Law, the Emperor, French Kings, Scots and the Pope, all seeking at once to raise their powers against England. The ciuill tu∣mults lately passed, and new commotions greatly to be feared, hee letted not to remember, and all to nip the spring of the new spreading Gospell, whereby The sixe Articles deuised▪ this wise Politician in the end got six such Articles against it, as the Consistory of Hell could deuise no worse. Whose cruelties were such that not long after, and in the dayes of this King, some of those Acts were againe repealed, and some of them qua∣lified, 32. H. 8. chap. 10▪ 35. H. 8. cap. 5. as too sharpe and searching into the bloud of the Kings best Subiects. (106) The fruite of these bloud-thirsty instiga∣tors, the Lord Cromwell, and Lady Anne of Cleue soon Lord Cromwell imprisoned. tasted of, he by imprisonment and death, and she by disgrace and diuorce; hauing been his wife from la∣nuary to Iune, in all which time the King refrained the mutuall knowledge of her body, for the dislike hee had of her person, euen at the first sight, as him∣selfe called to witnesse the Lord Cromwell then Pri∣soner In a letter writ ten by himself . Ex MS. An 32. . . cap. 5. in the Tower, for whose report hee wrote a Letter with his owne hand; and shee good Lady no other cause alleadged, was diuorced by Parlia∣ment, when also it was enacted that shee should no Queene diuorced by Parliament. longer bee styled Queene. The Lord Cromwell was charged by the Lord Rich, and Sir George Throgmort with speaking of certaine generall words, not excepting therein the Kinges person, which neuertheresse were thought so sleight and in∣sufficient to take away his life, that his enemies fea∣red to put it to the triall of his Peeres, lest he should bee acquitted by them, as the Lord Dacres of the North not many yeeres before had beene; wherfore Cromwell affect his death ∣ted by ∣ment. Ex MS. there was a Bill drawne to attaint him of here and Treason, in generall words, rather then in particu∣lar proofes, which when hee was dead, passed in both houses of Parliament with the Kinges as∣sent: (107) Howbeit S ders that seldome speake well of the Gospels professors, will haue him to die D. ▪ for the breach of a Law made by himselfe, which was, that one appeached of treason, should not come in the Kings presence, till he had tried himself not guilty; but besides that wee find no such Act by him made: his inditement doth not charge him with treason, but with setting at liberty certain persons committed for misprision of treason and here ▪ for fauouring and maintaining the transation of No such things as poseth Cromwell. hereticall bookes into English; for bearing out Barnes and other hereticall Preachers▪ that himselfe was an heretike, and had spoken words▪ great word for the vpholding of his said religion, which were, that the King should not change it if hee would▪ for these things he was by Parliament of high Treason, and that grounded either vpon a St ute made in the fi e and twenty of Edward th N by well to cause . third, or else by the explanation of that Act which referreth the exposition of Treasons to the , and so no way did deuise or make a∣ny law of treason, which himselfe ▪ that partiall Romanist hath said. (108) But most sure it is▪ that the King ∣on, altogether guided by the obiect▪ ∣other point in the Compasse to fire his eye, besides that onely, which by his touched by the of , and th to bee the Lady , ∣ward the Lady ▪ the brother of Thomas Duk of ▪ whom Cromwell standing in the defence of Anne, and vsing words of dis ke the Lady , distastfull vnto the King▪ was thereupon ap∣prehended (his enemy so ) and vpon the A. D. 1540. twenty eight of Iuly suffered with the of the Axe vpon , be∣headed the of , neither nor quietly dying for his of∣fence . committed ▪ (109) The sword thus vnsheathed vpon the necks of the Nobility; strucke off the head of Margaret A. D. 1541. May 17. Countesse of Salisbury, daughter and he re vnto George Duke of Clarence, and mother vnto Reynold Poole Cardinall, being neither arraigned nor tried, but condemned by Parliament as Cromwell had bin. Margaret Coun tesse of Salisbury beheaded. And the Lord Leonard Gray in this present yeere lost his head for treason, the twenty eight of Iune. And the next day following Thomas Fines Lord Dacres of the South, died at Tyborne for killing a priuate man in a fray. Neither was it put vp, vntill that Lord Dacres han∣ged. the heades of Queen Katherine Howard, and the La∣dy Iane Rochford were stricken off, the one for A∣dultery, the other for concealement, as was allead∣ged, the parties offending were Fra it Dereham, and Thomas Culpepper, Dereham before shee was Queene, and Culpepper after, who both were execu∣ted at Tiburne, the tenth of December, and the Stat. in 33. of H. . cap. 21. twelfth of February following, Mistresse Katherine Howard (for so in the Act of her Attainture is called) who had beene stiled and receiued Queene for the space of sixe moneths, and fou dayes, with Since the eight of August . the Lady Iane then widow, and late wife vnto Bullen, Lord Rochford, were both of them brought vnto a Scaffold raised vppon the hill within the Queene Kathe∣rine and the La∣dy Iane Roch∣ford beheaded. Tower, where they in lamentable passions suffered death. (110) Howsoeuer those times afforded such Queenes to the Kings bed, or himselfe vnfortunate in making his choise: yet many of no meane iudge∣ment haue rather accused King▪ Henry for his changing and variable affections, then thinke them guilty in the breach of Matrimony. Of Anne wee haue seene what hath beene said, and of this Queene let vs heare what shee protested after her condem∣nation to White Bishoppe of her last Confessor, and by him deliuered to a noble young Lord of her name, and neere alliance: Her words were these: As to the Act my Lord for which I stand condemned, God and his holy Angels I take to witnesse vpon my soules , that I die , neuer hauing so abused my Soueraignes : what o∣ther sinnes and follies of youth I haue , I will not excuse; but assured that for these, God hath brought this punishment vpon me, and will his them, for which I pray you, pray with me, vnto his sonne and my S iour Christ. (111) As these then in case of Treasons eyther acted or intended, ended their liues; so others in case of conscience (though diuersly affected) c e to The of ∣cted. their deathes, and that by fo ce of the Statutes ena∣cted vnder this King; whereof one was the aboli∣shing of the Pope, and the oath of Supremacy, the S t. H. 8. 28. c. 10. re sers of either made offenders in stare of high Treason, and the other in of religion, when Articl enacted by Parliament, was made Heresie and death, to such as held or taught the con∣ , which Ar cles were thus concluded in both . H. 8. 3 . c. 4. the houses of Parliament with consent of the King. 1▪ That after the words of consecration spoken by the Priest, the reall and naturall body and bloud The fixe bloody Articles ena∣cted. of Christ, as hee was conceiued and crucified, was in the Sacrament, and no other substance consisting, in the forme of and wi e, besides the substance of Christ God and man. 2 That the communion in both kinde was not necessarie vnto , the flesh onely in forme of bread, sufficient for the Laity. 3 That Prie they haue recei ed ders might not marry by the law of God. 4 That the vowes of chastity either in or wo∣man, ought by God law to be , and by which they are exempted from other of Christian people. 5 That priu Masses was necess ry for the peo∣ple, and agreeable to the law of Go . 6 That auricular confession was pedient be reteined, and continued the Church of God. These Statutes I say aswell the one as the other, brought many to their ends, which otherwise were very good Subiects, and worthy instruments in the common weale: for offending in the first, there di∣ed Bishoppe Pisher, and Sir Thomas More, besides many Abbots, Priors, and Friers, and among Iohn Fisher. Sir Thomas Moore beheaded. them, in Smithfield the Welsh rode set Frier Forrest on fire, according to the prophecy very rife in their mouthes, that this holy rode should set a whole for∣rest on fire. For the other suffered in flames, many godly Christians, whereof Robert Barnes a reuerend Doctor, and worthy minister of Christ, the first re∣ducer (as M. Fox reporteth) of the Vniuersity of Cambridge from rudenesse and barbarity, vnto good Fox. Mart. pap. 1363. literature and learning, was with the first: And Anne Askew a Gentlewoman of an incomparable dexteri∣ty one of the last, who, aboue the weakenesse of her sexe most valiantly stoode against the violence of the time. (112) Her birth was worshipfull, and educati∣on accordingly, bestowed in marriage, vnto Iohn Anne Askew her story. Io. Bale Cent. 8. ol. 669. Ky e a Gentleman in , and commended by Bale for her rare wit, and elegant beauty; which her pars the pensill of N. D. with his vne∣uen hand (euer ouerhard to shadow the truth,) hath slanderously blurred and measured those graces in her, by his owne loose affections, and those want on , which in the height of sinne haue changed Rom. 1. 16. the naturall vse of women against nature. This young heifer (saith hee) abiding no yoake, a coy dame, and of very euill fame, left the company of Master Three conuersi∣ons by N. D. pag. 495. Ky e, to vp a Gospelling and G ssip∣ping where might, and ought not, but especially in London, and the Court, now shee being faire and but twenty yeers old at her death▪ doth shew what Anne accused by no rule of Chri∣stianity. may be suspected of her life, and the mysticall speeches and demands of the Kings Co sell touching her departure from her , were grounded vpon somewhat, espe∣cially in that shee called her selfe Askew alias Ky e. Thus this man hath accused this holy Anne by the outward appearance of her youth and beauty: as holy Anne by Eli was accused of and compared. drunkennesse when her heart was most seruent, in supplications to her God, and his partiall pe made the to the of her holy con∣uersation to finde out some chaffe, whereof none is free, nor is ee to be condemned vpon the ima∣gerie of his suspicious head (who vndoubtedly would haue old all if any thing could haue beene found) whereas shee in the vigour of beauty and weakenesse of her Sexe, the gaine-saiers of the truth with her dearest blood: testifying from the Prisons her faith and constancy, and from the The Counter▪ Newgate and the Tower. Racke preached Christ, whereon most vnhumane∣ly and against kind, shee was twice tormented; and lastly sealed her in Smithfield through the of fire: being borne to the place of her death ∣ned in Smithfield. in a Chaire, her bones so by the R cke that shee could . (113) The N. D. whose affection to Chri Gospe to the English Crowne as suppose. Three ∣ons. pag. 493. hath sufficiently ▪ to make her no , and that her did demerit the Racke, saith that the King himselfe commanded that tor∣ture to be ▪ with her erroneous doctrine, his Court, his ▪ daughters, ▪ & . and . the truth tels vs that the to racke her the second was by Lord Chancellor (who did it himselfe) to bee complained of to the King, who immediately tooke Boate and told the whole Tragedy; whereof King seemed to be sore offended, for vsing a woman with such . had the Popes vnder the of the Church and wing of this , they not to follow the appeale of , euen that slept in owne , which Parre, espoused Queene ∣rines life laid . vnto him three yeeres before, and (as this States intelligēcer doth confesse) he meant to haue Ibid. co . p 494. burned had he longer liued. For the truth is (saith hee) that the Kings sickenesse and death shortly ensuing was the chiefe cause of her escape; and the error of the Lord Chancellor Wriothesley, who let fall out of his boso e, the three con ersions. Kings hand and commission for carrying her to the Tower gaue occasion (the paper found and brought her) to goe and humble her selfe to the King; the principal occasion against The Lord Chan∣cellor lost his commission. her, was Heretical Books, found in her closet, both brought & sent her by Anne Askew, wherof thewitnesses were the Lady Herbert, Lady Iane, Lady Tyawit, and others. In∣deed it is true that by Gods prouidence such papers were let fal out of the Lord Chancellors bosome con∣teining certaine Articles against her, with a warrant to commit her to the Tower, whereunto the Kings hand was subscribed: which being found was pre∣sently brought vnto the Queene, whereof the vn∣expected The Queene seeth the sen∣tence of her death. content so deepely touched her tender heart, that foorth with shee fell into great feares, la∣ments, and a most heauy melancholy, and was in such danger of death, that the King came to visit her, hauing not gone foorth of his Chamber of ma∣ny dayes before; whereat shee so reioiced, as shee began to : and to acknowledge her like loue and duty, the next night following, repaired to the Kings Bed-chamber, accompanied onely with the Queene Kathe∣rine visiteth the King▪ who falleth in conference with her about . Lady Herbert her sister, and the Lady the Kings neece, carrying the Candle before her, of whose pre∣sence the King seemed to be most desirous▪ and pre∣sently falling in talke of Religion, began to debate some question thereof with the Queene, demanding to haue her resolutions therein, but shee knowing that his nature was not to be crost, and the sorenesse of his legge to encrease his chol er, made him an∣swere that she was a woman, accompanied with many im∣perfectio s, but his Maiesty wise and , of wh m Act. and Mon. Queene Kathe∣rines wise answer. shee must learne as of her Lordand Head, for so God hath appointed you (said shee) the Supreame Head of vs all, of whom next vnto him I will euer learnt. Not so, by Saint Mary, said the King, you are become a Doctor Kate to instruct vs, and not to be instructed by vs as often heeretofore we haue seeme. Indeede (said ) if your Maiestie haue so conceiued, I haue beene mistaken in my meaning, who haue euer held it preposterous for a woman to instruct ▪ Lord. And whereas I haue heeretofore held talke with your highnesse touching Religion, it was to le ne of your Maiesty some excellent which my selfe stood in doubt of: and sometimes to the end that you might with lesse griefe passeouer this paineful time of your infirmity, wherein if by my ouermuch boldnesse I haue fai∣led in the latter, yet haue I not in the former, to my no small benefit and comfort. And is it euen so sweet heart? (quoth the King) why then, are me friends, and so kissing her, gaue her leaue to depart. But the The Lord Chan∣cellors purpose to apprehand the Queene. day drawne on for her apprehension, and the King disposed to take the yre, sent for the Queene to walke in the , himselfe accompanied onely with two Gentlemen, and shee with the three fore∣said Ladies. Whenas suddenly the Lord Chancel∣lor with forty of the Guard, came into the Garden, with purpose to h e apperhended and carried the Queene to the Tower; whose malep rt approach the King greatly misliked, and ernely beholding him, slept aside, him with the names of , foole, and , bidding out of pre∣sence. The Queene seeing the King chased, but knew not the cause, indeauo ed by all meanes to his Maiestie, and i treted for the Lord Chancellour, whose faultas shee thoughtand allea∣ged, was rather through misimprision then will, and therfore, said she, I wil become an humble him vnto your Highnesse. Ah (quoth the King) little Kate euill he this at thy hands: of my word (sweet heart) a . But in following this tr ct of blood, owed from the fountaine of A ticles, wee haue stepped ouer some other occurrences that happened somewhat before this time, vnto which with thy patience, goodReader, we will returne againe. (114) King Henrie by order of Parliament ha∣uing Henry assumeth the name of King of Ireland. A. 154▪ confirmed by Parl. 35. Hen▪ . Iohn assumed the Stile and Title of King of Ireland, with the submission of most of the Irish Nobi ty, Iames his Nephew, King of Scotland, tooke it not well, forthat, as Li ley saith, a great part of Ireland, especially in the North, had been in possession of the Scotishmen for many hundred of yeeres before. These discontents conceiued, King Henrie well per∣ceiued; and because hee would haue no ill will so neere him, that had so many enuiers abroad, he sent vnto King Iames that it would please him to repaire The Kings of England and Scotland appoint to meet at Yorke▪ vnto the City of Yorke, where he would meet him, to conferre for the wealth of both the Realmes, which at first was granted, but vpon better aduise, vnac∣complished, his Counsellors moouing the dangers; and his Clergy the feares, lest their Religion should be changed to the offence of his confederates the Pope, the Emperour, and the French King. (115) The vnkindnes growing from this small sparke, was presently kindled into great flames, for A. D. 1542. Commissioners being sent from both Kings, to view the limits of either Kingdome, they fell at ods about a small peece of ground, and from that tooke occasi∣on of emulations and warres: to prosecute which King Henry prepared an Armie, and sent them into Scotland vnder the Conduct of the Duke of Nor∣folke, accompanied with the Earles of Shrewsbury, An expedition into Scotland. Darby, C mberland, Surrey, Hertford, Augus and ∣land. These passing the English Marches, did much hurt in the Kingdome of Scotland. To withstand whom King Ia es gathered a power, of fiue and thirty strong, and at Fa aw more meant to haue bid∣den the Duke battell, which as that writer relaxed, was not then minded to doe, but made againe into England, and passing the water Twe d, sustained great losse by the couragious pursuit of the Lord Huntly. King Iames vpon a lusty courage meaning to repaire the Scot losses with the English spoiles, was very forward to follow the Duke into their Borders, but the Scotish Nobility wisely waying the danger of warre, by no meanes would either assent, or assist The Scotish no∣blemen refuse to inuade England▪ him out of his owne kingdome, affirming it honour sufficient, to haue forced the English backe with no little losse. (116) King I es discontented at his Nobles da∣nials, made towards the Burders himselfe; where, mouing the Lord Maxewell, Lord Warden of the West The Lord of the We -Borders y eld to the Kings per∣swasions. Borders, with many other men of speciall fauour and account, to inuade England, whereunto they gaue their consents. These passing the Riuer Eske, did some small dammage vpon the Westerne Borderers, whereof Thomas Dacres, and Willi saith Stow. of Hollinshed cals them, sent word to Thomas Wharton, Lord Warde for the King vpon the West Marches: But the Scot comming forward▪ they were forced to prepare for ight before the Lord could come, and out of their company lest a stand vpon the side of a hill. (117) The Scots aduanced forward with no lit∣tle The mistaking of th . hope, were pres ly the ght of these men, and verily thought the Lord had assembled Charge▪ or the Duke of with a great Army were come to their , whereupon they began to consu what to be done, and demanding who was deputed by the King, Oliuer of the Kings Generall. nor honorable , being lifted vp vpon the Shoulders of two Souldiers, the Commission, wherein himselfe was appointed their Generall, and it ▪ the Lords that so ma∣ny The Scotish No∣ in of their generall . more worthy, honourable, and approued Cap∣ of the ▪ should be by this his ▪ but o of . In whose , and for the of their . o , willingly lost the . (118) This vpon the twenty fourth of Nouember, at a place beyond Carliel, called Solem-mosse, where were taken Prisoners the Earles of Solem-mosse. Cassils and Glencarne, the Lords Maxwell, Flemming, Summerwell, Oliphant, and Grey, Sir Oliuer Sinclere, and Gra n saith foure and twen∣tie. others, to the number of one and twenty men of ac∣count, who were conueighed to London, and com∣mitted to the Tower. For griefe of which losse, and suspition of his Nobility, King Iames fell into a me∣lancholy Passion, which the birth of his new borne Princesse rather increased, then gaue him any cōfort, so as hee deceased the foureteenth day of December following, foreshewing (saith Leslie) great troubles to The death of K. of Scotland. follow in Scotland. (119) Newes brought neere at one instant, of the death of King Iames, & birth of the Princesse his daughter, King Henry intended to doe that by the match of a marriage, which long had beene assayed A marriage in∣tended betwixt Prince Edward, and the young Queene of Scot∣land. by the sword of Mars: all things so consorting as it did, he hauing one onely sonne, then aboue fiue yeres of age, and Scotland no heire beside this new borne daughter; their yeeres suiting a consent for marriage, the whole Iland offering both the ioynter and dow∣ry, and that which most moued, their chiefe Nobili∣ty in his owne hands, to be moulded for this designe, as if heauen it selfe had bid the banes. (120) Those Prisoners therefore which had re∣mained in the Tower only two daies, vpon the twen∣ty The Scotish pri∣soners honoura∣bly entertained. one of December, he sent for to Westminster, the Earles and Lords all suited in Gownes of blacke da∣maske, furred with Cunny, whereafter some words of friendly reproofe, they were bestowed among the English Nobility, who vsed them according to their estates: and the third day in Christmas were inuited to the Court at Greenewich, where they went before the King to Chappell, were royally feasted, and the motion then made for the establishing of peace, by the Coniunction of the two Princes, whereunto the Scotish were as willing as the English, & proffered The Scotish Pri∣soners released without Ran. some. all forward assistance to haue it accomplished. So that these Nobles were deliuered without other ran∣some, and richly rewarded at their departure from Court. (121) These returned into Scotland, declared what they had done, and so effectually followed the Io . busines, that in a Parliament assembled of the three Estates, the marriage was confirmed, and a peace proclaimed to continue betwixt the two Realmes The marriage of Prince Ed∣ward and Queen Mary, concluded by Parliament. the space of tenne yeeres, which agreements were sent into England by honourable Ambassadors, and there interchangeably sealed betwixt these Potent Estates. But Cardinall Bet Archbishop of Saint Andrewes, fearing least Scotland would change the Church Orders, England had done (the Bible alrea∣dy read in their owne language, and the Popes vsur∣ped Cardinill against the ∣ringe with Eng∣land. power called in Question, as then it began to be▪ by the feruent preaching of Friet Guiliam, to the great liking of most of the Lord▪) made some excep∣tions against the Earle Arraine the new chosen Go∣uernour, and second person in the Land, being nee∣rest in blood to the young Queene. And the French King not liking this vnion with England, sought by The French King set faction▪ in Scotland. all meanes to the same match: to effect which, he sent the Ea le of Lennox to perswade with the Gouernour, with great proffers and promises of as∣sistance, but finding him faithfull vnto King Henry▪ presently made faction for the French, wherein hee drew the Queene mother, the Earles Huntly, Argile, M trosse, Menteith, and many more Peeres, the Car∣dinall amongst them euer the chiefe. (122) Earle Lennox thus growne into credite with the Queene mother, made strong by her adherents that fauoured the French, presently clai∣med to be Gouernour of Scotland, being the second person of degree in the Realme, and withall to haue The Queene, and Queene mother conuey∣to ed . the custody of the young Queene, who with he mo∣ther were forth with taken from vnder the charge of the Gouernour Arrai e, and brought vn∣to Striueling strongly guarded, with the continuall presence of the Lords, , Ersk , Fle ing, and Ruthwen, least Queene Mary should be conuey∣ed into England vnto King Henry. These violent courses, caused great Emulations among the Scotish Nobility, each of them siding as their affections were setled, but lastly agree to set the Crowne on their young Queenes head: prepared for the solem∣nity, whereunto all the Lords came, excepting those that stood for England, and from them the Gouer∣nour Queene Marie of Scotland crow∣ned. with much adoe was drawne to be present at the Coronation: but that accomplished, and the state affaires consulted vpon, it was agreed that the French Kings suite should be fauoured, and that the Earle Arran should be Gouernour still, whereat Earle Len∣nox conceiued such displeasure, as he became wholy The Earle of Lennox falleth from the Queene mother. for King Henrie, & ioined himselfe with the Earles of Augus, Gle carne, and Cassils, the Lords, Maxwel, Sum∣meruell Gray, and others that stood with the Eng∣lish for the match with Prince Edward. (123) King Henry then hearing what was done, and intended▪ sent presently into Scotland to demand King Henry d mandeth the young Scotish Queene. the Custody of the young Queene, and that certaine Scotish Noblemen might be appointed to guarde her in England, vntill shee came to yeeres of consent, according to Couenants formerly concluded; which no waies would be granted, and thereupon he pre∣pared an Army thetherward, vnder the Conduct of Lord Edward Sei er Earle of Hertford Lieutenant Generall by Land, accompanied with the Earle of An Army into Scotland. , and a Fleete of two hundred saile by Sea, whereof Sir Iohn Dudley, Vicount Lisle was Ad∣mirall. (124) To the aide of the Scots the Peopes holi∣nesse was very forward, who sent them the Patriarch Io n Leslie. of Venice as his Legate, & Orator, to perswade their Resolutions, with whom the French King sent Mon∣fieur Iohn Leslie. The Pope and French King send aide into Scot∣land. la Broche, and Monfieur Menager, to lead them to fight▪ and fifty thousand Crownes of the Sun, to su∣ taine the Charge; with munition worth ten thou∣sand Crownes more. It seemeth by Lesly that part of this siluer fell into the Earle Lenn his hand, and that therewith he made head against the Gouernor, but not able to match him, sent vnto King Henry for aide, with proffer of his seruice against the French side, which so well was accepted of Henry, as he made him his Nephew, by giuing the Lady Margaret his si∣sters Math. Earle of Lennox marrieth Lady Margaret. daughter to be his wife. (125) Th English thus seconded with this vn∣looked for Allyance, Cardinall Beton thought good Earle Lennox proclaimed an enemie to the state. to binde all to the Gouernour, who with the Autho∣rity of the Queene Dowager proclaimed Lennox an Enemy to the State. But in the meane while the Admirall of England was entred the Frith, and at new Hauen landed his men, where ioining his, to the land Seruice, they altogether marched thence towards L th, himselfe leading the Vaward, Shrewsbury the Rereward▪ and the Lord Lieutenant the maine Bat∣tell. The English en∣ Scotland. These comming to Lieth, spoiled the Town, and thence to Edenbrough, burnt the City, and wa∣sted the Country for seauen miles about, this done they set fire vpon Haddington, and , and then the whole Army returned vnto Barwicke. (126) Whilst things thus passed in Scotland, and the maine purpose resting in suspence, King Hen∣ry A. D. 1544. well knew where the greatest rub did lie in his way, which was the French King, the chiefest▪ A bet∣ter of the Scots, whom he euer vpheld, to hold him tacke at home, least otherwise he should with France for his owne right. And therefore hauing ioined with the Emperour against the French, sent his Herald, Garter, King at Armes, to demand cer∣taine couenants, which if he refused, proclaime de∣fiance Defiance sent into France. vnto open warres, but he not suffered to doe his message to the King, retur ed, and prepa∣red an expedition into France, wherein he imploied the Dukes of and , the Earle of A∣ , Oxf rd and Sur ey, the Lords, R ssell, Grey, ∣rers, , and Sain -Iohn, besides many other Io . Stow. seruiceable Knights, and Sir appointed high Admirall for the Se . Of these some with the Emperials, and shewed their value in the siege of Mattrell. (127) The Duke of Suffolke in the meane while strucke downe his Standerds on the East side of Bol∣loigne, and with many sharpe skirmishes, entred the Bolloigne besie∣ged. base Towne, which siege King Henry himselfe in person seconded, who hauing passed the Seas from England, vpon the sixe & twentith of Iuly, encamped before Bolloigne on the East-side, whence his Canons so rent the Wals and Bulwarke, as their mounted tops lay vpon the Ground, and his great morter pee∣ces were discharged with so skilfull a Compasse, that their bullets falling downe right, beate all buil∣dings downe vpon the Enemies heads. Whereby (saith Sleidane) in short time he got that, which neither Io . Sleid . . his Father, nor the Kings in former times could neuer winne. For thereupon the Town was surrendred and cleared of the French souldiers, women and children. (128) The King like a Conquerour with his sword borne before him entred the Gate, where the Bolloigne wonne. Duke of Suffolke presented him with the keyes of the Towne, the Trumpets still sounding, and no∣thing wanting that might applaud his fame. The Towne thus wonne, the English meant still to keep; for the strengthening whereof, the King comman∣ded the faire Church of Saint Maries to be taken downe, and in the same place, a mount to be raised for the planting of Ordinance, to annoy any siege. But being thus busied in Bolloignes affaires, the Em∣perour without his knowledge or consent, came to a peace with the French King, whereat King Henrie was sore displeased, and the sooner left France, lea∣uing R. Gra con. Sir Iohn Dudley Lord Lisle, his deputy in Bol∣loigne, and landed at Douer the first day of October, to his great honor and ioy of his Subiects. (129) The French King chafed with this late and great losse, sought to trie fortune in further at∣tempts, Iohn Serres. and that not onely for the recouery of Bol∣loigne (which with twenty thousand well appointed hee assaied) but also in assayling the English domi∣nions, as the Ile of Wight and those parts of Sussex The French in∣uade the Ile of Wight and the coasts of Sussex. that lay vpon the Seas, though with losse of many Captaines and thousands of Souldiers, that neuer re∣turned to tell him what intertainement they had; as likewise in sending aide vnto Scotland, where Mon∣sieur Mungumry of the Order of France, with 5000 strong, entred to maintaine the breach betwixt them A Roade made into Scotland. and K. Henry, which was so followed on both parts, as the English making a Roade towards Gedworth, got praise for their valour, but reproch for their spoiles, and the Scots renowne for killing the Lord Eure, Lord Warden of the East-Marches, with many other Captaines in defence of their Countrey. Lord slaine. (130) Hereupon an Army of twelue thousand strong was sent into Scotland, whereof the Earle of Hertford was Generall: with these he forraged the Borders before him, and burnt many Townes in the Middle-Marches, with Kelsey & Coldingham Abbey, the French not hastie to stay the incursion, lay still, and let them (vnfought with) depart for England. (131) But the warres remoued againe into France, the Reingr e with a great power came to vi∣ctuall A. D. 1546. a Fort built neere vnto Bolloigne; to impeach which, the Earle of Surrey, then Lie tenant of the Towne made forth, but was discomfited in the en∣terprize, and Sir Edward Poy ings Captaine of a Band A great losse of English in France. slaine, with fifteene other Captaines, besides many Officers and Common Souldiers. These Princes wars in these violent proceedings, became very fear∣full least they would grow to the Common hurt of Christendome, and therefore many other poten∣tates, whereof the Emperour was first, sollicited these Kings vnto a peace, which the sooner was heard and Serres. imbraced, for that they were both of them old, and King Henry diseased in body, Commissioners there∣fore appointed certaine articles were agreed vpon: the first thereof was, that the French King should pay vnto King Henry, eight hundred thousand . . lib. 7. Crownes in eight yeeres space, and then to r nter vpon Boll igne, but in the meane time it to remaine vnder the English; to accomplish which peace Moun∣sieur Peace concluded betwixt England and France. Danebalt high Admiral of France, was sent into England; and Sir Thomas Cheynie Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, to be the Kings Agent at the Font, for the Baptisme of the Dolphins new borne daughter. (132) Notwithstanding these Complements, the sight of Bolloigne was a great sore in the French mens eies▪ insomuch that Monsieur Chatillon Captain Holinshed. of Mountplaisier, beganne to make a new Bastilion Chasti raiseth a fort neere nto Bolloigne. neere vnto the Towne, euen in the very mouth of the Riuer, which the Lord Grey of Wilton perceiuing certified the King, what inconuenience would hap∣pen if that were made strong, and the same discus∣sed at the Counsell-Table, it passed with one voice that the Peace with France was not to be infringed, notwithstanding this French attempt: to which end a prohibition drawne, whereunto King Henry also set his hand, that no let should be made against Chatillon in his Fort. Howbeit the King commanded Sir Thomas Palmer (imploied in this busines) to bid the King Henries comand against his own writing. Lord Grey to impeach the new worke, and to flat so much as was raised thereof vnto the Earth. This commission read with the report of Command to the Contrary, the Counsell of State, thought it most meete to follow their instructions in writing, least the words might either be mis-deliuered or mis∣taken. But the Lord Grey causing the messengers words to be writ, and subscribed with all their hands that were present at the report, suddainely and vn∣looked for, came to the Fort, and in foure houres space cast downe, what had beene in raising three The Lord Grey fla teth Chatill ort. moneths before, which when the King heard off, he asked his Counsellors what they thought of this, that Chatill -garden was cast downe▪ amongst whom one of them answered, the d er thereof was worthy to loose his head, I had rather (said the King) loose a dozen of such heades as thine is, then his that had done the deed, and immediately sent the Lord Grey his pardon with many great thankes. A. D. 1547. (133) But now the d te of his time almost run▪ and he preparing towards the way of all flesh, the King . great and faire Church of the Gray Friers London, lately suppressed by himselfe, he caused againe to be opened, and to be made a Parish Church, giuing the reuenewes thereof vnto the Citie of London to∣wards the reliefe of their poore, whereunto he gaue fiue hundred Markes yeerely of Lands for euer to maintaine Gods diuine seruice and the said Chur∣ches Iohn in Suruey Lon∣don. reparations, within whose walles we finde this often written, This is Christs Church founded by King Henrie the eight. (134) And his sicknes in asing to the great dan∣ger of life hee prepared himselfe to make his Wil, wherein howsoeuer titles had been vnhabled in Par∣liaments, the ▪ of December and▪ . of his raigne. he ordained his three children to succeede each after others; for want of other Issue; One thousand markes he commanded to be giuen to the poore, and to twelue poore Knights at Winsere each of them twelue pence a day for euer, euery yeere a long Gowne of white cloth, the G ter imbroidered vpon the breast, wherein was placed the Crosse of Saint George, and a Mantle of red cloth to bee worne thereupon, ord ning for his Executors in the mi∣nority of Prince Edward, these heere vnder named. 1 Thomas Cr er, Archbishop of Ganterbury. 2 Thomas ▪ Lord Chancellor▪ 3 William Knight of the Order. 4 Lord Saint-Iohn Great Master of the Houshold 5 Iohn Russell Lord Seale. 6 Edward of Hertford Lord great Chamber ine. 7 Iohn Lord high Admiral 8 Cutbert . of . 9 Knight M r . of the Horse▪ 10 Page Knight of the Order. 11 Chiefe iustice of the Common-ple . 12 Thomas Bromley Lord Chiefe Iustice. 13 Anthony Deny Knight. 14 Edward North Knight. 15 Edward Wotton Knight. 16 Doctor Wotton Deane of Canterbury. And for their aide and assistance in Counsell he appointed these following. 1 Henry Fitz-Alan Earle of Arundel. 2 William Parre Earle of Essex. 3 Thomas Cheney Knight, Treasurer of the Hou∣shold. 4 Iohn Gage Knight, Cōtroler of the Houshold. 5 Anthony Winkefield Knight, Vice-Chamber∣laine. 6 William Peter Knight, principall Secretary. 7 Richard Rich Knight. 8 Iohn Baker Knight. 9 Ralph Sadler Knight. 10 Thomas Seimer Knight. 11 Richard Southwell Knight. 12 Edmund Pecham Knight. And in great penitency for his sinnes, died vpon Thursday the twenty eight day of Ianuary, in the King Henries death. yeere of Christ Iesus 1546. when hee had raigned thirty seuen yeere, nine moneths, and fiue daies, & had liued fifty fiue yeres, fiue months, & fiue daies, whose body with great solemnity was buried at Windsore vnder a most costly and stately Tombe be∣gunne in Copper and guilt, but neuer finished, in the inclosures of whose Grates is curiously cast this in∣scription. HENRICVS OCTAVUS REX ANGLIAE, FRANCIAE, DOMINVS HI∣BERNIAE, FIDEI DEFENSOR with what cost and state this his Monument was intended, is manifested by a Manuscript taken from the true modell thereof, which I receiued from that indu∣strious Herauld, Master Nicholas Charles Lancaster, and for the great magnificence is worthy heere to be inserted. The maner of the Tombe to be made for the Kings Grace at Windsore. First, the pauement wherevpon the Tombe shall stand, shall be of Orientall stone: That is to say, of Alabaster, Porfido, Serpentines, and other stones of diuers colours, as in the patterne sheweth. Item, vpon the same Pauement shall be two great steps vnder all the worke of like Orientall stones. Item, the Basement of the Pillers shall be of white Marble with Angel holding betweene them Crownes or Garlands guilt, and white Marble as more plainely sheweth in the Patterne. Item, aboue the said Basement and Angels, shall be all the old Testament, that is to say, xiiij. Images in the xiiij. Casements of the same two Pillers of the Prophets, and all the Pillers which shall be xvi. shall be of stones Serpentine, Porfido and Alabaster, and other fine Orientall stones, of such colours as is shewed in the Patterne; and the foote of euery pil∣ler, and also the head shall be of Brasse. And euery Prophet shall haue an Angell sit at his foote, with Scripture of the name of his Prophet, and aboue ouer the head of the same shall bee the story of his Prophet: in euery of which Story shall bee at least viij. or xi. figures. Item, aboue all the same Pillers shall bee another Basement of white Marble, with a partition being made of such fine Orientall stones as the Pillers bee, wherein shall bee written such Scripture as please you. Item, aboue the same Basement shall be the Story of the new Testament, that is to wit, with the Ima∣ges of the Apostles, the Euangelists and the foure Doctors of the Church, and euery Image shall haue sitting at his foote a little child with a Scripture of the name of his Image, and a little Basket full of red and white Roses, which they shall shew to take in their hands, and cast them downe off the Tombe and ouer the Pauement, and the Roses that they shal cast ouer the Tombe shall bee enamelled and guilt, and the roses that they cast ouer the Pauements shal be of fine Orientall stones of white and red. Item, behinde all the same Images of the new Te∣stament round shall be made in brasse and guilt all the life of Iesus Christ from the natiuity to his ascen∣tion, and it shall be so clearely and perfectly made, that the Mystery of Christs life to his ascention shall plainely appeare. Item, aboue the said new Testament and Images thereof, and aboue the said life of Christ, shall bee a Quire of xx. Angels standing vpon a Basement of white Marble, with great Candlestickes in their hands hauing lights in them shewing to honour and reuerence the same Tombe. Item, all these foresaid figures, stories and orna∣ments shall be made to garnish and ornate the two Pillers of the Church betweene which the Tombe shall be set. Item, betweene the said two great Pillers of the Church thus garnished, shall be a Basement of white Marble of the height of the Basement of the Pillers, and therein the Epitaph of the King and Queene, with letters of gold, of such Scriptures as yee de∣uise. Item, vpon the same Basement shall bee made two Tombes of blacke-touch, that is to say, on either side one, and vpon the said Tombes of black Touch shall be made the Image of the King and Queene on both sides, not as death, but as persons sleeping, be∣cause to shew that famous Princes leauing behinde them great fame, their names neuer doe die, and shal lie in roiall Apparels after the antique maner. Item, ouer the right hand, ouer both the sides of the same Tombe shall be an Angell which shall hold the Kings Armes, with a great Candlesticke, hauing as it were light on it as a Lampe, and in like manner shall be an other Angell holding the Queenes Armes on the left hand with a like Candlesticke. Item, on the right hand and left hand on both the sides ouer the said Images of the King and Queene, shall be two Angels shewing to the people the bo∣dies of the King and Queene holding aboue their Heades veiles of gold, and the Crownes of the King and Queene on their hands. Item, betweene the said two Tombes of blacke Touch and the said Angell ouer the King & Queene shall stand an high Basement like a Sepulchre, and on the sides whereof shalbe made the story of Saint George, and ouer height of the Basement shall bee made an Image of the King on Horsebacke, liuelie in Armor like a King after the Antique maner shew∣ing in countenance and looking on the said two I∣mages lying on the said Tombes. Item on the right hand and left hand of the said two Tombes shall bee foure Pillers of the foresaid Orientall stones, that is to say, on either side two Pillers, and vpon euery Pillar shall bee a like Base∣ment of white Marble with partitions for Scriptures as shall be aboue the other Pillers. And on the same foure Basements of the said Pillers shall bee made foure Images, two of Saint Iohn Baptist, and two of Saint George, with foure little children by them ca∣sting roses, as is aforesaid. Item, ouer the said Image of the King on Horse∣backe shall bee made an Arch triumphall, of white Marble wrought within, and about it, and vpon the same Arch, in maner of a Casement of white Marble garnished with like Orientall Stones of diuers co∣lours, as the pattern sheweth, and on the two sides of the said Casement shall be made and set of brasse guilt, the story of the life of Saint Iohn Baptist, and one hight of the said Casement shall bee made fiue steps, euery one more then other downeward, of like Orientall stones, as the said Pillers shall shew. Item, on the foure corners of the said Casement shall be made the Images of the foure Cardinal ver∣tues hauing such Candlestickes in their hands as is aboue said. Item, on the toppe of the highest step of the said fiue steps on the one side shall be an▪ Image of the Father, hauing in his left hand the Soule of the King and blessing with his right hand, with two Angels holding abroad the Mantle of the Father on either side. Item, in like wise shall bee made on the other side the said Image of the Father, hauing the soule of the Queene in his left hand, blessing with his right hand with like Angels. The height of the same worke from the Father vnto the Pauement shall be xxviij. foot. Item the breadth and largenes of the said worke shall be xv. foote, and the Pillers of the Church in greatnes, v. foote: and so the largenes of the said worke, from the vttermost part of the two great Pil∣lars shalbe xx. foote. Item, euery of the Images of the xiiij. Prophets, shall containe euery Image V. foote in length, and the Angels shall containe two foote and a halfe in length. Item, euery of the xx. Pillers shall containe in length X. foot. Item, euery of the Images of the Apostles, Euan∣gelists and Doctors shall containe in length V. foote and the Angels as is abouesaid. Item in likewise euery of the xx. Angels of the quire shall containe in length two foot and a halfe, and in likewise the Images of the Children two foot and a halfe. Item, the foure Images of S t . Iohn Baptist and S t . George and all the figures of the father and Angels on the V. steps shall be V. foote. Item, the foure Images of the King and the Queen shall be of the Stature of a man and woman, and the foure Angels by them of the stature of a man euery one. Itē, the Image of the King on Horseback with his Horse shall be of the whole stature of a goodly man and large Horse. Item, there shal be a Cxxxiiij. figures, Xliiij. Stories, and all of Brasse guilt, as in the patterne appeareth. (135) This magnificent Monarch was of pre∣sence Maiesticall, and of Personage more then ordi∣narily t l, faire of Complexion and Corpulent of bo∣dy, very wise and very well learned, of a sudden and ready speach, in youth very prodigall, and in his age very liberall, pleasant and affable, but not to be dal∣lyed with, bolde in attempting, and euer thirstie of potent glory: an expert Souldier, and fauouring such as were actiue or seruiceable, according to the then vsuall saying, King Henrie loues a man: and indeed somewhat too wel the delights with women, as by his many wiues heere ensuing, may well appeare. His Wiues. (136) Katherine the first wife to King Henry was the daughter of Ferdinando the sixt King of Spaine, and widow dowager of Prince Arth r his elder bro∣ther, as hath beene said: she was married vnto this King the third of Iune: and first of his Raigne, the yeere of saluation 1509. being solemnely crowned with him vpon the twenty fourth day of the same, and was his wife aboue twenty yeeres, and then di∣uorced from him by the sentence of the Archbishop of Canterbury: liued three yeeres after by the name of Katherine Dowager. Shee deceased at Ki balton A. D. 1533 in the County of Huntington the eight of Ianuary, and yeere of Christ 1535. and lieth interred on the North-side of the quire in the Cathedrall Church of Peterborow vnder a hearse of Blacke Saye, hauing a white Crosse in the middest. (137) Anne, the second wife of King Henry, was the second daughter of Sir Thomas Bullen, Earle of Wiltshire and Ormond. Shee was solemnly at Wind∣sore created Marchionesse of Pembrooke, the first of September and twenty foure of his Raigne, hauing A. D. 1532▪ one thousand pound giuen her by yeere, to main∣taine her estate. Shee was married vnto king Henry in his Closet at White-Hall, vpon the twenty fift day of Ianuary, and yeere of Christ Iesus, 1533. being the foure and twentith of his Raigne, and was Crowned with all due obseruances, at Westminster vpon Whit∣sunday the first of Iune, where the Crowne of Saint Edward was set vpon her head, the scepter of Gould deliuered into her right hand, and the Iuory rodde with the Doue into her left. Shee was his wife three yeeres, three monthes and twenty fiue daies, when being cut off by the sword the nineteenth of May, her body was buried in the Quire of the Chap∣pell in the Tower, leauing her accused fame to bee A. D. 1536. censured as affections best pleased the vncharitable minded, and her bed to bee possest of a vertuous Lady. (138) Iane, the third wife of King Henry, was the daughter of Iohn Seimer Knight, and sister to Lord Edward Seimer, Earle of Hertford, and Duke of Som∣merset. Shee was married vnto him the twentieth of May, euen the next day after the beheading of Queene Anne, and the twenty eight of his Raigne. Shee was his wife one yeere, fiue monthes and twen∣ty foure daies, and died in Child-bed the foureteenth of October, to the great griefe of the King, who not onely remoued from the place, but kept himselfe priuate, and wore the Garment of mourning euen in the Festiuall time of Christmas, her body was so∣lemnely conueied to Windsore the eight of Nouem∣ber following, where she was interred in the middest of the Quire of the Church within the Castell. (139) Anne the fourth wife of King Henry and sister to William Duke of Cleue was married vnto him the sixth of Ianuary in the thirty one yeere of his Raigne, the yeere of Grace, 1540. shee was his wife sixe moneths, after which time certaine Lords of A. D. 1540. the vpper House of Parliament came into the ne∣ther, and alleaged cause for which that marriage was vnlawfull, whereunpon shee was diuorced, and by Statute enacted, that shee should no more be taken for Queene, but should be called the Lady Anne of Cle e. See remained in England long after the Kings death, though small mention is made of her by any of our Writers, only we finde that she accompanied the Lady Elizabeth through London at the solemni∣zing of Queene Maries Coronation. (140) Katherine the fifth wife of King Henry the eight, was the daughter of , and Neece vnto Thomas Howard his brother, Duke of Norfolke: Shee was married vnto him the eight of August and yeere of race 1540. being the thirtie two of his Raigne, at Hampton Court, and continued his Queene the space of one yeere, sixe moneths and foure daies, and for her vnchaste life was attainted by Parliament, and for the same beheaded within the Tower of London the twelfth of February and her body buried in the Chauncell of the Chappell by Queene Anne Bullen. (141) Katherine the sixth and last wife of King Henry was the daughter of Sir Thomas Parre of Ken∣dall and sister to Lord William Parre Marquesse of Northampton, shee was first married to Iohn Neuill, Lord Latimer, and after his decease, vpon the twelfth of Iuly maried vnto the King at Hampton Court, the yeere of Saluation, 1543. and thirtie fiue of his Raigne: Shee was his wife three yeeres, sixe months and fiue daies, and suruiuing him, was againe marri∣ed vnto Thomas Seimer Lord Admirall of England, vnto whom she bare a daughter, but died in the same Child-bed, the yeere of Grace, 1548. His Issue. (142) Henrie the first sonne of King Henry by Queene Katherine his first wife, was borne at Rich∣ d in Surrey vpon the first of Ianuary, and the first of his fathers Raigne, whose Godfathers at Font were the Lord Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterburie, and the Earle of Surrey: his Godmother, Lady Ka∣therine Countesse of Deuonshire, daughter to King Edward the fourth. This Prince liued not fully two months but died in the same place wherein he was borne, vpon the two and twentieth of February, and his body with all due obsequies buried in Westmin∣ster. (143) A sonne not named was borne vnto King Henrie by Lady Katherine his first Queene in the month of Nouember, and the sixth yeere of his Raigne, who liued not long, and therefore no fur∣ther mention of him can bee made: the deathes of these Princes King Henrie tooke as a punishment from God, for so he alleaged it in the publike Court held in Blacke-friers London, they being begot on his owne brothers wife. (144) Marie the third childe and first daughter of King Henrie by Queene Katherine his first wife, was born at Greenewich in Kent, the eighteenth of Fe∣bruar in the yeere of Christs humanity, 1518▪ and the eighth of his Raigne. Shee was by the direction of her mother brought vp in her Childe-hood by the Countesse of Salisbury her neere kinswoman, for that as some thought, the Queene wished a marriage betwixt some of her sons and the Princesse, to streng∣then her Title by that Aliance into Yorke, if the King should die without issue Male. In her yong yeeres shee was sued to be married with the Emperour, the King of Scots, and the Duke of Orleance in France, . p. 183. but all these failing, and shee succeeding her brother K Edward in the Crowne, at the age of thirtie sixe yeeres, matched with Phillip King of Spaine, to the great dislike of many, and small content to her selfe, hee being imploied for the most part beyond the Seas, for griefe whereof and the losse of Calice, shee lastly fell into a burning feauer, that cost her her life. (145) Elizabeth the second daughter of King Henrie, and first childe by Queene Anne his second wife, was borne at Greenwich, vpon Sunday the se∣uenth of September, the yeere of Christ Iesus, 1534 and twenty fiue of her Fathers Raigne, who with due solemnities was baptized the Wednesday fol∣lowing, Archbishop Cranmer, the old Dutches of Norfolke, and the old Marchionesse of Dorset being the witnesses at the Font, and the Marchionesse of Excester at the confirmation: Shee succeeded her si∣ster Queene Marie in the Monarchy of England, and was for wisdome, vertue, piety, and Iustice, not one∣lie the Mirrour of her Sexe, but a patterne for Go∣uernment to al the princes in Christendome: whose name I may not mention without al dutiful remem∣brance, and whose memory vnto me is most deare, amongst the many thousands that receiued extraor∣dinary fauours at her gracious and most liberall hand. (146) Another man childe Queene Anne bare vnto King Henry, though without life vpon the nine Iohn Stow. and twentieth of Ianuary, and twenty seuen of his Raigne, to the no little griefe of the mother, some dislike of the King, as the sequel of her accusation and death did shortly confirme. (147) Edward the last childe of King Henry, and first of Queene Iane his third wife, was borne at Ham∣pton Court, the twelfth of October, the yeere of Grace, 1537. and twenty nine of the Kings Raigne, being cut out of his mothers wombe as is constant∣ly affirmed, like as Iulius Caesar is said to haue been: his Godfathers at the Font, was Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Duke of Norfolk, his sister Lady Mary being Godmother, saith Graf∣ton: Sixe daies after his birth he was created Prince of Wales, and at the death of his Father, succeeded him in all his Dominions, of whom more followeth heereafter. His Naturall Issue. (148) Henrie Fitz-R ie the naturall sonne of A. D. 1519. King Henrie the eight was begotten of the Lady called Elizabeth Blunt, and borne in the Mannor of Black moore in Essex about the tenth Iohn Stow. . yeere of his Raigne; at the age of sixe yeeres he was created Earle of Nottingham and in the fiue and twentieth of his Fathers Raigne vpon the eigh∣teenth of Iune in the Kings Pallace of Bridewell was made Duke of Richmond and Sommerset, Lord War∣den of the East, West, and Middle-Marches against Scotland, and Lieutenant Generall of all the parts of England Northward, he was a Prince very forward in Marshal Actiuities, of Good literature and know∣ledge in the tongues, vnto whom the learned Anti∣quary Leland dedicated a Booke; He married Ma∣rie daughter of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolke, Earle Marshall and Lord high Treasurer of England, with whom he liued not long, but died at Saint Iames Thomas Mille . Holinshed saith Thetford in Nor∣folke. p. 1237. by Westminster the two and twentieth of Iuly in the yeere of Christ Iesus, 1536. and was buried at Fra∣mingham in Suffolke. T He tempestuous in the Raigne of this King Henrie the eight, and the violent de∣luge raised against the Church-state of his times; bare downe so many religious strong foun∣dations, and were the destruction of so many beautifull Monasteries, as the onely relation of their numbers and names, would haue much interrupted the narration of his history. Wher∣fore to retein their memorials (though their walles are laid wast ) aswell for the reue∣rence we owe vnto venerable Antiquity, as for the example of their Founders holyzeale, we haue inserted a Catalogue of their names, orders, and true valuations, as in the originall Booke thereof taken by Com∣mission, and giuen vnto the King, we finde them set down, though at their dissolutions their values were fauourably and farre vnder rated. Some Founders, and times of foundations wee want, the rest, Tablewise, to auoid prolixity wee haue set downe in this present following CHAPTER. A CATALOGVE OF THE RELIGIOVS HOVSES VVITHIN THE REALME OF ENGLAND AND VVales, with many their Orders, Founders, and Values, most of them being sup∣pressed by King Henry the eight. Together with such other sacred places, as either then wereby him left standing, or since haue been erected. BARKESHIRE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob. q. Reeding.— Saint Iacob — By Queene Alfrith. By King Henry the first. First Nunnes, after Blacke Monks, Cluniacenses. 2116 03 09 oo q Abingdon.— Saint Mary. —M Cissa, King of the West-Saxons.— Blacke Monkes.— 2042 02 08 ob q Bromhall in Windsor For∣rest. S. Mary Magd. —N Edward the Blacke Prince.— Blacke Nunnes.— Bistleham now Bisham. Christ Iesus & our Lady M William Montacute the first Earle of Sa∣lisbury, A. 13. E. 3. Canons.— 0327 04 06 oo o Donington.— —F Richard de Abberbury Knight.— Ordinis Sancta Crucis. 0020 16 06 oo o Donington.— —H Richard de Abberbury Cheualier.— — Hamme.— S. Mary Magd. N — Blacke Nunnes.— Hurley.— Saint Mary. —M — Blacke Monks, Westmonast. 0134 10 08 ob o Murresley.— —P — — 0014 03 01 oo o Poghley.— —M The Predecessors or Ancestors of the Ab∣besse of Almesburie. — 0071 10 07 oo o Shottesbroke.— —C — — 0033 18 08 oo o Wallingford.— Saint Trinity. —P Edmund sonne of Richard, King of the Romans, and Earle of Cornwall. Blacke Monks of Saint Albans. Wallingford castle —C Edward the Blacke Prince.— — Wallingford.— Saint Iohn. —H — — 0006 00 00 oo o BEDFORDSHIRE. Places. Dedication. Founders and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob q Bedford.— —F. Lady Margaret de Patteshall. — Friers Minors, alij Grey Friers. 0005 00 00 oo o Bedford.— Saint Iohn. —H — — 0021 00 08 oo o Bedford.— Saint Leonard —H — — 0016 06 08 o q Bigleswade.— Sancta Trin. in Ecc S . Andrea C — — 0007 00 00 o o Bosco.— —M. — — 0143 18 03 o o Bushemede alias Bissemed —P Hugo de Bello Campo, and Roger his bro∣ther. Canons Augustines— 0081 13 05 ob o Caldewel.— S. Iohn Baptist. —P The Lord Latimer. Alij Iohn de Byddysley. — Blacke Canons.— 0148 15 10 o o Chicksand.— Saint Mary. —P Paine de Beauchamp. — White Canons. Nunnes 0230 03 04 ob o Eaton.— Corporis Christi —C — — 0007 16 00 o o Dunstable.— Saint Peter. —P King Henrie the first.— Blacke Canons.— 0402 14 07 ob o Dunstable.— —F — Friers Preachers.— 0004 18 04 o o Fraternitas ibidem. — — — 0009 08 07 o o Elnestowe alias Helenstow, now Elstow. —N Iudith wife to Waltheof E. of Huntingdon.— Blacke Nunnes.— 0325 02 01 ob q Harwold alias Harewood. Saint Peter —P Samson surnamed Fortis. — Blacke Nunnes— 0047 03 02 o o Markeyate.— Saint Giles —N Gilbert de Clare Earle of Glocester and Hertford. Anno 6. E. 1. Nunnes.— Newenham.— —P Roise the wife of Paine de Beauchampe. — Canons Augustines.— 0343 15 05 o o Northyle.— —C — — 0061 05 08 ob o Sanctingfield iuxta Whitsand. —H King Henrie the second.— — Wardon.— Saint Marie —M King Henrie the first, and Walter Espe . — White Monkes.— 0442 11 11 o o Woburne.— Saint Mary —M Hugo de Bolbick. Alij Robert de U re, Earle of Oxford by licence of King Richard. 2. White Monks.— 0430 13 11 ob o BVCKINGHAMSHIRE. Places Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob. q. Ailesburie.— —F Edith daughter of Frewald. — Friers Minors: ali∣bi Grey Friers.— 0003 02 05 o o Ankerwicke.— —N — Nunnes.— 0045 14 04 o o Asheridge.— Saint Augustine.—C Edmund Earle of Cornewall sonne to Richard King of the Romans.— Bonorum virorum Eremits.— 0447 18 00 ob o Bordesley.— Saint Marie. — Maude the Empresse.— Cistertians.— Bradewell.— Saint Mary. —P Manef lmus. — Black Monkes.— Burnham.— —M — 0091 05 11 ob o Byttelsden.— Saint Mary —M Arnald de Bosco, A. D. 1127— Cistertiā white Monks. 0142 01 03 o Eaton.— —C King Henrie 6.— Praefectus: Socy 8. & Cātores Scolares. 60. Laueden.— Saint Marie. —M Iohn de Bedon. — White Canons.— 0091 08 03 ob Luffeld.— Saint Mary. —P Robert Earle of Leicester.— White Canons.— Medmenham. alias Mendham —M The Ancestors of the Earls of Suffolk. — — 0023 17 02 o Merlowe parua. — —M — Blacke Nunnes.— 0037 06 11 o Myssenden.— Saint Mary. —M D'Oiles ue Doily. — Blacke Canons.— 0285 15 09 o Newport painel— Saint Leonard —H Iohn Peynton of Newport.— — 0006 06 08 o Noteley.— Saint Marie. —M Walter Giffard Earle of Buckingham. A. 1112 Blacke Canons.— 0495 18 05 ob Paretrendune.— —P — Blacke Canons.— Raueneston.— —M Domini Regis Progenitor. — — 0066 13 04 o Sandewell.— —M The Ancestors of Thomas Stanley of Safford.— — 0038 08 04 o Snelshall.— —P — — 0024 00 00 o Stoke-Pogeis.— —H Edward Baron Hastings of Loughborrow.— Poore people.— Tekeford.— Saint Marie. —P Fulco Paganell, Alij, Domini Regis progenitor. Blacke Monkes.— 0126 17 00 o Wicombe, or high Wickham. —H — — 0007 15 03 ob S. Margaret. —P — — 0022 06 07 o CAMBRIDGESHIRE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob. q. Cambridge.— —F K. Edward the first, and Sir Guy Mortimer. Thomas de Hertford a great Benefactor. White Friers.— — — Cambridge— —F King Edward 1.— Friers Minors, a∣libi, Grey Friers.— — — Cambridge.— —F — Friers Augustines.— — — Cambridge.— —F — Blacke Friers.— — — Cambridge.— Saint Radegund —N — Black Nunnes.— — — Cambridge.— —P — Canons.— — — The Colledges in Cambridge. Peterhouse. — — Hugh Balsham Bishop of Ely. An. Dom. 1 84— — — — Clare-hall. — — Rich. Badew and El . Clara Countesse of Vlster. Anno Dom. 1340. — — — Pembroke-hall. — — Maria de S to . Paulo Countesse of Pem∣broch. A. 1347.— — — — Corpus Christi or Bennet Colledge — Societas fratrum Corporis Christi. A. D. 1346.— — — — Trinity-hall. — — William Bateman Bishop of Norwich. 1353.— — — — Gon ill and Caius Colledge. — Edmund Gon le and Iohn Caius. A. 1348.— — — — Kings-Colledge & Chappel. — King Henry the sixth, A. D. 1441.— — — — Queenes Colledge. — — Queene Margaret wife of H. 6. A. D. 1448. — — — Katherine-hall. — — Robert Woodlarke. A. D. 1459. — — — Iesus-Colledge. — — Iohn Alcocke Bishop of Ely. A. D. 1497. — — — Christs-Colledge S t . Iohns-Colledge — Lady Margaret Countesse of Richmond mother to K. Henry the seuenth. A. 1506. — — — Magdalen-Col∣ledge. — — Thomas Awdley Chancellor of England. A. D. 1542. Christopher Wray Lord Chiefe Iustice of England. — — — Trinity Colledge. — — King Henrie the eight. Anno Dom. 1546. Tho. Neuil Deane of Canterbury, the M r . therof hath most magnificently enlarged — — — Emanuel-Colledge. — Sir Walter Mildmay Knight, a Councellor to Queene Elizabeth. — — — Sydney-Sussex Colledge. — — Lady Frances Countesse of Sussex gaue fiue thousand pound to build it. — — — Ely.— S t . Peter and S. Ethelred Eccles. Cath. M — Andry wife to King Egfrid, placed Priests in it. Ethelwold Bishop of Winchester sto∣red it with Monkes: King Henry 1. made it a Bishops See: King Henry 8. in steed of the Monkes placed a Dean, Prebends, and a Grammar Schoole, with maintenance and teaching for 24. Schollers. Blacke Monks.— 1301 08 02 o Ely.— S. Iohn & S. Mary Magd. H Thomas Bishop of Ely.— — 0025 05 03 ob q Anglesey.— —P Richard de Clare. — — 0149 18 06 ob Barnewell.— S. Andrew. S. Egidius. P Sir Paine Penerell, Standard-Bearer to Robert Duke of Normandy, in the Holy Warres against Infidels, in the time of Henry the first. Blacke Canons.— 0351 15 04 oo o Chatters.— Saint Mary annexed by H. 1. to Ely. N Alfwena a deuout woman, and her bro∣ther Ednothus Abbot of Ramsey. Blacke Nunnes.— 0112 03 06 oo q Denny.— Saint Clare. —N Maria de Sancto Paulo, wife of Adomar Earle of Pembroke. Anno Domini, 1341. Nunnes.— 0218 00 01 ob o Saint Edmunds— —P King Canute. — White Canons.— 0016 16 00 oo o Fordham.— —P Henry Deu, or Dew. — De ordine Simplingham 0046 03 08 oo o Ikelington.— —P — — 0080 01 10 ob o Marmound.— —P — Canons.— Soffam Bulbecke— —N — Blacke Nunnes.— 0046 10 08 oo o Shengaye.— A Comēdon & Praeceptoria to S. Iohn of Ie∣rusalem. Sybil daughter of Roger Mountgomery, Earle of Shrewsbury, and wife of l. de Paines. A. D. 1130. Knights Templers.— 0175 04 06 oo o Swauesey.— — Alan la Zouch brother to the Vicount Rohan in the lesser Britaine. Blacke Canons.— Thorney— Saint Mary and Saint Botulph. M Sexwulph a deuout man for Eremites, Ae∣thelwold B. of Winchester for Monks, and King Edgar. — 0508 02 05 oo o CARLIOL Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob q Apelby in West∣morland. —F Lord Vescy, Lord Percy, and Lord Clif∣ford, A. D. 1281. White Friers.— Armethwait in Cumberland. —N King William the Conquerour, Anno Reg∣ni, 2. Nunnes.— 0018 18 08 oo o Carliolin Cum∣berland. Saint Mary. —P Domini Regis Progenitor. — — 0482 08 01 oo o Holme Coltreyn in Cumberland Saint Mary —M Dauid King of Scots, and Henry Earle of Huntington his sonne. — 0535 03 07 ob. q. Lanercost in Cumberland. Saint Mary Magd. P Robert de Uanlx, Lord of Gillesland. — — 0079 19 00 oo o Sharpe in Westmorland —M Thomas the sonne of Gospatricke, sonne of Orms. — 0166 10 06 ob o CHESHIRE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l s. d. ob. q. Chester.— Saint Iohn; Eccl Cath. King Henry the eight.— Secular Canons.— Chester,— —F Thomas Stadham Gentleman. A. D. 1279.— White Friers.— Chester.— —F King Iohn. — Gray Friers.— Chester.— —F — Blacke Friers.— Chester.— Saint Were∣burg. M Hugh the first of the Norman bloud that was Earle of Chester. Blacke Monkes.— 1073 17 07 ob o Chester.— The virgin Mary M Fundator Domini Regis Progenitor. — Blacke Canons.— 0099 16 02 oo o Chester.— Beatae Mariae. —N — Nunnes.— Chester.— Saint Iohn C Baptist, alii H Fundator Domini Regis Progenitor. — — 0013 07 10 oo o Birkehead.— S. Iames. —M Fundator Comitis Derbia Antecessor. — Blacke Canons.— 0102 16 10 oo o Bunbury, alias Boniface-bury —C Hugh Cal ley and the Egertons. — Priests.— Combermere.— —M William de Maibedeng. A. D. 1134.— White Monkes.— 0258 06 06 oo o Maclesfeild.— —C Thomas Sanage first Bishoppe of London, and afterwards Archbishoppe of Yorke. — Norton.— Saint Mary —N William Fitz-Nigell a Norman.— — 0258 11 08 oo o Stanlaw.— — Iohn Lacy Constable of Chester. A. D. 1173.— Monkes.— Valle Regalis.— —M King Edward the first.— — 0540 06 02 oo o CORNVVALL. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualew. l. s. d. ob. q Saint Anthony. — —M — Blacke Monks of the Angels. Bodmin.— Saint Peter. —M First by K. Adelstan, after William Warnast Bishop of Excester, & confirmed by king Iohn. Blacke Canons after Grey Friers. 0289 11 11 oo o Bonury.— Saint Petrorsi —M King Athelstan. — Blacke Canons.— Crantocke.— —C — — 0089 15 08 oo o Saint German. — —M — — 0243 08 00 oo o Glassoney.— Saint Thomas. —C Walter Br nescome B. of Oxford. A. D. 1288.— — 0205 10 06 oo o Helston.— S. Iohn Baptist. —P — — 0014 07 02 ob o Launceston.— Saint Stephen. —M Reginald Earle of Cornwall, A. D. 1150.— Blacke Canons, Aug. — 0392 11 2 oo q Saint Mary de val. —M — Blacke Monks of the Angels. Saint Michael de Monte. —M William Earle of Cornwall and Morton. — Blacke Monks of the Angels. Saint Michael de magno monte —M — Black Monkes.— Sulli Isle.— Saint Nicholas —M — Blacke Monks.— Saint Syriace. — —M — Blacke Monkes.— Talearn.— Saint Andrew. M — Blacke Monks of the Angels. Trury.— —F — Blacke Friers. s— Tywardreth.— Saint Andrew. — P — — 0151 16 01 oo o DARBY-SHIRE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. ▪ ob. q. Darby.— Omnium San∣ctorum. Eccl. Collegiat. — — 0038 14 00 o o Iuxta Darby.— Beata Ma∣riae de Pratis. M — — 0018 06 02 o o Darby.— Saint Iames —Cella Fundator Domini Reg Progenitor. — Blacke Canons.— Darby.— Saint Marie. —P Blacke Monkes.— Darby.— Beatae Mariae —N Fundator Domini Regis Progenitor. — Nunnes.— Darby.— —H The Countesse of Shrewsbury. — Eight pooremen, foure women. Bello-Capite.— Saint Thomas. —M Robert the son of Ranulph L. of Alfreton, a Canon there. — 0157 10 02 oo o Bredsall or Brisol Park —M Fundator Antecessor Iohannis Diricke, alias Duthik Armigeri. — 0010 17 09 oo o Brend in the Peake —M Sir Robert Duin Knight.— — Chesterfeild.— Saint Crosse Saint Mary C — — 0019 00 00 oo o Dala.— Beatae Mariae or S. Mary. M William Fitz-Ralph Antecessor Geruasy Kingston. — 0144 12 00 o Derelege or Darleigh. Beatae Mariae. —M — Blacke Canons.— 0258 14 05 oo o Fauerwell.— Saint Marie. —N — Blacke Nunnes.— Gresly.— Saint George. —M William de Lyons called Fitz-Nigel of Gresley — 0039 13 08 o Pollewerke.— Saint Edith. —N — Blacke Nunnes. — Repingdon, alias Repton. Saint Marie. —M Fundator Domini Regis Progenitor. Alij Aimer de Valence & Randulph E of Chester Blacke Canons.— 0167 18 02 o Yeuelay or Iue∣lay and Bar∣row. —P — — 0107 03 08 oo Yeuelay or Iue∣lay, and Bar∣row. Praceptoria. — — — 0093 03 04 ob o DEVON-SHIRE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualew. l. s. d. ob. q Excester.— S. Peter, Episcop. — King Athelstan. — Secular Canons.— Excester.— Saint Iames. M — Blacke Monks.— Excester.— Saint Nicholas. P — Black Monks Benedict. 0154 12 00 oo o Excester.— Saint Iohn —P — Grey Friers.— 0102 12 09 o Excester.— S. Nicholas. —H — — 0147 21 00 o Barnstaple.— Saint Mary Magd. P Iohel, sonne of Ailred. — Black Monks Bene∣dictines Cluniacens. 0129 15 03 oo q Berdleston.— —P — Blacke Canons.— Buckland.— Saint Mary. S. Benedict. M Amice Countesse of Deuonshire. Isabelde Fortibus, & Lady of the Isle a benefactor. Cistertians.— 0241 16 09 ob q Buckfaster.— Saint Marie. —P — White Monkes. Cistertians. Canonleigh.— Beata Mariae. —M — Nunnes. 02 2 15 03 o Cliue.— S. Mary Magd. —M Almar Earle of Cornwall. — Blacke Canons.— Cornworthy.— —N — Nunnes. 0063 03 10 Cowyke.— Saint Andrew. —P Thomas Earle of Deuonshire. — — Crediton.— S. Crueis. —C — — 0140 14 5 Cuich.— Saint Andrew. —M — Blacke Monkes.— Dunkiswel.— —M — Cistertians.— 0298 11 10 oo Ford.— Saint Mary. —M Adelize daughter to Baldwine of Oke∣hampton, A. D. 1140. White Monkes.— 0381 10 6 ob Frethelstoke.— Saint Gregory. —P — — 0127 03 04 oo q Hartland.— S. Nectan the Martyr M Githa Earle Goodwins wife. Richard Picta∣uensis Archdiac: and Geffrey de Dynan Senior, & Oliuer his brother benefactors. Blacke Canons.— 0306 13 02 oo q Saint Michael de Monte. —P — Blacke Monkes Malms. Molery.— Saint Gregory. —M — Black Monkes.— Newham, alias Newenham. —M Reginald Mohun, Earle of Dunster, Anno Domini, 1246 — 0231 14 04 oo o Othery.— Saint Marie —C Iohn Grandison B. of Excester, tempore Ed. 3.— Blacke Monks.— 0303 02 09 o o Pilton.— Saint Mary the Virgin. P King Adelston. — Blacke Monks Benedictines. 0056 12 08 oo o Plimouth.— —F — Grey Frie .— Plimpton.— Saint Peter Saint Paul. P Baldwyn de Reduers, Earle of Deuonshire, & Dominus de Insula, in Henry 3. time. Blacke Canons Augustines. 0912 12 08 ob q Polsloo.— Saint Katharine. N — Blacke Nunnes.— 0170 02 03 oo q Syon.— —M — — Tauystocke.— Saint Mary Saint Burion M Ordolph the son of Ordgare, Earle of De∣uonshire, Anno Dom. 961. Blacke Monkes Augustines. 0902 05 07 ob q Torre.— Saint Sauiour. —M William de Briewer. — White Canons Augustines. 0396 00 11 oo o Tottenes.— Saint Mary Aliens. P Roger Newman. — Blacke Monkes Benedictines. 0124 10 02 ob o Twynham or Christ-Church Twynham. —M Isabel de Fortibus sometime Countesse of Albemarle and Deuonshire, and Lady of the Isle founded it for William de Forti∣bus Earle of Albemarle, and Richard de Reduers Earle of Deuonshire. A. D. 1161 This is placed also in Hampshire. DORSET-SHIRE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob. q. Dorset.— —M The Ancestors of Sir Iohn Chediok Knight.— Franciscane Friers.— Shirb rne. — Saint Peter. —M A Bishops See vnder Adelmus the first Bi∣shoppe thereof, A. D. 704. Sunning, another See translated to it by Hermannus Bishoppe, tempore Ethelredi Regis. After that by the said Hermannus translated to Salisbury, left for a retiring place to them, tempore Gulielm Conque∣storis, the Church where the Bishops seat was, became a Monastery. Robert Neuill Bishop of Salisbury, a chiefe founder. Black Monks Bene∣dictines. 0682 14 07 ob o Abbotesbury.— Saint Peter. —M Orking King of Denmarke. — Blacke Monkes.— 0485 03 05 ob q Bindon.— Saint Mary. —M — White Monkes. Cistertians. 0229 02 01 ob o Brydport, alias Birtport. —P — — 0006 00 00 oo o Brydport, alias Birtport. Saint Iohn Bap. —H — — 0008 06 01 oo o Camestrum.— S Mary Magd. N — White Nunnes.— Cerne.— Saint Peter S. Adelwold. M M. Camden saith, Augustin the English Apo stle. Others, Agelwaldus a rich m . Som say, Almarus E of Dorset, or rather of Cornwal Blacke Monkes.— 0623 13 02 ob q Cranborne.— —M Aelward a noble Gentleman. A. D. 930.— — S. Iohn Baptist. — —H — — 0051 10 04 oo q Kalendarum.— —D — — 0 10 18 08 o Beata Marie Magdalen. —D — — 0021 11 03 oo o Saint Marke alias LeGaunts. —H — — 0112 09 09 oo o Melcombe.— — — Blacke Friers.— Middleton alias Milton. Saint Mary. S. Sauiour. M Athelstanus Rex. — Blacke Monkes.— 0720 04 01 o Shafton.— — — — 1329 01 03 o o Shaftesbury.— Saint Edward Martyr. N Elfgine wife to Edmund King Aelfrids ne∣phewes sonne. Blacke Nunnes Benedictines. Tarent.— —A Cel. Richard Poer Bishoppe of Sarisbury. — Virgins Votarics.— 0239 11 10 o Warham.— S. Peter. S Adelwold — Blacke Monkes— Winburn Minster— —N Cuthburga sister to Ina King of the West Saxons, and husband to the King of Northumberland. A. D. 713. Nunnes.— DVRHAM DIOCES. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualew. l. s. b. ob. q Durham.— S. Cuthbert. —P Bishop Aldwin the first builder. William de Car leph B. gathered ag ne the dispersed Monkes. Ralph his Successor finished what he had begun. N. Fernham Bishop Thomas Melscombe Prior enlarged it. A. D 742. William Skirlaw Bishop builded that part called Galilee. Blacke Monks.— 1615 14 10 ob o Dutham in Ox∣onia. —C Fundator Domini Regis Progenitor. — — 0115 04 04 o o Chester in the St eet. —C Anthony Bec Bishop and Patriarke of Ie∣rusalem. A Deane and 7. Prebends. Egleston.— —M Conan Earle of Brittaine, and Richmond, & after by Ralph de Molton. — Finchcale.— —Cella R. brother vnto that rich Bishop, Hugh Pudsey. — 0146 19 02 oo Gateshead.— Saint Edmund. H — — 0109 00 04 oo o Gretham.— —H Robert Bishoppe of Durham. — — 0097 06 03 ob o Hartlepoole.— —M Hien, a religious woman.— — Iarrow.— —Cella Abbot Ceolfrid, in the 16. yeer of K. Ecfrid Antecessor Episcop. Dunelm. — 0040 07 08 o o Keprey.— Saint Egidius. —H — — 0167 02 11 oo o Lanchester.— —C Anthony Bec Bishop of Durham. — Dean & Prebends.— Letham.— —Cella. — — 0053 15 10 oo o Monkes Were∣mouth. Saint Peters. —M Benedictus Biscop. — — Monkes Were∣mouth. Saint Paul. —M Benedictus Biscop. — — Nesseham.— —N Fundator Domini Dakers Antecessor. — Nunnes.— 0026 09 09 o o Sherborne.— —H Hugh Pudsey. B. and E. of Northumberland. — — 0135 07 0 o o Stanedrop.— —C Fundator Domini Neuill Antecessor. — — 0126 05 10 o o Stampford or Sampford. —Cella — — 0036 17 0 o o Warmouth.— —Cella — — 0026 0 0 o ESSEX. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob q Colchester,— S. Iohn Baptist —M Eudo Dapifer Henriciprimi. — Blacke Monkes.— 0008 01 08 o o Colchester.— Saint Botulph. —P — — 0113 12 08 o o Colchester.— Sanctae Crucis. —F — Fratres Sanctae Crucis — 0007 07 08 o o Colchester.— S. Mary Magd. H Eudo Dapifer. — Leprosi. — Barking.— Saint Mary & S. Eadburg. M — Blacke Nunnes.— 1084 06 02 ob q Barking.— —H The Ances ors of Sibel de Felton Abbesse of Barking. — Bierdon.— —P — — 0031 05 01 ob o Bileigh.— —M First by Robert Moruile, after by Heruey de Monte-Merenciano. — 0196 06 05 o o Blakamore.— Saint Laurence —M Iordan de Samford. — — 0085 04 07 o o Brendwood.— S. Thomas the martir chap pell. Isabel Countesse of Bedford. — — Chelmsord.— — Domus — Friers Preachers.— 0009 06 05 o o Chich.— Saint Peter Saint Peter Saint Osith M Richard B. of London, Anno Dom. 1120.— Blacke Canons.— 0758 05 08 o o Coggeshall.— Saint Marie. —M K. Stephen, Nephew to William the Conqueror White Monkes.— 0298 08 0 o o Dunmowe.— Saint Marie —P Iuga a Noble Lady, A. D. 1111.— Blacke Canons.— 0173 02 04 o o Earles-colne.— Saint Marie. —P Albericus de Uere. — Blacke Monkes of Abingdon. 0175 14 08 ob o Ginge-attestone.— —P — Blacke Canons.— Halstide siue Hasted. —C Robert Bourchier. — — 0023 16 05 ob Hatfeild Regis.— —P Robert de Uere Earle of Oxford, tempore Henrici tertij. Blacke Monkes.— 0157 03 02 ob o Heneninghā castel. —P Iohn Haukewood Knight, Iohn Oliuer Esquier, and Thomas Newenton, Es∣quier. — 0029 12 10 o o Horkislegh.— —M The Ancestors of Sir Roger Went∣worth, in the right of his Wife. — 0027 07 11 o o Ilford.— —H — — 0016 13 04 o o Lyghes.— —P — — 0141 14 08 o o Maldon. —F Richard Grauesend, Bishop of London, and Richard Iselham Priest, Anno Dom. 1292. Carmelites or White Fri∣ers. 0026 00 08 o o Mercy This is also placed in Hertford∣shire, be∣cause it is doubtfull in which of these 2 it is. Saint He∣len. P Ali∣en. Roger Fitz-Ranulph. — — Newport.— —H — — 0023 10 08 o o Saint Osithe.— —M Richard B. of London, A. D. 1520.— Regular Canons.— 0758 05 08 o o Pipewell or Pritwell. Saint Mary. —P — Blacke Monkes.— 0194 14 03 ob o Plecy.— —C — — 0139 03 10 o o Stanesgate.— —P The Predecessors of the Prior of Lewis. — Blacke Monkes.— 0043 08 06 o o Stratford Lang∣thorne. Saint Mary. —M Gulielmus Mountfitchet primus Fundator, & postea Richardus secundus Rex Ang∣liae, regni 20. — 0573 15 06 ob q Thoby,— —P Michael de Capra Knight: the ancestors of Iohn Mounteny, Fitzherbert and Iermin. — 0075 06 10 ob o Tiptree.— —M The Ancestors of Anthony Darcy. — — 0022 16 04 o o Tiltie.— Saint Marie. —M Maurice the sonne of Gilbert. — White Monks Ci∣stertians. 0177 09 04 o o Tremhale, alias Trenchale. —P — — 0070 19 03 ob o Walden parua.— Saint Iacob. —M Galfridus de Magna-villa. — Blacke Monkes.— 0406 15 11 o o Waltham.— Sanctae Crucis. —M King Harold the last; after by King Henry the second. Blacke Canons.— 1079 12 01 o o GLOVCESTER-SHIRE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l s. d. ob. q. Gloucester.— Saint Peter. —M King Osrick of Northumberland first made it a Nunnerie: afterward Aldred Archb. of Yorke, and B. of Worcester, A. D. 68 . Blacke Monkes Benedictines. 1550 04 05 ob o Iuxta Gloucester— Saint Oswald. —P Egelfleda Daughter of King Elfred, first Foundresse, Anno Domini, 910. Blacke Canons, alij Friers Prea∣chers. 0090 10 02 ob o Gloucester.— Saint Barth. H — — 0044 07 02 ob o Gloucester.— Saint Barth. H — — 0025 11 02 oo o Gloucester.— —F Queene Aeleanor wife to King Edward the first. Sir Iohn Giffard, and Sir Thomas Barkley Knights. Carmelites or white Friers. Gloucester.— — King Athelstan. — Canons Augustines— Barkley.— —N — Nunnes.— Bro feild.— —P — Canons.— 0078 19 04 oo o Cirencester.— S. Iohn & S. Laurence. H The Abbot of Cirencester. — — Cirencester.— Saint Marie. M First the Saxons, afterward King Henry the first. Blacke Canons.— 1051 07 01 ob o Dierherst siue Dereherst. — First by King Etheldred, after by Edward Confessor, after made a Cell to S. Dennys in France, by Edward king of England. Blacke Monkes.— Flaxeley in the forrest of Dean. —M Roger Earle of Hereford in King Henry the seconds time. Cistertians.— 0112 03 01 o o Hailes.— —M Richard Earle of Cornwall, and King of Ro∣mans, A. D. 1246. — 0357 07 07 ob o Kingeswood.— Saint Marie M Barkleis of Duresley. — White Monkes.— 0254 05 10 o o Lanthonie neere Glouc. Saint Marie. P Milo Earle of Hereford. — Blacke Canons Augustines 0748 19 11 ob o Lanthonie parua in the Marches of Wales. —P — — 0112 00 05 o o Minching-hamptō —N — Nunnes.— Niwetton.— — — Blacke Monks— Quinington.— —H — — 0137 07 01 ob o Stanley.— Saint Leonard. M Mande il Earle of Essex. King Henry the second. — 0126 0 08 o o Stow.— —H Almare Earle of Cornwall. — — 0025 14 08 o o Teuxbury.— Saint Mary. M Odo & Dodo, men of great power in Mer∣cia founded it at Cranborne, afterward remoued by Robert Fitzhamon to Te x∣bury, A. D. 717. made first a Priory, after an Abbey, A. D. 1102. Blacke Monkes Benedictines. 1598 01 03 o o Westbury.— —C For Richard Duke of Yorke, and Edmund Earle of Rutland: K. Edward gaue them the Hospitall of S. Laurence by Bristow. Deane and Canons.— 232 14 0 o o Winche combe.— Saint Mary. M Kenulph the Merci King.— Blacke Monkes.— 0756 11 09 oo o HAMP-SHIRE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob. q. Winchester.— S. Swithin, M S. Peter. Lucius the first Christian King, after by Ke alch King of the West Saxons, Aelfred and Edgar circa annu , 670. Blacke Monkes.— 1507 17 02 oo q Winchester.— Saint Mary N S. Edburg. Aelfwida the wife of King Aelfred, after by King Edward the first. Blacke Nunnes.— 017 07 02 o o Winchester.— —F Peter of Winchester Parson of Saint Hel∣lons in Winchester, A. D. 1278. Carmelites or White Friers. Winchester.— —F — Austine Friers.— Winchester.— —F K. Henry the third.— Grey-Friers.— Winchester.— —F Peter of Rochi . — Blacke Friers.— Iuxta Winchester. Beatae Mariae. —C William Wickham Bishoppe of Win∣chester. — 0639 08 07 oo Iuxta Winchester. —H Henry Beauford Cardinall of Winchester founded it, and gaue it lands to the va∣lue of 158. l. 13. s. 4. d. And S. Iohn de Fo∣dering bridge an Ho pital was giuē to it Two Chaplens. 35 Poore Men. 3. Women. Iuxta Southamp∣ton, Le teley, alias Le o loco. S. Edward and M S. Marie. Henry the third, and Peter de Rupibus. — Augustine Eriers.— 0160 02 09 ob o Iuxta Southamp∣ton. Sancti Dio∣nis. P K. Richard the first, called Cord -Lion, Anno Dom. 1179. Blacke Canons.— 0091 09 00 o Southampton.— Beatae Mariae Magd. H Confirmed by Pope Alexander, Anno Dom. 1179. — 0016 16 02 ob o Apple-durwell, in the Isle of Wight. —P Nicholas Spenser, and Margerie his wife.— — .— Praeceptoria. — — — 0118 16 7 oo Bello-loco— —M. King Iohn. — — 0428 06 08 oo o Bromere.— S. Trinity. P S. Mary. S. Michael. Baldwin Earle of Riuers, and Deuonshire. — Blacke Canons.— 0200 05 01 ob o Chritwynh ms si e Christ-church of Twynham. —P Isabel de Fortibus, sometime Countesse of Albemarle and Deuonshire, and Lady of the Isle founded it for William de Forti∣bus Earle of Albemarle, and Richard de Red ers Earle of Deuonshire, A. D. 1161. This is placed also in Deuonshire. 0544 06 00 oo o Caresbroc in the Isle of Wight. S. Mary Magd. —P — Blacke Monks.— Deretford in the Isle of Wight. Sāctae Elizabetha. P King Edward the third.— — Ham le.— Saint Andrew. —P — Grey Monks.— Hide.— Saint Peter. M Saint Paul. S. Grimball. First King Alfride, after performed by K. Edward Senior, and lastly the Monks themselues remoued from the old, tem∣pore Henrici primi. Blacke Monkes.— 0865 01 06 ob q Mottisfount.— Sanctae Trini∣tatis. P Ranulph Flammard Bishoppe of Durham, Richard de Riparijs Earle of Deuonshire, and William de Bruere, tempore Gulielms Rufi. Blacke Canons or Augustines of Berton. 0167 15 08 ob o Portsmouth.— A Church and Hospitall. Peter de Rupibus. — — 0033 19 05 ob o Quarrer in the Isle of Wight. S. Mary Magd. —M Baldwine Earle of Deuonshire, and Richard his sonne. About the time of King Stephen. White Monkes.— 0184 01 10 o o Redford or Red∣bridge. —M — — Romsey.— —N King Edgar, and Earle Alwyn. — Nunnes.— 0528 08 10 ob o Southwyke.— Saint Mary. —P William Pontlarge, siue Pont-le-arch, and William Danys Normans. Also William de Ponteys a Benefactor. Regular Canons.— 0314 17 10 ob o Tychefeild.— Saint Marie —M Peter de Rupibus Bishop of Winchester. — — 0280 19 10 ob o Whorwell.— Sanctae Crucis N Saint Peter Queene Aelfrith. — Blacke Nunnes.— 0403 12 10 o o Wyntney.— —P — — 0059 01 00 oo o — Sāctae Elizabethae C — — 0112 17 04 ob o — Sanctae Crucis. —H Henry Blois brother to King Stephen. — — 0084 04 02 o o HEREFORD-SHIRE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l s d ob q Hereford.— S. Mary Epā tus. S. Ethelbert Milfrid a petty King of the Country. Reinelm Bishop, tempore Henrici primi. Secular Canons.— Hereford.— S. Guthlac. —F Henry Penbrigge. — Grey Friers.— 0121 03 03 ob o Hereford.— S. Peter. S Paul. —P Iohn Pe brigge. — Blacke Monkes.— Acornebury.— S. Katherine. —N — VVhite Nunnes.— 0075 07 05 ob o Barrone.— — — Blacke Monks— Clyfford.— Saint Marie. —P — Blacke Monkes.— 0065 11 11 oo o Dore.— Saint Mary. —M Robert Lord of Ewias — White Monkes.— 0118 00 02 o o Flansford.— —M Richard Talbot. — Regular Canons.— 0015 08 09 oo o Kilpeke.— —P — — Ledbury.— S Katherine. —H Iohn Bishop of Hereford. — — 0022 05 00 oo o Leomenstre.— Saint Iacob. —P M rewald a King of the Mercians, and K. Henry the first. Blacke Monks of R ding. Lymbroke.— —N — VVhite Nunnes.— 023 17 08 o Wiggemore.— Sancto Iacobo. —P — Blacke Canons.— Wormesty.— —P — — 0083 10 02 Hertford, a Cel to S. Albans. —P — Blacke Monkes.— 0086 14 8 Saint Albans. — Saint Alban Martyr. M Offa King of the Mercians, Anno D . 795. Blacke Monkes.— 2510 06 01 ob q HERTFORD-SHIRE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l s. d. ob. q. Beluero, a Cel to S. Albans. Saint Mary. S. Ioh. Baptist. P — Blacke Monkes.— 0135 05 10 oo o Bosco, neere Flamsteed. S. Egidius. —N — Nunnes.— 0046 16 01 ob o Button.— Saint Marie. —P — Monkes.— Binham, in Com. Norff. A Cel to S. Albant. —P — — 0160 01 00 oo o Chesthunte.— —N Henr. Rex Angliae, Domin us Hibernia, Dux Norm. Aquitan. & Comes Anged. confirmed Shestrehunt Moniales totam terram Dom. ten. cumpertin. suis quae Canonicis de Catha∣le, quos amoueri fecimus. At Westm. 11. Aug. 24. Regni nostri. Nunnes.— 0027 06 8 Chille.— —N — Blacke Nunnes.— Chiltree.— —N — Blacke Nunnes.— Hatfeild Peue∣rel, in Com. Es∣sex, A Cell to Saint Albans. Saint Mary. —P Daughter of Ingelrick, and wife to Peue∣rel, in K. William the Conquerors time. Blacke Monkes of Saint Albans. 0083 19 07 o o Hychin.— —F K. Edward the second; Iohn Blomnil, and Adam Rouse, and Iohn Cobham. Carmelites or White Friers. 0004 09 04 Langley Regis.— —F Robert, sonne of Roger Helle Baron.— Preaching Friers.— 0150 14 08 o o Langley, vid Leicestershire. —N Fundator Antecessor vxoris Francisci Bigo Militis, & einsdem vxoris Sororum. Nunnes.— Mersey.— S. He∣len. P Alien Roger Fitz-Ran lph. — — Mirdiall.— Saint Mary. —P — Blacke Canons.— Monketon, in Dioc. S. Dauids, A Cel to S. Albās —P — — 0113 02 06 ob q New-bigging infra villam de Huchyn. —P — — 0015 01 11 oo o Royston, alias Cr x Rohay∣siae. S. Iohn Bap∣tist. S. Th m. Martyr. P Eustach de Marc Knight, Lord of N cels, and Radulphus de Rancester, and others renued it. Canons.— 0106 03 01 oo o Royston.— S. Iohn. S. I mes Apostles. H — — 0005 06 10 oo o Roweney.— A Free Chappel or Hospitall. — — 0013 10 09 o o Sopewell.— Saint Mary. N The Abbots of Saint Albans. — Blacke Nunnes.— 0068 08 00 oo o Thele.— —C William Bishop of London. — A Master. 4 Chaplens. Tynmouth, in com. Northb. a Cel to S. Albans. —P Fundator Antecessor Dueis Norfolcia. — — 0511 04 01 ob o Ware.— —P The Progenitors of King Richards mother.— — Wymondley.— —P Richard Argenten. — Canons.— 0037 10 06 ob o HVNTINGDON-SHIRE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. . . q. Huntingdon.— Saint Mary. P Eustachius Lo tot. — Blacke Canons Augustines. 0232 0 00 ob Huntingdon.— S. Iohn Baptist —H Founded by Dauid Earle of Huntingdon, Lord of Connington, tempore H. 2. — 0006 07 08 oo o Hinchingbroke.— —N William Conqueror, in place of Eltesly by him suppressed. Nunnes.— 0019 09 02 oo o S. Neot, A Cell to Becco in Nor∣mandy. —P E. Aelfric first: Roisia de Claraster. A. D. 1113.— Blacke Monkes.— 0256 01 03 ob o Ramsey.— Saint Mary S. Benedict. M Earle Aylwin. Anno Dom. 969.— Blacke Monkes Benedictines. 1983 15 03 oo q Saltry.— Saint Mary. —M Simon 2. Earle of Huntingdon: Kinges of Scots, and Lords of Connington, in the raigne of King Stephen. White Monkes Cistertians. 0199 11 08 oo o Stoneley.— —P Mande le Earle of Essex. — Blacke Canons Augustines. 0046 00 0b oo o S. Yuo, A Cell to Ramsey. —P Earle Ad us in the raigne of Ed d Ir side. Blacke Monkes Benedictines. KENT. Places Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. . . . Canterbury. Christ-Church Saint Trinity —. P ll beleeuing Romans, after Et l∣red King of Kent. — 2489 04 09 oo o Iuxta Canter∣bury. Saint Augu∣stine. M King Ethelbert, and after King Edward the second. Blacke Monkes.— 1412 04 07 ob q Iuxta Canter∣bury. S. Gregory, or S. George. P Lowffran Archbishop there.— Blacke Canons.— 0166 04 05 ob o Iuxta Canter∣bury. Saint Sepul∣ hers. N — Black Nunnes.— 0038 19 07 ob o Canterbury.— —F King Henry the third.— Grey-Friers.— Canterbury.— —H — Poore Priests.— 0010 13 08 ob o Iuxta Canter∣bury. Saint Laurence. —H — — 0031 07 10 o o Canterbury extra Mur s. Saint Iacob. —H — — 0032 11 01 ob q Ailefford.— —F Richard Lord Grey of Cod r, in the time of King Henry the third, Anno Dom. 1240. Carmelites or white Friers. Ashford.— —C Sir R. Fogge Knight.— Priests.— Beigham.— Saint Marie. —P The Ancestors of Thomas Sak ile, Alij Sir Robert Thornham. White C nons.— 0152 19 04 ob Bels ton or Bilsington. Saint Mary. —P Iohn Maunsell Praepositus Be lacen∣sis for King Henry the third, and Elea∣nor his wife. Blacke Canons.— 0081 01 06 o o Bradgare.— —C Robert de Bradgare, T. Ioseli Clerie. and Iohn at Uise. — Bradesoke.— S. Radegundis. —M Hugh the first Abbct.— White Canons.— 0142 08 09 o o Boxley.— Saint Marie M William de Ipres a Fleming, Earle of Kent, tempore Regis Stephani. White Monkes.— 0218 19 10 o o Cobham.— —C Iohn Baron Cobham. — — 0128 01 09 ob o Combewell.— S. Mary Magd. M — Blacke Canons.— 0080 17 5 o q Dar ford.— —N King Edward the third, Ann Reg i Ang∣lia 30. Francia ver 17. Nunnes.— 0400 08 00 oo o Daunton.— —N — Blacke Nunnes.— Douer.— Saint Marie, Saint Martin P King Henry the first.— Blacke Monkes.— 0232 01 05 ob o Douer, Dei. —H Henricus tertius Rex Anglia. — Knights Templers.— 0159 18 06 ob q Eastbridge.— —H King Henry the first gaue for William his Father, quicquid Robertus Bru dederat Ec lesia de Esteburch, & fratribus ibidem Regularibus. — 0023 18 09 ob q El et.— —N Dom ▪ — Nunnes.— Feuersham.— S. Sauiours. —M King Stephen and Maud his wife.— Blacke Monkes Cluniacenses. 0286 12 06 ob o Folkestone.— S. Eanswide. —N Eanswide daughter to Eadbald King of Kent: After Roger Segrane and Iulian his wife, and Iohn Clinton Baron. Blacke Nunnes.— 0063 00 07 o o Greenwich.— —F King Henry the seuenth.— Obseruant Friers.— Greenwich.— —C William Lambard. — Queen Elizabeths poore people. Greenwich.— F Alien K. Edward the third, Anno Regni 55. Iohn Norbury. Frier Minors.— Harballdowne.— —H Iohn Stratford, or Stafford, Archbishop of Canterbury. — 0109 07 02 oo o Heyham.— —N — Blacke Nunnes.— Horton.— Saint Iohn Euangelist. P — Blacke Monkes Cluniacenses. 0111 16 07 ob o Langdon.— S. Th . Martyr. M — White Canons.— 0056 06 09 o o Leedes.— Saint Nicholas. P Robert Cre equeur. — Blacke Canons Augustines. 0362 07 07 o o Lesnes vpon Thames. S. Augustin or S. Th. Martyr. P Richard de Luci , Chiefe Iustice of Eng∣land. Anno D . 1179. Blacke Canons.— 0186 09 00 o o Lewesham— P Alien Iohn Norburie. — Blacke Monkes.— Maidstone.— Omniū Sanctorū. C Boniface of Sa y. — — 0159 07 10 oo o Malling.— Saint Marie. —N Gundulph Bishoppe of Rochester. — Blacke Nunnes.— 0245 10 02 ob o Mottynden.— —M — — 0060 13 00 ob o Newenden.— —F Built at the charges of Sir Thomas Al∣buger Knight, A. D. 1241. Carmelites or White Friers. Northgate.— Saint Iohns —H — — 0091 16 08 ob o West Peccam.— — Praeceptoria Iohannes Culpepper, Iustic. de communi Banco, Anno 10. H. 4 — 0063 06 08 o o Reculuer.— —M Bassa an English Saxon.— — Rochester.— Saint Andrew. —M Bishop Gundulph a Norman, A. D. 1080.— Blacke Canons.— 0486 11 05 o o Rochester.— S Bartholmew, —H King Henry the third confirmed it, and Edward the third discharged them of all Taxes, Tallages, &c. Leprosi. — Rumney.— P Ali — — Sandwich.— —F Henry Cowfeild an Almane, Anno D . 1272. Carmelites or White Friers. Sandwich.— Saint Thomas. H Thomas Ralyng Clerke, William Swanne Clerke, Iohn Goddard and Richard Long. — Strode or Strowde. —H Robert Glanuile. — — 0052 19 10 ob o Swingfeild.— — Pracept ria. — — 0087 03 03 ob o Sh pey.— S. Sexb rg. N Sexburga wife of Erc bert King of Kent or East-Angles, Anno D . 710. Nunnes.— 0129 07 10 ob o Shepey.— Saint Marie. — William de-la-Poole Marquesse of Suffolke, by the name of William de-la—Poole Earle of Suffolke. Tunbridge.— S. Mary Magd. —P Richard Clare Earle of Glocester. — Blacke Canons.— 0169 10 03 o o Wingham.— —C Founded by Archbishop Pecham. — Canons.— Wye.— —C Iohn Kempe Archbishoppe of Canterbu∣rie. Priests.— 0093 02 0 ob o — Saint Mary S. Swythin. Sir Iohn Segraue. — — LANCA SHIRE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob. q. Lancaster.— Saint Marie. —P Iohn Earle of Morton, and confirmed by him afterward when hee was King of England. Monkes.— Lancaster.— —A Cell Roger of P ictiers. — Monkes Aliens. — Burstough.— —P — Canons.— 0129 01 00 o o Calder.— — Fundator Antecessor Domini de Copeland. — — Cartmele.— —P William Marshall the elder, Earle of Pem∣broke for King Henry the second, Anno D . 1188. — 0113 19 07 oo o Cokersand.— —M Ranulph de Meschines. — Monks Cluniacks.— 0228 05 04 ob o Conyshed.— —P Fundator Antecessor G lielmi Pennington. — — 0124 02 01 o o Furnes.— —M Stephen Earle of Bullen, afterward King of England. Monks Cistert ans.— Holland.— —P Robert Holland and Maud his wife. Alij Antecessores Comitis Derbia. — 0061 03 04 o o Horneby.— —Cella Fundator Antecessor Domini Mounteagle. — — Ieruaux.— —M — — Manchester.— —C The Grelleyes Ancestors to Thomas West Lord La Ware, tempore H. 5. — Penwortham.— —M — — 0114 16 09 oo o Whalley.— —M The Ancestors of the Lacyes Earles of Lincolne, Anno D . 1296. White Monkes.— 0551 04 06 oo o LEICESTER-SHIRE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. . d. b. q. Leicester.— Saint Mary. —M Robert de Bossu, Earle of Leicester. — Blacke Canons or Friers Preachers. 1062 00 04 ob q Iuxta Leicester Castle. Saint Mary. —C Henry Duke of Lancaster. — — 0023 12 11 o o Bredon, A Cell to S Oswald. —M Fundator Domini Regis Proge tor. Alij Al Earle of Cornwall. Blacke Canons.— 0025 08 01 o o Bradley.— —P — — 0020 15 07 oo o Burton.— — Mowbrayes and by a common contributi∣on ouer all England. Leprosi. — 0265 10 02 o q Canwell.— —M. The Ancestors of the Lord Lizle. — — 0025 10 03 oo o Croxton.— —M The Lord Barkleyes Ancestors.— Pramonstratenses. — 0458 19 11 ob q Castledonington.— S. Iohn Baptist. —H — — 0003 13 04 o o Cumbe.— Saint Mary. M — White Mo kes.— Cale.— —P — Blacke Canons.— Dalby-Rothley Heyther. Praceptoria. — — — 0231 07 10 oo o Garradon.— —M Fundator Antecessor Comitissa Oxford. — — 0186 15 02 ob o Gracedew, nee re Donington. —N Roisia wife of Bertram de Verdon. — Nunnes.— 01 08 02 ob o Gerewerdon.— Saint Mary. M — White Monkes.— Hinkley.— —P Alien — — Kirkby Bellers.— —P Roger Bel rs, and A yse his wife.— — 0178 07 10 oo q Launda.— —M Richard Basset Di c. Lincoln. — Blacke Canons.— 0510 16 05 ob q Langley.— — Fundator Antecessor Uxoris Frane. Bigot Mil. & Vxoris S ∣rum. Nunnes.— 0034 06 02 oo o Litterworth.— Saint Iohnns. H — — 0 26 09 5 o o Noui-Operis.— —C — — 0595 7 04 o o Olneston, or Oselneston. —M Robert Grimbald. — — 0173 18 09 oo q Staue.— N — Blacke Nunnes.— Vlneserost.— —P Roger Quiney Earle of Wint n. — — 0101 03 10 ob o Werewerdon.— —M — Blacke Canons.— — Saint Ursula. —H — — 0008 00 00 oo o LINCOLNE SHIRE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob q Lincoln Epātus. — Saint Marie. —M — Secular Canons.— Lincolne.— —F M. Odo de Kilkenny, a Scotish mam, A. D. 1269. Carmelites or White Friers. Lincolne.— Saint August. —F — Friers Eremites.— Lincolne.— —F Iohn Pickering of Stampwike. — Friers Minors.— Iuxta Lincolne.— S. Katherine. —P Robert de Caneto Bishop of Lincolne. — Gilbertines.— 0270 01 03 oo o Aluingham.— Saint Mary. —P Anthony de Bec Bishop of Durham and Pa∣triarch of Ierusalem. White Canons and Nuns Gilbertines. 0141 15 00 oo o Balwatus Aqui∣lae. — — — 0124 02 00 oo o Bello-vero, siue Beauuoir. Saint Marie. — Ralph de Todeney. — Blacke Monkes of S. Albans. 0129 17 06 o o Berling s.— —M Radulphus de Haya. — — 0307 16 06 oo o Bolyngton.— Saint Marie M — White Canons and Nuns Gilbertines. 0187 07 09 oo o Boston.— —M S. Botolph in the Saxons time.— — Boston.— —F Sir Orby, A. D. 1300.— Carmelites or white Friers. Boston luxta Mare. Saint Mary. —P T. Morley Knight, Iohn Bacon Esquier, Iohn Hagon, Thomas Hoke de Shynham, and Iohn Hyrd of Boston. — Boston,— Beatae Mariae. C — — 0024 00 00 oo o Boston.— Corporis Christi. C — — 0032 00 00 oo o Boston.— Saint Peter. —C — — 0010 13 04 o Bradney.— Saint Oswald. M Confirmed by William de Gannt, sonne and heire of Gilbert de Gannt, Anno Dom. 1115. — 429 07 00 oo o Brunne.— Blacke Canons.— — — Bryggerd.— —P — — 0101 11 00 ob o Cateley, or Cat∣lin. Saint Marie. —M Iohn Spaule Esquier.— White Canons & Nuns Gilbertines. 0038 13 08 o o Croyland or Crowland. —M Aethelbald King of the Mercians, Anno Dom. 716. It was new built at the benenolence of the whole land, giuen vpon pardon for their sinnes. Blacke Monkes.— 1217 05 11 oo o Elsham.— —P William Dyne. — Blacke Canons.— 0083 17 10 oo o Eppworth in the Isle of Axholme. A Conuentual House. Thomas Mowbray Earle of Nottingham & Marshall of England. Carthusians.— 0290 14 07 ob q Fosse.— —N — Nunnes.— 0008 05 04 oo o Frisetun.— — Mauritius de Creon Baron.— Blacke Monkes.— Glamfordbridge in Parochia de Wrawby. —H William Tirwhit. — — Goykewell.— —N — Nunnes.— 0019 18 06 oo o Greenfeild.— Saint Mary. —N Dudon de Gro esby. — Blacke Nunnes.— 0079 15 01 o o Grimmysby.— Saint Leonard —N Robert Grosted Bishoppe of Lincolne, and Thomas Hesterton Knight. Blacke Nunnes.— 0012 03 07 o Grimmesby.— S. Augustine. & S. Toloss. Fundator Domini Regis Progenit r. — Blacke Canons.— Hagneby.— —M Herbert of Orbe or Orreby. — — 0098 08 04 oo o Hauerholm.— Saint Mary. M Alexander Bishoppe of Lincolne. — White Canons, & Nuns Gilbertines. 0088 05 05 oo o Heuings.— —N — — 0058 13 04 oo o Hunston or Humberston. Our Lady & S. Peter. M Fundator Domini Regis Progenitor. — — 0042 11 03 oo o Irford.— —M — — 014 13 04 ob o Kirksted.— Saint Marie. —M Hugh Britay. — White Monkes.— 0338 13 11 ob q Kyme.— —M Philip de Valisby. — — 0138 04 09 oo o Letherstoke.— — Iohn Gifford Clerke.— — Leyborne.— Our Lady M Robert Fitz Gilbert. — — 0057 13 05 o q Louthparke.— Saint M ry. —M — White Monkes.— 0169 05 06 ob o Markeby.— —P — — 0163 17 06 ob o Newebo.— —M — — 0115 11 08 o o Newhouse.— S. Martiall. — Peter de Ga lia. — White Canons, the first house of the Order Prmon∣stratenses in Eng∣land. Newnersby, or Nun-orm by. —P — White Canons & Nuns Gilbertines 0098 00 00 oo o Newsom.— —M — — 0114 01 04 ob o Newsted neere Stansford. —M — Gilbertines.— 0042 01 03 oo Newsted neere Axhol e. —P — — 0055 11 08 oo o Noton, or N c∣ton-Parke. S. Mary Magd. M Robert D'Arci . — Blacke Canons.— 0052 19 02 ob o Nun-Cotton.— Saint Mary. P — White Canons and Nunnes. 0046 17 07 oo o Oxeneyes.— — — Blacke Canons.— Raueston.— Saint Augustin. —C — — Reuesby, or Reuyswy. —M William Romare. — Nunnes.— 0349 04 10 oo o Sempringham.— Saint Gilbert. M Saint Gilbert beginner of the said Order.— White Canons & Nuns Gilbertines. 0359 12 07 oo o Sixle.— Saint Marie. — — Whit Canons & Nuns. Spalding.— Saint Mary, and S. Nicholas. M Iuo Talbois comes Andegauensis, and William de Romara, and Lucy Coun∣tesse of Chester and Lincolne. Audegauenses Mo∣nachi. 0878 18 03 oo o Iuxta Stansford — Saint Michael. M — Blacke Monkes.— 0072 18 10 ob o Stanford.— Saint Mary & Saint Nicholas — Blacke Monkes.— 0065 19 09 o o Stanford.— —F King Edward the third.— Carmelites or White Friers. Stanford.— —H William Browne Citizen there.— — Stanford.— —H The L. Burghley L. Treasurer of Engand. — — Staynsfeld.— —P Confirmed by K. Iohn for his Father Hen∣ry the second. Blacke Nunnes.— 0112 05 00 oo o Stixwold or Stixwell. Saint Marie. —M Lucie first Countesse of Perch. — White Canons and Nunnes. 0163 01 02 o ob Swinshed in Holland. Saint Marie. —M Sir Robert Grisley. — White Monks.— 0175 19 10 oo o Syxhill.— —P — Gilbertines.— 0170 08 09 o o Tatteshall.— —C Sir Ralph Cromwell Knight.— — 0348 05 11 ob q Temple-Bruer.— Praeceptori . — — — 0184 06 08 oo o Thorneholme.— —P — — 0155 19 06 ob o Thornton.— —M — — 0730 17 02 ob o Torington.— Saint Marie. — William de Arundell. — Blacke Canons.— Torkesey.— —P — Blacke Canons.— 0027 02 08 o o Tupholme.— Saint Mary. M Alain Neuill. — White Canons.— 0119 02 08 oo o Valla Dei.— Saint Mary. —M Gilbert Gaunt Earle of Lincolne. — White Monkes Cistertians. 0177 15 07 ob q Wello.— —M — — 0152 07 04 oo o Willoughton.— Praeceptori . — — — 0174 11 01 ob o — Saint Peter. & Saint Paul M — — 0197 17 05 oo q — Omnium Sāctorū H — — 0018 16 00 ob q MIDDLESEX. London within the VVals. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob. q. Eccles. Cath. — Saint Paul. — Ethelbert King of Kent, Anno Dom. 610.— Secular Canons.— Iuxta Ludgate.—F — K. Edward the first, and Aeli ora his wife. Robert Kilwarby Archbishop of Canterbu∣ry, & the Citizens of London, A. D. 1276 Blacke Friers.— 0104 15 04 oo o Iuxta Newgate. F — Queene Margaret second wife to K. Ed∣ward the first, and Iohn of Britain, Earle of Richmond, with diuers other Citizens of London, A. D. 1225. & 1306. Friers Minor. or Grey Friers. 0032 19 10 oo o Iuxta Alders∣gate. C Saint Martius. — Ingelricus and Edward his brother, Anno Dom. 1056. Secular Clerks.— Guild-hall.— — Peter Stambarr, Adam Frances, Henry de and William Brampton Chap∣lens, A. D. 1299. A Chappell and 4. Chaplaines. 0012 18 09 oo o In Cheap-side.—H S. Thom. of Acon. — Thomas Fitz-the bald de Heily, & Agnes his wife, sister to Thomas Becket; in the raigne of Henry the second. — 0277 03 04 oo o In Candleweek street. C Corpus Christi. — Iohn Poultney Maior of London, Anno 20. Edward. 3. — 0079 17 11 oo o S. Laurence Pountney. VVhittingdon.—C — Richard Whitingdon a Citizen of Lon∣don, An. 3. H. 6. — 0020 01 10 oo q In Gay spur lane. Elsing Spittle. H — William Elsing Citizen of London. An. Dom. 1329. Anno 3. Ed. 3. Canons Regular, A lij 100. blind men. 0239 13 11 ob o In Lothburie.— — Anno Dom. 1257.— Fratres de Sacra. — In Broadstreet.—F S. Augustin. — Humfrey Bohun Earle of Hereford and Es∣sex, A. Dom. 1253. Austine Friers.— 0057 00 04 oo o In 3. Needle street, A Cel to S. Antho∣ny of Uienna. H S. Anthony. — King Henry the third.— — In Bishopsgate streete. N Saint Helens. — William Basing Deane of Paules, in the se∣cond yeare of Edward the second. Blacke Nunnes,— 0376 06 00 oo o In Leaden-hall.—H S. Trinitatis. — William Rouse, Iohn Risby, and Thomas Ashby Priests. A. D. 1466. 60. Priests.— Iuxta Aldgate Christs Church P The holy Trinity.— Queene Matilda wife to K. Henry the first Anno Dom. 1108. Blacke Canons or Canons Regular. In Hartstreet.— — Ralph Hosiar, & William Sabernes. A. D. 1298. Fratres Sancta Crucis. 0052 23 2 oo o Barking Chappel.— Our Lady.— Iohn Earle of Worcester, made it a fraterni∣ty. King Richard the third made it a Colledge of Priestes, and reedified it. — London without the VVals, in the Suburbes. Westminster.—M Saint Peter. — Sebert King of the East-Saxons, Dunstan B. of London. K Edward Confessor. Backe Monkes.— 3977 06 04 ob q Westminster. C Saint Stephen. — King Stephen: after by King Edward the third. Secular Canons.— 1085 10 05 oo o Westminster in Tote-hill street.. H — The Lady Anne Dacre. — — 0100 00 00 oo o Westminster.—H Saint Iames. — The Citizens of London. — — Westminster neer Charing Crosse, A Cell to our Lady of Rouncinall in Nauarre. H Saint Marie. — Anno 15. Edward 4.— — Westminster, S. Giles in the fields. H — Queene Matilde, wife to King H. 1. A. D. 1117 — Westminster, The Sauoy. H Saint Iohn Bap. — King Henry the seuenth. A. D. 1509.— — 0529 15 07 ob o In Fleetstreet New Temple. Our Lady.— Founded by themselues in the raigne of Henry the second. Knights Templers.— In Fleestreet.— — Richard Grey of Codnor. A. D. 1241.— VVhite Friers.— 0063 11 04 o o In Smithfield.—M S. Bartholmew. — Henricus Rex Anglia pri , Ec∣clesiam. After by Rahere first Prior of the same, Anno Dom. 1102. Blacke Canons or Canons Regular. 0757 08 04 ob q In Smithfield. H S. Bartholmew. — Rahere a Prior, A. D. 1102.— — 0305 06 07 oo o The Charter∣house in Saint Iohns street. — Sir Walter Many of Cambrey Knight, A. D. 1340. or 1371. Carthusians.— 0736 02 07 oo o In Saint Iohns street. P Saint Iohn of Ierusalem. Iorden Brises Baron, and Muriel his wife. A. D. 1100. — 2385 19 08 oo o Clerken-well. N Saint Mary. — Iorden Briset Baron, the sonne of Ralph, Anno Domini 1100. and Muriel his wife. Black Nunnes.— 0282 16 05 oo o Exta Creples∣gate, Corpus Christi. H Our Lady, Saint Giles. Matildis Regina, Henrici secundi A∣uia. After by Iohn Bela r, 35. Edw. 3. — In White Crosse street. H Saint Giles. — King Henry the fift.— Of the French Order. Halywell.—N S. Iohn Baptist. — A Bishoppe of London. — Blacke Nunnes.— 0347 01 03 oo o Extra Bishops gate, New-Hospitall. P Beata Maria, — Walter Brunne and Roisia his wife, A. D. 1235. Canons Regular.— 0557 14 10 ob Extra Algate. N Saint Clare, — Blanch Queene of Nauarre, and her hus∣band Edmund E. of Lancaster, Leicester, & Darby, brother to K. E. 1. 1292. 21. E. 1. Nunnes Minors.— 0342 05 10 ob o In East Smith∣field neere the Tower. New Abbey. M S. Marie Gracis. King Edward the third, Anno regni cius 25. A. D. 1359. White Monkes Cistertians. 0602 11 10 ob o Neer the Tower. H S Katherine. — Matilda wife to King Stephen, and after by Aelioner, wife to King Edward the first. A Custos. 3. Chaplens. 3. Sisters. 18. poore women. 6. poore Clerks. 0315 14 02 o o Middlesex. Iuxta Brainford. F Ecclesia sancto∣rum Angelorū. Iohn Sommerset Chancellor of the Exche∣quor, and the Kings Chaplaine. — Kylborne. N Saint Mary. — — Nunnes.— 0086 07 6 o o Hownslow. Domus — — Captiues.— 0080 15 00 ob o Langley.— — The Earle of Derby. — — Okeburn.—P. Alien — — — Stanes.—P — Ralph Stafford. — — Stratford Bow.—M Sancti Leonards. — King Henry the second.— Nuns or white Monkes. 0121 16 00 oo o Syon.—M — King Henry the fift, Ann. 2. of his raigne. Nuns & Priests Augustines. 1944 11 08 o q Vxbridge.—M Saint Mary. — Hugh Rowse. — — NORFFOLKE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob q Norwich produced frō the Abbey of Feschamp in Normandy. Ecc. Cat. Saint Trinity.— Elbert de Losing. Bishop Herbert of Thetford, Anno Dom. 1096. in the raign of King William Rufus. Black Monks, Bene∣dictines. 1061 14 03 ob o Norwich.—F — Philip Cowgate Citizen & Maior of Nor∣wich, A. D. 1268. Carmelites or White Friers. Norwich.—F — Iohn Hestynford.— Grey Friers.— Norwich,—F — — Blacke Friers.— Norwich.—F — Remigie, or the King.— Austine Friers.— Norwich.—H Saint Egidius.— — — 0090 12 00 oo o Linne.—F — Lord Bardolf, Lord Scales, and Sir Iohn Wignhall, Anno Dom. 1269. Carmelites or white Friers. 0001 15 08 oo o Linne.—F — Thomas Geduey.— Blacke Friers.— Linne.—F — T. de Feltsham.— White Friers.— Linne.—H Saint Iohn.— — — 0007 06 11 o o Attilburgh.—C Sancta Crucis.— Robert Mortimer.— — 0021 16 00 ob o Beeston.—P — — — 0050 06 04 ob q Blakburgh.—N — — Nunnes.— 0076 03 09 ob o Blakeney.—F — Lord Rosse, Sir Robert Bacon, and S. Iohn Bret Knights, A. D. 1321. Carmelites or White Friers. Bokenham, ali∣as Bukkenham P Saint Iacob.— — Blacke Canons.— 0131 11 00 oo o Bromhall in Windsor Forrest. P — Edward the Blacke Prince.— — Bromholme.—P S. Sepulchers.— G. Glamnile.— Blacke Monkes Cluniacenses 0144 19 00 ob q Bromholme.— Saint Andrew.— William Glamnile.— Benedictines.— Brunham.— — Sir Ralph Hempnall, and Sir William Cal∣throp, Anno Dom. 1241. Carmelites or white Friers. 0002 05 04 oo o Budham.— Saint Mary.— — Blacke Canons.— Carow.—N Saint Mary.— King Stephen.— Blacke Nunnes.— 0084 12 01 ob q Carbroke.—C S. Iohn Ierusalem.— — — 0065 02 09 ob o Castell-acre.—M Saint Marie.— — Black Monks Clunic.— 0324 17 05 ob q Crobbehouse.—N — — Nunnes.— 0031 16 07 oo o Flytham, A Cel to Walsin∣gham. N — — Nunnes.— 0062 10 06 ob o Hempton or Hompton. P Our Lady and Saint Stephen. Richard Ward Chanon here.— — 0039 00 09 oo o Heringby. C — — — 0023 06 05 oo o Hilderlands. H — — — 0000 14 00 o o Horsseham.—P Saint Fidis.— Robert Fitz-Walter.— Blacke Monkes Benedictines. 0193 02 03 ob o Hulme.—M Saint Benedict.— King Kanute the Dane. After K. Edward Confessor. Blacke Monkes.— 0677 09 08 oo q Hyckelyng.—P — — — 0137 00 01 ob q Kockesforth, or Cokesford. M — Sir William Cheyney Knight.— Blacke Canons.— 0153 07 01 oo o Langley.—M — Fundator Antecessor vxoris Francisci Bigot Militis, & eiusdem vxoris Sororum. Vide Hertf. & Leicest. Nunnes.— 0128 19 09 ob o Marmound. N — — White Nuns Gilbert.— 0013 06 01 ob o Markham Bar∣bara. M — — — 0042 04 07 ob q Pentney and Wormegay. M S. Mary Magd.— Reginald de Warenna.— Blacke Canons.— 0215 18 08 oo o Rushworth. C — Sir Robert Wingfeild Knight.— — 0085 15 oo ob Shuldeham.—P Sancta Crucis & S. Marie. — White Nunnes Gilbertines. 0171 06 08 oo o Thetford.—F Sancta Trinitatis.— Bishoppe Arfast of El ham, in the raigne of King Edward Confessor, made it a Bishoppes See. After Hen∣ry Duke of Lancaster, made a Socie∣ty of Preachers. Friers Preachers.— Thetford.—F — Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster.— Augustine Friers.— Thetford.—F S. Sepultur.— The Earle of Warren.— Blacke Friers.— Thetford.—P S. Mary, & S. Iohn— Roger Bigod Earle of Norffolke.— Blacke Canons.— 0049 18 01 oo o Thetford.—N Saint Gregory.— — Blacke Nunnes.— 0050 09 08 o o Thetford.—M Saint Andrew.— Hugh Bigod Steward to King Henry.— Blacke Monkes Clunicenses. 0418 06 03 ob o Thetford.—C Beata Mariae.— — — 0109 00 07 oo o Thetford.— S. Mary Magd, & S. Iohn Bap. Iohn Warren Earle of Surrey.— — Tomeston.—C — Thomas de Shardelow, and Iohn his brother A. 23. E. 3. 6. Chaplens.— 0052 15 07 ob Wabburne.—P — — — 0028 07 02 oo o Walfingham—M Saint Marie— Edmond Earle of March, and Elizabeth de Burgo. Blacke Canons Friers Minors. 0446 14 04 ob q Wendling.—F — William de Wendling Priest.— Austine Friers.— 0055 18 04 ob q Westacre. P S. Mary & alSaints — Blacke Canons.— 03 19 11 ob q Westdereham. M — — VVhite Canons.— 0252 12 11 ob o Weybridge or Wexbridge. P Saint Margaret. — Robert Oliuer, Thomas Munday, Iohn Pal∣mar and Iohn Barford. — 0007 13 04 oo o Wirham.—P VVinewald.— — Black Canōs de martial Wymondham.— Saint Marie — William D'Albiney, Butler to King Henry the first. Blacke Monks of S. Albans. 0072 05 04 oo o Yarmouth.—F — King Edward the first, Anno Domini, 1278 Carmelites or white Friers. Yarmouth.—F — Galfridus Pilgrim, and Thomas Fastolfe — Blacke Eriers.— Yarmouth.—F — Sir William Gerbrigge. — Grey Friers.— Iuxta Yar∣mouth in Castretleg. C S. Iohn Baptist. — First Robert de Castre, after by Iohn Fa∣stolfe Esquier, father to Sir Iohn Fa∣stolfe. — Yngham. P Saint Marie — — Blacke Monkes of Saint Albans. 0074 02 07 ob o —F — — Friers Preachers.— 0000 18 00 o o —F — — Austine Friers.— 0001 04 06 oo o NORTHAMPTON-SHIRE. Places Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob. q Northampton.—M Saint Iacob. — — Blacke Canons.— 0213 17 02 ob o Northampton. P Saint Andrew. — Simon de Sancto Licio, first E. of Northampton. — Blacke Monkes.— 0334 13 07 oo o Iuxta Northāp ton. N S. Mary de pra∣tis, or de laprey Simon de Sancto Licio second Earle of Northampton. Nunnes.— 0119 09 07 oo q Northampton.—F — — Friers Minors or Grey Fricrs. 0006 17 04 o o Northampton.—F — — Friers Preachers.— 0005 07 10 oo o Northampton.—F — Simon Mountfort, and Sir T. Chitwood Knights. A. D. 1271. Carmelites or white Friers. 0010 10 00 oo o Northampton.—N Saint Mary. — — Blacke Nunnes.— Northampton,—F — Iohn de Glannile. — Augustine Friers.— Asheby.—P — — — 0127 19 00 oo o Catesby.—N S. Tho. & S. Mary. — — Nuns of Sempringham. 0145 00 06 oo o Chacum.—P S. Peter. S Paul. — William Knowles. Sir Hugh Awresey. — Blacke Canons.— 0093 06 03 ob o Cotherstoke.—C — Iohn Gifford Clerke, A. 22. E. 3.— — Dauintree.—P Saint Austin. Angl. Apost. Fundator Domini Regis Progenitor. — Blacke Monkes Clunicenses. 0236 07 06 oo o Fynneshed the Church of Saint Maries of the Castel of Hyuiell. M S. Mary the Virgin Richard Engaigne. — — 0062 16 00 oo o Foderinghay. C — Edmund de Langley Duke of Yorke. King H. 4 and Queen Ioan his wife, an. 13. lastly, H. 5. and Edward Duke of Yorke. — 0419 11 10 ob o Gare.—N S. Mary Magd. — — Blacke Nunnes.— Higham-Ferrars. C — Henry Chicheley Archbishop of Canterbury. — — 0156 02 07 ob o Brackley. C — The L. Zouchs. — — Irt elingburgh. C — Iohn Pool. — A Dean & 6. Clerks.— 0064 12 10 ob o Iuxa Kingesthorp H Saint Dauid. — — — 0024 06 00 oo o Peterborough. M Saint Peter. — Wolpherue. fil. Regis Restani Etheldredus. Ethelwoldi. Blacke Monks.— 1972 07 00 q Pipewell.—P Saint Mary. — William Boteuillei, & Robert Boteuillei, & Ranulph Earle of Chester. A. H. 2. White Monkes Cistertians. 0347 08 00 ob o Rothewell.—N S. Iohn Baptist. — — Nunnes.— 0010 10 04 oo o Sainct-Dauy. P Saint Trinity, & Saint Mary. — Blacke Canons.— Sewesby or Sewardesley. N S. Mary Magd, — — Black Nunnes.— 0018 11 02 oo o Stanford.—N — — Nunnes.— Sulby.—M Saint Mary. — — Blacke Monkes.— 0305 08 05 ob o Towceter.—C — — — 0019 06 08 oo o Withorpe.—M — — Blacke Monkes.— H Saint Leonard. — — — 0010 00 00 oo o H Saint Iohns. — — — 0025 06 02 ob q C Omnium sanctorum — — 0001 19 04 oo o P S. Michael. — — Blacke Monkes.— NOTTINGHAM-SHIRE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob. q. Nottingham. F — Sir Reginald Grey of Wilton, and I. Shir∣ley, Anno Dom. 1276. White Friers.— Nottingham. F — King Henry the third.— Grey Friers.— Nottingham. H — Iohn Plomtree. — — Bawtree. H — — — 0006 06 08 oo o Bella valla. P — Iohn Cantelupe, and Nicholas de Cantelupe Confirmed by Edward the third, Anno 19. Angliae, & 6. Franciae. Carthusians Cistertians. 0227 08 00 oo o Bingham. C Beatae Mariae. — — — 0040 11 00 oo o Blythe. P Saint Mary. — Roger Busly, and Foulk de Lisieurs. — Blacke Monkes.— 0126 08 02 ob o Blythe. H — — — 0008 14 00 o o Brodham. P — — — 0016 05 02 oo o Clyston. C — — — 0020 02 06 oo o Felley. M Our Lady.— Fundator Antecessor Iohannis Chough Militis. Iohn Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury. Blacke Monkes.— 0061 04 08 oo o Lenton P Sanctae Trinitatis. — William Penerell the base sonne of King William the Conquerour. Black Monks, Clu∣niacenses. 0417 19 03 oo o In Marisco, apud Capell. Sancti Tho∣mae Ebor. Cel∣la. — — — 0063 06 08 o o Mattersey.— — Fundator Antecessor Edwardi Thirland. — — 0061 17 07 oo o Newsteed, or Nono-Loco in Shirwood. Our Lady.— King Henry the second.— — 0219 18 08 ob o Rufford. M — Dominus Beaumount Antecessor Domini Norreys. White Monkes.— 0254 06 08 oo o Shelford. P — Ralph Hanselin: & H. Norris Antecessor. — — 0151 14 01 oo o Southwell. C — Paulinus the first Archbishop of Yorke. — — 0039 05 06 ob o Thurgarton. P Saint Peter. — Sir Ralph D'eincourt, and confirmed per Regem. Blacke Canons.— 0359 15 10 oo Wallingwells. N — The Lord Fitz-Hugh, Ancester to the L. Dacres. Nunnes.— 00087 11 06 o o Welbeck. M Saint Iames. — Fundator Antecessor Episcopi Eliensis. Tho. de Cukeney, or Cokeney. Blacke Canons.— 0298 04 08 oo o Workesope. M Saint Mary of Radford. William Louetot, and the Ancestors of the Earle of Shrewsbury. Blacke Canons.— 0302 06 10 oo o NORTHVMBERLAND. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob. q Alba-Launda, or Blanche∣land. M — Fundator Antecess. Comitis Westmorlandia. Iohn de Torington a Benefactor. K. Iohn confirmed it. Anno 16. Cistertians.— 0044 09 01 ob o Alnewicke or Holne. F — Iohn Lord Uesey (Antecessor Cmitis Nor∣thumbria) brought this Order first in∣to England. A. D. 1240. Carmelites or White Friers. 0194 07 00 oo o Barwicke. F — Sir Iohn Grey, Anno Dom. 1270.— Carmelites or White Friers. Brekenbourne. P — William Batram the elder, father to Roger Bartram, tempore Regis Iohannis. — 0077 00 00 oo o Frameland, Ferne-Eland, or Flaneland. Cel la. — — — 0012 17 08 oo o Hexham.—P — Fundator Antecessor Archiep. Eboracensis. — — 0138 01 09 oo o Holiscombe. N — — Nuns.— 0015 10 08 o o Insula-sacra.— Cella — — — 0060 05 00 oo o Lambley.—N — The Lucies. — Nunnes.— Newcastle. F — — Grey Friers.— Newcastle. N — — Nunnes.— 0037 04 02 oo o Newcastle. F — King Edward the first.— Carmelites or White Friers. Newcastle. H S. Mary. Magd. — — — 0009 11 04 oo o New-Mona∣stery, alias New Minster. M — Fundator Antecessor Domini Dakers. — — 0140 10 04 oo o Ouingham Cella de Hexam. — — — 0013 04 08 oo o Tynmouth. a Cell to Saint Albans in Hertford∣shire. N — Fundator Antecessor Ducis Norfolcia. — Nuns.— 0511 04 02 ob o OXFORD-SHIRE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob. q Oxford, Eccle∣sia Cathedralis. — King Henry the eight.— — Oxford. P S. Frideswid. — Frideswida filia Algari, Restaurator Ethel∣redus Rex, & Dom. Regis Progenitores. Nuns, afterwards Blacke Canons. 0224 04 08 9 Oxford.—F — Richard Cary. — Fratres Sanctae Crucis. — Oxford.—F — Henricus Rex. — Friers Minors, or Grey Friers. Oxford.—F — K. Edward the second, Anno 11. Edwardi 2. Carmelites or White Friers. Oxford. F — — Blacke Friers.— Oxford. F — King Henry the third.— Augustine Friers.— Oxford. M S. Mary Osney. — Rob. the sonne of Niele, brother of Rob. D Oily a Norman, A. D. 1129. Blacke Canons.— 0755 18 06 ob Oxford. M Locus Regalis, alias Rewley. Edmund Earle of Cornwall. — Monkes Cistertians.— 0174 03 00 oo o The Colledges in Oxford. Vniuersity Colledge. — First King Aelfred, after William Archdea∣con of Durham. Baliol Colledge. — — Iohn Baliol Father of Iohn Baliol King of Scots, tempore H. 3. Merton Colledge. — — Walter Merton B. of Rochester. Anno D. 1274. Exceter Colledge. — — Walter Stapledon Bishop of Excester, tem∣pore Edw. 2. Harts Hall. — — Walter Stapledon Bishop of Excester, tem∣pore Edw. 2. Kings, now O∣riall. Colledge. — King Edward the second.— S. Maries Hall. — — King Edward the second.— Queens Colledge. — — Queene Philip wife K. Edward the third.— S. Edmunds Hall — — Edmund Archb. of Canterbury, vt creditur. Canterbury now Christs Church Colledge. — Simon Islip Archbishoppe of Canterbury. After Cardinall Wolsey, and K. Hen∣ry the eight. S. Mary, alias New Colledge. — William Wiccam Bishoppe of Winche∣ster. Gloucester Colledge — Benedictine Monkes. — Durham, now Trinity Colledge. — Thomas de Hatfeild, Bishop of Durham. After in our time, Sir Thomas Pope knight Lincolne Colledge. — — Richard Fleming Bishop of Lincolne. — S. Albans Hall. — — — Broadgate Hall — — — All-Soules Col∣ledge. — Henry Chichley Archbishop of Canterbury tempore H. 5. New Inne. — — — Bernard now S. Iohn Baptist Colledge. — Henry Chicheley, Archbishop of Canter∣bury, tempore H. 5. After in our time, Sir Thomas White L. Maior of London. Sancti Iohannis Hospitale, now Mary Magda∣len Colledge. — Fundator Henricus Rex, Afterward Willi∣am Wainflet B. of Winchester. Magdalen Hal. — — William Patten, alias Wainflet. — Brasen Nose Col ledge. — William Smith Bishop of Lincolne, tempo∣re H. 7. Doctor Nowell Dean of Pa les, Benefactor. Corpus Christi Colledge. — Richard Fox B. of VVinchester, Hugh Ol∣da B. of Excester, Benefactor. Iesus Colledge. — — Hugh Price Doctor of the Lawes.— Wadham Colledge. — Wadham, an Esquier, and his wife.— Banbury. H Saint Iohn. — — — 0015 01 10 ob o Banbury. C Beate Mariae. — — — 0048 06 00 oo o Brackele. P Saint Mary. — — Blacke Canons.— Bruern. M Saint Mary. — Nicholas Basset. — White Monkes.— 0124 10 10 oo o Burcester, vulgo Bisset r. Saint Eadburgh. — Gilbert Basset, and Egelina Courtney his wife, tempore Henrici Secundi. — 0167 02 10 oo o Burford. P — — — 0013 06 06 oo o Chiping Norton in Ecclesia. — — — 0007 14 00 oo o Clattercote. M Sancti Leonardi. — — — 0034 19 11 oo o Coges. P — — Blacke Monkes.— Dorchester. M Saint Peter and Saint Paul. Birinus the Apostle of the West-Saxons, and after by Nicholas Huntercombe, heire of William Huntercombe. Blacke Canons.— 0219 12 00 oo o Ewelme, or New Elme. H — William de la Pole Duke of Suffolke. — — 0020 0 0 o o Eynsham, M Saint Marie. — Athelmar a Nobleman. King Aethelred confirmed it. A. D. 1005. Blacke Monkes Benedictines. 0421 16 01 oo o Godstowby Oxf. N Saint Mary. — Dame Ida a rich Widow. Repaired by K. Iohn. Blacke Nunnes.— 0319 18 08 oo o Goring. N Saint Marie — — Blacke Nunnes.— 0060 05 05 oo o Lidmore, alias Littlemore. N — Fundator Domini Regis Progenitor. — Blacke Nunnes.— 0033 06 08 oo o Norton.—P — Domini Regis Progenitor. Reginald Earle of Boloigne gaue 108½. Acres to it. Richard Sergeaux. Blacke Canons.— Saucombe. P Saint Marie. — — Blacke Canons.— Stodeley. N Saint Mary. — Peter Corbyzen▪ and William de Cantelop. — — 0102 06 07 oo o Tame. M Saint Mary. — Alexander Bishoppe of Lincolne, the great builder of Castles. White Monkes.— 0256 13 07 ob o Wroxton. P Saint Mary. — Master Michael Bylet, for Heruey Bylet his Father, and confirmed by K. Iohn. Canons.— 0078 14 03 o o RICHMOND-SHIRE. Places Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob. q Richmond. M Saint Agath. — Roaldus Constable of Richmond, and Gra∣cian his wife. Fundator Antecessor. Dom. Scroope. A. D. 1152. — 0188 16 02 oo o Richmond. H Saint Nicholas. — — — 0010 00 00 oo o Couerham, ali∣as Somerham M — First founded at Swaynsie by Halwisia daughter of Ralph Glam ill, wife to Ralph Lord of Midleham, but remo∣ued after to Couerham. A. D. 1182. Chanons Prae∣monstratenses. 0207 14 08 oo o Cander. M — — — 0064 03 09 oo o Ellerton. N Saint Mary. — William Fitz-Pier. — Nunnes.— 0015 14 08 oo o Furnesse. M Saint Mary. — First, Stephen Earle of Bolleyn. Anno Dom. 1127. After William de Mow∣bray gaue lands to it, which lands hee had of Richard Moruill, and Amie his wife. King Henry the 1. confirmed it. VVhite Monkes.— 0966 07 10 oo o Fountaines. M Saint Mary. — Thurstin Archbishoppe of Yorke. A. D. 1132. White Monkes.— 1173 00 07 ob o Gilling. N — — Nunnes.— Ieruall. M Saint Mary. — Stephen Earle of Britaine and Richmond. — White Monkes Cistertians. 0455 10 05 oo o Iuxta Kendall. H — — — 0006 04 03 oo o Neere Knares∣brough. F Saint Robert. — Richard King of Romains, Earle of Corn∣wall, A. D. 1218. Friers.— 0035 10 11 oo o Maryke. N — Askes. — Nunnes.— 0064 16 09 oo o Middleham, or Barnards Castle. — Richard Duke of Yorke. — — Nun-Munketon. N — Fundator Antecessor G ll. Gascoign Militis. Nunnes.— 0085 14 08 oo o Rybleston. Com∣mendary. — — — 0207 09 07 oo o Rypon Eccles. Collegiat. — — — 0035 03 08 oo o Rypon. H S. Mary Magd. — — — 0024 00 07 o o Rypon. H S. Iohn Baptist. — — — 0016 14 04 oo o Seton. N — Fundator Antecessor Henrici Kirkeby. — Nunnes.— 0013 17 04 oo o Welles. H S. Michael. — Ralph Lord N ill. A. D. 1367.— — 0020 17 11 oo o RVTLAND-SHIRE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualew. l. s. d. ob. q Occham, vnder the custodie of a Prior of Saint Anne Carthu∣sians by Couen∣tree. Saint Iohn H Euangelist. H William Dalby of Ext . — 2 Chaplens, 12 poore, each 30. s. yeerely. Brooke.— S. Mary the Virg. P — 0043 13 04 oo o SHROPSHIRE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l s. d. ob. q. Shrewsbury. M Saint Peter, Saint Paul. Saint Melb. Roger Earle of Mountgomery. Anno Dom. 1081. Blacke Monkes.— 0615 04 03 ob o Shrewsbury, Eccles▪ Collegiat. Saint Chadds. — — — 0014 14 04 oo o Shrewsbury, Ecc. Colleg. Saint Mary. — — — 0013 01 08 oo oo Shrewsbury. F — — Carmelites or white Friers. Shrewsbury. F — — Blacke Friers.— Shrewsbury. F — Geffrey Lord of Powis. — Grey Friers.— Abberbury, giuen to Al-Soules in Oxford by the King. P Ali∣en. — Fundator Domini Regis Progenitor. — — Battlefield. C — King Henry the fourth.— — 0054 01 01 oo o Bildewas. M Saint Marie. — Roger Bishop of Chester. — Black Monkes Cistertians. 0129 06 10 oo o Brewood. M — — — 0031 01 04 oo o ridgenorth. H F — Iohn Earle of Shrewsbury, Cosen and Heire to Ralph Strange Originall Founder. Grey Friers,— 0004 00 00 oo o B umfeild.— — — Blacke Monkes.— Chirbury. P — — — 087 07 04 oo o Halisowen. M — King Iohn. Peter de Rupibus Bishoppe of Winche∣ster. — 0337 15 06 ob o Haughmond. M Saint Mary, & S. Iohn Euang. William Fitz-Alane. — White Canons.— 0294 12 90 oo o Ludlow. F — Sir Laurence Ludlow Knight, An. Dom. 1349. Carmelites or White Friers. Ludlow. F — Edmundus de Pontibus, siue Briggman▪ Benefactor. Augustine Friers.— Ludlow. H Saint Iohn. — — — 0017 03 03 o o Lyleshull. M — Bea meis Family.— Blacke Canons.— 0327 10 00 oo o Stone. P Saint Michael. — — Blacke Monkes.— Tonge. C Saint Barthol∣mew. Isabel wife of Fulke de Penbridge Chena∣lier. — 0022 08 01 oo o Wenlocke. P Saint Milburg. — Earle Roger of Montgomerie. A. D. 1081. Blacke Monkes.— 0434 00 01 oo o Womebridge. P — — — 0072 15 08 oo o Wygmore. M — Hugo de Mortu -Mari, A. D. 1172.— White Canons. 0302 12 03 ob o STAFFORD. SHIRE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob. q. Lichefeild Eccles. Cath. — Oswy King of Northumberland made it a Bishoppes See. Pope Adrian made it an Archbishops See. Grey Friers, and lately Canons. Lichefeild. P S. Iohn Baptist. — Roger B. of Couen ree and Lichefeild. — — Lichefeild. H Saint Iohn. — — — 0008 15 00 oo o Stafford, P Saint Thomas Martyr. Ralph Earle of Stafford, and Richard Bi∣shop of Chester. Blacke Canons & Augustines. 0141 13 02 oo o Stafford. C Saint Marie. — — Grey Friers.— 0035 13 10 oo o Brewood. N — — Blacke Nunnes,— 0011 01 06 oo o Briuerne. P Saint Marie. — — Blacke Monkes.— Briuerne. N Saint Leonard. — — White Nunnes.— Burton vpon Trent. P S. Mary, Saint Modwen. Ulfricke Sprot Earle of Mercia. — Blacke Monkes.— 0356 16 03 ob o Catune. P — — Blacke Nunnes.— Chetwood. P — Iohn Chetwood Chidlet. T. Conell, Willi∣am Gardiner Parson of Somerton. Iohn Parson of Godyngton. — Croxden. P — Barons Uerdon. — — 0103 06 07 oo o Delacresse. M — Ranulph the third of that name E. of Chester. White Monks.— 0243 03 06 oo o Dudley. A Cel to the Priorie of Wenlocke. P — Iohn the sonne and heire of Iohn lare Ba∣ron de Dudley. Blacke Monkes.— Faireweld. N Saint Mary. — — Blacke Nunnes.— Ferburge. H — — — 0050 00 00 oo o Hulton. M — The Ancestors of the Lord Audley. — — 0076 14 10 ob o Lappele. P Saint Remigij. — — Blacke Monkes.— Meriuall..— — — — 0199 14 10 oo o Penchriche.—C — — — Renton.—P — The Noels Ancestors of Sir Simon Harecourt. — 0090 02 10 ob o Roceter.—M — — — 0111 13 07 oo o Stone.—P Saint Wolphade. — Ralph Earle of Stafford. — Blacke Canons.— 0119 14 11 oo o Tameworth.—N — Edith King Edgars daughter.— Veiled virgins or Nūs. Tameworth, Eccles. Colleg. — Marmions of Normandy. — — Iuxta Tame∣worth. H Saint Iames. — — — 0003 06 08 oo o Trentham.—P — Ralph Earle of Chester. — Canons.— 0106 03 10 oo o Tricingham. M — Saint Werburg. — — Tutbury.—P Saint Mary. — Henry de F rrars a Nobleman of Norman∣dy, in the raigne of William Conqueror. Blacke Monks.— 0244 16 08 o o Woller-hamptonC — Clement Luson Chaplen, and William Wa∣terfall. — SOMERSET-SHIRE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob. q. Bristow. M Saint Augustine. — King Henry the second, and Lord Robert the sonne of Harding, the King of Denmarkes sonne. In our time King Henry the 8. made it a Cathedrall Church. Blacke Canons Uictorines. 0767 15 03 oo o Bristow. P Saint Iacob or Saint Iames. Robert Earle of Gloucester, the base sonne of K. Henry the first. Blacke Monkes Benedictines. Bristow. F — King Edward the first. A. D. 1267.— White Friers.— Bristow. Eccl. Colleg. now a Hospitall. — The former by Sir Henry Gaunt knight. The other by Thomas Carre a wealthy Citizen. Orphanes.— Bathe. M Saint Peter, and Saint Paul. King Edgar, Edwyn, Ethelred and Wolstan. Afterward Iohn Bishop of Welles made it a Cathedrall Church, tempor H. 1. Blacke Monkes.— 0695 06 01 ob o Bathe.— — Reginaldus Bishop of Bath. — — 0022 16 09 ob o Welles. M S. Iohn Bap. or Saint Andrew. King I a built the Church and Colledge, King Kinewolph gaue it great possessi∣ons, A . 766. King Edward senior made it a Bishops See. Robert and Iocelinus Bishops, and Ralph of Shrewsbury. Secular Canons.— 0041 03 06 ob q Welles. H — Nicholas Bubwith Bishop.— 24. Poore.— Glastenbery. M Saint Marie. — Ioseph of Arimathea. De i Bishoppe of S. Dauids. Twelue Northerne men. King Ina. Dunstane changed these Monkes into Benedictines: this Or∣der continued 600. yeeres. Blacke Monkes.— 3508 13 04 ob q Athelme. M Saint Peter, S. Athelwin. King Alfred. — Blacke Monks.— 0209 03 00 oo q Barlynch. P — Fety-places.— — 0098 14 08 ob o Bearwe. N S. Mary. S. Edwin. — — Blacke Nunnes.— Bridgewater. P — — Grey Friers,— 0120 19 01 ob o Bridgewater. H Saint Iohn. — William Briewer iunior. — — Buckland. P — Amice Countesse of . — — 0223 07 04 ob o Bruton. M Saint Mary. — The Mo s there entombed.— Benedictines.— 0480 17 02 oo o Cadbury, or North-Cad∣bury. C Saint Michael. — Elizabeth Botreaux, and her sonne William Botreaux. A Rector. 7 Chaplaines. 4 Clerks. Cliue. M — — VVhite Monkes.— 0155 09 05 oo q Conington. N Saint Marie. — William de Romara, Cosen to the Earle of Lincolne. Blacke Nunnes.— 0039 15 08 oo o Dunkeswel. P — William Briewer iunior. — — Dunster. P — Iohn de Mohun de D ster. — — 0037 04 08 oo o Fareley. P S. Mary. Magd. — Humfrey Bohun. — Blacke Monkes— Henton.— — Ela Countesse of Salisbury. — Carthusians.— 0262 12 00 oo o Keynsham. M Saint Mary. — William Earle of Gloucester. — Blacke Canons.— 0450 03 06 oo o Montague. M Saint Peter & Saint Paul. Earle Moriton brother by the mothers side to K. W. Conqueror, confirmed by H. 1 Blacke Monkes Cluniacenses. 0524 11 08 ob o Moundroy. C — — — 0011 18 08 oo o Muchelney. M Saint Peter. — King Athelstane. — Blacke Monkes.— 0498 16 03 oo q Mynchinbarrow. P — — — 0029 06 08 ob o Stoke vnder Hamden. C Saint Andrew. — Gornays. — Blacke Monkes.— Tau ton. N Saint Peter and Saint Paul. William Giffard and Henry de Bl is Bishop of Winchest r. Blacke Nunnes.— 0438 09 10 oo o Temple-Combe Commendary. — — — 0107 16 11 ob o Westbury. C — William Canings Maior of Bristow. — — Worspring. P — — — 0110 18 04 ob q Wytham.— Saint Mary. S. Iohn Bapt. All-Saints. King Henry the third.— Carthusians.— 0227 01 08 oo o —H Saint Katherine. — — — 0021 15 08 oo o Yeueley, or Iuell. — Iohn Woborne Petty Canon of Paules, and Richard Hewet. — SVF FOLKE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. . ob. q. Ipswich. P Saint Trinity.— Norman and Iohn de Oxenford. — Blacke Canons.— 0088 06 09 o o Ipswich. M Saint Peter and Saint Paul. Cardinall Wolsey, but before him Th as de Laey and Alice his wife. Blacke Canons.— 0088 06 10 oo o Ipswich. F — Henry de Manesby, Henry Redred, and Hen ry de . Frie s Preachers.— Ipswich. F — The Lord Bardeley, Sir Geffrey Hadley, and Sir Rob. Nort n knights. A. D. 1279. Carmelites or White Friers. Ipswich. F — Robert Tilbot. — Gr y Friers.— Ipswich. F — Iohn Hares gaue ground to build their house (larger. Blacke Friers.— Blyburgh. P — King Henry the first. Richard Beluois, or Beanuols Bishop of London. Blacke Canons.— 0048 08 09 oo Brisete.—P Saint Leonard. — — Blacke Canons.— Bungey N — Roger Glanuil and Gundreda his Wife, Alij, the Ancestors of Tho. Brotherton, Earle of Norffolke. Nunnes.— 0062 02 0 oo o Burshyerd or Brusyed. M — — — 0056 02 01 o Butley. P Saint Marie — Ralphde Gla ile. — Blacke Canons.— 0318 17 02 ob q Campsey. M Beatae Maria Virginis. — — 0182 09 05 oo o Clara or Stoke. P Saint Iohn. Bapt. — Henry Earle of Essex, and Isabel his wife. Blacke Monkes or Austine Friers. Cnobersburg, or Burgh-Castell. — Fursey a Scotish man. Also Sigebertus King of the East Angles. — Denston. C — — — 0022 08 09 oo q Dodnash. M Saint Mary. — The Ancestors of the Duke of Norffolke — — 0042 18 08 ob o Dunwich, Sedes Episco∣palis. — Foelix the Burgundian, that reduced the East-Angles againe vnto the chri∣stian faith, Anno Domini, 630. — S. Edmundsbury. M — King Canute. — Blacke Monkes.— 2336 16 00 oo o Saint Edwards place, si Edwards∣stow. M — Peter Bishoppe of Winchester. — — Eye. M Saint Peter. — Robert Malet Lord of Eye. — Blacke Monkes.— 0184 09 07 ob q Flyxton. M — — — 0023 04 01 ob q Heringflete. M Saint Olanes. — Roger the sonne of Osbert. — Canons Regular.— 0049 11 07 oo o Hoxon. M — — — Leiston. N Saint Mary. — 1 Ralph Glanuile. 2 Sir Robert Ufford. White Canons Pramonstratenses 0181 17 01 ob o Letheringham. P — — — 0026 18 05 oo o Liteburch. P Saint Mary. — — Blacke Canons.— Mettingham. C Beatae Maria Uirginis. Sir Iohn de Norwich, Lord of Mettin∣gham. — 0202 07 05 ob o Rafford. M Our Lady.— Robert Bishop or Earle of Lincolne. — — Ratisford. H Saint Iohn. — — — 0053 10 00 oo o Redlingfeild. M Saint Mary. — Manasses de Guies. — Blacke Nunnes.— 0081 02 05 ob o Rumbuthe. P Saint Michael. — — Blacke Monkes.— Snapes. P Saint Marie. — William Martill, Alij, Domini Regis Progenitor. Blacke Monkes Roffienses. 0099 01 00 11 ob Stocke. C — — — 0324 04 01 ob o Suthbery. P Saint Barthol . — Simon Sudbiry Archbishoppe of Canterbu∣ry and Iohn Chartsey. Blacke Monks West , or Friers Preachers. 0122 18 03 o o Sybbeton M Saint Mary. — William Cheiney, or de Caneto. — Blacke Monkes Cistertians. 0250 15 07 ob o Walton. P S. Foelicis. — — Blacke Monkes Rochester. Wangsford. P Saint Marie. — Ansered of France. — Blacke Monkes Cluniacenses. 0030 09 05 oo o Wingefeild. C — — — 0069 14 05 oo o Woodbridge. M Saint Mary. — — — 0050 03 05 ob o Wykes.— — Domini Regis Progenitor. — — 0092 12 03 ob o —M Saint Bennet. — — — Ykesworth or Ixworth. P — Gilbert Blund. — — 0280 09 05 oo o SVRREY. Places Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob. q Barmondsey. M S. Sauiours. — Alwyn Childe Citizen of London, Ann. D. 1081. Monkes introduced., A. D. 1087. Blacke Monks Cluniacenses. 0548 02 05 ob q Chartsey. M Saint Peter. — Frithwald a Petty Regent of Surry, Anno Dom. 666. — 0744 13 06 ob q Guilford. F S. Crucis. — — Preaching Friers.— Guilford. F — — Backe Friers.— Horsham. P S. Fidis. — Mary Saint Paul founded it. Alij Robert Fitz-walter and his sonnes. — Lingfeild. C — Reginald Cobham Knight, William Cro∣ an, Iohn Arderne, and Iohn Bay∣hall. — 0075 00 00 oo o Marton. P Saint Mary. — King Henry the first, An. D. 1117.— Blacke Canons.— 1039 05 03 oo o Newarke, vel de Nouo Loco. P Saint Mary and S. Thom. Martyr. — — 0258 11 11 ob o Reygate. P Sanctae Crucis. — William Warren first Earle of Surrey, and after Iohn Mowbray. Augustines.— 0078 16 08 oo o Shene. P — King Henry the fifth.— Carthusian Monks.— 0962 11 06 oo o Southwarke, M Sanctae Mariae Uirginis, de Ouerey. First by Swethen a noble Dame, after by a maiden called Mary, and after con∣uerted to a Colledge of Priests, by William Pont-le-Arch. Canons first in∣troduced. 1016. Blacke Canons.— 0656 10 00 ob o Southwarke. H Saint Thomas. — Richard Prior of Bermondsey, Anno Dom. 1213. — 0266 17 11 oo o Tanrigge. M — — — 0078 16 10 ob q Wauerley. N S. Mary. — William Gifford Bishop of Winchester. — White Monkes.— 0174 08 03 ob o SVSSEX. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l s. d. ob. q. Chichester Epātus. Saint Trinity. — Radulphus Episcopus, primo suo ipsius sump∣tu, deinde munificentia Henrici pri , postea Seffridus secundus eius nominis Episcopus tempore Regis Richardi pri∣mi. Secular Canons.— Chicheste. M Saint Peter. — — Grey Friers.— Chichester. F — — Blacke Friers.— Iuxta Chiche∣ster. H Saint Iacob. S. Mary Mag. — Leprosi. — 0004 03 09 oo o Infra Chichester. H Saint Mary. — — Pauperes. — 0011 11 06 ob o Arundel. H Saint Trinity. — Thomas Earle of Arundel, & Beatrix his wife— Elemosinarij. — 0042 03 08 oo o Arundel. P Saint Nicholas. — Richard Earle of Arundel. — Blacke Monkes.— 0168 00 07 ob o Acceseale.— Saint Peter. — — Blacke Monks.— Battell. M Saint Martin. — King William the Conqueror. A. D. 1066.— Blacke Monkes.— 0987 00 11 ob q Bidlington. H S. Mary Magd. — — — 0001 00 00 oo o Bosenham, or Boseham. M — Di l a Scotish Monke.— — Boxgraue.— Saint Mary. — Iohn Saint Iohn. Alij, Robert de la Haye. Blacke Monkes Benedictines. 0145 10 02 ob o Durfford. M S. Iohn Baptist. — — White Canons Pramonstratenses. 0108 13 09 oo o Eastborne. P — — — 0047 03 00 oo o Hastings. P Saint Trinity. — Founded by Iohn Pelham Knight, when their lands were deuoured by inun∣dation of the Sea. Blacke Canons.— 0057 19 00 o o Lewis. P Saint Pancras. — William de Warren, first Earle of Surrey. Black Monks, Clu∣niacenses. 1091 09 06 oo q Lullmenster. N S. Mary Magd. — — Blacke Nunnes.— Michelham. P S. Mary Magd. — — Blacke Canons Aug.— 0191 19 03 oo o Occeham. P S. Laurence. — — White Canons.— Remsted. N S. Mary Magd. — — Blacke Nunnes,— Roberts Briggs. M Saint Mary. — Aluredus de Sancto Martino, tempore Hen ricisecundi. White Monkes Cistertians. 0232 09 08 oo o Rupperar. N S. Mary Magd. — — Blacke Nunnes.— 0039 13 07 oo o Sel ey. M & sedes E∣piscopal. — King Cedwall. — — Shulbred. P — — — 0079 15 06 oo o Southmalling. C — — — 0045 12 05 ob q Stenings.— S. Mary Magd. — — Secular Canons.— Shoreham. F — King Edward the second and the Lord Mowbray. Carmelites or white Friers. Tortyng. P S. Mary Magd. — — Blacke Canons.— 0101 04 01 oo o Winchelsea. F — King Edw. 2.— Friers Preachers.— —M Our Lady. — William de Buckingham, confirmed by K. Edward 3. — VVARVVICKESHIRE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob. q Warwicke. P Saint Sepulchers. — Richard Neuill Earle of Warwicke. — — 0049 13 06 oo o Warwicke. P — Peter de Mountford. — Blacke Canons.— Warwicke. F — — Friers Preachers.— 0004 18 06 oo o Warwicke. Eccles. Colleg. — — — 0247 13 00 ob Warwicke. H Saint Michael. — — — 0010 01 10 oo o Warwicke. H Sancta Baptista. — — — 0019 03 07 oo o Warwicke.— Saint George. — Robert de Deneby, William Russell, and Hugh Cooke for the state of the King and Anne the Queene. Michael de la Poole, and all their Brethren, and Sisters, and for Enne Prince of Wales. A Fraternity.— Warwicke. Hongingate, Chauntry. — Thomas Beanchampe Earle of Warwicke. — — Warwicke. H Saint Iohn. — Thomas Beanchampe. — — Couentree. P Saint Anne. — Frier Iohn of Northerbury a Carthusian Prior. Carthusians.— 0251 05 09 o o Couentree. P Saint Mary. — King Canute and Leofricke Earle of Mer∣cians, A. D. 1043. Blacke Monkes.— Couentree. F — Sir Iohn Poultney Knight, Anno Domini 1332. Carmelites or White Friers. 0007 13 04 oo o Couentree. H S. Iohn Baptist. — — — 0083 03 03 oo o Alcetter, or Alnecester. P S. Iohn Baptist. — — Blacke Monkes.— 0101 14 00 oo o Asteley. C — Thomas Lord Astley. — Deane and Secular Canons. 0039 10 06 oo o Atherston. F — — Augustine Friers,— 0001 10 02 oo o Auecater A C to Mal∣ rno Priorie in Worcester∣shire. P — — — 0034 08 00 oo o Babelacke. C — — — 0045 6 008 oo o Berdeslege. M Beata Maria. — — White Monkes.— Cadbury.— — The Ancestors of Sir Ralph Botelar knight, Baron, and Lord of Sudley, Treasurer of England. — Combe. M Saint Mary. — Camuils and Mowbraies. — White Monkes.— 0343 00 05 oo o Erneby, or Erdebury. P — — — 0122 08 06 oo o Godscliffe. C — Richard Earle of Warwicke. — — Henwood. N Saint Margaret — Cethelbarne de la Laund. — Nunnes.— 0021 02 00 ob o Kenelworth. M — Geffrey Clinton Chamberlaine vnto King Henry the first. Blacke Canons.— 0643 14 09 ob o Kingeswood. N — — Blacke Nunnes,— Knolle. C — Elizabeth wife to Iohn Lord Clinton. — — 0018 05 06 oo o Maxstocke. P — — — 0129 11 08 ob o Meriuall. M Saint Mary. — Robert Ferrars. A. 1. H. 2.— White Monkes.— 0303 10 00 oo o Nuneaton. N — Amice wife to Robert Bossu Earle of Lei∣cester. Nuns.— 0290 15 00 ob o Pollesworth. N Saint Edith. — Modwena an Irish Virgin. Repaired by R. Mar a Nobleman. Blacke Nunnes.— 0023 08 06 oo o Pynley. N — — Nuns.— 0027 14 07 oo o Stoneley. M — K. Henry the second.— White Monkes.— 0578 02 05 oo o Stratford super Anon. Eccles. Colleg. — Iohn of Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury. — — 0123 11 09 oo o Studeley. P — — Blacke Canons.— 0181 03 06 oo o Thelford.— — The Lucies Knights.— Poore folke and Pilgrimes. 0023 10 00 oo o Wroxhall. N God, and Saint Leonard. Hugh de Hatton. — Blacke Nunnes.— 0078 10 01 ob o VVESTMORLAND. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob. q Sharpe. M — Thomas the sonne of Gospatricke, sonne of Ormes. — 0166 10 06 ob o VVILT-SHIRE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob. q. Salisbury. Epātus. Saint Peter. — Osmond Bishoppe of Salisbury, temp. W. Ru∣fi, Anno Dom. 1091. Secular Canons.— Salisbury. C Saint Edith. — — — Salisbury. F — King Edward the first, and Robert Kilward by Archbishop of Canterbury. Blacke Friers.— Salisbury. F — — Grey Friers,— Iuxta Salisbury. H Saint Michael. — Richard B. of Salisbury, A. D. 1382.— — 0025 02 02 oo o Ambresbury. M — Alfritha King Edgars wife.— White Monkes.— 0558 10 02 oo o Ambresbury. N — King Etheldred. — Holy Virgins.— Austy. H — — — 0081 08 05 ob o Bradnesioke. P Saint Marie. — Walter the eldest sonne of Walter de Eu∣reux, Earle of Rosmar in Normandy. Blacke Monkes.— 0270 10 08 oo o Bromhore, or Bromere. P Saint Mary & S. Michael. Banldwin Earle of Riuers and Deuonshire. — Blacke Canons.— Brioptune. P S. Mary Magd. — — Blacke Canons.— Calne. H — — — 0002 02 08 oo o Crekelade. H — — — 0004 10 07 ob o Edoros. P — King Henry the second, and after Henry the third. Blacke Canons.— 0133 00 07 ob o Edindon. P All-Saints. — William de Edindon Bishop of Winchester. — Bonis hominibus. — 0521 12 05 ob o Eston. P Saint Trinity. — — — 0055 14 04 oo o Farleigh Monachorū P S. Mary Magd. — The Earle of Hereford, or Hertford. — Blacke Monkes Cluniacenses. 0217 00 04 ob o Fishhart. F — Mary Countesse of Norffolke. — Friers Preachers.— Heitesbury, Eccles-Collegiat. — Robert Lord Hungerford and Margaret. — — Henton. N — Dame Ela Countesse of Salisbury. — Nunnes.— Kynton. P Saint Mary, & S. Michael. — Nunnes.— 0038 03 10 oo o Lacocke. M Saint Mary. — Dame Ela Countesse of Salisbury, An. D 1232 — 0203 12 03 ob o Malmesbury. M Saint Adelme. — Madulph an Irish Scot. Adelme his Scholler. King Athelstan. Blacke Monks.— 0803 17 07 oo o Middleton. P — King Athelstan. — — Marleburgh. P Saint Margaret. — Edmund Earle of Cornwall. — Canons.— 0038 19 02 oo o Marleburgh. F — Iohn Goodwyn & William Rems ich, A. D. 1316 Carmelites or White Friers. Iuxta Marle∣burgh. H S. Iohn Baptist. — — — 0006 18 04 oo o Maiden-Bradley. P — Manasses Bisset. Confirmed by King Iohn. — — 0197 18 08 oo o Maiden Bradeley — One of the Inheritrices of Manasses Bisset. — Leprosi. — Stanley. M Saint Mary. — — White Monkes.— 0222 19 04 oo o Wilton. N Saint Mary and Saint Edith. Weolsthan Earle of Ellandanum or Wil∣ton. Edith wife of S. Edward. Blacke Nunnes.— 0652 11 05 oo q Iuxta Wilton. H Sant Egidius. — — — 0005 13 04 oo o Westchurch. P — — — VVORCESTERSHIRE. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob. q Worcester M now Eccl. Cath. Saint Marie, Saint Wolstan, Saint Katherin Sexwulph Bishoppe of the Mercians, Anno Domini 680. Oswald Bishop of Wor∣cester. Wolstan Bishoppe there also Anno Domini, 1090. These continued, 500. yeers. K. Henry the eight, in stead of these placed in it a Dean & Prebends, & ordained to it a Grammer Schoole. Blacke Monkes.— 1386 12 10 ob q Worcester. F — — Grey Friers.— Worcester. F — William Beanchampe. — Blacke Friers.— Worcester. H Saint Wolstan. — — — 0063 18 10 oo o Alcetur. Cellula. — — — 0075 07 00 oo q Bordelege. P Saint Mary. — K. Henry the second, and Maud the Empresse. VVhite Monkes.— Bredon. M — Offa king of the Mercians.— — Brodesey. M Saint Mary. — — White Monkes.— 0392 08 06 oo o Cokehill. N — — White Nunnes.— 0034 15 11 oo o Elnecester. P — — Blacke Canons.— Euesham. M S. Mary, & S. Aedburg. Egwin Bishoppe of VVorcester, first Ab∣bot there with king Kenred the sonne of Wolpher king of the Mercians and K Offa, A. D. 700. Blacke Monkes— 1268 09 09 oo o Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob. q Stokekyrke. Cella — — — 0008 00 00 oo Sutton. Ecclesia Collegiata. — — — 0013 18 08 oo o Swinhey. N — The Ancestors of Sir Iohn Melton knight.— Nunnes.— 0134 06 9 ob o Thy kehead or Thiken∣head. N — The Ancestors of Iohn Aske.— Nunnes.— 0023 12 02 oo o Tickhill. F — Iohn Clarrel Deane of Paules.— Fricrs Augustines.— Warter. P Saint Iacob.— Galfridus Trusbut knight, and William Rosse de Hamela. About king Henry the firsts time. Blacke Canons Augustines. 0221 03 10 oo o Watton. M — Eustach the sonne of Fitz-Iohn with one eye, in the raigne of King Ste∣phen. White Canons and Nunnes. 0453 07 08 oo o Whitby. M Saint Peter & Saint Hilda. Saint Hilda: Enriched by Edelfleda, King Oswins daughter, and himselfe: destroyed by the Danes, it was reede∣fied by William Perey, about the com∣ming in of the Normans. Black Monks.— 0505 09 01 oo o Woderhall, Cella Sanct Trinitatis. — — — 0128 05 03 ob o Woodkirke, A Cell to S. Oswald. — Earle VVarren.— — 0047 00 04 oo o Wycham. M — The Kinges Ancestors▪— White Canons and Nunne . 0025 17 06 oo o Wylberfosse. M — The Ancestors of the Archbishop of Yorke.— Nunnes.— 0028 08 08 o o Yedingham. N — The Ancestors of the Lord Lati er.— Nunnes.— 0026 06 08 oo o —N Saint Clements.— — Nunnes.— 0055 11 11 oo o —H Saint Nicholas.— — — 0029 01 04 oo o —M Sancta Sepultura.— — — 0011 18 04 oo o Montis Sancti Iohannis. Com∣men∣dari . — — — 0102 13 10 oo o Chappell Sepul∣chers. — — — 0138 19 02 ob o S. ASAPH DIOCES. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualew. l. s. d. ob. q Basingwerke in Flintshire. M — — — 0157 15 02 oo o Conway, or Aber-conway in Carnaruon∣shire. M Saint Marie — Kenelme sonne of Geruaise, once Prince of North-Wales. — 0179 10 10 oo o Hawston Com∣men∣darie. — — — 0160 14 10 oo o Lanllugen, or Wanligan, in Montgomere∣shire. N — — Nunnes.— 0022 13 08 oo o Strata-Marcel la or Strat∣marghill, in Montgome∣reshire. M — Owen the sonne of Gryffin, and confir∣med by his sonne ▪ Ann Dom. 1202. — 0073 07 06 oo o Valla de Cruce in Denbigh∣shire. M — — — 0214 03 05 oo o BANGOR DIOCES. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l s. d. ob. q. Bangor. F — — Blacke Friers.— Bardesey in Carnaruon∣shire. M Saint Mary. — — — 0058 06 02 o ob Beaumarys in Anglesey. F — — Grey Friers.— Beth ylhert. M — — — 0069 03 08 oo o Castr. Cubij, Ecclesia Collegiat. — — — 0024 00 00 oo o Holyhead in Anglesey. C — — — Kynner in Merion th∣shire. M Saint Mary. — Lewellyne the sonne of Geruais. — — 0058 15 04 oo o Penmon. P — — — 0040 17 09 ob o Siriolis. M — — — 0047 15 03 oo o S. DAVIDS DIOCES. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Ualue. l. s. d. ob. q Abe guylly. C — — — 0042 00 00 oo o Alba-launda, in Carmar∣denshire. M — — — 0153 17 02 oo o Brechon. P S. Euangelist.— — — 0134 11 04 oo o Cardigan in Cardigansh. P — — — 0013 04 09 oo o Carmarden, in Carmardensh. F — — Grey Friers,— 0174 00 08 oo o Combehyre. M — — — 0024 19 04 oo o Iuxta S. Dauids in Pembrokesh. C Saint Mary. — Iohn Duke of Lancaster. — — 0106 03 06 oo o Denbigh in Denbighsh. F — Iohn , Ann , 1339.— Car elltes or White Friers. Saint Dogma∣ lls in Pe ∣brokshire▪ M — Marti de Turonibus Lord of Ke ys: after by Willia Ualence, H. 3. — 0068 01 06 oo o Hau ford∣west in P ∣brokeshire. P — — — 0135 06 01 oo o Kydwelly in Carmardēsh. Cel∣la. — — — 0029 10 00 oo o Llanleyre in Carmardesh. M — — — 0057 05 04 oo o Newport. F — — Austine Friers.— Pulla. P — — — 0052 02 05 oo o Slebach in Bembrock∣shire. Prae∣cepto∣ria. — — — 0184 10 11 ob o Strata lorida o Stratflow∣er in Cardi∣ganshire. M — Griffith Rhese and Meredith. — — 0122 06 08 oo o Swansey Gardianatus — — — 0020 00 00 oo o Talleia. M Saint Mary. and S. Iohn Bapt. Restus. — — 0153 01 04 oo o Tyronense.— — Robert Martin, tempore Hen. — — LANDAFFE DIOCES. Places. Dedication. Founder and Time. Order. Value. l. s. d. ob. q Landaffe. Eccles. Cath. Saint Telean. — German and Lupus rench Bishops.— — Abergeuenny in Monmouth shire. P — — — 0059 04 00 oo o Brecknocke a Cell to Bat∣tell Abbey. F S. Iohn Euang. — Barnard de Newmarch: Miles and Roger Earles of Hereford, in the raigne of H. . Blacke Friers.— Cardiffe. F — — Grey Friers.— Cardiffe. F — — Blacke Friers.— Chepstow, in Monmouthsh. M — — — 0032 04 00 oo o Gods-grace or Gratia Dei in Monmouth shire. M Beata Maria Virginis. — — 0019 04 04 oo o Goldcliffe, in Monmouthsh. P — Chandos, — — S. Kynmercy, with a Chap∣pell. P — — — 0008 04 08 oo o Lanterna in Monmouthsh. M — — — 0071 03 02 oo o Malpas, by Newport neer the Riuer of Uske. Cel la. — — — 0014 09 11 oo o Monmouth in Monmouthsh. P S. Katherine & Saint Florence. — Blacke Monkes.— 0056 01 11 oo o Morgan in Glamorgansh. M — William Earle of Gloucester. — — 0188 14 00 oo o Neth in Glamorgansh. M Beata Maria Virginis. Richard Gran ils. — — 0150 04 09 oo o Tinterna in Monmouthsh. M — Walt rus fili s Richards, Comitis de Ogi, frater G berti Comitis Pembrochia. — 0256 11 06 ob o Vske in Monmouthsh. P — — — 0069 09 08 ob o The Totall Number and Valevv of these and all the Promotions Spirituall certified at the Taxation in King Henry the eight his time of the first Fruites and Tenthes, are by the Record, as followeth. Promotions. Nūber particular Number totall. Value totall. Archbishoprickes and Bishoprickes.— 21. Deaneries.— 11. Archdeaconries.— 60. Dignities and Prebends in Cathedrall—Churches.— 394. l. s. Benefices.— 8803. 12474. l. 320180. 10. Religious Houses.— 605. Hospitals.— 110. Colleges.— 96. Chauntries and free Chappels.— 2374. Taken from the possession of the Clergy by Henry the eight, and conuerted to temporall vses out of the former summe, 161100. l. 9. s. 7. d. q. Since in this precedent Table, wee haue laide to the Readers view a great part of this Kings ill, the waste of so much of Gods reuenewe (howsoeuer abused) let him not holde it in curiosity, out of season, since it may in charity fall well in sequence by setting downe the Churches either erected, or restored by him, or by him (which is the now state of our Clergy) continued, to redeem his memory blemished by the former error, from the vulgar aspersion of sacrilegious impietie. This King after the dissolution of the Religious houses, erected these sixe Bishoprickes, to witte, West∣minster, Chester, Peterborough, Oxford, Bristoll, and Gloucester, whereof the fiue last are in esse, and at the same time he erected also these Cathedrall Churches here after mentioned, wherein he founded a Deane, and the number of Prebends following. viz. Canterbury.—12 Winchester.—12 Worcester.—10 Chester.—6 Peterborough.—6 Oxford.—6 Ely.—8 Gloucester.—6 Bristoll,—6 Carliol.—4 Durham.—12 Rochester.—6 Norwich.—6 The yearely value of which Cathedrall Churches so newly by him erected, with the Collegiats of Windsor, Westminster, and Woluerhampton, ouer and besides the Petti-Cannons, and other inferiour Ministers amoun∣teth by estimation to 5942. l. 8. s. 2. d. The Promotions Ecclesiasticall, which for the most part, except a little pared, hee preserued entire, are in a generall estimate by the Shires, wherein they stand in the ensuing Table expressed. The present Number and Value of the Spirituall Promotions in England and Wales. Counties. Promotions. Value. l. s. d. ob. q. Barkeshire.— 139.— 2 53 06 00 ob o Bedfordshire.— 116.— 1506 05 05 oo o Buckinghamshire.— 172.— 2236 02 06 oo q Cambridgeshire.— 151.— 1902 18 07 ob o The Town of Callis, and the Marches therof.— 26.— 0590 06 10 oo o Cheshire.— 68.— 1776 12 00 ob o Cornwall.— 161.— 2706 16 02 oo o Cumberland and Westmorland.— 63.— 1022 06 06 ob q Darby.— 106.— 1017 11 10 ob o Deuonshire.— 394.— 7466 01 04 oo o Dorsetshire.— 248.— 3077 05 08 ob q The Bishopricke of Durham in the County of Northumberland. 118.— 2332 07 05 ob o Essex.— 378.— 5347 06 11 oo q Yorkeshire.— 440.— 4974 00 00 ob o Glostershire.— 288.— 3296 06 04 ob q Huntingtonshire.— 79.— 1097 02 06 oo q Hartfordshire.— 120.— 1837 16 00 ob o Herefordshire.— 160— 1364 19 02 ob q Kent.— 335.— 3974 13 00 ob q Lancashire.— 30.— 0789 10 01 oo o Leicestershire.— 199.— 2564 14 08 oo o Lincolneshire.— 638.— 6129 01 04 ob o The City of London. — 96.— 3365 00 10 ob o Middlesex.— 58.— 1074 19 06 ob o Norffolke.— 668.— 6505 15 10 ob o Northamptonshire.— 271.— 3884 08 11 ob q Nottinghamshire.— 168.— 1640 07 09 ob o Oxfordshire.— 164.— 1917 17 07 ob o Rutlandshire.— 52— 0548 00 10 oo o The Archdeaconry of Richmond.— 105.— 1841 11 08 ob q Shropshire.— 190.— 1530 05 10 ob o Staffordshire.— 134.— 0884 03 11 oo o Southamptonshire.— 158— 3749 06 07 ob o Sommersetshire.— 385.— 4910 13 07 oo q Suffolke.— 428.— 4811 08 00 oo o Surrey.— 113.— 1701 08 09 oo q Sussex.— 322.— 3069 16 04 oo o Warwickshire.— 158.— 1732 18 10 ob q Worcestershire.— 153.— 2035 14 00 ob o Wiltshire.— 305.— 3505 02 09 ob q Number totall of the Benefices in England, 8501. Value totall of the Be∣nefices in England, 16772. l. 5. s. 2. The seuerall Dioces of Wales. Promotions. Value. The Bishopricke of Saint Assaph. — 312— 1536 18 07 ob The Bishopricke of Bangor. — 104.— 1225 05 08 oo o The Bishopricke of Landaffe.— 166.— 1204 11 10 ob o The Bishopricke of Saint Dauids. — 323.— 2531 12 09 oo o Number totall of the Benefices in Wales. 905. Value totall of the Benefices in Wales. 6498. l. 8. s. 11. Number total of al the Benefices both in England and Wales. 9407. Value totall of all the Benefices both in Eng∣land and Wales. 113 270. l. 14 s. 1. d. The value of these inferior Promotions in England which haue cure of Soules, I haue suited into seuerall Proportions as they are rated in Re∣cord, and distinguished the Vicaradges from Parsonages in the Table following. Liuings vnder tenne pound.—4543 Personages.— Vicarages.— Liuings of tenne pound, and vnder twentie Markes. 1445. Personages.—905. Vicarages.—540 Liuings of twenty Markes, and vnder twenty pound. 1624. Personages.—1134. Vicarages.—0490 Liuings of twenty pound, and vnder twenty sixe pound. 0524. Personages.—0414. Vicarages.—0179. Liuings of twenty six nd, and vnder thirty pound. 0206. Personages.—0163. Vicarages.—0043 Liuings of thirty pound, and vnder forty pound. 0248. Personages.—0188 Vicarages.—0060 Liuings of forty pound and vp∣wards. 0144 Personages.—0115. Vicarages.—0029 To preuent any mistaking in the Reader, I haue thought it not vnfitte to conclude this Table with the discouerie of my meaning by certaine letters before vsed. viz. M. Monastery. P. Priorie. F. Frierie. N. Nunnery C. Colledge H. Hospital. EDVVARD THE SIXT OF THAT Monarch 59 Edward VI. NAME, KING OF ENGLAND, FRANCE AND IRELAND, DEFENDER OF THE FAITH, &c. THE FIFTIE NINTH MONARCH OF THE ENGLISH, HIS LIFE, ACTS, AND DEATH. CHAPTER XXII. E DWARD the sixt of that Name, and onely sonne liuing vnto King Henry A. D. 1547. the eight, was borne at his Mannor of Hampton-Court in Middlesex, the twelfth of October, and yeere of saluation, 1537. and sixe dayes after being R. Graston. the eighteenth of the same moneth, hee was created Prince of Wales, Duke of Edward created Prince of Wales presently after his birth. Cornwall, and Earle of Chester: his birth was ioy∣full vnto the King and Commons; but the death of his mother, the vertuous Queen Iane, brought immediat sorow vnto both, whose womb was cut (as some haue affirmed) to the sauing of his, but losse of her owne life, vpon whose death these elegant ver∣ses were writ; Phoenix Iana iacet nato Phoenice, dolendum Sacula Phoenices nulla tulisse duas. Alluding to the Crest of her father a Phoenix in flames within a Crowne. Here lies the Phenix Lady Iane, whose death a Phenix bare, O griefe two Phenixs at one time, together neuer were. (2) Nine yeeres and od monethes hee was ver∣tuously trained vp in the life of his father, and at his death appointed the first of his heires, and for want By his will dated the 30. of De∣cember. A. D. 1546. of Issue (if it so chanced) Mary, and shee failing, E∣lizabeth to succeed in his throne: for as Henry with Salomon was blame-worthy for women, so left hee but one sonne and two daughters, as the other in Scripture is said to haue done: Salomon had Reho∣boam Salomon and Henry compared in their sinnes and in their Issue. a foole and vnfortunate, his daughters, but obscure, and both of them Subiects; but Henry much adoe, lastly to little purpose these Articles were agreed vpon, and sent to the King, the Copy whereof was thus. (22) For asmuch as man, except he be borne of Wa∣ter Articles of the Rebels. Sacrament of Baptisme. and the holy Ghost, cannot enter into the kingdome of God, and for asmuch as the gates of Heauen bee not open without this blessed Sacrament of Baptisme, therefore we will that our Curates shall minister this Sacrament at all times of need aswell in the weeke daies, as on the holy daies. Item, wee will haue our children confirmed of the Bishops whensoeuer we shall within the Diocesse resort vn∣to Confirmation. them. Item for asmuch as we constantly beleeue that after the Priest hath spoken the words of Consecration being at Consectation of the Lords body. Masse, there celebrating and consecrating the same, there is very really the Body and Blood of our Sauiour Iesus Christ God and Man, and that no substance of Bread Holinshed. and Wine remaineth after, but the very same Body that was borne of the Virgine Mary, and was giuen vp∣on the Crosse for our Redemption: therefore we will haue Masse celebrated as it hath beene in times past, without any man communicating with the Priests, for asmuch as many rudely presuming vnworthily to receiue the same put no difference betweene the Lords body and other kind of meate; some saying that it is bread before and after: some saying that it is profitable to no man except hee re∣ceiue it, with many other abused termes. Item we will haue in our Churches reseruation. Item wee will haue holy bread, and holy water in the Reseruation of the Lords Body consecrated. Holy Bread and Holy water. remembrance of Christs precious Body and Blood. Item we will that our Priests shall sing and say with an audible voice, Gods seruice in the Quier of the Parish Churches, and not Gods seruice to be set forth like a Christ∣masse play. Item for asmuch as Priests be men dedicated to God, for ministring and celebrating the blessed Sacrament, and preaching of Gods word, we will that they shall liue chast Priests' not to be married. without marriage, as Saint Paul did, being the elect and chosen vessell of God: saying vnto all honest Priests, be yee followers of mee. Item we will that the sixe Articles which our Soue∣raigne The sixe Arti∣cles. Lord King Henry the eight set forth in his later daies, shall bee vsed, and so taken as they were at that time. Item we pray God saue King Edward, for we be his both body and goods. (23) To these their Demands the King sent this answere, therein pittying their ignorance, and bla∣ming their folly, and therewithall his Generall par∣don, The Kings an∣swere and gene∣rall pardon. to as many as would desist whiles it was time. First he reproued them, for their presumptions, thus contumeliously to rise against their dread Soue∣raigne, to the disturbance of his loyall Subiects peace; whose simplicity they had notoriously abu∣sed, in vsing his name to draw them into action of Rebellion: and no lesse likewise in the grounds of their demands. As in their first Article for Baptis∣me, The first article answered. where it was well knowne the same was admit∣ted as necessity required, or rather commanded by the Booke of Common praier, published by autho∣rity of Parliament, and as themselues knew in pre∣sent practise. But touching the Sacrament in their The second arti∣cle answered. second Article, how impudently they did belie the true receiuers thereof, was manifest, who make so much difference in that holy administration, that they account no profit in Common bread, besides the nourishment of their naturall Bodies: but this blessed bread to be the food of their soules vnto eter∣nall life. And as you are seduced in these (saith the The third article answered. admonition) so in confirmation also they carrie your simplicities captiue, for the truth teacheth no other∣wise then themselues beleeue, namely, that a Child baptized, and dying before confirmation is nethe∣lesse in state of Grace, else are themselues causers of their childrens damnation: so the seruice of God brought from an vnknowne tongue, cannot surely Their other ob∣iections answe∣red. offend any reasonable man, which is onely to make him vnderstand that, which before he knew not, and to giue his consent to those prayers, whereof he hath most need, and giueth the neerest touch to his owne feeling conscience, for God requireth the heart onely which with an vnderstanding seruice, we must sacri∣fice vnto him. But most of all (saith this good King) we maruell at your demand, for the sixe Articles re∣stored, to haue them in power as formerly hath Answere to the sixe articles. beene. Doe you know what you aske, or in obtai∣ning doe you know what you get? They were lawes indeed lately made, but quickly repented; too cruell for you, and too mercilesse for vs; who would haue our Raigne written with milke, and not with blood, and because they were bloody, we took them away, with the same authority, by which they were King Edwards lawes written in mi ke and not in blood. made; least reteining them, our sword should be too often drawne, and rigour extended vpon our true and well-deseruing subiects. We for our parts seeke no longer to liue, then to be a father vnto our peo∣ple, and as God hath made vs your rightfull King, so hath he commanded you vnto obedience: by whose great Maiestie we sweare, you shall feele the power of the same God in our sword; which how mighty it Spoken like a King. is, no subiect knoweth: how puissant it is no priuate man can iudge, and how mortall no English heart can thinke: therefore embrace our mercy while it is offered, least the blood spilt by your meanes cry ven∣geance from the Earth, and be heard in the eares of the Lord in Heauen. (24) All this notwithstanding, the Rebels per∣sisted in their traiterous attempts: against whose se∣ditions Sir Iohn Russell Lord Priuy Seale, was appoin∣ted Generall of the Kings Army; vnto whose assi∣stance Forces sent a∣gainst the rebels. was ioined the Lord Grey of Wilton, vnder whom serued a band of Italians intended against Scotland, these lay at Bristow attending the comming of the Lord Generall: who now was marched West∣ward to Honiton, where daily looking for more Iohn Hooker in description of Excester. supply, those which he had, began to shrinke away, whereby the Rebels were emboldned to make to∣wards him, and came as far as Fenington-bridge with∣in three Miles of Honiton, and in a faire Meadow The rebels make toward the Lord generall. there spread their Colours. The Lord Russell though weake in comparison of them, holding it more ho∣nour to assaile then to be assaulted, made forward e∣uen vnto the Bridge: at whose sight the Enemies pre∣pared themselues to fight, and with a strong guard maintained the Bridge, besides which there was pas∣sage ouer the Riuer, that held his course betwixt the two Armies. (25) Great were the attempts the Lord Lieute∣nant gaue, and manfull was the resistance that the The valiant at∣tempt of the Lord Russell. Rebell made, yet lastly the way was wonne, and fol∣lowed vnto the battell of the disloyals: where pre∣sently beganne a most cruell fight, and a while was maintained to the losse of their blood, but the false hearts failing, and the true subiects courage increa∣sing, the Cornish immediately gaue backe and fled, whereat the Kings souldiers out of Order fell to the spoile, minding nothing lesse then that which pre∣sently The rebels put to flight. ensued, for the Cornishmen perceiuing their disordered carriage, suddainely returned, and began a new fight, when the Lord Russell likewise ordered a new his Army: these furiously ioining, a sharpe and cruell encounter ensued, with the losse of much The rebels re∣turne and main∣taine the fight. blood, and the liues of three hundred Rebels, who lastly tooke to their heeles and left the field: the chase a while followed, and the souldiers scattered, a fearefull crie suddainely arose, that all the Com∣mons were vp, which caused the Lord Generall to And againe put to flight. returne vnto Honiton: whether shortly came the Lord Grey of Wilton, hauing in pay Spiniola an Itali∣an Captaine with three hundred shott. (26) The Lord Russels forces augmented, his greatest care was to releeue the City Excester, whi∣ther vpon the third of August he hasted from Honi∣ton being a thousand strong; and passing ouer the Downes toward Woodbury, lodged his Campe that night neere to the Wind-Mill, whereof the Rebels hauing intelligence, raised themselues from Saint Mary Clift, and made amaine vnto the Downes, thinking to surprise the Lord Generall before hee was ready; but hee as vigilant as they were for∣ward, encountred them againe in battell, and againe The Rebels againe ouer-throwne. gaue them the ouerthrow with the losse of the most of their liues, the rest escaping by flight, got vnto the Towne of Saint Mary Clift. (27) The newes whereof bruted, and the Papal side bruised by these three ouerthrowes, the Com∣mons M. Fox. in Act. and on. in whole troupes resorted to their aide, and to make all sure on their side (by the presence and helpe of their consecrated God) they brought into The Crucifixe brought in a cart into the field. the field the Crucifixe vnder a Canopy, which in stead of an Altar was set in a carte', accompanied with Crosses, and Candlestickes, Banners, Holy-Bread, and holy-water, both to driue away Di∣uels, and to dull their enemies swords; which not∣withstanding they did not, neither could they deli∣uer themselues in the day of destruction; for the Towne being fired, and the Armies met vpon Clift heath, a most cruell and bloudy battell was fought, The Rebels a∣gaine ouer-throwne. wherein was slaine the whole rout of the Rebels, & all these trinkets cast in the durt. (28) The chiefe Captaines were taken and sent vnto London, who were Humfrey Arundell, Winsland, Holmes and Burie, who there paid the law with the The Captaines of the Rebels executed. losse of their liues. Many others were executed without iudgement, onely by Marshall Law, as was Boier Maior of Bodmin in Cornwall, vnto whom The Maior of Bodmin hanged. Sir Anthony Kingston, Prouost Marshall sent worde he would visite him at dinner, but before he was set downe, commanded the Maior to cause a paire of Gallowes to be set vp; & the Table taken away, he willed the said Maior to acompany him to the place, & there presently commanded Boier his Host to the halter, and saw him hanged before he departed. (29) At the same time, and neere the same place dwelled a Miller, who had beene a busiedoer in the Rebellion, but hee knowing the danger, willed his man to take the name of the master, if any enquired after him; whereupon the said Sir Anthony came to the mill, and calling for the master, the man in his name presented himselfe, who strait commanded him vnto the Gallowes, the seruant then seeing the A Millers man hanged for his master. danger of death, confessed hee was not the master, but the man: well, said the Knight, thou canst ne∣uer doe thy master better seruice then to hang for him, and thereupon trussed him vppe in the next tree. (30) As these things were in acting in the West, so other Commotions arose in other partes of the Land, though broched vnder another pretence, Commotions for Inclosures. namely the laying open of inclosures, which the king by Proclamation had commanded to be done, but many offenders bearing themselues out with great∣nesse, slackened the execution, and the poorer pre∣suming vpon the Kings pleasure, began to execute his commission themselues, and those in many pla∣ces at once, as in Kent, Essex, Sommerset, Buckingham, Northampton and Lincolue shires they did. (31) But most dangerous was that in Norfolke, whose Inhabitants following the examples of the A. D. 1549. Commotions in Norfolke. rest, held out much longer, and in more violent ma∣ner. Their first attempt was at Atilborough against one Greene that had taken away part of their com∣mons, Grene. next at Wimonham, where by the instigation of Iohn Flowerdew they cast downe the fences of Inclosures, belonging to Robert Ket a Tanner in the same Towne; who to bee euen with Flowerdew Iohn Flowerdew and Robert Ket the caulers of the commoti∣ons. brought them to Hetherset, and set them on worke to pull downe both hedge and ditch of his pasture grounds inclosed: to which worke hee gaue such desperate incouragements, that these vnrulies pre∣sently Ket made Cap∣tains of the Commotion. chose him for their ringleader, who with them passed to Bowthrope, laying all leuel where they came. (32) Their number encreasing, and doings outragious, Sir Edmund Windam Knight, at that time high Shiriffe of the Shire, made proclamation among them in the Kings name to depart, which if they did not foorthwith, he pronounced them Traitors, but had not his Horse beene the swifter, he had beene ei∣ther Sir Edmund Windam in danger. taken or slain, thereupon their terror began to be fearefull, & themselues to be furnished with wea∣pons, Armour, and Artillery, daily brought them in abundance by the By-dwellers, besides store of victuals to maintaine their Campe. (33) But now considering what dangers were open, if dispersedly scattered they should attend their bad worke, they held it best policy to draw to one place: and to fortifie themselues together with further strength; whereupon with full resolution, Monshold was thought fittest neere vnto Mount Sur∣rey, Monshold the place of the randeuo . a place built by these Earles of that County, and vpon S. Leonards hill which hangeth ouer Norwich, they vnkennelled themselues; besides these of Mon∣shold, a lesser rabble of them lay at Rising-chase neere Linne, which were rowsed thence by the Gentle∣men of those parts: who first from Watton, then from Thetford, and next from Brandon, were forced to their litter at Monshold. (34) Their parts were rigorous, or rather inhu∣mane euen to their welwillers, for it is a knowne truth, that Sir Roger Woodhouse in kinde courtesie The inhumani∣ties of the Com∣motioners. bringing them two Carts laden with Beere, and an∣other with victuals, was recompenced with the losse of all his Horses, his owne apparell, and his body tugged, and torne, cast into a ditch, whom lastly with others was imprisoned by them in the house of Mount Surrey, and yet would they seeme verie Religi∣ous, hauing one Coniers for their Chaplen, who de∣uoutly said seruice vnto them both morning and e∣uening. (35) To these, the lewdly disposed of Suffolke assembled, as also the scum and dregs out of Nor∣wich, Supplies of the commotioners. adding still fewell to their own smoaky flames by firing of Beacons, ringing of Bels, and what not, to set all in an vproare: some true and faithfull sub∣iects they violently led away, and made them of their counsell, namely Thomas Cod, Maior of Nor∣wich, Robert Watson Preacher, and Thomas Alderiche Gentlemā, Sergeant & Catlyn, Sergeant Gaudy, whom Many good sub∣iects forced to attend vpon the Rebels. they kept fettered, and compelled them to be atten∣dant vpon Kette; who now tooke vpon him to bee the Kings Deputy, and to giue out warrants in his Maiesties name, by vertue of which many of Wor∣ship and credit were fetched from their dwellings, brought before him, and violently cast into prison: their Rabble encreased to the number of sixeteene thousand men. (36) And that the shew of iustice and piety was only the marke whereat these lawlesse leuelled, they ordained a tribunall seat in an olde tree, whose Ca∣nopie was the Cope of Heauen: In this sate the The tree of Re∣formation. Tanneras Chauncellor or chiefe Iudge, accompa∣nied with his Counsellors, assisted by two chosen men out of euery hundred among them, hither as∣sembled the complaints of the Campe, and hence had they commission to fetch out of Ships both Or∣dinance, powder and shorte, and out of Gentle∣mens houses all abileaments of warre: and heere such Raskals as had exceeded their commission had iudgement of imprisonment, so that this tree was termed, the Oake of Reformation, whence likewise sometimes Sermons were deliuered to the people, and once by the Reuerent Doctor Parker, which had almost cost him his life. (37) To these the Kings generall Pardon was publikely pronounced by an Herald at Arms, but The Kings par∣don contemned. so farre off from embracing, as the Rebels from the height of the hill, shot at the Citie, which doing lit∣tle harme, they remoued their Ordinance to the lower ground, and thence beganne to batter the Norwich by the Rebels. walles, and without great resistance entred the town, where they became Masters of al the munitions, and emprisoned the Maior, and many other Citi∣zens. (38) These times thus troublesome, the King and Citizens of London, requiring their aide in these their opposite quarrels, and surely in their assem∣bly the talk of the Lords by the Recorder was so wel tolde, as had not a graue George Strad∣lon. Citizen stept vp betimes, the common Councell had granted aid against their King, whose wisdome and loyalty, in regarde my selfe a Citizen, would haue it recorded to his euerla∣sting memory, and an example and motiue for our obedient loue and duety toward our Soueraignes, I will insert as I find them vttered and spoken. (58) In this case (said hee) good it is to thinke George Stradlon his Oration. on things past, to auoide the danger of thinges to come; for I remember a story written by Fabian in his Chronicles of the warres betwixt the King and his Barons, who euen then as our Lords doe now, demanded aid of the Maior and Commons of London, against their Soueraingne King Henry the third, and that in a cause rightfull, and good for the Common-weale, which was the execution of certain wholesome lawes, somwhat derogating from his princely prerogatiue, which hee would not permit. The aide was granted, and quarrell came vnto battell, wherein the Lords preuailed, and tooke the King and his sonne prisoners. But they againe restored to liberty, among other con∣ditions this was one, that the King should not onely grant his free pardon to the Lords, but also vnto the Citizens of London; which was done, yea and the same confirmed by Parliament. But what followed? was it forgotten? no surely, nor ne∣uer forgiuen during the Kings life: for the liber∣ties of the City were taken away, strangers appoin∣ted to bee our heads and Gouernours, the Citi∣zens giuen away both body and goods, and from one persecution to another, were most miserably afflicted: such it is to enter the wrath of a Prince, which (as Salomon saith) is death: Wherfore, for∣asmuch as this aide is required of the Kings Maie∣sty, whose voice (being our high Shepheard) wee ought to obey, rather then to hearken to the Lords, whom neuerthelesse I wish not to bee vt∣terly cast off▪ my counsell is, that they with vs, and wee with them, become humble Petitioners vnto his Highnesse, that it would please him to heare such complaints against the Lord Protector, as may be iustly alleadged and proued, and I doubt not but this matter will be so pacified, that neither shall the King, nor yet the Lordes haue cause to seeke for further aide, neither we to offend any of them both. (59) These words well weighed, and the Councel dissolued, fiue hundred Londoners were prepared in a readinesse: for Sir Philip Hobby being sent from the Lords to the King, so deliuered their minds, that the Lord Protector was commanded out of presence, and the next day being the twelfth of October, the Lords of the Councell resorted to Windsor, where Iohn Stow they so wrought with the King, as his vncle was de∣liuered into their hands, whom the same night they imprisoned in Beauchamps Tower in the same Castel, and the next day strongly attended, brought him to London, whence the streetes were guarded onely by housholders, the Aldermen taking the charge of the busines, and so to the great griefe and wondering of the people hee was conueyed to the Tower, and The L. Prote∣ctor committed to the Tower. there left. (60) Whither shortly after the Lords themselues repaired, and charged the Protector with these 20. M. in . Articles as followeth. 1 That at his entry into that waighty office, hee was expresly prohibited to doe any thing in State Articles dr wne against the Lord Protector. without the assent of the last Kings Executors. 2 That hee had contrariwise vpon his owne au∣thority both subuerted lawes, and staied iustice, well by letters, as commandement. 3 That he had deliuered diuers persons arrested, and committed to prison for felonie, manslaughter, murther and treason, contrary to the lawes and sta∣tutes of the Realme. 4 That hee had made Captains and Lieutenants ouer waighty affaires vnder his owne Seale and Writing. 5 That hee had alone communicated with for∣raine Ambassadors about most weighty State af∣faires. 6 That hee had checked diuers of the Kings Priuy Councell, speaking for the good of the State, yea and threatned to displace them if they consented not to his mind. 7 That hee had against law erected a Court of Requests in his owne house, whither were enforced diuers of the Kings Subiects to answere for their Free-holds. 8 That he had for money disposed Offices in the Kinges gifte, money, leases, and Wardes, and giuen presentations of Benefices, and Bishop∣rickes, yea and medled with sale of the Kinges lands, which by office hee could not, without con∣sent of the maior voice of the Councell. 9 That hee had commanded multiplication by Alcumistrie to the abuse of the Kings coine. 10 That against the King and Councels will, hee had set forth a Proclamation against inclosures, which had caused daungerous insurrections in the land, wherein diuers of the Kings liege Subiects haue beene spoiled, and many a worthy man therein slaine. 11 That to the same end hee had giuen commis∣sion with Articles annexed concerning inclosures of Commons, high wayes, and decayed Cottages, gi∣uing the Commissioners authority to heare and de∣termine the same causes, contrary to the lawes and statutes of the Realme. 12 That hee had suffered Rebels and traitours to assemble, and lie in Campe and Armour, against the King, his Nobles, & Gentlemen, without any speedy suppressing of them. 13 That by his gifts in money, with promises of Fees, rewards and seruices, he had encouraged ma∣ny of the said rebels. 14 That in fauour of them contrary to law he had caused a Proclamation to bee made, that none of the said Rebels, or Traitors should be sued, or vexed for any of their offences committed in the said Rebel∣lion. 15 That hee had liked well of these rebellions, and had said that the couetousnesse of the Gentry gaue the occasion, affirming that it was better for the Commons to die, then to perish for lacke of li∣uing. 16 That hee had reported the Lords of the Par∣liament were loath to reform themselues for the re∣formation of Inclosures, and therefore the people had good cause to reforme the thinges themselues. 17 That vpon the report of the defaultes and lackes of Bulloigne nothing was there amended. 18 That the Forts of Newhauen and Blacknesse standing in want of men and victuall, whereof hee was informed, were suffered notwithstanding still to want, to the great encouragement of the French, and dishonour of the English. 19 That he had vntruly published, that the Lords at London minded to destroy the King, which hee instantly desired hee would neuer forget, and to that end instigated many young Lords, whereby sedition and discord was made among the Nobles. 20 Lastly, that whereas the Lords assembled at London, onely to consult vpon a charitable commu∣nication to be had with the Protector for his misgo∣uernment of the King and Realme, hee contrari∣wise sent letters of credence to many places and per∣sons, that the said Lords were no lesse then high Traitors to the King, and great disturbers of the whole realme. All these accusations notwithstanding (the young King so labouring it) he was released from the Tow∣er The Protector released from the Tower. the sixt of February following vnto his free liber∣ty, though not vnto his former authority, and so remained vntouched for the space of two yeeres and two dayes. (61) Whilest these his and other troubles were commencing in England, the Lord Grey of Wilton left Lieutenant of the North, remained in Scotland, where many feates of warre were vndergone, and many Forts fortified, and some taken, such were Lowden, Hadington, and Yester, at whose assault certaine op∣probrious speeches in most contemptuous manner were vttered by a Scotish man against King Edward of England, whereat the Lord Grey was so offended, as vpon composition for the deliuerie of the Castell, Vlpian Fulwell. all were let goe with life, onely that person excep∣ted, and his name knowne to bee Newton, was ap∣pointed A combate fought betweene two Scottishmen before the Lord Grey. to die for the same; but hee denying the words, imposed them vpon one Hamilton, a man va∣lorous inough, and wrongfully touched, who denied the accusation, and challenged Newton the combat, which hee accepted, and in performance slew Ha∣milton, though more at disaduantage then for lacke ei∣ther of courage or strength: The victor was rewar∣ded with a great chaine of gold, and the gowne that the Lord Grey ware at the present, though many maligned and accused him still to bee the vtterer of those base words. (62) The English keeping foot still in Scotland, burnt Dawketh and Muskelburgh, and fortified Ha∣dington The English for∣ced out of Scot∣land. both with munition and men, spoyling the Country, saith Bishoppe Lesly, all about Edenburgh, Lowthian and Mers: repairing of Forts, and pla∣cing of Garrisons, as if they meant there to remaine and abide: but their young Queene being con∣uaied into France, and the Scots aided with the assi∣stance of the French, so quit themselues, that they voided their land of the English, and recouered of them all they had lost. In which times of variable successe, the King but a child, the Nobles at vari∣ances, and the combustuous Commons obedient to neither, the French sought to recouer the holds that the English had in their Country, and first by stealth meant to surprise the fortresse of Bulloig berg, vnto which enterprise seuen thousand were chosen, vnder the conduct of Monsieur Chatillon. (63) These secretly marching in the night with ladders and furniture meete for the enterprize, ap∣proached within a quarter of a mile vnto Bullingberg The French in∣tend to surprise Bulloignoberge. fort, amongst whom was an English Souldier dischar∣ged out of their pay, for that he had taken a French woman to wife. This Carter for so was his name got entertainement vnder Chatillon, and now vnder∣standing whereabout they went, hastily made from his Company, and gaue the Alarum to his Coun∣trimen The good ser∣uico of Carter an English souldier. within the Fort; where Sir Nicholas Arnalt Captaine of the peece, caused him to bee drawne vp betwixt two pikes to the height of the wall, vnto whom hee declared the attempt in hand, & among them stood so valiantly in defence of the fort, that hee gaue many a wound, and ed some himself: by him and this meanes the Peece was quit from surprisall, and the slaughter of the French so great A great slaugh∣ter of the French. that fifteene Wagons went laden away with dead Corps. (64) This losse sustained, and the English masters in those parts of their Maine, the French sought to trie fortune for their Isles in the Seas, namely ∣nesey and Iersey, possest and subiect to King Edwards Crowne, their preparations were great, and their The French as∣sault the Isles of Garnesey and Iers e. Marshallists many; which notwithstanding with such losse were beaten backe from their , as a thousand men at Armes were ine in the attempt, & the successe so vnfortunate, as the French for feare of further discouragement forbad e report, and made an inhibition, not to mention the expedition of that iourney. (65) Neuerthelesse the French King ceased not his desired purposes, till hee had got by nder , Black sse, Bulloignberg, and the town vpon composition de liuered to the French. of Bulloigne it selfe, though bought at a deare rate, and deliuered with great griefe to the English; vnto such a lamentable state, and dishonourable compo∣sition was the good King Edward brought, by the bandings of his great Counsellors, and insurrecti∣ons of his vnruly Commons; after which calami∣ties Iohn Caix . a great and mortall disease followed, namely the sweating sicknesse, that raged extreamely through the land, wherein died the two sonnes of Charles Brandon, both of them Dukes of Suffolke, besides an A. D. 1550. infinite number of men in their best strengths, which The sweating sickenes. followed onely Englishmen in forraine Countrey, no other people infected therewith, wherby they were both feared and shunned in all places where they came. (66) And to fill vp the dolours of these dolefull times, the good Duke of Sommerset was againe ap∣prehended, euen when the least suspition was of any vndirect workings: for vpon his first releasement, to A sained recon∣cilement. linke a firme loue betwixt him and the potent Earle of Warwicke, his most malignant; a marriage was contracted betwixt the Lord Lisle his eldest sonne & heire, and the Lady the Earles eldest daugh∣ter, which was solemnized with great ioy at Sheene, in presence of the young King; this amity was out∣wardly carried with all faire shewes for a time, thogh Iohn St . inward hatred lay secretly hid, as by the sequell in∣continentlie appeared: for after a solemne creation of many Estates, wherein the Earle of Warwicke had his style raised to bee Duke of Northumberland, vnto whose rayes at that time most of the Courtiers cast their eyes: the sparkes of emulation began pre∣sently to breake forth; where the simplicity of the one gaue aduantage to the other, to compasse that which long had beene sought. (67) The Duke of Sommerset not well aduised, The Duke of Sommerset prius∣ly armed. and yeelding too much vnto Sycophant flatteries, was put in feare of some sodaine attempt intended against him, and therefore counselled to weare vn∣der his garment a coate of defence, which hee ac∣cordingly did, and being so armed came vnto the Councell Table, supposing no man had known of any such thing; but his bosome being opened and the Armour perceiued, hee was forthwith appre∣hended, as intending the death of some Counsellor, and by Northumberland so vehemently taxed (who Rich. Grafton. in Counsell was euer the principall man) that hee was forthwith attached, and sent to the Tower, vp∣on The Duke of Sommerset sent to the Tower. the sixteenth of October with the Lord Grey of Wilton, Sir Michael Stanl p, Sir Thomas Arundel, Sir Ralph Vane, and Sir Mile Partridge, and the next day Stow. A. D. 1551. the Dutchesse his wife was likewise committed; all of them for suspition of treason and fellonie; and he standing so indited vpon the S w saith the first. second of December following; was arraigned at Westminster, attended with the Axe of the Tower, Billes, Halberds, and Pollaxes a great number. (68) His inditement was for treason and fellony, The Duke of Sommersets in∣ditement. and the same vrged vnto extremity, with many am∣plifications, and bitter inuectiues, especially that hee had sought and pretended the deathes of the Duke of Northumberland, the Lord Marquesse, and Pembroke: where after many mild answeres to these * Of William Herbert. matters obiected, he put himselfe to be tried by his Peeres, who acquitted him of treason, but found the inditement of felloni : when presently the A The Duke con∣demned of . was commaunded away, whereat the shout of the people shewed the great affection that was bo e to the Duke: little mistrusting that the sentence of death was p ounced against him, or that the ki vncle should die as a fellon; neither did Sta intend any such thing as some are of opinion, but ra∣ther was purposely made for the suppression of ∣bellions, and vnlawfull herein such as should seeke or procure the C sellor should be guilty as in case of felloni . But such was the pleasure of the all ordering power he which knew no theft should die for that sinne; so that nei∣ther himselfe, nor demaun∣ded the benefite of would haue sa∣ued his life if it had beene required. (69) His sentence thus pronounced, hee was a∣gaine sent backe to the Tower, wherein he kept a ve∣ry sad Christmas, yea and that in the Court, incli∣ned to little mirth, the King lamenting the condem∣nation Rich. Graf. Iohn Stow. Holinsh. of his vncle, had not some witty disportes broke off his passions, which how, and by whome they proceeded, let others report, and vs continue the Tragedie of this Duke; who vpon the two & twenty of February following being Friday was brought to the Scaffold vpon Tower-hil, by eight in the morning, where turning himselfe towardes the East, he spake to the people, as followeth. (70) Dearely beloued friends, I am brought hither to suffer death, albeit I neuer offended against the King, neither in word nor deed, and haue alwayes been as faith∣full The Duke of Sommersets speech at his death. and true vnto this Realme, as any man hath been: but for somuch as I am by law condemned to die, I doe ac∣knowledge my selfe as well as others to be subiect thereun∣to: wherefore to testifie mine obedience which I owe to the lawes, I am come hither to suffer death, where unto I willingly offer my selfe with most hearty thanks vnto God, that hath giuen me this time of repentance, who might through sodaine death haue taken away my life, that I nei∣ther should haue acknowledged him nor my selfe. (71) These words vttered, besides others exhor∣tatory, that the people would continue constant in the Gospell, sodainly was heard a great noyse, wher∣by A great feare without any cause. the assembly was strucke into great feare, some thinking that a storme or tempest descended from a∣boue, some supposed that the barrels of Gunpow∣der in the Armorie had taken fire, & were all blowne vp into the Aire, others thought that they heard a noise of horses prepared to battell, some againe af∣firmed confidently that it did thunder, and others thought verily it was an earth-quake, and that the ground moued: vnto such confusion and terrour were they presently brought, which (saith Stow) was none other, but that certaine men from the Hamlets Ioh. Stow in Annales . warned with weapon to guard the Tower-hill, came thither somewhat after the hower appointed, whose formost seeing the Prisoner on the Scaffold, beganne to runne forward themselues, and call to their fel∣lowes to come away: which word away sounding as an Eccho in the peoples eares, they thought that rescue had come to the Duke to take him away: and seeing the Bil-men to make forward so fast, beganne themselues to shrinke backe from the hill, euery man seeking to saue one, and by this accident and confu∣sed cries, this feare among them fell and beganne: This stirre scarce ended, another ensued by the run∣ning of the people towards the Scaffold, who seeing Sir Anthony Browne riding thitherward, supposed a pardon had come from the King, so that a sodaine shout arose, apardon, apardon, God fane the King; by The Duke en∣tirely beloued of the Commons. which it onely appeared in what loue hee was had, and how much his life was desired of the Com∣mons. (72) The Duke whose mind being altogether prepared for death, was little moued either to hope The Dukes se∣cond speech vp∣on the Scaffold. or feare, and thereupon addressed his second speech to the people, and with no deiected countenance spake againe and said: Beloued friends there is no such matter intended as you vainely hope and belieue: It see∣meth thus good to the Almighty, vnto whose ordinance it is meet that wee all bee obedient, wherefore I pray you bee quiet and without tumult, for I am quiet, and let vs so ioyne in prayer vnto the Lord for the preseruation of our Noble King, vnto whose Maiesty I wish c uall health, with all felicitie and abundance of prosperous successe. Moreouer, I wish to his Counsellers the grace and fauour of God, whereby they may rule all things vprightly with Iustice, vnto whom I exhort you all in the Lord, to shew your selues obedient, the which is also very necessarie for you vnder paine of condemnation, and also most profi∣table for the preseruation of the Kings Maiesty. And thereupon asking euery man forgiuenesse, freely for∣gaue euery man against him, and desiring the people to bee quiet, lest the flesh should be troubled, though his spirit was willing, hee meekely laide downe his head to the Axe, and receiued at one stroke his rest by death. (73) Howsoeuer this Dukes cause was ballanced by law, and him taken away that stood betwixt some Duke of Sōmerset soone mist, and sore lamented. and their Sunne; yet was his death heauily disgested by the people, that spake very bitterly against the Duke of Northumberland; but most especially the young King sore mourned, and soone missed the life of his Protector thus vnexpectedly taken away, who now depriued of both his vncles, howsoeuer the times were passed with pastimes, playes and shewes, to driue away dumpes, yet euer the remem∣brances of them sate so neere vnto his heart, that last∣ly he fell sicke of a Cough, which grieuously increa∣sing ended with a consumption of the lungs. King Edward falleth sicke. (74) His sicknesse continuing with great doubt of his life, vpon purpose saith Grafton to alter the Rich. Grafton. succession of the Crowne, three marriages were in one day solemnized, whereof the first was betwixt the Lord Guilford Dudley, fourth sonne to the Duke of Northumberland, and the Lady Iane, eldest daughter of Henry Duke of Suffolke: the second was betwixt Three marriages entended to re∣uert the succes∣sion. the Lord Herbert, sonne and heire to William Earle of Pembroke, and the Lady Katherine the yonger daugh∣ter of the said Duke of Suffolke, and the third was be∣tweene Hanry L. Hastings, sonne and heire of Frances Earle of Hantington, and Katherine the youngest daughter of the Duke of Northumberland, which ten∣ding (saith he) to the di erison of the rightfull heires, they proued nothing prosperous, for two of them were presently made frustrate, the one by death, and the other by diuorce. (75) The policy established, and languishing sick∣nesse of the King gaue way vnto such, as sought the euersion of the State, & alienation of the Crown. In whose eye no head was scene fitter for that faire Dia∣deme, then was Guilfords Bride, Iane the elder daugh∣ter of Suffolke, whose mother Lady Francis then li∣uing, Lady Iane made successor by sicke King Edward. was the daughter of Mary the French Queen, the younger sister to King Henry the eight, vnto whom King Edward ouer-wrought in his weakenes, ordained his Crowne by Will, at the suggestions of such Politiques, as mount to disherite the two law∣full Princes, Mary and Elizabeth, and to impugne the Statute, in case prouided for the succession of K. Henry the eight his children: vnto which Will (O Vide Stat. in an. 35. de R. . . M. Fox. in all. & M . griefe to heare) subscribed all the Kings Councell, most of the Nobility, the reuerend Bishops, and all the Iudges of the land, one onely excepted, ouen Sir Iames Halles knight, a Iustice of the common Pleas, vpright in iudgement, & a fauourer of the Gospell, Sir Iames Halles refused to sub∣scribe to K. Ed∣words Will. he, I say, neuer would write or consent to the disheri∣ting of the Lady Mary. (76) The King thus accomplishing what his Sta∣tists had wrought, lay languishing in his faintnes: the end wherefore could not be expected but one∣ly by death, and now being worne almost to no∣thing (his last drawing to the limits of Na∣ture) he lift vp his eyes with a prepared heart, and prayed as followeth. Lord God deliuer me out of this miserable and wret∣ched life, and take me among thy Chosen: howbeit not K. Edwards prayer. my will but thy will be done; Lord I c i my spirite to thee: O Lord thou knowest how happy it were for mee to be with thee: yet for thy chosen sake, if it bee thy will send, me life and health that I may truly serue thee: O my Lord blesse thy people and saue thine inhe∣ritance: O Lord God saue thy chosen people of England: O my Lord God defend this Realme from Papistrie, and maintaine thy true religion, that I and my people may praise thy holy for thy sonne Iesus Christs sake. So turning , and seeing some by him saide, I thought you had not beene so nigh: you, said Doctor Owen, wee heard you speake to your selfe, then said the King, I was praying to God: O I am faint, Lord haue m rcy me, and reuiue my spirit: so saying, gaue vp the Ghost; to the g of gl d, in whom they had conceiued most hopes. (77) His vertues were rare and many, exceeding most Princes, and vices so few, that none can be tax∣ed with lesse; very learned (according to his yeeres) The vertues of King Edward. he was in the Latine and Greek tongues, the French, Spanish, and Italian, yea (and saith Hieronymus Car∣danus) The report of Hieronymus Car∣danus, ex Fox. he was adorned with the skill of Logicke, natu∣rall Philosophie, and Musicke, and for Astronomy (saith he) my selfe had experience, whom he learnedly opposed of the cause and course of Comets: for Humanity, he is the very Image of Morality, and in princely graue Maiesty best beseeming a King: briefly, hee may well His learning. seeme to be a miracle in Nature: nor doe I speake thus Rhetorically to amplifie things, or to make them more then truth is, for the truth is more then I do vtter: and in this hee was most admirable, that hee could tell and re∣cite all the Ports, Hauens, and Creekes, not within his owne Realme onely, but also in Scotland, and His Memory. likewise in France, what comming in there was, how the tide serued in euery of them, what burden of Shippe, and what winde best serued the comming in into them. (78) Of all his Nobles, Gentry, Iustices, and Magistrates, he tooke speciall name of their Hospi∣tality, His Care. and religious conuersations, and that which is best accepted of a Prince, hee was very liberall, louing, mercifull, meeke and gentle▪ to∣wards his people, and so farre from bloud, as hee euer fauoured and spared as much as might bee the life of man, yea euen of Rebels, as wee haue seene; neither was hee willing to put Heretickes to His Mercy. death, as in a certaine dissertation had once with M. Cheeke it appeared: insomuch that when Ioan But∣oher should be burned for her heresie, all the Coun∣cell could not moue him to set his hand to the war∣rant of her execution, vntill D. Cranmer his Godfa∣ther, Archbishoppe of Canterbury laboured to in∣duce him, vnto whom ee said, what my Lord? will you haue me to send quicke to hell, and taking the pen vsed this speech: I will lay all the charge here∣of vpon Cranmer before God. Then how his hand had beene gotten for his vncles death is to bee admired. (79) But his constancy vnto Christs Gospell, with the abandoning of all superstition, was very admirable, one example among many wee will not K. Edwards zeale to Christs Gospell. let to declare. Lady Mary his sister through the suit of Charles the Emperour, made great meanes to haue Masse said in her house, and that to bee done without all preiudice of law: the greatnesse of her Person being the immediate successor, and the might of the Emperour in amitie with England, moued the Councell to giue their consent to the suit; to for∣ward which Cranmer Archbishoppe of Canterbury accompanied with Ridley Bishoppe of London were imployed from them to the King, who hearing their message, gaue the replication so grounded vppon Scripture, as they gaue ouer to vrge more that way: but like Politicians alleadged the danger in breach of amity with the Emperour, to which the King an∣swered, hee would rather aduenture the hazard of his own life then to grant that which was not agree∣able to the truth. The Bishops yet vrged him with the bonds of nature, and submissiuely said, they would haue no nay: the King seeing himselfe so im∣portunated, burst into weeping, and sobbingly desi∣red them to be content, whereat the teares so abun∣dantly burst from their eyes, as they departed his presence not able to speake. And for a further te∣stimony of this yong Kings zeale, reade if you please a letter sent vnto his sister the Princesse Lady Mary, out of the originall. (80) Right deare, and right entirely beloued sister we greet you well, and let you know that it grieneth vs much to no amendment in you of that, which wee for K. Edwards letter to Lady Mary. good cause, your soules health, our conscience, and com∣mon tranquility of our Realme haue so long d sired; assu∣ring you▪ that our sufferance hath more demonstration of nat r all loue then contentation of our conscience, and fore-sight of our safety. Wherefore, although you giue ∣sion asmuch almost as in you is, to diminish our naturall lode; yet bee wee loath to feele it decay, and meane not to bee so carelesse of you as wee bee prouoked. And therfore meaning your weale, and therewith ioyning a care not to be found guilty in our own conscience to God, hauing cause to require forgiuenesse that wee haue so long for respect of loue towards you omitted our bounde duety, we do send at this present our right trusty, & right welbeloued Counsel∣lor the L. Rich, our Chancellor of England, our trusty and right well beloued Counsellor Sir Anthony Wingfield Knight, Comptroler of our Houshold, and Sir Will. Peter Knight, one of our two principall Secretaries in message to you touching the order of your house, willing you to giue thē firme credite in those things they shal say to you from vs, & do there in our name. Yeouen vnder our Signet at the Castle of Windsor, the of in the fift yeare of our Raigne, 1556. (81) The fruites of which Religion this godly King shewed by his workes of compassion towardes the poore, & that especially vpon the foundation of Christs Hospitall, the late suppressed place of the Grey Friers in London, and that vpon occasion as fol∣loweth. It chanced the reuerend Bishop Doctor Rid∣ley to preach before his Maiesty at Westminster, wher∣in D. Ridleies ser∣mon before King Edward. hee Christianlike exhorted the rich to be merciful vnto the poore, and to that end amplified the words of the Text against the mercilesse rich, and the neg∣ligence of such as were in great place. The Sermon ended, and the King set to dinner, hee sent to the Bishop, commanding him not to depart the Court, before he knew his further pleasure, and thereupon causing two Chaires to be set in the Gallery, all o∣thers auoided, hee compelled the Bishoppe to sit downe by his side, and in no wise would admitte him to bee vncouered. (82) Where entring conference, he first gaue him heartie thankes for his Sermon, repeating vnto him the chiefe points thereof, and coming to his exhorta∣tion The conference betwixt the King and Bishoppe Ridlay. for the poore, he then told him that he thought himselfe first touched in the speech; for saide he, my Lord you speake to them in authority, whereof v God I am the chiefe, and must first ma e answere to him if I be negligent, and therefore I thinke you principally meant me: Gods commandement I know most expresly inioineth vs to haue compassion of s poore members, for whom we must make account; and truly my Lord I am most willing to trauell that way, not doubting but that your long appro∣ued learning and wisdome, whose zeale is such as wisheth them helpe; but that also you had conference with others what is best herein to be done, which I am also desorous to know, and therefore I pray say freely your mind. (83) The mouer vnto these pious considerations little looking for such questions of the Prince, sate a while silent, ouerioyed at his words, and lastly vn∣prepared of any present instructions, told the King that the Citizens of London were best able to direct the plot, whose great Charity, and well ordered go∣uernement, besides their dayly charges, being ouer-burdened with poore, had sufficient experience, and if it would please his Maiestie to direct his letters vnto em himselfe, he would be very ready to fur∣ther this godly resolution so far as his meanes might any wise extend: whereupon the King presently commanded his letters to be writ, and would not suffer the Bishoppe to depart before himselfe had K. Edwards great care for the poor thereto set his hand and signet, desiring him to deli∣uer the same to the Lord Maior, and with him to conferre about this businesse, which hee wished might be accomplished with all expedition. (84) The Bishoppe as ready as the King was de∣sirous, posted apace to the Lord Maior of London, where deliuering the letter, offered his assistance to King Edwards deliuered to the L. Maior. forward the worke, and they together with some Aldermen, and twenty foure Commoners agreede vpon three degrees of the poore, and them diuided againe into nine. (85) The Booke thus drawne, and presented to the King, he thereupon desired to be accounted the chiefe Founder of their reliefe, and forth with vnto the City S. Bartholmewes Hospitall by Smith∣field, The Kings great liberality for the poore in London. and the Grey-Friers Church neere adioyning,